1 

/.Ziy.a-Z.,  ,  • 


LIBRARY  OF  THE  THEOLOGICAL  SEMINARY 


PRINCETON.  N.  J. 

Presented  by 


rrirs.V/\j\\\\£Am  SWcAn 

Section ^ 


SERMONS 

ON    SEVERAL 

Subjects  and  Occasions, 

By  the  mofl  Reverend 

Dr.  JOHN  riLLOrSON, 

L  A  T  £ 

Lord  Archbifliop  of  Canterbury. 
VOLUME    the    FIFTH. 


LONDON: 

Printed  for  R.  Ware,  A.  Ward,  J.  and  P.  Knapton,  7.  Longman, 

R.  Hetty  C.  Hitch,  J.  Hodges,  S.  Aufien,  J.  and  R.  Tonjon, 

y.  and  H.  P  ember  ton,  and  J .  Rivington. 


MDCCXLIII. 


8  §7:^ 

SERMON    LIX.  : 

Of  Conftancy  in  the  Prcfeffion  of  th^  ' 

true  Religion.  i 

H  E  B.    X.   23.  .  I 

Let  us  hold  faft  the  profeffion  of  our  faith  without  \ 

wavering  \  for  he  is  faithful  that  promifed.  \ 

•i 

I  Have  already  made  entrance  into  thefe  words^  SERM.  ' 
which  I  told  you  do  contain  in  them,  ^I^-     \ 

Firft,  An  exhortation  "  to  hold  fail;  the  profef-  ^he  fe-    ' 
*'  fion  of  our  faith  without  wavering."  cond  fer-   - 

Secondly,  An  argument  or  encouragement  there-  !^°"  °!!    > 
to  ;  "  becaufe  he  is  faithful  that  promifed."     If  we  '   | 

continue  ftedfail  and  faithful  to  God,  wefhall  find  | 

him  faithful  to  us,  in  making  good  all  the  pro-  1 

mifes   which  he  hath  made  to  us,  whether  of  aid  \ 

and  flipport,  or  of  recompence  and  reward  of  our  3 

fidelity  to  him. 

I  have  begun  to  handle  the  firil  part  of  the  text,^  \ 

viz.    the  apoftle's  exhortation  to  Chriftians  to  be  i 

conflant   and  Iready  in  their  religion:     ^'  Let  us  \ 

*'  hold  fall  the  profefiion  of  our  faith  without  wa- 
*'  vering."     The  word  uKKm^  which  we  render  \ 

without  wavering,  fignifies  inflexible  and  unmove-  I 

able,  not  apt  to  waver  and  to  be  Inaken  with  every  \ 

wind  of  contrary   dodxine,  nor  by  the  blafts  and  ! 

llorms   of  perfecution.      And  that  we  might  tlie  ; 

better  comprehend  the  full    and  true   meaning  of  ' 

Vol.  V  8  G  2  this 


888  Of  conjiancy  hi  the 

ERM.  this  exhortation,   I   propounded  to  do   thefe  two 
things. 

I.  To  fliew  negatively,  wherein  this  conftancy 
and  fteadinefs  in  the  profefTion  of  the  true  rehgion 
doth  not  confift.     And, 

II.  To  fhew  pofitively,  what  is  implied  and  in- 
tended here  by  the  apoflle,  "  in  holding  faft  the 
"  profefTion  of  our  faith  without  wavering.'* 

I.  To  fhew  negatively,  wherein  this  conftancy 
and  fteadinefs  in  the  profefTion  of  the  true  religion 
doth  not  confift.  This  I  fpake  to  the  laft  day  ; 
and  fhewed  at  large,  that  there  are  two  things  which 
are  not  contained  and  intended  in  this  exhortation. 

1 .  That  Men  ftiould  not  have  the  liberty  to  ex- 
amine their  religion,  and  to  enquire  into  the  grounds 
and  reafons  of  it  •,  fuch  I  mean  as  are  capable  of  this 
examination  and  enquiry  \  which  fome,  I  fhewed, 
are  not  •,  as  children,  w^ho  while  rhcy  are  in  that 
ftate,  are  only  fit  to  learn  and  believe  what  is  taught 
them  by  their  parents  and  teachers  :  and  likewife 
fuch  grown  perfons,  as  either  by  the  natural  weak- 
nefs  of  their  faculties,  or  by  fome  great  difadvan- 
tage  of  education,  are  of  a  very  low  and  mean  ca- 
pacity and  improvement  of  underftanding.  Thefe 
are  to  be  confider'd  as  in  the  condition  of  children 
and  learners  •,  and  therefore  muft  of  necefTity  truft 
and  rely  upon  the  judgment  of  others. 

2.  "  This  holding  faft  the  profefTion  of  our 
"  faith  without  wavering,"  docs  not  imply,  that 
when  men  upon  examination  and  enquiry  are  fettled, 
as  they  think  and  verily  believe,  in  the  true  religion, 
they  fiiould  obftinately  refufe  to  hear  any  reafon  that 
can  be  ofiercd  againft  tliem.  Both  thefe  principles 
I  fhewed  to  be  unreafonable,  and  arguments  of  a 
bad  caufe  and  religion. 

Ifhall 


profejjion  of  the  true  rdigion.  889    ' 

I  fhall  now  proceed  to  explain  the  meaning  of  ^  ^  ^  ^^-  " 
this  exhortation,  "  to  hold  fail  the  profeffion  of  our 
*'  faith  without  wavering,"  by  fhewing  in  the 

Second  place,  what  it  is  that  is  implied  in  the 
conflant  and  fteady  profeffion  of  the-  true  faith  and 
religion :  namely,  that  when  upon  due  fearch  and 
examination,  we  are  fully  fatisfied,  that  it  is  the  true 
religion  which  we  have  embraced,  or  as  St.  Peter 
exprefles  it,  ift  epiftle  v.  12.  ^*  that  this  is  the 
*'  true  grace  of  God,  wherein  we  ftand  ;"  that  then 
we  fhould  adhere  ftedfaftly  to  it,  and  hold  it  faft, 
and  not  fuffer  it  to  be  wrefted  from  us,  nor  our 
felves  to  be  moved  from  it,  by  any  pretences  or 
infinuations,  or  temptations  whatfoever.  For  there 
is  a  great  deal  of  difference  between  the  confidence 
and  fbedfaftnefs  of  an  ignorant  man,  who  hath  never 
confidered  things,  and  inquired  into  the  grounds  of 
them  j  and  the  affurance  and  fettlement  of  one, 
who  hath  been  well  inftru6ted  in  his  reHgion,  and 
hath  taken  pains  to  fearch  and  examine  to  the  bot- 
tom, the  grounds  and  reafons  of  what  he  holds  and 
profeffeth  to  believe.  The  firft  is  mere  wilfulnefs 
and  obftinacy.  A  man  hath  entertained,  and  drank 
in  fuch  principles  of  religion  by  education,  or  hath 
taken  them  up  by  chance  ;  but  he  hath  no  reafon 
for  them :  and  yet  however  he  came  by  them,  he 
is  refolved  to  hold  them  fail,  and  not  to  part  with 
them.  The  other  is  the  refolution  and  conilancy 
.  of  a  wife  man.  He  hath  embraced  his  reHgion  upon 
good  grounds,  and  he  fees  no  reafon  to  alter  it; 
and  therefore  is  refolved  to  ftick  to  it,  and  to  hold 
faft  the  profeffion  of  it  fledfaftly  to  the  end.  And 
to  this  purpofe  there  are  many  exhortations  and 
cautions  fcatter'd  up  and  down  the  writings  of  the 
holy  apoilles  •,  as  that  we  fhould  be  "  fledfaft  and 

3 


890  Of  conjlancy  in  the 

ERM.  «  unmoveable,  eftablifhed  in  the  truth,  rooted  and 
'  grounded  in  the  faith,"  and  that  we  fhould 
•  hold  fait  that  which  is  good,"  and  not  fuffer  oui" 
felves  "  to  be  carried  to  and  fro  with  every  wind  of 
"  dodlrine,  through  the  Height  of  men,  and  the 
''  cunning  craftinefs  of  thofe  that  lye  in  wait  to  de- 
"  ceive  -,  that  we  fhould  not  be  removed  from  him 
"  that  hath  called  us  unto  the  grace  of  Christ, 
*'  unto  another  gofpel ;  that  we  fhould  {land  fail  in 
"  one  Ipirit  and  one  mind,  ftriving  together  for  the 
*'  faith  of  the  golpel,  and  be  in  nothing  terrified  by 
"  our  adverfaries  ;"  and  that,  if  occafion  be,  we 
fhould  "  contend  earneilly  for  the  faith  which  was 
"  once  delivered  unto  the  faints  •,"  and  here  in  the 
text,  that  we  fhould,  "  hold  fail  the  profeffion  of 
"  our  faith  without  wavering/'  For  the  explain-* 
ing  of  this,  I  fhall  do  two  things  : 

I.  Confider  what  it  is  that  we  are  to  hold  fall ; 
namely,  "  the  profelnon  of  our  faith  ;"  and 

II.  How  we  are  to  hold  it  faft,  or  what  is  im- 
plied '^  in  holding  faft  the  profeflion  of  our  faith, 
"  without  wavering." 

I.  What  it  is  that  we  are  to  hold  fall  ;  namely, 
"  the  profeffion  of  our  faith  ;"  i.e.  of  the  chrifLian 
faith  or  religion  :  for,  I  told  you  before,  that  this 
profefTion  or  confeffion  of  our  faith,  or  hope  (as  the 
word  properly  fignifies)  is  an  allufion  to  that  profef- 
fion of  faith  which  was  made  by  all  thofe  who  were 
admitted  members  of  the  chriftian  church  by  bap- 
tifm  •,  of  which  the  apoftle  makes  mention  immedi- 
ately before  the  text,  when  he  fliys,  "  let  us  uraW 
*''  near  in  full  aflurance  of  faith,  having  our  hearts 
"  fprinkled  from  an  evil  confcience,  and  our  bodies 
*'  wafhed  with  pure  water  :"  i^.nd  then  it  folio vvs, 
"  let  us  hold  fall  the  profeffion  of  our  faith  with- 

''  out 


frofejjion  of  the  true  religion.  g^i 

**  out  wavering."    The  profefTion  of  faith  which  we  S  E  R  M« 

made  in  our  baptifm,  and  which  by  the  ancient  fa-  , 

thers  is  called  the  rule  of  faith,    and  which  is  now 

contained  in  that  which  we  call  the  apoftle's  creed, 

and  which  is  called  by  St.  Paul,  Rom.  vi.  17.  the 

"  form  of  do6lrine  which  was  delivered  to  them  ;'* 

i.  e.  to  all  Chriftians  ;  and  2  Tim.  i.  13.  "  the  form 

*'  of  found  words  ,  hold  faft,  faith  he,  the  form  of 

"  found  words  which  thou   haft  heard  of  me,    m 

*'  faith  and  love  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  ;"  and 

by  Su  Jude,  "  the  faith  which  was  once  delivered 

*'  unto  the  faints." 

So  that  it  is  the  firft  and  ancient  faith  of  the  chriA 
tian  church,  delivered  to  them  by  Christ  and  his 
apoftles,  which  we  are  here  exhorted  to  hold  faft  j 
the  neceffary  and  fundamental  articles  of  the  chrif- 
tian  faith  ;  and  by  confequence  all  thofe  truths  which 
have  a  neceffary  connexion  with  thofe  articles,  and 
are  implied  in  them,  and  by  plain  confequence  are 
to  be  deduced  from  them.  It  is  not  the  doubtful 
and  uncertain  traditions  of  men  ;  nor  the  partial 
didlates  and  do6lrines  of  any  church,  fince  the  pri- 
mitive times,  which  are  not  contained  in  the  hdly 
fcriptures  and  the  ancient  creeds  of  the  chriftian 
church,  but  have  been  fince  declared  and  impofed 
upon  the  chriftian  world ;  though  with  never  fo 
confident  a  pretence  of  antiquity  in  the  dodrines,  and 
of  infallibility  in  the  propofers  of  them  :  thefe  are  no 
part  of  that  faith  which  we  are  either  to  profefs,  or 
to  hold  faft  ;  becaufe  we  have  no  rcafon  to  admit 
the  pretences,  by  virtue  whereof  thofe  dodrines  or 
pradices  are  impofed ;  being  able  to  make  it  good, 
and  having  effedtually  done  it,  that  thofe  dodrines 
are  not  of  primitive  antiquity  •,  and  that  the  church, 
which  propofeth  them,  hath  no  more  daim  to  infal- 
libility. 


Of  conjlaiicy  in  the 

Jibllir\%  than  all  other  parts  of  the  chrlftlan  churcH; 
which  fincc  the  apollles  time  is  none  at  all. 

In  a  wort!  -,  no  other  dodrines  which  are  not  fuf- 
ficiently  revealed  in  fcripture,  either  in  exprefs  terms 
or  by  plain  and  neceflary  confequence  \  nor  any  rites 
of  worlhip,  nor  matters  of  pradlice,  which  are  not 
commanded  in  fcripture,  are  to  be  efteemed  any  part 
of  that  faith  in  religion,  the  profeflion  whereof  the 
apoflle  here  commands  all  Chriflians  "  to  hold  fait 
"  without  wavering  •,"  much  lefs  any  doctrines  or 
pradlices,  which,  are  repugnant  to  the  word  of  God, 
and  to  the  faith  and  pradlice  of  the  firft  ages  of 
Clirillianity  \  of  which  kind  I  Ihall  have  occafion  in 
my  following  difcourfe  to  inftance  in  feveral  particu- 
lars. In  the  mean  time  I  fhall  only  obferve,  that 
that  faith  and  religion  which  we  profefs,  and  which 
by  God's  grace  we  have  ever  held  fall,  is  that  which 
hath  been  acknowledged  by  all  chriftian  churches  in 
all  ages,  to  have  been  the  ancient  catholick  and  apo- 
llolick  faith,  and  cannot  (as  to  any  part  or  tittle  of 
it)  be  denied  to  be  fo,  even  by  the  church  of  Rome 
her  m. 
s\  proceed  to  the 

IKl  thing  which  I  propofed  to  confider ;  namely, 
how  we  are  to  hold  faft  the  profeflion  of  our  faith, 
or  what  is  implied  by  the  apoflle  in  this  exhortation, 
*'  to  hokl  faft  the  profeflion  of  our  faith,  without 
•'  wavering."  And  I  think  thefe  following  particu- 
lars may  very  well  be  fuppofed  to  be  implied  in  it. 

1 .  That  we  fliould  hold  faft  the  profeflion  of  our 
faith,  againft  the  confidence  of  men,  without  fcrip- 
ture or  reafon  to  fupport  their  confidence. 

2.  And  much  more  againft  the  confidence  of  men, 
contrary  to  fcripture,  and  reafon,  and  the  common 
fenfe  of  mankind, 

3,  Againft 


profejjion  of  the  true  religion^  89;^ 

3 .  Againft  all  the  temptations  and  terrors  of  the  ^  E  R  M. 
world. 

4.  Againft  all  vain  promifes  of  being  put  into  a 
fafer  condition,  and  groundlefs  hopes  of  getting  to 
heaven  upon  eafier  terms  in  another  religion. 

5.  Againft  all  the  cunning  arts  and  infinuations  of 
bufy  and  difputing  men,  whofe  defign  it  is  to  un- 
hinge men  from  their  religion,  and  to  gain  profelyteS 
to  their  own  party  and  fadion.  I  lliall  go  over  thefe 
with  as  much  clearnefs  and  brevity  as  I  can. 

I .  We  fliould  hold  fail  the  profeffion  of  our  faith, 
Againft  the  confidence  of  men,  without  fcripture  or 
reafon  to  fupport  that  confidence.  All  religion  is  ei- 
ther natural  or  inftituted.  The  rule  of  natural  reli- 
gion is  the  common  reafon  of  mankind :  the  rule  of 
inftituted  religion  is  divine  revelation,  or  the  word 
of  God  ;  which  all  Chriftians  before  the  council  of 
Trent  did  agree  to  be  contained  in  the  holy  fcriptures. 
So  that  nothing  can  pretend  to  be  religion,  but  what 
can  be  proved  to  be  fo,  one  or  both  of  thofe  ways ; 
either  by  fcripture  or  by  reafon,  or  by  both.  And 
how  confident  foever  men  may  be  of  opinions  defti- 
tute  of  this  proof;  any  man  that  underftands  the: 
grounds  of  religion,  will  without  any  more  ado  re- 
jed  them,  for  want  of  this  proof ;  and  notwith- 
ftanding  any  pretended  authority  or  infallibility  of 
the  church  that  impofeth  them,  will  have  no  more 
confideration  and  regard  of  them,  than  of  the  con- 
fident didates  and  alfertions  of  any  Enthufiaft  what- 
foever  ;  becaufe  there  is  no  reafon  to  have  regard  to 
any  m.an's  confidence,  if  the  arguments  and  reafons 
which  he  brings  bear  no  proportion  to  it.  We  fee 
in  experience  that  confidence  is  generally  ill  grounded, 
and  is  a  kind  of  palTion  in  the  underftanding,  and  i^ 
commonly  made  ufe  of,  like  fury  and  force,  to  fup- 

Vol.  V.  8  H  ply 


1. 


894  Of  conjlancy  m  the 

S  E  R  M.  ply  for  the  weaknefs  and  want  of  argument.  If  a 
'  ■  man  can  prove  what  he  fays  by  good  argument  \ 
there  is  no  need  of  confidence  to  back  and  fupport 
it.  We  may  at  any  time  truft  a  plain  and  fubftan- 
tial  reafon,  and  leave  it  to  make  it's  own  way,  and 
to  bear  out  itfelf.  But  if  the  man's  reafons  and  argu- 
ments be  not  good  -,  his  confidence  adds  nothing  of 
real  force  to  them,  in  the  opinion  of  wife  men,  and 
tends  only  to  it's  own  confufion.  Arguments  are 
like  powder,  which  will  cany  and  do  execution  ac- 
cording to  it's  true  fbrength  ;  and  all  the  reft  is  but 
noife.  And  generally  none  are  fo  much  to  be  fuf~ 
pedted  of  error,  or  a  defign  to  deceive,  as  thofe  that 
pretend  moft  confidently  to  infpiration  and  infallibi- 
lity :  as  we  fee  in  all  forts  of  enthufiafts,  who  pre- 
tend to  infpiration,  although  we  have  nothing  but 
their  own  word  for  it  \  for  they  work  no  miracles, 
and  all  pretence  to  infpiration  and  infallibility,  with- 
out miracle,  whether  it  be  in  particular  perfons,  or 
in  whole  churches,  is  enthufiaftical  •,  i.  e.  a  pretence 
to  infpiration  without  any  proof  of  it. 

And  therefore  St.  Paul  was  not  moved  by  the  boaft- 
ing  and  confidence  of  the  falfe  apoftles  •,  becaufe  they 
gave  no  proof  and  evidence  of  their  divine  infpira- 
tion and  commilTion,  as  he  had  done  \  for  which  he 
appeals  to  the  fenfe  of  men,  whether  he  had  not 
wrought  great  miracles  •,  which  the  falfe  apoftles  had 
not  done,  though  they  had  the  confidence  to  give 
out  themfelves  to  be  apoftles  as  well  as  he  •,  2  Cor. 
xii.  1 1,  12.  "  I  am  (fays  he)  become  a  fool  in  glo- 
*'  rying,  ye  have  compelled  me.  And  truly  the 
^'  figns  of  an  apoftle  were  wrought  among  you  in 
•'  all  patience,  in  figns,  and  wonders,  and  mighty 
*'  deeds."  And  Rev.  ii.  2.  Christ  there  com- 
mends the  churcli  of  Ephefus,  becaufc  *'  ft^e  had 

"  tried 


profejjion  of  the  true  religion, ^  895 

^*  tried  them,  which  faid  they  were  apoftles,    but  S  E  R  M. 
"  were  not ;  and  had  found  them  Hars."     And  as 
we  are  not  to  believe  every  one  that  fays  he  is  an 
apoftle,  fo  neither  every  one  that  pretends  to  be  a 
iwQQt^Q'i  of  the  apoftles,  and  to  be  endued  with  the 
fame  fpirit  of  infallibility  that  they  were  -,  for  thefe 
alfo,  when  they  are  tried  whether  they  be  the  fuc- 
cefTors  of  the  apoftles  or  not,  may  be  found  liars. 
And  therefore  St.  John  cautions  Chriftians  not  to  be- 
lieve every  fpirit,  (that  is,  every  one  that  pretends 
to  divine  infpiration  and  the  fpirit  of  God,)  "  but 
'^  to  try  the  fpirits,  whether  they  be  of  God  -,  be- 
"  caufe  many  falfe  prophets  are  gone  out  into  the 
^'  world,"    I  John  iv.  i.     And  therefore  the  confi- 
dence of  men  in  this  kind  ought  not  to  move  us, 
when  their  pretence  to  infallibility  is  deftitute  of  the 
proper  proof  and  evidence  of  it,  which  is  a  power 
of  miracles  ;  and  when  their  dodlrines  and  pradtices 
have  neither  the  evidence  of  reafon  or  fcripture  on 
their  fide. 

For  inftance ;  that  the  church  of  Rome  is  the  mo- 
ther and  miftrefs  of  all  churches ;  which  is  one  of 
the  new  articles  of  pope  Pius  the  IVth's  creed  ;  and 
yet  there  is  not  one  fyllable  in  fcripture  tending  to 
this  purpofe.  And  in  reafon  it  cannot  be,  that  any 
but  that  which  was  the  firft  chriftian  church  fhould 
be  the  mxOther  of  all  churches  \  and  that  the  church 
of  Rome  certainly  was  not,  and  the  church  of  Jeru- 
falem  undoubtedly  was. 

And  then  that  the  biftiop  of  Rome,  as  fucceftbr 
of  St.  Peter  there,  is  the  fupreme  and  univerfal  paftor 
of  Christ's  church  by  divine  appointment,  as  he 
ailumes  to  himfelf ,  and  that  it  is  neceftary  to  falva- 
tion,  for  every  human  creature  to  be  fubjed:  to  the 
biihop  of  Rome,  as  is  declared  in  their  canon-law  by 
8  H  2  a  con- 


8q6  Of  co'riftancy  in  the 

S  F  R  M.  aconftiuiticn  of  pope  Boniface  the  Vlllth,  which  con- 
_  '_;  ,  llitiition  is  connrmcd  in  the  laft  Lateran  council  •,  of  all 
which  there  is  not  the  leait  mention  in  fcripture,  nor 
any  divine  appointment  to  that  purpofc  to  be  found 
there.  And  it  is  againfc  reafon,  that  all  the  world 
fhould  be  obliged  to  trudge  to  Rome  for  the  deci-. 
fion  of  caufes  and  differences,  which  in  many  and 
the  moil  weighty  matters  are  referved  to  the  decifion 
of  that  fee,  and  can  be  determined  no  where  elfe. 
And  againft  reafon  likewife  it  is  to  found  this  uni- 
verfal  fupremacy  in  his  being  fuccefTor  of  St.  Peter; 
and  to  fix  it  in  the  bifhop  of  Rome,  rather  than  at 
Antioch  ;  when  it  is  certain,  and  granted  by  them- 
feives,  that  St.  Peter  was  firfl  bifliop  of  Antioch, 
and  out  of  all  queflion  that  he  was  billiop  of  An- 
tioch •,  but  not  lb,  that  he  was  bifliop  of  Rome. 

Nor  is  there  any  thing  in  fcripture  for  the  delive- 
rance of  fouls  out  of  purgatory  by  the  prayers  and 
riialTes  of  the  living.  The  whole  thing  is  ground- 
lefs,  and  not  agreeable  to  the  conftant  fuppoAtions 
of  fcripture  concerning  a  future  (late.  Nor  is  there 
any  reafon  for  it,  befides  that  which  is  not  fit  to  be 
given,  the  wealth  and  profit  which  it  brings  in. 

The  invocation  and  worfl-iip  of  the  bleffed  virgin, 
and  of  all  the  faints  departed,  is  deftitute  of  all  fcrip- 
ture-warrant  or  example,  and  confeffcd  by  themfelvcs 
not  to  have  been  owned  or  pradtifed  in  the  three  firft 
ages  of  the  church,  becaufe  it  looked  too  like  the 
heathen  idolatry  \  which  defer ves  to  be  well  confider- 
ed  by  thofe,  who  pretend  to  derive  their  whole  re- 
ligion from  Christ  and  his  apoflles  by  a  continued 
and  uninterrupted  fuccefTion.  And  this  pradice  is 
likewife  deftitute  of  all  colour  of  reafon  ^  unlefs  we 
be  affurcd,  that  they  hear  our  prayers  in  all  places  ; 
wliich  we  cannot  be,  unlefs  they  be  prefent  in  all 
3  places. 


profejjion  of  the  true  religion,  897 

places,  which  they  themfelves  do  not  believe;  orSERM. 
that  God  doth  fome  way  or  other  reveal  and  make 
known  to  them  the  prayers  which  are  made  to  them, 
which  we  cannot  pofTibly  be  alTured  of,  but  by  fome 
revelation  of  God  to  that  purpofe  ;  which  we  no 
where  find,  nor  doth  the  church  of  Rome  pretend 
to  it. 

But  I  proceed  to  the 

2d  Thing  ;  namely,  that  we  fhould  much  more 
*'  hold  fafb  the  profeflion  of  our  faith"  and  religion, 
againfl  the  confidence  of  men,  contrary  to  fcripture, 
and  reafon,  and  the  common  fenfe  of  mankind. 
For  thefe  are  the  chief  grounds  of  certainty,  which 
we  can  have  for  or  againft  any  thing  ;  and  if  thele 
be  clearly  on  our  fide,  we  ought  not  to  be  much 
moved  by  the  confidence  of  men,  concerning  any 
doctrines  or  pradices  of  religion,  which  are  plainly 
contrary  to  thefe.  If  in  points  wherein  we  have 
this  advantage  on  our  fide,  we  do  not  *'  hold  fafl: 
"  the  profeflion"  of  our  religion ;  our  error  and 
folly  are  capable  of  no  excufe.  And  this  advantage 
we  plainly  have  in  feveral  points  and  controverfies 
betwixt  us  and  the  church  of  Rome. 

As  in  the  worfliip  of  images  •,  which  is  as  ex- 
prefiy  and  clearly  forbidden  in  the  fecond  command- 
ment,  and  that  without  any  diftindion,  as  any  other 
thing  is  forbidden  in  the  whole  bible.  And  that  it 
is  fo  forbidden  in  this  commandment,  and  that  this 
commandment  is  flill  in  force  among  Chriftians,  was 
the  univerfal  fenfe  of  the  ancient  chriftian  church. 

Prayers  and  the  fervice  of  God  in  an  unknown 
tongue  are  dire6tly  contrary  to  the  veiy  nature  and 
end  of  religious  worlhip,  which  ought  to  be  a  rea- 
fonable  fervice  •,  which  it  cannot  be,  if  it  be  not  di- 
reded  by   our  underltandings,    and  accompanied 

with 


8^8  Of  conjlancy  in  the 

with  our  hearts  and  affedions :  but  if  it  be  per- 
formed in  an  unknown  tongue,  our  underftanding 
can  have  no  part  in  it ;  and  if  we  do  not  underftand 
it,  it  cannot  move  our  aflfedlions.  And  this  Uke- 
wife  is  plainly  contrary  to  fcripture  \  namely,  to  a 
large  diicourfe  of  St.  Paul's,  almoft  throughout  a 
whole  chapter,  where  he  purpofely  fets  himfclf  to 
ihew  the  unprofitablenefs  and  grofs  abfurdity  of 
praying,  or  celebrating  any  other  part  of  religious 
worlliip  in  an  unknown  tongue.  If  any  part  of  our 
religion  had  been  half  fo  clearly  condemned  in  fcrip- 
ture, as  this  is  (which  yet  is  the  conftant  and  gene- 
ral pradice  of  the  church  of  Rome)  we  muft  have 
*'  lain  down  in  our  lliame,  and  confufion  would 
*'  have  covered  us ;"  and  we  muft  either  have  re- 
jeded  the  authority  of  the  bible,  or  have  renounced 
that  point  of  our  rehgion,  whatever  it  had  been  ; 
though  it  had  been  dear  to  us  as  our  right  hand, 
and  our  right  eye,  we  muft  upon  fuch  plain  evidence 
of  fcripture  againft  it,  have  "  cut  it  oif,  and  pluck- 
*'  ed  it  out,  and  caft  it  from  us." 

The  like  may  be  faid  of  locking  up  the  fcriptures 
from  the  people  in  an  unknown  tongue,  contrary  to 
the  command  of  the  fcriptures  themfelves,  and  to 
the  great  end  and  defign  of  Almighty  God  in  the 
writing  and  publiftiing  of  them  ;  and  contrary  to 
the  perpetual  exhortations  and  councils  of  all  the  an- 
cient fathers  of  the  chriftian  church  for  a  great  ma- 
ny ages,  not  one  excepted.  They  are  hardly  more 
frequent,  and  copious,  and  earneft  in  any  argument  \ 
than  in  perfuading  people  of  all  ranks  and  condi- 
tions, to  the  conftant  and  careful  reading  of  the 
holy  fcriptures.  And  contrary  to  the  common  rea- 
fon  and  fenfe  of  mankind.  For  what  ftiould  men  be 
perfuaded  to  be  acquainted  withal  \  if  not  with  that 

which 


profejjion  of  the  true  religion.  899 

which  is  the  s^eat  inflrument  of  our  falvation  ?  That  S  E  R  M. 

T  TV 

book  which  was  written  on  purpofe  to  reveal  and 
convey  to  men  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  of  his 
will,  and  their  duty  ?  What  ihould  men  be  allowed 
to  know  •,  if  not  that  which  is  the  beft  and  moll 
effed:ual  means,  to  dire6b  and  bring  them  to  heaven, 
or  turn  them  from  fin,  and  to  preferve  them  from 
eternal  mifery  ?  When  our  Saviour  would  repre- 
fent  the  beft  and  moll  effedlual  means  of  bringing 
men  to  happinefs,  and  faving  them  from  the  eternal 
torments  of  hell,  in  the  parable  of  the  rich  man  and 
Lazarus,  he  brings  in  Abraham,  giving  the  beft 
advice  he  could  to  the  rich  man  who  was  in  hell, 
concerning  his  brethren  that  were  upon  earth,  how 
they  might  prevent  their  coming  into  that  place  of 
torment  \  and  he  direds  them  to  the  fcriptures,  as 
the  beft  and  moft  effedual  means  to  that  purpofe : 
"  They  have  (fays  he)  Mofes  and  the  prophets : 
*'  let  them  hear  them." 

Now  if  in  the  church  of  God  among  the  Jews,  ; 
the  fame  courfe  had  been  taken,  that  is  now  in  the 
church  of  Rome  j  the  rich  man  might ,  and  in  all 
reafon  ought  to  have  replied,  "  Nay,  father  Abra- 
"  ham  ;  but  they  have  not  Mofes  and  the  pro- 
"  phets,  nor  are  they  permitted  to  read  them  in  a 
"  language  that  they  can  underftand  •,  and  there- 
"  fore  this  advice  is  of  no  ufe  to  them  :"  and  then  , 
he  might  with  reafon  have  prefs'd  him,  as  he  did, 
that  "  one  might  be  fent  to  them  from  the  dead,  to 
"  teftify  unto  them."  But  it  appears  that  Abra- 
ham was  very  pofitive  and  peremptory  in  this  ad- 
vice ;  and  that  he  prefers  the  knowledge  of  the 
fcriptures,  to  any  other  way  and  means,  that  could 
bethought  of-,  and  that  if  this  had  not  it's  effect  . 
to  perfuade  men  to  repentance,  and  to  preferve  them  X. 

f^om 


Of  conjlancy  in  the 

from  hell,  l"re  did  not  know  any  thing  elfe  that  was 
fo  likely  to  do  it  :  for  he  concludes,  "  If  they  hear 
"  not  Mofes  and  the  prophets  •,  neither  will  they 
*'  be  perfuaded  though  one  rofe  from  the  dead." 
And  this  is  the  conclufion  of  the  parable  ;  which 
plainly  fhews,  what  was  the  rnain  fcope  and  defign 
of  our  Saviour  in  it  ;  namely,  to  recommend  to 
us  the  ufe  of  the  holy  fcriptures,  as  the  beft  and  mod 
effedual  means,  which  the  wifdom  of  God  hath 
provided  for  the  falvation  of  mankind. 

And  now  any  man  would  be  apt  to  think,  that 
the  declared  judgment  of  our  Saviour  in  the  cafe 
fhould  go  a  great  way  j  even  with  the  mod  infalli- 
ble church  in  the  world.  However  this  we  muft 
fay,  that  it  is  in  truth  a  very  hard  cafe,  to  which 
the  church  of  Rome  hath  reduced  men  ;  that  it  will 
neither  allow  them  falvation  out  of  their  church,  nor 
the  beft  and  moft  effe6lual  means  of  falvation,  when 
they  are  in  it.  I  might  fay  much  more  upon  this 
head  ;  but  this  I  hope  may  be  fufficient. 

The  next  inftance  fhall  be  in  the  do(ftrine  of 
tranfubftantiat'on  ;  which  is  contrary  to  the  fcrip- 
tures, which  after  confecration  fo  frequently  call  the 
elements  bread  and  wine  ^  and  which,  without  rea- 
fon  or  neceffity,  puts  an  abfurd  and  impoflible  fenfe 
^ipon  thofe  words  of  our  Saviour,  "  This  is  my 
"  body;'*  which  do  no  more  prove  tranfubftantia- 
tion  ;  than  thofe  words,  "  This  cup  is  the  new 
'^  teftament,"  do  prove  that  the  material  cup  which 
was  ufed  in  the  facrament,  was  fubftantially  changed 
into  the  new  teftament  •,  and  no  more,  than  thofe 
texts  which  affirm  God  to  have  eyes,  and  ears,  and 
hands,  do  prove  that  he  really  hath  fo.  But  be- 
fides  the  contrariety  of  this  dodlrine  to  fcripture, 
nothing  can  be  more  repugnant  to  reafon.     It  is  fo 

big 


profejjion  of  the  true  religion^.  90T 

big  With  contradi6lions,   and  fo  furfeited  of  Impof-  S  E  R  M. 
fibilities,  that  it  would  be  endlefs  to  reckon  them  up. 
And  befides  all  this,  it  plainly  contradi6ls  the  clear 
and  conftant  evidence  of  four  of  our  five  fenfes  ; 
which  whoever  contradids,  undermines  the  founda-  ■ 
tion  of  all  certainty. 

And  then  the  communion  in  one  kind  is  plainly 
contrary  to  our  Saviour's  inftitution  of  the  facra- 
ment  in  both  kinds ;  as  they  themfelves  acknow- 
ledge. And  therefore  the  council  of  Conftance, 
being  fenfible  of  this,  was  forced  to  decree  it  with 
an  exprefs  7ion  ohftante  to  the  Inftitution  of  Christ, 
and  the  pra6lice  of  the  apoftles  and  the  primitive 
church.  And  their  dodtrine  of  concomitancy  (as  if 
the  blood  were  in  the  flefh,  and  together  with  it) 
will  not  help  the  matter  :  becaufe  in  the  facrament 
Christ's  body  is  reprefented  as  broken,  and  pierced, 
and  exhaufted,  and  drained  of  it's  blood  ;  and  hLs 
blood  is  reprefented  as  ihed  and  poured  out ;  fo 
that  one  kind  can  by  no  means  contain  and  exhibit 
both. 

The  next  inftanceis,  the  repetition  of  Christ's 
propitiatory  facrifice  in  the  mafs,  fo  often  as  that  is. 
celebrated :  againft  all  reafon  ;  becaufe  the  facrifice 
of  Christ  once  offered  upon  the  crofs,  was  a  full 
and  perfed  propitiation  for  the  fins  of  the  whole 
world  ;  and  therefore  ought  not,  becaufe  it  needs 
not,  to  be  again  repeated  for  that  end,  in  any  man- 
ner whatfoever.  And  it  is  diredly  contrary  to  the 
main  fcope  of  a  great  part  of  this  epiftle  to  the  He- 
brews, which  Ihews  the  excellency  of  the  gofpel 
above  the  law  in  this  refpedl,  that  the  expiatory  fa- 
crifice of  the  gofpel  was  offered  once  for  all  -,  where- 
as the  facrifices  of  the  law  were  perpetually  repeat- 

VoL.  V.  '        81  cdt 


Of  conjlancy  in  the 

ed.  Chap.  vii.  27.  fpcaking  of  Christ  •,  "  who 
"  needs  not  daily,  as  thofe  high-priefls,  to  offer  up 
"  facrilices  ;  firft  for  his  own  fins,  and  then  for  the 
*'  people's :  for  this  he  did  once  when  he  offered 
"  up  himfelf."  Chap.  i\.  26.  "  But  once  in'the 
"  end  of  the  world  hath  he  appeared,  to  take  away 
*'  fin  by  the  facrifice  of  himfelf :  and  as  it  is  ap- 
*'  pointed  for  all  men  once  to  die,  fo  Christ  was 
*'  once  offered  to  bear  the  fins  of  many."  And 
chap.  X.  10.  "  By  the  which  will  we  are  fandiified, 
"  through  the  offering  of  the  body  of  Jesus 
*'  Christ  once  for  all:"  and  verfe  the  12th, 
*'  But  this  man,  after  he  had  offered  one  facrifice 
*'  for  fins,  for  ever  fat  down  on  the  right  hand  of 
"  God."  And  verfe  the  14th,  "  For  by  one  of- 
*'  fering  he  hath  perfected  for  ever  them  that  are 
*'  fandtificd."  There  cannot  be  plainer  texts  for 
any  thing  in  the  bible,  than  that  this  propitiatory  fa- 
crifice was  never  to  be  repeated. 

And  whereas  they  fay,  that  the  facrifice  of  the 
mafs  is  an  unbloody  facrifice  :  this,  inftead  of  bring- 
ing them  off,  doth  but  intangle  the  matter  m.ore. 
For  if  blood  be  offered  in  the  facrifice  of  the  mafs, 
how  is  it  an  unbloody  facrifice  ?  What  can  be  more 
bloody  than  blood  ?  And  if  blood  be  not  offered, 
how  is  it  propitiatory  ?  Since  the  apoftle  lays  it  down 
for  a  certain  rule,  that  "  without  lliedding  of  blood, 
'*  there  is  no  remiffion"  of  fins:  i.e.  there  can  be 
no  propitiation  for  the  fms  of  the  living  or  the  dead, 
which  the  church  of  Rome  affirms  there  is. 

I  might  have  added  one  or  two  inflances  more  ; 
and  then  fhould  have  proceeded  to  fhew,  in  the  third 
place,  that  we  are  to  "  hold  faft  the  profeffion  of 
'''  our  faith  without  wavering,"  againfl  all  the  temp- 
tations 


profejjton  of  the  true  religion.  9^3 

tations  and  terrors  of  the  world ;  which  is  more 
efpecially  and  principally  here  intended  by  the  apoftle 
in  this  exhortation. 

But  I  fhall  proceed  no  farther  at  prefent. 


SERMON    LX. 

Of  Conftancy  in  the  Profeffion  of  the 
true  Religion. 


H  E  B.    X.  23. 

luet  us  hold  faft  the  profeffion  of  our  faith  without 
wavering  y  for  he  is  faithful  that  promifed, 

IN  thefe  words,  I  have  told  you,  are  contained      S E  R  M. 
Firft,  an    exhortation  to  "  hold  fail  the  pro-     •'"^• 
"  feffion  of  our  faith,  or  hope,  without  wavering."  The  third 

Secondly,  an  argument  or  encouragement  there-  fermon  on 
to  ;  "  becaufe  he  is  faithful  that  promifed."  I  am  '^^'  ^'''^* 
yet  upon  the  firft  of  thefe  ♦,  the  exhortation  to  Chri- 
ftians,  to  be  conftant  and  fteady  in  the  profeffion  of 
their  rehgion  :  "let  us  hold  faft  the  profeffion  of 
*'  our  faith  without  wavering."  And  that  we 
might  the  better  comprehend  the  true  and  full  mean- 
ing of  this  exhortation,  I  ftiewed, 

Firft,  negatively,  what  is  not  meant  and  intended 
by  it.     And  I  mentioned  thefe  two  particulars. 

I .  The  apoftle  doth  not  hereby  intend,  that  thofe 
who  are  capable  of  enquiring  into,  and  examining 

8  I  2  the 


504  Of  conjlancy  in  the 

S  E  R  M.  the  grounds  of  their  religion,  fhould  not  have  the  li- 
berty to  do  it.     Nor, 

2.  That  when  upon  due  enquiry  and  examina- 
tion, men  are  fettled,  as  they  think  and  verily  be- 
heve,  in  the  true  faith  and  religion,  they  fhould  ob- 
llinately  refufe  to  hear  any  reafon  that  can  be  offered 
againft  their  prefent  perfuafion.  Both  thefe  I  fhew- 
ed  to  be  unreafonable,  and  arguments  of  a  bad 
caufe  and  religion  :  and  therefore  neither  of  them 
can  be  intended  by  the  apoftle  in  this  exhortation. 

Secondly,  I  proceeded  pofitively  to  explain  the 
meaning  of  this  exhortation.  And  to  this  purpofe  I 
propofed, 

I.  To  confider  what  it  is,  that  we  are  to  hold 
fall,  viz.  the  confefTion  or  "  profeflion  of  our  faith.'* 
The  ancient  chriftian  faith,  of  which  every  Chriflian 
makes  profeflion  in  his  baptifm  :  for  of  that  the 
apoftle  here  fpeaks,  as  appears  by  the  context ;  not 
the  doubtful  and  uncertain  traditions  of  men,  nor 
the  impious  di6lates  and  do6lrines  of  any  church, 
not  contained  in  the  holy  fcriptures,  impofed  upon 
she  chriftian  church  •,  though  with  never  fo  confi- 
dent a  pretence  of  the  antiquity  of  the  dodrines  pro- 
pofed, or  of  the  infallibility  of  the  propofers  of  them. 
And  then  I  proceeded  in  the 

II.  Place,  to  ftiew  how  we  are  "  to  hold  faft  the 
"  profelTion  of  our  faith  without  wavering."  And 
I  mentioned  thefe  following  particulars,  as  probably 
implied  in  the  apoftle' s  exhortation. 

1.  That  we  fhould  "  hold  faft  the  profelTion  of 
"  our  faith,"  againft  the  confidence  of  men,  with- 
out Icripture  or  reafon  to  fupport  their  confidence. 

2.  And  much  more  againft  the  confidence  of  men, 
againft  fcripture  a^id  reafon,  and  the  common  fenfe 
of  mankind. 

3.  Againft 


profejion  of  the  true  religion »  go^ 

3.  Againft  all  the  temptations  and  terrors  of  the  SER  M, 
world.  ,    ^^' 

4.  Againft  all  vain  promifes  of  being  put  into  a 
fafer  condition,  and  groundlefs  hopes  of  getting  to 
heaven  upon  eafier  terms,  in  another  religion. 

5.  Againft  all  the  cunning  arts  and  infinuations 
of  bufy  and  difputing  men,  whofe  defign  it  is  to 
unhinge  men  from  their  religion,  and  to  gain  profe- 
lytes  to  their  party  and  fadlion. 

1.  We  are  "  to  hold  faft  the  profefTion  of  our 
*'  faith,"  againft  the  confidence  of  men,  without 
fcripture  or  reafon  to  fupport  their  confidence.  And 
of  this  I  gave  feveral  inftances.  As  in  the  pretence 
of  the  church  of  Rome  to  infallibility,  without  any 
proof  or  evidence  of  it,  either  by  fcripture  or  mira- 
cles :  I  mean  fuch  miracles,  as  are  fufHciently  atteft- 
cJ.  For  as  for  their  legends,  fince  the  wifeft  among 
themfelves  give  no  credit  to  them,  I  hope,  they  do 
not  exped  that  we  fhould  believe  them,  or  be  mov- 
ed by  them.  And  then  their  pretence  that  the  church 
of  Rome  is  the  mother  and  miftrefs  of  all  churches ; 
which  is  now  made  an  article  of  their  creed.  And 
that  the  bifhop  of  Rome,  as  fuccelTor  of  St.  Peter 
there,  is  by  divine  appointment  the  fupreme  and 
univerfal  paft or  of  Christ's  church.  And  that  it 
is  neceftary  to  falvation,  for  every  human  creature 
to  be  fubjedl  to  him.  And  laftly,  their  invocation 
and  worlhip  of  the  blefled  virgin,  and  faints  depart- 
ed ;  without  any  warrant  or  example  of  any  fuch 
thing,  either  in  fcripture,  or  in  the  pradice  of  the  firft 
ages  of  the  chriftian  religion  -,  and  without  fufHcient 
ground  to  believe  that  they  hear  the  prayers  which 
are  put  up  to  them. 

2.  Much  more  are  we  '^  to  hold  faft  the  profef- 
.**  fion  of  our  faith,*'  againft  the  confidence  of  men, 

I  contrary 


oo6  Of  conjlajicy  in  the 

S  E  R  M.  contrary  to  fcripture  and  reafon  and  the  common 
_  L^  i  ienfe  of  mankind.  And  here  I  inftanced  in  the  wor- 
fhip  of  images  \  the  locking  up  of  the  fcriptures 
from  the  people  -,  and  celebrating  the  publick  pray- 
ers and  fervice  of  God  in  an  unknown  tongue  \  in 
their  dodlrine  of  tranfubftantiation,  their  commu- 
nion in  one  kind,  and  their  daily  repetition  in  the 
facrifice  of  the  mafs,  of  the  propitiatory  facrifice  of 
Christ  •,  which  was  offered  "  once  for  all,"  and  is  of 
eternal  virtue  and  efficacy,  and  therefore  ought  not, 
becaufe  it  needs  not,  like  Jewifli  facrifices  under  the 
law,  to  be  repeated. 

To  thefe  inftances,  which  I  have  already  fpoken 
to,  I  fhall  add  one  or  two  more ;  as  namely,  that  to 
the  due  adminiftration  of  the  facraments,  an  inten- 
tion in  the  miniiler  at  leaft  to  do  what  the  church 
does,  is  requifite.  This  is  exprefly  defined,  and  un- 
der an  anathema  upon  all  that  Ihall  fay  otherwife, 
by  the  council  of  Trent,  felT.  the  feventh,  can.  i  ith ; 
which  is  to  make  the  validity  and  virtue  of  the  fa- 
craments to  depend  upon  the  intention  of  the  prieft 
or  miniiler.  So  that  if  in  the  adminiftration  of 
baptifm,  he  do  not  intend  to  baptize  the  party  he 
pretends  to  baptize,  then  it  is  no  baptifm,  and  con- 
fequently  the  perfon  baptized  is  not  made  a  member 
of  Christ's  church-,  nor  is  any  grace  or  fpecial 
benefit  conferred  upon  him  •,  nor  is  he  a  Chriftian. 
So  likewife  in  the  facramentof  the  Lord's  fupper^ 
if  the  prieft  do  not  intend  to  confecrate  the  hoft, 
then  is  it  no  facrament  \  and  they  that  receive  it,  re- 
ceive no  benefit  by  it  -,  and  (which  according  to  their 
opinion  is  a  dreadful  confequence)  by  the  words  of 
confecration,  there  is  no  change  made  of  the  ele- 
ments into  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  and 
confequently  they  that  give  adoration  to  the  facra- 
ment 


profejjion  of  the  true  religion.  907 

ment^  in  '  fuch  cafes,  worfhip  bread  and  wine,  for  S  E  R  M. 
God  ;  which  is  idolatry.  And  fo  likewife  in  their 
facrament  of  penance,  though  the  prieft  pronounce 
the  words  of  abfolution ;  yet  if  he  do  not  intend  to 
abfolve  the  penitent,  though  he  be  never  fo  truly 
penitent,  and  God  on  his  part  is  ready  to  forgive 
him  •,  yet  if  the  prieft  do  not  intend  to  do  fo,  there 
is  nothing  done,  and  the  man  is  ftill  in  his  fin.  So 
likewife  in  ordination  (which  is  another  of  their  fa- 
craments)  if  the  bifhop  do  not  intend  to  ordain  the 
man  ;  he  is  no  prieft,  and  all  that  he  does  as  a  prieft 
afterwards,  either  in  adminiftration  of  baptifm,  or 
the  Lord's  fupper,  or  the  abfolution  of  penitents, 
all  is  vain,  and  of  no  effeft.  Nay,  in  marriage  (which 
they  will  needs  have  to  be  a  facrament  too)  if  the 
intention  of  the  prieft  be  wanting  •,  there  is  nothing 
done,  the  contradb  is  null'd,  and  they  that  are  fo 
married  do  really  live  in  adultery  ;  though  they  do 
not  know  it,  nor  have  any  fufpicion  of  it. 

Now  this  is  contrary  to  fcripture  and  the  whole 
tenour  of  the  gofpel,  which  promifeth  the  benefit 
and  efficacy  of  the  facraments,  to  all  thofe  that  per- 
form the  conditions  of  the  covenant  which  are  re- 
quired on  their  parts,  and  declares  forgivenefs  of  fins 
to  thofe  who  confefs  them  to  God,  and  truly  repent 
of  them. 

And  there  is  not  the  leaft  intimation  given  in 
the  bible,  that  the  viKue  and  efficacy  of  the  facra- 
ments does  depend  upon  the  intention  of  him  that 
adminifters  them ;  or  that  the  forgivenefs  of  fins  is 
fufpended  upon  the  intention  or  abfolution  of  the 
prieft ;  but  only  upon  the  fmcere  refolution  of  the 
penitent.  And  furely  nothing  can  be  more  abfurd, 
and  contrary  to  reafon,  than  that  when  men  have 
performed  all  the  conditions  which  the  gofpel  re- 
quires 5 


LX. 


908  Of  conjlancy  in  the 

SERJvf.  quires-,  yet  they  fhoiild  notwithftanding  this  be  de- 
prived of  all  the  blefTings  and  benefits  which  God 
hath  promifed,  and  intends  to  confer  upon  them ; 
becaufe  the  prieft  hath  not  the  fame  intention.  So 
that  when  a  man  hath  done  all  that  he  can  "  to 
*'  work  out  his  own  falvation,"  he  fhall  be  never 
the  nearer  ;  only  for  want  of  that  which  is  whol- 
ly out  of  his  power  j  the  right  intention  of  the 
priefl:. 

Befides,  that  after  all  their  boafts  of  the  fafe  con- 
dition of  men  in  their  church,  and  the  moft  certain 
and  infallible  means  of  falvation  to  be  had  in  it  ; 
this  one  principle  (that  the  intention  of  the  priefl  is 
neceflary  to  the  validity  and  virtue  of  the  facraments) 
puts  the  falvation  of  men  upon  the  greateft  hazard 
and  uncertainty  •,  and  fuch  as  it  is  impofTible  for  any 
man  either  to  difcover  or  prevent,  unlefs  he  had  fome 
certain  way  to  know  the  heart  and  intention  of  the 
prieft.  For  upon  thefe  terms,  who  can  know  whe- 
ther any  man  be  a  prieft,  and  really  ordained ;  or 
not  .'*  Nay,  whether  he  be  a  Chriftian,  and  have 
been  truly  baptized  ;  or  not  ?  And  confequently 
whether  any  of  his  adminift rations  be  valid,  and  we 
have  any  benefit  and  advantage  by  them  ?  Becaufe 
all  this  depends  upon  the  knowledge  of  that,  which 
we  neither  do  nor  can  know. 

So  that  when  a  man  hath  confcientioufly  done  all 
that  God  requires  of  any  man,  to  make  him  capa- 
ble of  falvation  •,  yet  without  any  fault  of  his,  the 
want  of  intension  in  an  idle- minded  man  may  fru- 
ftrate  all :  and  though  the  man  hath  been  baptized, 
and  do  truly  believe  the  gofpel,  and  hath  fincerely 
repented  of  his  fins,  and  lived  a  moft  holy  life  \  yet 
all  this  may  fignify  nothing,  and  after  all  he  may 
.be  no  Chriftian  j  becaufe  his  baptifm  was  invalid  : 

an(i 


profeffwi  of  the  true  religion,  gog 

and  all  the  promifes  of  God  to  the  means  of  falva-  S  E  R  M. 
tion  which  his  goodncfs  and  wifdom  hath  prefcribed, 
may  be  of  no  efBcacy  •,  if  the  pried  do  not  intend 
in  the  adminiflration  of  the  facraments  to  do  that 
which  God  and  the  church  intend. 

Now  if  this  be  true  ;  there  is  certainly  no  churchy 
in  the  world,  in  which  the  falvation  of  men  runs 
fo  many  hazards  ;  and  yet  all  this  hazard  and  un- 
certainty has  it's  rife,  from  a  fcholaftical  point,  which 
is  directly  contrary  to  ail  the  notions  of  mankind 
concerning  the  goodnefs  of  God,  and  to  the  clear 
reafon  of  the  thing,  and  to  the  conitant  tenor  of  the 
gofpel  ;  and  which  was  never  aiierted  by  any  of  the 
ancient  fathers ;  much  lefs  defxned  by  any  council 
before  that  of  Trent  :  fo  that  it  is  a  doctrine  new 
and  heedlefs,  and  in  the  neceifary  confequences  of  it 
unreafonable  and  abfurd  to  the  utmoft  degree. 

The  laft  inftance  I  Ihall  mention,  is  their  rule  of 
faith.  The  rule  of  fiith  univerfally  received  and  ac- 
knowledged by  the  chriflian  church  in  all  ages,  be- 
fore the  council  of  Trent,  was  the  word  of  God, 
contained  in  the  canonical  books  of  holy  fcripture ; 
which  were  therefore  by  the  church  called  canonical, 
becaufe  they  were  the  rule  of  faith  and  manners,  of  . 
the  do6lrihes  to  be  believed,  and  the  duties  to  be 
pradlifed  by  all  Chrifbians.  But  when  the  errors  and 
corruptions  of  the  Romifh  church  were  grown  to  the 
height,  and  the  pope  and  his  council  at  Trent  were 
refolved  not  to  retrench  and  reform  them,  they  faw 
it  neceflary  to  enlarge  and  lengthen  out  their  rule  *, 
becaufe  the  ancient  rule  of  the  holy  fcrlptures  would 
by  no  means  reach  feveral  of  the  dodrines  and  prac- 
tices of  that  church,  which  they  v/ere  refolved  to 
maintain  and  make  good  by  one  means  or  other : 
as  namely,    the  dodrine  of  tranfubftantiation  •,    of 

Vol.  V'.  8  K  purga- 

I. 


Of  conjiancy  in  the 

purgatoiy  -,  and  of  the  feven  facraments  :  and  the 
pradlice  of  the  worfliip  of  faints,  and  images;  of 
the  fcriptures,  and  the  fervice  of  God  in  an  unknown 
tongue  •,  of  indulgences ;  and  the  communion  in  one 
kind ;  and  feveral  other  fuperflitious  pra6lices  in  ufe 
among  them. 

Now  to  enlarge  their  rule  to  the  bed  advantage  for 
the  juftification  of  thefe  do6lrines  and  pradices,  they 
took  thefe  two  ways. 

Firft,  they  have  added  to  the  canonical  books  of 
the  old  teilament,  which  were  received  by  the  Jew- 
iih  church,  (to  whom  were  committed  the  oracles  of 
God)  I  fay  to  thefe  they  have  added  feveral  apocry- 
phal books  not  warranted  by  divine  infpiration,  be- 
caufe  they  were  written  after  prophecy  and  divine  in- 
fpiration was  ceafed  in  the  Jewilli  church  \  Malachi 
being  the  laft  of  their  prophets,  according  to  the 
general  tradition  of  that  church.  But  becaufe  the 
addition  of  thefe  books  did  not  make  a  rule  of  faith 
and  pra6lice  large  enough  for  their  purpofe  ;  in  imi- 
tation of  the  Jews,  in  the  time  of  the  greateil  con- 
fufion  and  degeneracy  of  that  church,  they  added 
in  the 

Second  place  to  their  books  of  fcripture,  which 
they  call  the  v/ritten  word,  an  unwritten  word, 
which  they  call  oral  tradition  from  Christ  and  his 
apoftles  •,  which  they  declare  to  be  of  equal  autho- 
rity with  the  holy  fcriptures  themfelves  •,  and  that  it 
ought  to  be  received  with  the  fame  pious  veneration 
and  affection  :  of  which  traditions,  they  being  the 
keepers  and  judges,  they  may  extend  them  to  what 
they  pleafe,  and  having  them  in  their  own  breafts, 
they  may  declare  whatever  they  have  a  mind  to,  to 
have  been  a  conllant  and  univcrfal  tradition  of  their 
church ;  though  it  is  evident  to  common  fenfe,  that 

nothing 


profejjion  of  the  true  religion,  911 

nothing  can  be  more  uncertain,  and  more  liable  to  ^  E  R  ^^• 
alteration  and  miftake,  than  tradition,  at  the  diilance 
of  fo  many  ages,  brought  down  by  v/ord  of  mouth, 
without  writing,  and  pafling  through  fo  many  hands.  , 
He  that  can  think  thefe  to  be  of  equal  certainty  and  * 
authority  with  what  is   delivered  by  writing,    and 
brought  down  by  books,  undertakes  the  defence  of 
a  ftrange  paradox,  viz.  that  general  rumour  and  re- 
port of  things  faid  and  done  1 500  years  ago,  is  of  \ 
equal  authority  and  credit  with  a  record,  and  a  writ- 
ten hiflory. 

By  which  proceeding  of  the  council  of  Trent, 
concerning  the  rule  of  faith  and  pradice ;  it  is  ve- 
ry  evident  that  they  had  no  mind  to  bring  their  faith 
to  the  ancient  rule,  the  holy  fcriptures.     That  they 
knew  could  not  be  done  ;    and  therefore  they  were 
refolved  to  fit  their  mle  to  their  faith.     And  this 
foundation  being  laid  in  their  firft  decree',  all  the  reft 
would  afterwards  go  on  very  fmoothly.     Fordo  but 
give  men  the  making  of  their  rule,  and  they  can 
make  good  any  thing  by  it. "    And  accordingly  the 
council  of  Trent  having  thus  fixt  and  fitted  a  rule  to 
their  own  purpofe  ;  in  the  conclufion  of  that  decree, 
they  give  the  world  fair  warning,  upon  what  grounds, 
and  in  what  ways  they  intend  to  proceed  in  their  fol- 
lowing decrees  of  pra6tice,  and  definitions  of  faith. 
Omnes  itaque  intelligent^  quo  or  dine  ^  via  ipfa  fynodus 
;poJi  ja5lum  fidei  confejfionis  fundament  urn  fit  progrejfura^ 
&c.     "  Be  it  known  therefore  to  all  men,  in  what 
*'  order  and  way  the  fynod,    after  having  laid  this 
**  foundation  of  the  confefiion  of  faith,  will  proceed ; 
"  and  what  teilimonies  and  proofs  fhe  chiefly  in- 
"  tends  to  make  ufe  of,  for  the  confirmation  of  doc- 
"  trines,  and  reformation  of  manners  in  the  church.'* 
And  no  doubt  all  men  do  fee  very  plainly  to  what 

8  K  2  purpofe 


Of  conjlancy  in  the 

purpofe  this  foundation  is  laid  of  fo  large  a  rule  df 
faith.  And  this  being  admitted,  how  eafy  is  it  for 
thicni  to  confirm  and  prove  whatever  doc^lrines  and 
practices  they  have  a  mind  to  eflablifh  ? 

But  if  this  be  a  new,  and  another  foundation,  than 
that  which  the  great  author  and  founder  of  our  reli- 
gion hath  kid  and  bulk  his  church  upon,  viz.  "  the 
."  foundation  of  the  prophets  and  apoftles  i"  it  is  no 
matter  what  they  build  upon  it.  And  if  they  go  about 
to  prove  any  thing  by  the  new  parts  of  this  rule  ; 
by  the  apocryphal  bocks  which  they  have  added  to 
the  ancient  canon  of  the  fcriptures,  brought  dovv^n 
to  us  by  the  general  tradition  of  the  chrivtian 
church  •,  and  by  their  pretended  unwritten  traditions : 
we  do  with  reafon  reject  this  kind  of  proof,  and  dc- 
fire  them  firil  to  prove  their  rule,  before  they  pre- 
tend to  prove  any  thing  by  it :  for  we  proteft  againft 
this  rule  as  never  declared  and  owned  by  the  chri- 
ftian  church,  nOr  proceeded  upon  by  the  ancient  fa- 
thers of  the  church,  nor  by  any  council  whatfoever, 
before  the  council  of  Trent, 

In  vain  then  doth  the  church  of  Rome  vaunt  it- 
felf  of  the  antiquity  of  their  faith  and  religion  -,  when 
the  very  foundation  and  rule  of  it  is  but  of  yeilerday  j 
a  new  thing  never  before  known  or  heard  of  in  the 
chriftian  world  :  whereas  the  foundation  and  rule  of 
our  religion  is  the  word  of  God,  contained  in. the 
holy  fcriptures  •,  to  which  Chriftians  in  ail  ages  have 
appealed,  as  the  only  rule  of  faith  and  life. 
I  proceed  nov/  to  the 

3.  Thing  I  propofcd,  viz.  that  wc  are  "  to  hold 
''  faft  the  profeQlon  of  our  faith  without  wavering," 
againft  all  the  temptations  and  terrors  of  the  world. 
And  this  feems  more  efpccially  and  principally  to  be 
here  intended  by  tlie  apoftle  in  this  exhortation. 

I  fhall 


profejfion  of  the  true  religion.  g  1 5 

"  I  fhall  firft  fpeak  of  the  temptations  of  the  world.  S  E  R  M. 
And  they  are  chiefly  thefe  two  •,  the  temptation  of 
fafhion  and  example :  and  of  worldly  intereft  and  ad- 


vantage. 


I.  Of  fafhion  and  example.  This  in  truth  and 
reality  is  no  ftrong  argument  ;  and  yet  in  experience 
and  effedl  it  is  often  found  to  be  very  powerful.  It 
is  frequently  feen,  that  this  hath  many  times  too 
great  an  influence  upon  weak  and  fooliHi  minds. 
Men  are  apt  to  be  carried  dov/n  v/ith  the  ftream, 
and  to  follow  a  multitude  in  that  which  is  evil.  But 
more  efpecially  men  are  prone  to  be  fv/ayed  by  great 
examples  ;  and  to  bend  themfelves  to  fuch  an  obfe- 
quioufnefs  to  their  fuperiors  and  betters,  that  in 
compliance  with  them,  they  are  ready  not  only  to 
change  their  afredion  to  perfons  and  things,  as  they 
do  ',  but  even  their  judgment  alfo  ;  and  that  in  the 
greatefl  and  weightieil  matters,  even  in  matters  of 
religion,  and  the  great  concernments  of  another 
world.  But  this  furely  is  an  argument  of  a  poor 
and  mean  fpirit,  and  of  a  weak  underftanding,  which 
leans  upon  the  judgment  of  another,  and  is  in  truth 
the  loweft  degree  of  fervility,  that  a  reafonable  crea- 
ture can  ftoop  too  •,  and  even  beneath  that  of  a  Qave, 
who  in  the  midfl  of  his  chains  and  fetters  doth  flill 
retain  the  freedom  of  his  mind  and  judgment. 

But  I  need  not  to  urge  this  upon  confiderate  per- 
fons, who  knov/  better  how  to  value  their  duty  and 
obligation  to  God,  than  to  be  tempted  to  do  any 
thing  contrary  thereto,  merely  in  compliance  with 
fafhion  and  example.  There  are  fome  things  in  re- 
ligion fo  very  plain,  that  a  wife  and  good  man  would 
ftand  alone  in  the  belief  and  pradice  of  them,  and 
not  be  moved  in  the  leail  by  the  contrary  example  of 
the  whole  world.  It  was  a  brave  refoiution  of  Jofhua ; 

though 


p  I  ^  Of  coiiftancy  in  the 

8  E  R  M.  though  all  men  fhould  forfake  the  God  of  Ifrael,  and 
^^_  ,  nin  aficle  to  other  gods,  yet  he  would  not  do  it,  Jo- 
fhua  xxiv.  15.  "  If  it  feem  evil  unto  you  to  ferve 
"  the  Lord  *,  chufe  you  this  day  whom  you  will 
"  ferve  :  but  as  for  me  and  my  houfe,  we  will  ferve 
''  the  Lord."  It  was  well  refolved  of  Peter,  if  he 
had  not  been  too  confident  of  his  own  flrength, 
when  he  faid  to  our  Saviour,  "  though  all  men 
*'  forfake  thee,  yet  v/ill  not  I." 

2 .  Another  fort  of  temptation,  and  which  is  com- 
monly more  powerful  than  example,  is  worldly  in- 
tereft  and  advantage.     This  is  a  mighty  bait  to  a 
great  part  of  mankind,  and  apt  to  work  very  (Irong- 
ly  upon  the  necefTities  of  fome,  and  upon  the  cove- 
toufnefs  and  ambition  of  others.      Some  men  are 
tempted  by  necelTity,  which  many  times  makes  them 
do  ugly  and  reproachful  things,  and  like  Efau,  "  for 
"  a  morfel  of  meat  to  fell  their  birth-right,    and 
*'  bleffing."     Covetoufnefs  tempts  others  to  be  of 
that  religion  which  gives  them  the  profped  of  the 
greatcfb  earthly  advantage,  either  for  the  increafing 
or  fecuring  of  their  eilates.     When  they  find  that 
they  "  cannot  ferve  God  and  Mammon  -,"  they  will 
"  forfake  the  one,  and  cleave  to  the  other."    This 
was  one  of  the  great  temptations  to  many  in  the 
primitive  times,    and  a  frequent  caufe  of  apoftafy 
from  the  faith ;  an  eager  defire  of  riches,    and  too 
great  a  value  for  them  \  as  St.  Paul  obferves,   i  Tim. 
vi.  9,  10.     "  But  they  that  will  be  rich,    fall  into 
*'  temptation  and  a  fnare,   and  into  many  fooUfh 
"  and  hurtful  lulls,  which  drown  men  in  deflrudion 
"  and  perdition.     For  the  love  of  money  is  the  root 
"  of  all  evil  •,  which  while  fome  have  coveted  after^ 
"  they  have  erred,  or  been  feduced  from  the  faith, 
"  and  pierced  themfelves  through  with  many  for- 


"  rows.'* 


profejjion  of  the  true  religion,  0 1  ^ 

**"  rows."     This  was  the  temptation  which  drew  ofF  S  E  R  M. 
Demas  from  his  religion  •,  as  St.  Paul  tells  us,  2  Tim. 
i.v.  10.     "  Demas  hath  forfaken  me,  having  loved 
"  this  prefent  world." 

Ambition  is  likewife  a  great  temptation  to  proud 
and  afpiring  minds,  and  makes  many  men  falfe  ta 
their  religion,  when  they  find  it  a  hindrance  to  their 
preferment  \  and  they  are  eafily  perfuaded,  that  that 
is  the  beft  religion,  which  is  attended  with  the  greateft 
worldly  advantages,  and  will  raife  them  to  the  high- 
eft  dignity.  The  devil  underftood  very  well  the 
force  of  this  temptation,  when  he  fet  upon  our  Sa- 
viour, and  therefore  referved  it  for  the  laft  aflault. 
^'  He  fhewed  him  all  the  Idngdoms  of  the  earth, 
"  and  the  glory  of  them  •,  and  faid  to  him,  all  this 
*'  will  I  give  thee,  if  thou  wilt  fall  down  and  wor- 
"  fhip  me."  And  when  he  faw  this  would  not  pre- 
vail, he  gave  him  over  in  defpair,  and  left  him. 
But  though  this  be  a  very  dazzling  temptation  ♦,  yet ' 
there  are  confiderations  of  that  weight  to  be  (tt  over 
againft  it,  from  the  nature  of  religion,  and  the  in- 
finite concernment  of  it  to  our  immortal  fouls,  as  is 
fufEcient  to  quench  this  fiery  dart  of  the  devil,  and 
to  put  all  the  temptations  of  this  Vv^orld  out  of  coun- 
tenance, and  to  render  all  the  riches  and  glory  of  it, 
in  comparifon  of  the  eternal  happinefs  and  mifery  of 
the  other  world,  but  as  the  very  fmail  duft  upon  the 
balance.  What  temptation  of  this  world  can  ftand- 
againft  that  argument  of  our  Saviour,  if  it  be  fe- 
rioufly  weighed  and  confidered ;  "  v/hat  is  a  man 
"  profited  5  if  he  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lofe 
"  his  own  foul?  or  what  fhall  a  man  give  in  ex- 
"  change  for  his  foul  ?"  If  he  would  conlider  things 
impartially,  and  weigh  them  in  a  juft  and  equal  ba- 
lance j   the  things  which  concern  our  bodies,   and 

this 


g  1 6  0/  conjlancy  in  the 

S  E  R  M.   this  prefent  life,  are  of  no  confideration,  in  compa" 
_       I  rifon  of  the  great  and  vaft  concernments  of  our  im- 
mortal fouls,  and  the  happy  or  miferable  condition 
of  our  bodies  and  fouls  to  all  eternity. 

And  religion  is  a  matter  of  this  vaft  concernment ; 
and  therefore  not  to  be  bargained  away  and  parted 
with  by  us  for  the  greateft  things  this  world  can  of- 
fer. There  is  no  greater  fign  of  a  fordid  fpirit,  than 
to  put  a  high  value  upon  things  of  little  worth  ;  and 
no  greater  mark  of  folly,  than  to  make  an  equal 
bargain,  to  part  with  things  of  greateft  price,  for  a 
fiender  and  trifling  confideration :  as  if  a  man  of 
great  fortune  and  efcate,  fhould  fell  the  inheritance 
of  it  for  a  pifture  \  which  when  he  hath  it,  will  not 
perhaps  yield  fo  much  as  will  maintain  him  for  one 
year.  The  folly  is  fo  much  the  greater  in  things  of 
infinitely  greater  value  -,  as  for  a  man  to  quit  God 
and  religion,  to  fell  the  truth  and  his  foul,  and  to 
part  with  his  everlafting  inheritance,  for  a  conveni- 
ent  fervice  for  a  good  cuftomer,  and  fome  prefent 
advantage  in  his  trade  and  profeftion,  or  indeed  for 
any  condition  which  the  foolifh  language  of  this  world 
calls  a  high  place,  or  a  great  preferment.  The  things 
which  thefe  men  part  with  upon  thefe  cheap  terms, 
God,  and  his  truth,  and  religion,  are  to  thofe  who 
underftand  themfelves,  and  the  juft  value  of  their 
immortal  fouls,  things  of  ineftimable  worth,  and 
not  to  be  parted  with  by  a  confiderate  man  for  any 
price  that  this  world  can  bid.  And  thofe  who  are 
to  be  bought  out  of  their  religion,  upon  fuch  low 
terms,  and  fo  eafily  parted  from  it,  it  is  much  to 
be  feared  that  they  have  little  or  no  religion  to  hold 
faft. 

Secondly,  "  As  we  are  to  hold  faft  the  profeffion 

"  of  our  faith  without  wavering,"  againft  the  temp- 

3  tations 


profejjion  of  the  true  religion,  g  i  y 

tations  and  allurements  of  this  world  •,  fo  likewlfe  S  E  R  M- 

TV 

againfl  the  terrors  of  it. 

Fear  is  a  paflion  of  great  force  •,  and  if  men  be 
not  very  refolute  and  conftant,  will  be  apt  to  dag- 
ger them,  and  "  to  move  them  from  their  fhedfafr- 
"  nefs."  And  therefore  when  the  cafe  of  fuffering 
and  perfecution  for  the  truth  happens,  we  had  need 
"  to  hold  fail  the  profefTion  of  our  faith."  Our 
Saviour  in  the  parable  of  the  fower  tells  us,  that 
there  were  many  "  that  heard  the  word,  and  with 
*'  joy  received  it :  but  when  perfecution  and  tribu-^ 
"  lation  arofe  becaufe  of  the  word,  prefently  they 
"  were  offended." 

And  though,  bleffed  be  God,  this  be  not  now 
our  cafe :  yet  there  was  a  time  when  it  was  the 
general  cafe  of  Chriftians,  in  the  firft  beginning  of 
Chriftianity,  and  for  feveral  ages  after,  though  with 
fome  intermiffion  and  intervals,  of  eafe.  It  was  then 
a  general  rule,  and  the  common  exped:ation  of 
Cliriftians  that  through  many  tribulations  they  mufl 
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God  ;  and  that  if  any 
man  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus,  he  mufl 
fuffer  perfecution.  And  in  feveral  ages  fince  thofe 
primitive  times,  the  fincere  profeflbrs  of  religion 
have,  in  divers  places,  been  expofed  to  moft  grie- 
vous fufferings  and  perfecutions  for  the  truth.  And 
even  at  this  day,  in  feveral  places,  the  faithful  fer- 
vants  of  God  are  exercifed  with  the  fharpeft  and 
foreft  trials  that  perhaps  were  ever  heard  of  in  any 
age  ',  and  for  the  fake  of  God,  and  the  conftant 
profefTion  of  his  true  religion,  "  are  tormented  and 
"  killed  all  the  day  long,  and  are  accounted  as 
"  fheep  for  the  flaughter."  It  is  their  hard  lot  to 
be  called  to  thefe  cruel  and  bitter  fufferings  ;  and 
our  happy  opportunity  to  be  called  upon  for  their 

Vol.  V.  8  L  relief; 


LX. 


g  I  8  Of  conjlancy  in  the 

S  E  R  M.  relief ;  thofe  of  them,  I  mean,  that  have  efcaped 
that  terrible  florm  and  temped,  and  have  taken  re- 
fuge and  fandluary  here  among  us,  and  out  of  his 
majefty's  great  humanity  and  goodnefs,  are  by  his 
publick  letters  recommended  to  the  charity  of  the 
whole  nation,  by  the  name  of  diftreficd  proteftants. 
Let  us  confider  how  much  eafier  our  lot  and  our 
duty  is,  than  theirs  •,  as  much  as  it  is  eafier  to  com- 
pailionate  the  fufferings,  and  to  relieve  the  diflrefles 
of  others,  than  to  be  fuch  fuiferers,  and  in  fuch  di- 
ftrefs  our  felves.  Let  us  make  their  cafe  our  own  •, 
and  then  we  our  felves  will  be  the  beft  judges,  how 
it  is  fit  for  us  to  demean  our  felves  towards  them, 
and  to  v/hat  degree  we  ought  to  extend  cur  charity 
and  compafTion  to  them.  Let  us  put  on  their  cafe 
and  circumftances  •,  and  fuppofe  that  we  were  the 
fufferers,  and  had  fled  to  them  for  refuge  :  the 
fame  pity  and  commj^ration,  the  fame  tender  re- 
gard and  confiderationW  our  fad  cafe,  the  fame  li- 
beral and  effe6tual  relief  that  we  fhould  defire  and 
expert,  and  be  glad  to  have  ihewn  and  afforded  to 
our  felves,  let  us  give  to  them  •,  and  then  I  am  fure 
they  will  want  no  fitting  comfort  and  fupport  from 
us. 

"We  enjoy  (bleffed  be  the  goodnefs  of  God  to 
ys)  great  peace  and  plenty,  and  freedom  from  evil 
^nd  fullering  :  and  furely  one  of  the  beft  means,  to 
have  thefe  blelTings  continued  to  us,  and  our  tran- 
quillity prolonged,  is,  to  confider  and  relieve  thofe 
who  want  the  blefTings  which  we  enjoy  ;  and  the 
readieft  way  to  provoke  God  to  deprive  us  of  thefe 
blefTings,  is,  to  fhut  up  the  bowels  of  our  compaf- 
fion  from  our  diflreffed  brethren.  God  can  eafily 
change  the  fcene,  and  make  our  fufferings,  if  not 
in  the  fame  kind,  yet  in  one  kind  or  other  equal 
I  to 


profejjton  of  the  true  religion.  919 

to  theirs,  and  then  we  (liall  "  remember  the  afflic-  SERM. 

LX 
"  tions  of  Jofeph,"  and  fay  as  his  brethren  did, 

when  they  fell  into  trouble,  ''  We  are  Verily  guilty 

''  concerning  our  brother,  in  that  we  fav/  the  an^ 

"  guilh  of  his  foul  when  he  befought  us,  and  we 

"  would  not  hear ;  therefore  is  this  diftrefs  come 

"  upon  us." 

God  alone  knows  what  ftorms  the  devil  may  yew 
raife  in  the  world,  before  the  end  of  it :  And  there- 
fore it  concerns  all  Chriflians,  in  all  times  and  places^ 
who  have  taken  upon  them  the  profefTion  of 
Christ's  religion,  to  confider  well  before-hand, 
and  to  calculate  the  dangers  and  fufFerings  it  may 
expofe  them  to,  and  to  arm  our  felves  v/ith  rcfolu- 
tion  and  patience  againft  the  fierceft  aflaults  of  temp- 
tation ;  confidering  the  fhortnefs  of  all  temporal  af- 
flidions  and  fuiferings,  in  comparifon  of  the  eternal 
and  glorious  reward  of  them  •,  and  the  lightnefs  of 
them  too,  in  comparifon  dBBie  endlefs  and  mtolera" 
ble  torments  of  another  wdBlf;  to  which  every  man 
expofeth  himfelf,  who  forfakes  God,  and  renounceth 
his  truth,  and  wounds  his  confcience,  to  avoid  tem- 
poral fufferings. 

And  though  fear  in  many  cafes,  efpecially  if  it 
be  of  death  and  extreme  fufferings,  be  a  great  excufs 
for  feveral  adlions  •,  becaufe  it  may,  cadere  in  con- 
ftantem  ijirum^  happen  to  a  refolute  man  :  yet  in 
this  cafe,  of  renouncing  our  rehgion  (unlefs  it  be 
very  fudden  and  furprifmg,  out  of  which  a  man  re- 
covers himfelf  when  he  comes  to  himfelf  (as  St.  Pe- 
ter did ;  or  the  fuffering  be  fo  extreme,  as  to  put 
a  man  befides  himfelf  for  the  time,  fo  as  to  make 
him  fay  or  do  any  thing  0  I  %  in  t:his  cafe  of  re- 
nouncing God  and  his  truth,  God  will  not  admit 
fear  for  a  juft  excufe  of  our  apoflafy  >  which,  if  it 

8  L  2  be 


Of  conjiancy  in  the 

be  unrepentcd  of,  (and  the  fcripture  fpeaks  of  re- 
pentance in  that  cafe  as  very  difficult)  will  be  our 
ruin.  And  the  reafon  is  •,  becaufe  God  has  given 
us  liich  fair  warning  of  it,  that  we  may  be  prepared 
for  it,  in  the  refolution  of  our  minds  :  and  we  en- 
ter into  religion  upon  thefe  terms,  with  a  profefTed 
expectation  of  fuffering,  and  a  firm  purpofe  to  lay 
down  our  lives  for  the  truth,  if  God  fhall  call  us  to 
it.  "  If  any  man  will  be  my  difciple,"  fays  our 
Lord,  "  \^x.  him  deny  himfelf,  and  take  up  his 
"•  crofs,  and  follow  me  :"  and  again,  "  He  that 
"  loveth  life  itfelf  more  than  me,  is  not  worthy  of 
"  me:  and  if  any  man  be  ailiamed  of  me,  and  of 
"  my  words,  in  this  unfaithful  generation  •,  of  him 
"  will  I  be  alhamed  before  my  Father  and  the  holy 


''  angels.'^ 


And  therefore  to  mailer  and  fubdue  this  fear,  our 
Saviour  hath  propounded  great  obje6bs  of  terror 
to  us,  and  a  danger  ifPaitely  more  to  be  dreaded, 
which  every  man  runs  himfelf  wilfully  upon,  who 
fhall  quit  the  profeflion  of  his  religion,  to  avoid 
temporal  fufferings  •,  Luke  xii.  4,  5.  "  Fear  not 
"  them  that  can  kill  the  body,  but  after  that  have 
"  nothing  that  they  can  do  :  but  I  will  tell  you  whom 
.*'  you  fhall  fear.  Fear  him,  who  after  he  hath 
"  killed,  can  deflroy  both  body  and  foul  in  hell  -, 
"  yea,  I  fay  unto  you,  fear  him."  And  to  this 
dreadful  hazard  every  man  expofeth  himfelf,  who, 
tor  the  fear  of  men,  ventures  thus  to  offend  God. 
Thcfe  are  "  the  fearful  and  unbelievers"  fpoken  of 
by  St.  John,  "  who  fhall  have  their  portion  in  the 
'*  lake  which  burneth  with  fire  and  brimftone,  which 
"  is  the  fecond  death." 

Thus  you  fee  how  we  are  to  "  hold  fafl  the  pro- 
"  it^\ox\  of  our  faith  without  wavering,"  againft 

all 


profejjloji  of  the  true  religion.  921 

all  temptations  and  terrors  of  this  world.  I  flioiild 
now  hav^  proceeded  to  the  next  particular  -,  name- 
ly, that  we  are  to  "  hold  fail  the  profeiTion  of  our 
"  faith,"  againft  all  vain  promifes  of  being  put  into 
a  fafer  condition,  and  groundlefs  hopes,  of  getting 
to  heaven  upon  eafier  terms,  in  fome  other  church 
and  religion. 

But  this  I  ihall  not  now  enter  upon. 


SERMON     LXI. 

Of  Conftancy  in  the  Profeflion  of  the 
true  Religion. 

H  E  B.    X^3. 

Let  us  hold  fafi  the  profejfwn  of  our  faith  without 
wavering  ;  for  he  is  faithful  that  promifed, 

IN  thqfe  words,  I  have  told  you,  are  contained  ^^y^^^* 
thefe  two  parts :  1   -y-^^ 

Firft,  an  exhortation  to  "  hold  fail  the  profeffion  The 
''  of  our  faith,  without  wavering."  fermono* 

Secondly,  an  argument  or  encouragement  there-  this  text. 
to  •,  "  becaufe  he  is  faithful  that  promifed."     I  am 
yet  upon  the 

Firft  of  thefe  ;  the  exhortation  to  Chriflians,  to 
be  conftant  and  fleady  in  the  profeflion  of  their  reli- 
gion :  "  let  us  hold  faft  the  profeflion  of  our  faith 
^  without  wavering. '  \    And  that  we  might  the  bet- 
ter 


Of  conjlancy  in  the 

ter  comprehend  the  true  and  full  meaning  of  this  ex- 
hortation, I  fhewed, 

Firft,  negatively,  what  is  not  meant  and  intended 
by  it.     And  I  mentioned  thefe  two  particulars. 

1.  The  apoftle  doth  not  hereby  intend,  that  thofe 
who  are  capable  of  enquiring  into,  and  examining 
the  grounds  and  rcafons  of  their  religion,  fhould  not 
have  the  liberty  to  do  it.     Nor, 

2.  That  when  upon  due  enquiry  and  examina- 
tion, men  are  fettled,  as  they  think  and  verily  be- 
lieve, in  the  true  faith  and  religion,  they  fhould  ob- 
llinately  refufe  to  hear  any  reafon  that  can  be  offered 
againft  their  prefent  perfuafion :  for  reafon,  when  it 
is  fairly  offered,  is  always  to  be  heard.  I  proceeded 
in  the 

Second  place,  pofitively  to  explain  the  meaning 
of  this  exhortation.  And  to  this  purpofe  I  propofed 
to  confider,  ^^^ 

Firft,  what  it  is^mat  we  are  to  hold  fail,  viz.  the 
confefTion  or  "  profeflion  of  our  faith."  The  ancient 
chriflian  faith,  which  every  Chriftian  makes  pro- 
feflion of  in  his  baptifm  :  not  the  doubtful  and 
uncertain  traditions  of  men,  nor  the  imperious  dic- 
tates and  doctrines  of  any  church  (which  are  not 
contained  in  the  holy  fcriptures)  impofed  upon  the 
chriftian  world,  though  with  never  fo  confident  a 
pretence  of  the  antiquity  of  the  dodirines,  or  of  the 
infallibility  of  the  propofers  of  them.  And  then 
I  proceeded,  in  the 

Second  place,  to  fhew  how  we  are  "  to  hold  faft 
*'  the  profeflion  of  our  faith  without  wavering  ;" 
and  I  mentioned  thefe  following  particulars,  as  pro- 
bably implied  and  comprehended  in  the  apofl:le's  ex- 
hortation. 

I.  That 


profejfion  of  the  true  religion,  923 

1.  That  we  lliould  "  hold  faft  the  profeffion  of  S  E R M. 
*'  our  faith"  againft  the  confidence  of  men,  with-  j^^^ 
out  fcripture  or  reafon  to  fupport  that  confidence. 

2.  And  much  more  againft  the  confidence  of  men, 
contrary  to  plain  fcripture  and  reafon,  and  the  com- 
mon fenfe  of  mankind  ;  under  both  which  heads  I 
gave  feveral  inftances  of  dodlrines  and  pradices  im- 
pofed  with  great  confidence  upon  the  world,  fome 
without,  and  others  plainly  againft  fcripture,  and 
reafon,  and  the  common  fenfe  of  mankind. 

3.  Againft  all  the  temptations  and  terrors  of  the 
world;  the  temptations  of  fafhion  and  example,  and 
of  worldly  intereft  and  advantage  ;  and  againft  the 
terrors  of  perfecution  and  fuftering  for  the  truth. 
Thus  far  I  have  gone.  I  fhall  now  proceed  to  the 
two  other  particulars  which  remain  to  be  Ipoken  to» 

4.  We  are  to  "  hold  faft  the  profefTion  of  our 
"  faith,"  againft  all  vain  pro^fes  of  being  put  in- 
to a  fafer  condition,  and  gr(:raTOlefs  hopes  of  get- 
ting to  heaven  upon  eafier  terms,  in  fome  other 
church  and  religion.  God  hath  plainly  declared  to 
us  in  the  holy  fcriptures,  upon  what  terms  and  con- 
ditions we  may  obtain  eternal  life  and  happinefs,  and 
what  will  certainly  exclude  us  from  it  %  that  "  except 
"  we  repent,"  (i.  e.)  without  true  contrition  for  our 
fins,  and  forfaking  of  them,  "  we  fhall  perifti ;  that 
*'  without  holinefs  no  man  ftiall  fee  the  Lord  •,'* 
that  "  no  fornicator,  or  adulterer,  or  idolater,  or 
"  covetous  perfon,  nor  any  one  that  lives  in  the 
"  pradtice  of  fuch  fins,  fhall  have  any  inheritance 
"  in  the  kingdom  of  God  or  Christ."  There  is 
as  great  and  unpafiable  a  gulf  fixed  between  heaven 
and  a  wicked  man  ;  as  there  is  betwixt  heaven  and 
hell.  And  when  men  have  done  all  they  can  to  de- 
bauch 


Of  conjlancy  in  the 

bauch  and  corrupt  the  chriftian  doftrine,  it  is  im- 
pofTible  to  reconcile  a  wicked  life  with  any  reafona- 
ble  and  well-grounded  hopes  of  happinefs  in  another 
world.  No  church  hath  that  privilege,  to  fave  a 
man  upon  any  other  terms,  than  thofe  which  our 
blefled  Saviour  hath  declared  in  his  holy  gofpel. 
All  religions  are  equal  in  this  ^  that  a  bad  man  can 
be  faved  in  none  of  them. 

The  church  of  Rome  pretends  their  church  and  re- 
ligion to  be  the  only  fafe  and  fure  way  to  falvation  ; 
and  yet,  if  their  dodrine  be  true,  concerning  the  in- 
tention of  the  prieft,  (and  if  it  be  not,  they  are  much 
to  blame  in  making  it  an  article  of  their  faith)  I  fay, 
if  it  be  true,  that  the  intention  of  the  prieft  is  necef- 
fary  to  the  validity  and  virtue  of  the  facraments  j 
then  there  is  no  religion  in  the  world,  that  runs  the 
falvation  of  men  upon  more  and  greater  hazards  and 
uncertainties,  and  fuch  as  by  no  care  and  diligence 
of  man  in  "  working  'out  his  own  falvation,"  are  to 
be  avoided  and  prevented. 

As  for  the  eafier  terms  of  falvation  which  they  of- 
fer to  men,  they  fignify  nothing,  if  they  be  not  able 
to  make  them  good  ;  which  no  man  can  reafonably 
believe  they  can  do,  that  hath  read  the  bible,  and 
doth  in  any  good  meafure  underftand  the  nature  of 
God,  and  the  defign  of  religion.  For  inftance  ; 
that  after  a  long  courfe  of  a  moft  lewd  and  flagitious 
life,  a  man  may  be  reconciled  to  God,  and  have  his 
fins  forgiven  at  the  laft  gafp,  upon  confefTion  of 
them  to  the  prieft,  with  that  imperfe6t  degree  of 
contrition  for  them,  which  they  call  attrition,  toge- 
ther with  the  abfolution  of  the  prieft. 

Now  attrition  is  a  trouble  for  fin,  merely  for  fear 
of  the  puniftiment  of  it.  And  this  together  with 
confeftion,  and  the  abfolution  of  the  prieft,  without 

any 


profejjlon  of  the  tf^ue  rcllgio72.  925 

any  hatred  of  fin  for  the  evil  and  contrariety  of  it  to  ^  E  R  M. 
the  holy  nature  and  law  of  God,  and  without  the 
lead  Ipark  of  love  to  God,  will  do  the  finner's  bufi- 
nefs,  and  put  him  into  a  ftate  of  grace  and  falvation, 
without  any  other  grace  or  difpofition  for  falvation, 
but  only  the  fear  of  hell  and  damnation.  This,  I 
confefs,  is  eafy :  but  the  great  difficulty  is,  .to  believe 
it  to  be  true.  And  certainly,  no  man  that  ever  fe- 
rioufly  confidered  the  nature  of  God  and  religion, 
can  ever  be  perfuaded  to  build  the  hopes  of  his  fal- 
vation upon  fuch  a  quick-fand.  The  abfolution  of 
all  the  priefts  in  the  world  will  not  procure  the  for- 
givenefs  of  God  for  any  man,  that  is  not  difpofed 
for  his  mercy  by  fuch  a  repentance,  as  the  gofpel  re- 
quires ;  which  I  am  fure  is  very  different  from  that 
which  is  required  by  the  council  of  Trent. 

They  that  offer  heaven  to  men  upon  fo  very  large 
and  loofe  terms,  give  great  caufe  to  fufped,  that 
they  will  never  make  good  their  offer ;  the  terms 
are  fo  unreafonably  cheap  and  eafy,  that  there  muft  be 
fome  fraud  and  falfe  dealing.  And  on  the  other 
hand,  nothing  ought  to  recommend  our  religion 
more  to  a  wife  and  confiderate  man,  than  that  the 
terms  of  falvation  which  we  propofe  to  men,  viz. 
faith  and  repentance,  and  a  fincere  obedience  to  the 
precepts  of  the  gofpel,  manifefted  in  the  tenure  of  a 
holy  and  virtuous  life,  are  not  only  perfedly  agreea- 
ble to  the  plain  and  conftant  declaration  of  holy 
fcripture  \  but  do  likewife  naturally  tend  to  engage 
men  moft  effeftually  to  a  good  life,  and  thereby  to 
make  them  "  meet  to  be  made  partakers  of  the  in- 
*'  heritance  of  the  faints  in  light.'*  And  therefore 
every  body  ought  to  be  afraid  of  a  religion,  which 
makes  fuch  lavifh  offers  of  falvation,  and  to  take 
heed  how  he  ventures  his  foul  upon  them.    For  if. 

Vol.  V.  8  M  after 

I. 


9  2  6  Of  conjlancy  in  the 

E  R  M.  after  all  the  hopes  that  are  given  of  falvation  upon 
fuch  and  fuch  terms,the  Tinner  doth  really  mifcarry  and 
mifs  of  heaven  ;  it  is  but  very  ill  comfort  to  him,  to 
be  put  into  a  fool's  paradife,  for  a  minute  or  two 
before  he  leaves  the  world,  and  the  next  moment  af- 
ter to  find  himfelf  in  the  place  of  torments.  I  pro- 
ceed to  the 

5.  And  laft  particular  I  mentioned,  as  implied  in  the 
cxiiortation  here  in  the  text,  viz.  that  we  Ihould  "  hold 
*'  flifr  the  profeflion  of  our  faith  without  wavering,'* 
againft  all  the  cunning  arts  and  infinuations  of  bufy 
and  difputing  men,  whofe  defign  it  is  to  unhinge 
men  from  their  rehgion,  and  to  gain  profclytes  to 
their  party  and  fa6lion.  To  this  purpofe  there  are 
feveral  cautions  given  by  our  blefTed  Saviour  and 
his  apoflles.  Matth.  xxiv.  4.  "  Take  heed  that  no 
"  man  deceive  you  \  for  many  fliall  come  in  my 
'^  name,  and  fhall  deceive  many."  Eph.  iv.  14. 
''  That  ye  henceforth  be  no  more  children,  tofTed  to 
*'  and  fro,  and  carried  about  with  every  wind  of  doc- 
"  trine,  by  the  Height  of  men :  \v  t?  av^eio.,  (the 
word  figniRes  the  cunnin^^  of  gamefters  at  dice;) 
"  by  the  fleight  of  men.  and  the  cunning  craftinels 
"  whereby  they  lye  in  wait  to  deceive."  And  chap, 
V.  6.  "  Let  no  man  deceive  you  with  vain  words.'* 
Col.  ii.  8.  "  Beware  left  any  man  fpoil  you  through 
''  philofophy  and  vain  deceit ;"  that  is,  by  fophiftry 
and  vain  reafoning,  under  a  pretence  of  philofophy. 
Heb.  xiii.  9.  "  Be  not  carried  about  with  divers 
*'  and  ftrange  dodrines."  2  Pet.  iii.  17.  '^  Beware 
*'  left  you  alfo,  being  led  away  with  the  error  of  the 
*'  wicked,  fall  from  your  own  ftedfaftnefs."  And 
this  caution  is  enforced  by  an  exprefs  prediction  of  ^ 
great  apoftafy  which  fhould  happen  in  the  chriftian 
i:lu]rchj  by  wliich  many  fliould  be  feduced,  by  pre- 
tence 


profejjion  of  the  true  religion.  927 

tenre  of  miracles,  and  by  feveral  arts  of  deceit  and  ^  E  R  ivi. 

T  YT 

falfhood.  This  apodafy  St.  Paul  exprefly  foretels,  v«JX)-^ 
2  Thef.  ii.  i,  2,  3.  "  We  befeechyou,  brethren,  by 
"  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that 
"  ye  be  not  foon  fhaken  in  mind,  or  be  troubled, 
"  neither  by  fpirit"  (that  is,  by  pretence  to  infpira- 
tionj  "  nor  by  word"  (or  mefTage)  "  nor  by  letter 
'^  as  from  us,  as  that  the  day  of  Christ  is  at  hand. 
"  Let  no  man  deceive  you  by  any  means  ;  for  that 
"  day  fhall  not  come,  except  there  come  a  falling  a- 
"  way,  and  that  man  of  fin  be  revealed,  the  fon  of 
"  perdition."  And  after  a  particular  defcription  of 
him,  he  adds,  ver.  9.  "  Whofe  coming  is  after  the 
"  working  of  Satan,  with  all  power,  and  figns,  and 
"  lying  wonders,  and  in  all  deceitfulnefs  of  unrigh- 
"  teoufnefs  in  them  that  perifh."  From  all  which 
he  concludes,  ver.  15.  "  Therefore,  brethren,  (land 
"  faft." 

The  particular  nature  and  kind  of  this  apoflafy  the 
fame  apoftle  defcribes  more  fully,  i  Tim.  iv,  i,  2,  3. 
'^  Now  the  fpirit  fpeaketh  exprefly,  that  in  the  latter 
''  times  fome  fhall  apoflatize  from  the  faith,  giving 
"  heed  to  feducing  fpirits  and  dodrines  of  devils, 
"  fpeaking  Hes  in  hypocrify,"  (i.  e.  under  a  great 
pretence  of  fandity,  fpreading  their  pernicious  errors) 
"  forbidding  to  marry,  and  commanding  to  abPcain 
"  from  meats."  This  is  a  very  lively  and  pat  de- 
fcription of  that  great  apoflafy  in  the  chriftian  church, 
which  began  in  the  weftern  part  of  it,  and  hath 
fpread  itfelf  far  and  wide.  For  there  the  fpirit  of  er- 
ror and  falfhood  has  prevailed,  under  an  hypocritical 
pretence  of  their  being  the  only  true  church  and  true 
Chriflians  in  the  world.  There  marriage,  and  feveral 
forts  of  meats,  are  forbidden  to  feveral  rank  sand  or- 
ders of  men.     All  the  difficulty  is,    what  is  here 

8  M  2    '  meant 


Of  conjiancy  i?i  the 

meant  by  "  doctrines  of  devils  •,"  and  thefe  certainly 
can  be  no  other  than  doftrines  tending  to  idolatry, 
which  the  fcripture  every  where  doth  in  a  particular 
manner  afcribe  to  the  devil,  as  the  inventer  and  great 
promoter  of  it.  And  this  is  very  much  confirmed  by 
what  we  find  added  in  fome  ancient  Greek  copies  in 
this  text,  which  runs  thus  \  '^  in  the  latter  times 
^'  fome  fhall  apoftatize  from  the  faith  \  for  they  fliall 
"  worfliip  the  dead,  as  fome  alfo  in  Ifrael  worfhip- 
"  ped.'*  And  then  it  follows,  "  giving  heed  to 
''  feducing  fpirks,  and  dodlrines  of  devils."  So 
that  the  particular  kind  of  idolatry,  into  which  fome 
part  of  the  chriflian  church  fhould  apoftatize,  is  here 
pointed  at  •,  that  they  fhould  worfhip  fouls  departed, 
or  the  fpirits  of  dead  men  •,  which  was  part  of  the 
heathen  idolatry,  into  which  the  people  of  Ifrael  did 
frequently  relapfe.  So  that  the  fpirit  of  God  doth 
here  foretel  fuch  an  apoftafy  in  fome  part  of  the  chri- 
ftian  church  as  the  people  of  Ifrael  were  guilty  of,  in 
falling  into  the  heathen  idolatry.  "  They  ihall  be 
*'  worfhippers  of  the  dead,    as  the  Ifraelites  alfo 


"  were." 


And  this  is  the  great  and  dangerous  feduflion 
which  the  Chriftians  are  fo  much  cautioned  againft 
in  the  new  teftament,  and  charged  "  to  hold  faft  the 
**  profelTion  of  the  faith"  againft  the  cunning  arts 
and  infinuations  of  feducing  fpirits  ;  not  but  (as  I 
laid  before)  that  we  are  always  to  have  an  ear  open 
to  reafon,  and  to  be  ready  to  hearken  and  to  yield  to 
that,  whenever  it  is  fairly  propofed  :  but  to  be  over- 
reached and  rooked  out  of  one's  religion,  by  little  fo- 
phiftical  arts  and  tricks,  is  childilh  and  filly.  After 
we  are,  upon  due  trial  and  examination  of  the  grounds 
of  our  religion,  fettled  and  eftabhftied  in  it,  we  ought 
not  to  fufFer  curfelves  to  be  removed  from  it,  by  the 

groundlefs 


LXI. 


profejjion  of  the  true  religion,  020 

groundlefs  pretences  of  confident  people  to  infalli-  S  E  R  M. 
bility,  and  to  be  pradifed  upon  by  cunning  men, 
who  lye  at  catch  to  make  profelytes  to  their  party. 
This  is  to  be  "  like  children  toiTed  to  and  fro,  and 
*'  carried  about  with  every  wind  of  do6lrine." 

And   we  ought  to  be  the  more  careful   of  our 
felves  ;  becaufe  there  never  was  any  time,  wherein 
feducing  fpirits  were  more  bold  and  bufy  to  pervert 
men  from  the  truth.     Againft  thefe  we  fhould  hold 
fall  our  rehgion,  as  a  man  would  do  his  money  in 
a  croud.     It  pafTeth  in  the  world  for  a  great  mark 
of  folly,  when  a  man  and  his  money  are  foon  parted : 
but  it  is  a  fign  of  much  greater  folly,  for  a  man  eafily 
to  quit  his  religion  \  efpecially  to  be  caught  by  fome 
fuch  grofs  methods,  as  the  feducers  I  am  fpeaking 
of  commonly  ufe,  and  which  lye  fo  very  open  to  fuf- 
picion  ;  fuch  as  ill-defigning  men  are  wont  to  prac- 
tife  upon  a  young  heir,  when  they  have  infinuated 
themfelves  into  Iiis  company,  to  make  a  prey  of 
him.     They  charge  him  to  tell  no  body  in  what 
company  he  hath  been ;  nor  to  aflc  the  counfel  and 
advice  of  his  friends  concerning  what  they  have  been 
perfuading  him  to  ;  becaufe  they  for  their  own  inte- 
reil  will  be  fure  to  difluade  him  from  it.     Jufl  thus 
do  thefe  feducers  pra6tife  upon  weak  people.     They 
charge  them   not  to   acquaint  their  minifler,    with 
whom  they  have  been  ^  nor  what  difcourfe  they  have 
had  about  religion  •,  nor  what  books  have  been  put 
into  thejr  hands  ;  becaufe  then,  all  their  kind  defign 
and  intention  towards  them  will  be  defeated.     But 
above  all,  they  mufl  be  fure  to  read  no  books  on 
the  other  fide,  becaufe  they  are  no  competent  judges 
of  points  of  faith  \  and  this  reading  on  both  fides 
will  rather  confound  than  clear  their  underilandings. 
TJiey  tell  ihem,  that  they  have  ftated  the  matter 
I  tnily, 


Of  conflancy  in  the 

tnily,  and  would  not  for  all  the  world  deceive  them  -, 
and  they  may  eafily  perceive,  by  their  earneft  ap- 
plication to  them,  that  nothing  but  charity,  and  a 
pafllonate  defire  of  the  falvation  of  their  fouls,  makes 
them  take  all  thefe  pains  with  them.  But  this  is  fo 
grofs  a  way  of  proceeding,  that  any  man  of  com- 
mon underflanding  mull  needs  difcern  by  this  kind 
treatment,  that  thefe  men  can  have  no  honeft  defign 
upon  them. 

To  come  then  to  a  more  particular  confideration 
of  the  arts  and  methods  which  they  ufe  (I  mean  par- 
ticularly thofe  of  the  church  of  Rome)  in  making 
profelytes  to  their  religion  :  as, 

I .  In  allowing  them  to  be  very  competent  and  fuf- 
ficient  judges  for  themfelves,  in  the  choice  of  their 
church  and  religion,  (that  is,  which  is  the  true  church 
and  religion,  in  which  alone  falvation  is  to  be  had) 
and  yet  telling  them  at  the  fame  time,  that  they  are 
utterly  incapable  of  judging  of  particular  dodlrines, 
and  points  of  faith  and  practice  •,  but  for  thefe,  they 
mull  rely  upon  the  judgment  of  an  infallible  church, 
when  they  are  in  it  •,  othei-wife  they  will  certainly 
run  into  damnable  errors  and  miftakes  above  thefe 
things. 

And  they  muft  of  necefTity  allow  them  to  be  fuf- 
iicient  judges  for  themfelves  in  the  choice  of  their 
religion  ;  as  will  be  evident,  by  confidering  in  what 
method  they  proceed  with  their  intended  profelyte. 

They  propofe  to  him  to  change  his  church  and 
his  religion,  becaufe  he  is  in  the  wrong  •,  and  they 
will  fhew  him  a  better,  and  fuch  a  one  as  is  the  only 
true  one,  and  in  which  alone  falvation  is  to  be  had. 
To  perfuade  him  hereto,  they  offer  him  fome  rea- 
fons  and  arguments,  or  give  him  books  to  read,  con- 
taining arguments  to  move  him  to  make  this  change, 

to 


profejfion  of  the  true  religion. 

to  fatisfy  him  of  the  reafonablenefs,  and  to  convince 
him  of  the  neceflity  of  it. 

Now  by  this  way  of  proceeding  (and  they  can 
take  no  other)  they  do,  whether  they  will  or  no, 
make  the  perfon,  whom  they  are  endeavouring  to  con- 
vert, a  judge  for  himfelf,  which  church  and  religion 
is  bell  •,  that  which  they  would  have  him  embrace 
and  come  over  to,  or  that  which  they  would  per- 
fuade  him  to  forfake.  For  to  what  end  elfe  do 
they  offer  him  reafons  and  arguments  to  perfuade 
him  to  leave  our  church,  and  to  come  over  to  theirs ; 
but  that  he  may  confider  the  force  and  weight  of 
them  \  and  having  confidered  them,  may  judge 
whether  they  be  of  force  fufficient  to  over-rule  him 
to  make  this  change  ?  So  that  as  unwilling  as  they 
are  to  make  particular  perfons  judge  for  themfelves 
about  points  of  faith,  and  about  the  fenfe  of  fcripture 
confirming  thofe  points  (becaufe  this  is  to  leave  every 
man  to  his  own  private  fpirit  and  fancy  and  giddy 
brain)  yet  they  are  compelled  by  necelTity,  and  agamfl 
their  own  principles,  to  allow  a  man  in  this  cafe  of 
chufing  his  religion,  to  be  a  judge  of  the  reafons  and 
arguments  which  they  offer  to  induce  him  thereto. 
So  that,  whether  they  will  or  no,  they  muft  permit 
him  to  be  a  judge  for  himfelf  for  this  once,  but  not 
to  make  a  pradlice  of  it,  or  to  pretend  this  privilege 
ever  after :  for  in  acknowledgment  of  this  great  fa- 
vour, of  being  permitted  to  judge  for  himfelf  this 
once  (which  they  do  unwillingly  grant  him,  and  up- 
on mere  necelTity)  he  is  for  ever  after  to  refign  up 
his  judgment  to  the  church.  And  though  this  liber- 
ty be  allowed  po  hac  vice^  and  properly  to  ferve  a 
turn,  i.  e.  in  order  to  the  changing  of  his  religion ; 
yet  he  is  to  underftand,  that  he  is  no  fit  and  compe- 
tent judge  of  particular  points  of  faith  j  thefe  he 

mufl 


Of  conjlancy  in  the 

mil  ft  all  learn  from  the  true  church  when  he  is  in  it, 
and  take  them  upon  her  authority,  and  in  fo  doing 
he  fliall  do  very  prudently,  becauie  fhe  is  infallible, 
and  cannot  be  deceived  •,  but  he  may. 

But  is  there  any  fenfe  in  all  this,  that  a  man  fhould 
be  very  fit  and  able  to  judge  of  that  which  they 
eileem  the  main  and  fundamental  point  of  all,  name- 
ly, which  is  the  true  church  and  religion  ;  and  of  the 
reafons  and  arguments  whereby  they  pretend  to  de- 
monftrate  it  *,  and  of  the  true  meaning  of  thofe  texts 
of  fcripture,  whereby  they  pretend  to  prove  theirs 
to  be  the  only  true  church  :  and  yet  Ihould  be  whol- 
ly unable  to  judge  of  particular  points  of  faith ;  or 
of  the  true  fenfe  of  any  texts  of  fcripture  that  can  be 
produced  for  the  proof  of  thofe  points  ? 

Is  it  fo  very  prudent,  in  all  the  particular  points 
of  faith,  for  a  man  to  rely  upon  the  judgment  of 
the  church,  becaufe  fhe  is  infallible  •,  and  not  to  truft 
his  own  judgment  about  them,  becaufe  he  is  falli- 
ble, and  may  be  deceived  ?  And  is  it  pruderit  likewife 
for  this  man  to  truft  his  own  judgment  in  the  main 
bufinefs  of  all  •,  namely,  which  is  the  true  church 
and  religion  •,  concerning  which  he  is  as  fallible  in 
his  judgment,  and  as  liable  to  be  deceived,  as  in  the 
particular  points  ?  And  if  he  be  miftaken  in  the 
main  point,  they  muft  grant  his  miftake  to  be  fatal ; 
becaufe  his  fmcerity,  as  to  all  the  reft,  depends  upon 
it.  This  is  a  great  myftery  and  riddle,  that  every 
particular  man  fhould  have  fo  fufficient  a  judgment 
as  to  this  main  and  fundamental  bufinefs,  which  is 
the  true  church  and  religion  ;  and  ftiould  have  no 
judgment  at  all  about  particular  points,  fit  to  be 
trufted  and  relied  upon  :  As  if  there  were  a  certain 
judgment  and  prudence,  quoad  hoc  \  and  as  if  all 
mens  underftandings  were  fo  framed,  as  to  be  very 

judi- 


profejjion  of  the  true  religion.  ' 

judicious  and  difcerning  in  this  main  point  of  reli- 
gion ;  but  to  be  weak,  and  dangerous,  and  blind,  as 
to  all  particular  points  :  or,  as  if  a  man  might  have 
a  very  good  judgment,  and  be  fit  to  be  trailed  and 
relied  upon^  before  he  come  into  their  church ;  but 
from  the  very  mioment  he  enters  into  it,  his  judg- 
ment were  quite  loft  and  good  for  nothing  :  for 
this  in  effe6l  and  by  interpretation  they  fay,  when 
they  allow  a  man  to  be  very  able  to  judge  which  is 
the  true  church  and  religion  -,  but  fo  foon  as  he  hath 
difcovered  and  embraced  that,  to  have  no  judgment 
of  his  own  afterwards  of  any  point  of  religion  what- 
foever ;  and  a  very  tempting  argument  it  is  to  any 
man  that  hath  judgment,  to  enter  into  that  church. 

2.  Another  art  they  ufe  with  their  intended  pro- 
felyte,  in  order  to  his  making  a  right  choice  of  his 
religion,  is  to  caution  him,  to  hear  and  read  only 
the  arguments  and  books  which  are  on  one  fide* 
But  now  admitting  their  defigned  profelyte  to  be  jull 
fuch  a  judge,  and  fo  far  they  will  allow  him  to 
be,  and  no  farther,  viz.  which  is  the  true  church  ; 
but  to  have  no  fitnefs  and  ability  at  all  to  judge  of 
particular  points  of  faith :  yet  methinks  they  put  a 
very  odd  condition,-  and  untoward  reftraint  upon  this 
judge,  in  telling  him,  (as  they  certainly  ufe  to  do 
thofe  whom  they  would  pervert)  that  he  muft  have 
no  diicourfe,  nor  read  any  books,  but  only  on  that 
fide  which  they  would  gain  him  to  -,  becaufe  that  is 
the  way  to  perplex  and  confound  him,  fo  that  he  fhall 
never  be  able  to  come  to  a  clear  judgment  and  refo- 
lution  in  the  matter.  But  will  any  man  admit  this 
Way  of  proceeding  in  a  temporal  cafe }  This  is  jult 
as  if  in  a  caufe  of  the  greateft  confequence,  the  coun- 
fel  on  one  fide  fhould  go  about  to  perfuade  the 
judge,  that  it  is  only  fit  to  hear  what  he  hath  to  fay 

Vol.  V,  8  N  'isx 


Of  conftancy  in  the 

in  the  cafe  •,  that  he  will  open  it  very  plainly,  and 
itate  the  matter  in  ditFerence  fo  clearly  and  impar- 
tially, and  bring  fuch  ftrong  reafons  and  proofs  for 
what  he  fays,  that  he  fhall  not  need  to  hear  any  thing 
on  the  other  fide,  but  may  proceed  to  judgment 
without  any  more  ado :  but  if  when  the  matter  is 
thus  laid  before  him  fo  plainly,  and  is  even  ripe  for 
judgment,  he  will  trouble  himfelf  needlefly  to  hear 
the  other  fide ;  this  will  cafl  them  back  where  they 
firfb  began,  and  bring  the  matter  to  an  endlefs 
wrangling,  and  fo  confound  and  puzzle  his  under- 
flanding,  that  he  fliall  never  be  able  to  pafs  any 
clear  judgment  in  the  caufe. 

What  think  we  would  a  judge  fay  to  fuch  a  bold 
and  fenfelefs  pleader  ?  The  cafe  is  the  fame,  and  the 
abfurdity  every  whit  as  grofs  and  palpable,  in  pref- 
fing  any  man  to  make  a  judgment  in  a  matter  which 
infinitely  more  concerns  him,  upon  hearing  only  the 
reafons  and  arguments  on  one  fide. 

3.  Another  art  which  they  ufe  in  making  profe- 
lytes,  is  to  poflefs  them,  that  there  is  but  one  thing 
that  they  are  mainly  concern' d  to  enquire  into,  and 
that  is  this  -,  fince  there  is  but  one  true  catholick 
church  of  Christ  upon  earth,  out  of  which  there 
is  no  falvation  to  be  liad  ;  which  that  true  church  is  ? 
and  when  they  have  found  that  out,  that  will  teach 
them  in  a  moft  infallible  way  the  true  faith  and  reh- 
gion,  and  all  thijigs  that  are  neceflary  to  be  believed 
or  done  by  them,  in  order  to  their  falvation  ;  fo 
that  they  have  nothing  to  do,  but  to  fatisfy  them- 
felves  in  this  fingle  enquiry  -,  which  is  the  true  ca- 
tholick church  of  Christ?  This  is  the  tmum  necef- 
fariiim^  the  one  thing  neceflary  ;  and  when  they 
have  found  out  this,  and  are  fatisfied  about  it,  they 
need  to  enquire  no  farther,  this  church  will  fully  in- 

ftrua 


profejjion  of  the  true  religion,  93  j; 

flrudl  and  fatisfy  them  in  all  other   things.     And^ERM. 
this  I  cannot  deny  to  be  a  very  artificial  way  of 
proceeding,  and  to  ferve  their  purpofe  very  well  -, 
for  they  have  thefe  two  great  advantages  by  it. 

1 .  That  it  makes  the  work  fhort,  and  faves  them 
a  great  deal  of  labour,  by  bringing  the  whole  bufi- 
nefs  to  one  fingle  enquiry :  and  when  they  have 
gained  this  point,  that  this  fingle  queftion  is  all  that 
they  need  to  be  fatisfied  in  \  then  they  have  nothing 
to  do,  but  to  ply  and  puzzle  the  man  with  their 
motives  of  credibility,  and  marks  of  the  true  church, 
and  to  fhew,  as  well  as  they  can,  how  thefe  marks 
agree  to  their  church,  and  are  all  to  be  found  in  it, 
and  in  no  other  ;  and  to  {tx.  out  to  the  beft  advan- 
tage the  glorious  privileges  of  their  church,  the  mi- 
raculous things  that  have  been  and  are  ftill  daily 
done  in  it,  and  the  innumerable  multitude  of  their 
faints  and  martyrs  ;  and  if  thefe  general  things  take 
and  fink  into  them,  their  work  is  in  effed  done. 

2.  Another  great  advantage  they  have  by  it,  is, 
that  by  bringing  them  to  this  method,  they  divert 
and  keep  them  off  from  the  many  objections  againft 
their  church  and  religion,  namely,  the  errors  and 
corruptions  which  we  charge  them  withal.  For  this 
is  the  thing  they  are  afraid  of,  and  will  by  no  means 
be  brought  to  \  to  vindicate  and  make  good  their 
innovations  in  faith  and  pra6lice,  fo  plainly  in  m^any 
things  contrary  to  fcripture,  and  to  the  faith  and 
practice  of  the  primitive  church  \  as  the  do6lrines  of 
tranfubllantiation,  of  purgatory,  the  pope's  fupre- 
m^acy,  of  the  infallibility  of  their  church,  of  their 
feven  facraments  inilituted  by  Christ,  and  of  the 
intention  of  the  prieft  being  necelTary  to  the  validity 
and  virtue  of  the  facraments :  and  then  feveral  of 
their  pradices  \  as  of  the  worfhip  of  images,  of  the 

8  N  2  invo- 


936  Of  conjlancy  in  the 

E  R  M.  invocation  of  angels  and  faints,  of  the  fervice  of 
God  and  the  fcriptures  in  an  unknown  tongue,  and 
the  communion  in  one  kind ;  and  feveral  other 
things,  fo  plainly  contrary  to  the  fcriptures,  and  the 
pradice  and  ufage  of  the  primitive  church,  that  al- 
mofl  the  meanell  capacity  may  eafjly  be  made  fen- 
fible  and  convinced  of  it.  Thefc  are  fore  places, 
which  they  dcfire  not  to  have  touched,  and  therefore 
they  ufe  all  poflible  artifice  to  keep  men  at  a  diflance 
from  them  •,  partly  becaufe  the  particular  difculTion 
of  them  is  tedious,  and  it  requires  more  than  ordi- 
nary fl^ill,  to  fay  any  thing  that  is  tenable  for  them, 
and  fo  to  paint  and  varnifli  them  over,  as  to  hide 
the  corruptions  and  deformities  of  them  ;  but  chiefly 
becaufe  they  are  confcious  to  themfelves,  that  as  in 
all  thefc  points  they  are  upon  the  dcfenfive,  fo  they 
are  alfo  upon  very  great  difadvantages  ;  and  there- 
fore to  avoid,  if  it  be  poflible,  being  troubled  with 
them,  they  have  devifed  this  fhorter,  and  eafler,  and 
more  convenient  way  of  making  profelytes. 

Not  that  they  are  always  able  to  keep  themfelves 
thus  within  their  trenches  •,  but  are  fometimes,  whe- 
ther they  v/ill  or  no,  drawn  out  to  encounter  lome 
of  thefe  objections  :  but  they  rid  themfelves  of  them 
as  foon,  and  as  dexterouQy  as  they  can,  by  telling 
thofe  that  make  them,  that  they  will  hereafter  give 
them  full  fatisfadlion  to  all  thefe  matters,  when  they 
are  gotten  over  the  firil  and  main  enquiry  j  which 
IS  the  true  church  ?  For  if  they  can  keep  them  to  this 
point,  and  gain  them  to  it,  they  can  deal  with  them 
more  eafily  in  the  reft  :  for  when  they  can  once 
fwallow  this  principle,  that  the  church  of  Rome  is 
the  one  true  catholick  church,  and  confequently,  as 
they  have  told  them  all  along,  infallible  \  this  in- 
fallibihty  of  the  church  once  entertained  will  cover  a 

multitude 


profejjion  of  the  true  religion,  937 

multitude  of  particular  errors  and  miflakes  ;  and  ^  ^  \  '^^- 
will  very  much  help  to  cure  the  weaknefs  and  defedls 
of  fome  particular  do6lrines  and  pradices,  and  at  laft 
to  filence  and  over-rule  all  objedions  againfl  them. 
So  that  the  benefit  and  advantage  of  this  method  is 
vifibly  and  at  firft  fight  very  great ;  and  therefore  no 
wonder  they  are  fo  fteady  and  conftant  to  it,  and  do 
fo  obfbinately  infift  upon  it.  But  how  convenient  fo- 
ever  it  be  to  them  ;  it  is,  I  am  fure,  very  unreafona- 
ble  in  itfelf ;  and  that  upon  thefe  accounts. 

1.  Becaufe  the  true  <jhurch  doth  not  conflitute 
and  make  the  true  chriftian  faith  and  dodrine  \  but 
it  is  the  true  chriftian  faith  and  dodlrine,  the  pro- 
fellion  whereof  m.akes  the  true  church ;  and  therefore 
in  reafon  and  order  of  nature,  the  firft  enquiry  muft 
be  ;  what  is  the  true  faith  and  doctrine  of  Christ, 
which  by  him  was  delivered  to  the  apoftles,  and  by 
them  publiHied  and  made  known  to  the  world,  and 
by  their  writings  tranfmitted  and  conveyed  down  to 
us  ?  And  this  being  found,  every  fociety  of  Chrifti- 
ans  which  holds  this  dodlrine,  is  a  true  part  of  the  ca- 
tholick  church  \  and  all  the  Chriftians  throughout 
the  world  that  agree  in  this  do6trine,  are  the  one  tme 
catholick  church. 

2.  The  enquiry  about  the  tme  church  can  have  no 
iftue,  even  according  to  their  own  way  of  proceed- 
ing, without  a  due  examination  of  the  particular 
doclrines  and  pradices  of  that  church,  the  commu- 
nion whereof  they  would  perfliade  a  man  to  em.brace. 
We  will  admit  at  prefent  this  to  be  the  firft  enquiry ; 
which  is  the  tme  church  ?  let  us  now  fee  in  what  way 
they  manage  this,  to  gain  men  over  to  their  church. 
They  tell  them  that  the  church  of  Rome  is  the  one 
tme  catholick  church  of  Christ.  The  tme  of  tliis 
alTertion  we  will  particularly  examine  afterwards,  when 

we 


Of  conjlancy  i?i  the 

we  come  to  confider  the  next  flep  of  their  method  in 
deahng  with  their  converts.  At  prefcnt  I  fhall  only 
take  notice  in  the  general,  what  way  they  take  to 
prove  this  aiTertion  •,  namely,  that  the  church  of 
Rome  is  the  one  true  catholick  cliurch ;  and  that  is,  by 
the  notes  and  marks  of  the  true  church,  which  they 
call  their  motives  of  credibility  ;  becaufe  by  thefe  they 
defign  to  perfuade  them,  that  the  church  of  Rome  is 
the  one  true  catholick  church.  I  Ihall  not  now  reckon 
up  all  the  notes  and  marks  which  they  give  of  the  true 
church  j  but  only  obferve,  that  one  of  their  principal 
marks  of  the  true  church  is  this  ;  that  the  faith  and 
do6lrine  of  it  be  agreeable  to  the  dodrine  of  the  pri- 
mitive and  apoftohck  church,  (i.  e.)  to  the  do6lrine 
delivered  by  our  Saviour  and  his  apoltlcs  :  and 
this  Bellarmine  makes  one  of  the  marks  of  the  true 
church.  And  they  mull  unavoidably  make  it  fo  ;  be- 
caufe the  true  faith  and  doctrine  of  Christ,  is  that 
which  indeed  conilitutes  the  true  cliurch.  But  if 
this  be  an  effential  mark  of  the  true  church  ;  then 
no  man  can  pollibly  know  the  church  of  Rome  to  be 
the  true  church,  till  we  have  examined  the  particular 
dodlrines  and  pra6tices  of  it,  and  the  agreement  of 
them  with  the  primitive  doftrine  and  pradice  of 
Chriftianity ;  and  this  neceffarily  draws  on  and  en- 
gages them  in  a  difpute  of  the  particular  points  and 
differences  betwixt  us  j  which  is  the  very  thing  they 
would  avoid  by  this  method,  and  which  I  have  now 
plainly  Ihewed  they  cannot  do  •,  becaufe  they  cannot 
pojfTibly  prove  their  church  to  be  the  true  church, 
•(Without  fhewing  the  conformity  of  their  dodrines 
and  practices,  to  the  dodrine  and  pradlice  of  the 
[primitive  and  apoflolick  church  -,  and  this  will  give 
them  work  enough,  and  will,  whether  they  will  or 
no,  draw  them  out  of  their  hold  and  faftnefs  5  which 
o  is 


profejjion  of  the  true  religion^  939 

is  to  amufe  people  with  a  general  enquiry,  which  is  S  E  R  M. 
the  true  church  ?  without  defcending  to  the  exami-  , 
nation  of  their  particular   do6lrines  and  pra6lices. 
But  this  they  muft  of  necelTity  come  to,  before  they 
can  prove  by  the  notes  and  marks  of  the  true  church, 
that  theirs  is  the  true  church. 

And  this  is  a  demonftration,  that  their  method  of 
fatisfadion,  as  it  is  unnatural  and  unreafonable,  fo  it 
cannot  ferve  the  purpofe  they  aim  at  by  it ;  which  is, 
to  divert  men  from  the  examination  of  the  particu- 
lar points  in  difference  between  the  church  of  Rome 
and  us,  and  to  gain  them  over  to  them  by  a  wile 
and  trick  ;  becaufe  the  very  method  they  take  to 
prove  themfelves  to  be  the  true  catholick  church,  will 
enforce  them  to  juftify  all  their  particular  doctrines 
and  pra6lices,  before  they  can  finiih  this  proof. 

And  here  we  fix  our  foot ;  that  the  fingle  queflion 
and  point,  upon  which  they  would  put  the  whole  if- 
fue  of  the  matter,  cannot  podibly  be  brought  to  any 
reafonable  ilTue,  without  a  particular  difcuffion  and 
examination  of  the  points  in  difference  betwixt  their 
church  and  ours :  and  when  they  can  make  out  thefe 
to  be  agreeable  to  the  primitive  doctrine  and  pra6lice 
of  the  chriftian  church ;  we  have  reafon  to  be  fatif- 
fied,  that  the  church,  of  Rome  is  a  church,  in  the 
communion  whereof  a  man  may  be  fafe :  but  till  that 
be  made  out,  they  have  done  nothing  to  periliade 
any  man  that  underftands  himfelf,  that  it  is  fafe, 
much  lefs  necelTary  to  be  of  their  communion.  But 
if  particular  points  muft  te  difculfcd  and  cleared,  be- 
fore a  man  can  be  fatisfied  in  the  enquiry  after  the  true 
church  •,  then  they  muft  allow  their  intended  convert 
to  be  a  judge  likewife  of  particular  points  •,  and  if  he 
be  fufHcient  for  that  too,  before  he  comes  into  their 
church,  I  do  not  fee  of  what  ufe  the  infallibility  of 
the  church  will  be  to  him,  when  he  is  in  it.      SER- 


940 


SERMON     LXIL 

Of  Conftancy  in  the  Profeflion  of  the 
true  Religion. 


H  E  B.   X.  23. 

Let  us  hold  faft  the  frofeffion  of  our  faith  without 
wavering  ;  for  he  is  faithful  that  -promifed, 

S  E  R  M  T  Have  already  macte  a  confiderable  progrefs  in  my 
LXII.     JL  difcourfe  upon  thefe  words,  in  which  I  told  you, 
Jj-pJTT'  there  is  an  exhortation  to  "  hold  faft  the  profeftion 
fermonon  "  of  our  faith  without  wavering : "  and  an  argument 
this  text,    or  encouragement  thereto,  becaufe  "  he  is  faithful 
"  that  promifed."     lam  yet  upon  the  firft  of  thefe, 
the  exhortation  to  "  hold  faft  the  profeflion  of  our 
"  faith  without  wavering  •,"  by  which  I  told  you  the 
apoftle  doth  not  intend,  that  thofe  who  are  capable  of 
examining  the  grounds  and  reafons  of  their  religion, 
fhould  not  have  the  liberty  to  do  it  \  nor  that,  when 
upon  due  enquiry  they  are,  as  they  verily  believe, 
eftabhftied  in  the  true  faith  and  religion,  they  ftiould 
obftinately  refufe  to  hear  any  reafon  that  is  fairly  of- 
fered againft  their  prefent  perfuafion. 
And  then  I  proceed  to  ftiew  pofitively, 
Firft,  What  it  is  that  we  are  exhorted  to  "  hold 
"  faft,"  (viz.)  "  the  confeflion  or  profeffion  of  our 
"  faith  ;'*  the  ancient  chriftian  faith,  of  which  eve- 
ry Chriftian  makes  profeflion  in  his  baptifm.     For  it 
is  of  that  the  apoftle  her^  fpeaks,  as  appears  plainly 
by  the  context.  Secondly, 


profeffion  of  the  true  religion,  941 

Secondly,  How  we  are  to  "  hold  faft  the  profefTi-  ^.^^^,^* 
**  on  of  our  faith."     And  of  this  I  gave  account  in 
thefe  following  particulars. 

1.  We  ihould  "^  hold  faft  the  profeflion  of  our 
"  faith,"  againft  the  confidence  of  men,  without 
fcripture  or  reafon  to  fupport  that  confidence. 

2.  And  much  more  againft  the  confidence  of  men, 
contrary  to  plain  fcripture  and  reafon,  and  the  com- 
mon fenfe  of  mankind ;  of  which  I  gave  you  particu- 
lar inftances. 

3.  Againft  all  the  temptations  and  terrors  of  the 
world. 

4.  Againft  all  vain  promifes  of  being  put  into  a 
fafer  condition,  and  groundlefs  hopes  of  getting  to 
heaven  upon  eafier  terms,  in  fome  other  church  and 
religion.     I  am  now  upon  the 

5.  And  laft  particular  I  mentioned,  namely,  that 
we  are  to  "  hold  faft  the  profeflion  of  our  faith  with- 
"  out  wavering,"  againft  all  the  cunning  arts  and  in- 
finuations  of  bufy  and  difputing  men,  whofe  defign 
it  is  to  unhinge  men  from  their  religion,  and  to  mal<e 
profelytes  to  their  party  and  fa6lion.  I  have  already 
mentioned  fome  of  the  arts  which  they  ufe,  (I  mean 
particularly  them  of  the  church  of  Rome)  in  making 
profelytes  to  their  religion  ;  and  I  have  fhewn  the  ab- 
furdity  and  unreafonablenefs  of  them.     As, 

Firft,  In  allowing  men  to  be  very  competent  and 
fufEcient  judges  for  themfelves,  in  the  choice  of  their 
religion ;  (i.  e.  which  is  the  true  church  and  religi- 
on in  which  alone  falvation  is  to  be  had  ;)  and  yet 
telling  them  at  the  fame  time,  that  they  are  utterly 
incapable  of  judging  of  particular  dodrines  and  points 
of  faith.  As  for  thefe,  they  muft  rely  upon  the  judg- 
ment of  an  infallible  church  \  and  if  they  do  not,  they 
will  certainly  run  into  damnable  errors  and  miftakes. 

Vol.  V,  SO  And 


Of  conjlancy  in  the 

And  they  mull  of  necefTity  allow  them  the  firfl,  a 
fufficient  ability  to  judge  for  themfelves  in  the  choice 
of  their  religion  :  otherwife  in  vain  do  they  offer  them 
arguments  to  perfuade  them  to  theirs  •,  if  they  can- 
not judge  of  the  force  of  them.  But  now,  after  this, 
to  deny  them  all  ability  to  judge  of  particular  doc- 
trines and  points  of  faith,  is  a  very  abfurd  and  incon- 
fifbent  pretence. 

Secondly,  Another  art  they  ufe,  in  order  to  their 
making  a  right  choice  of  their  religion,  is  earneftly 
to  perfuade  them  to  hear  and  read  only  the  argu- 
ments and  books  on  their  fide :  which  is  jufl  as  if 
one  fhould  go  about  to  perfuade  a  judge,  in  order 
to  the  better  underflanding  and  clearer  decifion  of  a 
caufe,  to  hear  only  the  counfel  on  one  fide. 

Thirdly,  They  tell  them  that  the  only  thing  they 
are  to  enquire  into,  is,  which  is  the  true  church,  the 
one  catholick  church  mentioned  in  the  creed,  out  of 
which  there  is  no  falvation ;  and  when  they  have 
found  that,  they  are  to  rely  upon  the  authority  of  that 
church,  v/hich  is  infallible,  for  all  other  things.  And 
this  method  they  wifely  take,  to  avoid  particular  dif- 
putes  about  the  innovations  and  errors  which  we 
charge  them  withal.  But  I  have  fhewn  at  large,  that 
this  cannot  be  the  firfl  enquiry  :  becaufe  it  is  not  the 
true  church,  that  makes  the  true  chriftian  faith  and 
dodrine :  but  the  profefTion  of  the  true  chriftian  faith 
and  do(5lrine,  which  makes  the  true  church. 

Befides,  their  way  of  proving  their  church  to  be 
the  only  true  church,  being  by  the  marks  and  pro- 
perties of  the  true  church,  of  which  the  chief  is,  the 
conformity  of  their  dodlrines  and  pradices  with  the 
primitive  and  apoftolical  church  ;  this  unavoidably 
draws  on  an  examination  of  their  particular  dodlrines 
and  praftices,  whether  they  be  conformable  to  thofe 

of 


prof ejjion  of  the  true  religion,  943 

of  the  primitive  and  apoftolical  church,  before  their  S  E  R  M- 
great  enquiry,  which  is  the  true  church?  can  be 
brought  to  an  ifTue  \  which  it  is  plain  it  can  never  be, 
without  entering  into  the  ocean  of  particular  difputes, 
which  they  defire  above  all  things  to  avoid.  So  that 
they  are  never  the  nearer  by  this  method  \  they  can 
i.cither  fhorten  their  work  by  it,  nor  keep  off  the  ex- 
amination of  their  particular  errors  and  corruptions ; 
which  are  a  very  fore  place,  and  they  cannot  endure 
we  fliould  touch  it. 

I  fhall  now  proceed  to  difcover  fome  other  arts  and 
methods  which  they  ufe  in  feducing  people  to  their 
church  and  religion,  and  fhall  be  as  brief  in  them  as 
I  can. 

Fourthly,  They  pretend  that  the  Roman  church  is 
the  catholick  church,  (i.  e,)  the  vifible  fociety  of  all 
Chriflians,  united  to  the  bifhop  of  Rome,  as  the  fu- 
preme  paflor  and  vifible  head  of  Christ's  church 
upon  earth :  from  whence  it  clearly  follows,  that  it 
is  neceflary  to  all  Chriflians  to  join  themfelves  to  the 
communion  of  the  Roman  church ;  otherwife  they 
cannot  be  members  of  the  catholick  church  of  Chri  st, 
out  of  which  there  is  no  falvation. 

We  grant  the  confequence,  that  if  the  Roman 
church  be  the  catholick  church,  it  is  neceifary  to  be 
of  that  communion  ♦,  becaufe  out  of  the  catholick 
church  there  is  ordinarily  no  falvation  to  be  had.  But 
how  do  they  prove,  that  the  Roman  church  is  the 
catholick  church  ?  They  would  fain  have  us  fo  civil, 
as  to  take  this  for  granted :  becaufe  if  we  do  not ; 
they  do  not  well  know  how  to  go  about  to  prove  it. 
And  indeed,  ^  fome  things  are  obflinate,  and  will  not 
be  proved  without  fo  much  trouble  and  difficulty,  that 
it  is  better  to  let  them  alone  j  and  by  the  confident 
afTertion  of  them,  by  importunity,  and  by  any  other 

8  0  2  fair 


Of  conjlancy  in  the 

fair  means,  to  get  them  believed,  without  proof  of 
this  ftubborn  fort  of  propofitions,  which  will  admit 
of  no  proof.  This  is  one,  that  a  part  is  the  whole  •, 
or,  which  is  all  one,  that  the  Roman  church  is  the 
catholick  church.  For  that  is  but  a  part  of  the 
chriflian  church,  and  not  the  befl  part  neither,  but 
perhaps  the  very  worfi:  and  moft  corrupt  of  all  the 
reft,  is  no  difficult  matter  to  prove,  and  hath  been 
often  done.  But  now  to  prove  the  church  of  Rome 
to  be  the  cathoHck  church,  that  is,  the  whole  fociety 
of  all  true  Chriftians  in  the  world,  thefe  following 
particulars  ought  to  be  clearly  fhewn  and  made  out. 

I.  A  plain  conftitution  of  our  Saviour,  where- 
by St.  Peter  and  his  fucceflbrs  at  Rome  are  made 
the  fupreme  head  and  paftors  of  the  whole  chriftian 
church.  For  St.  Peter  firft.  Can  they  fhew  any  fuch 
conftitution  in  the  gofpel,  or  can  they  produce  the 
leaft  proof  and  evidence  out  of  the  hiftory  of  the 
a6h  and  the  epiftles  of  the  apoftles,  that  St.  Peter 
was  acknowledged  for  fuch  by  the  reft  of  the  apof- 
tles ?  Nay,  is  there  not  clear  evidence  there  to  the 
contrary,  that  in  the  firft  council  of  the  chriftian 
church  at  Jerufalem,  St.  James,  the  biftiop  of  Jeru- 
falem  was,  if  not  fuperior,  at  leaft  equal  to  him  ? 
Does  ^t.  Paul  acknowledge  any  fuperiority  of  St. 
Peter  over  him }  Nay,  does  he  not  upon  feveral  oc- 
cafions  declare  himfelf  equal  to  the  chiefeft  apoftles, 
even  to  St.  Peter  himfelf?  And  is  this  confiftent  with 
a  plain  conftitution  of  our  Lord's  making  St.  Peter 
fupreme  head  and  paftor  of  the  chriftian  church  ? 

But  fuppofe  this  to  have  been  fo  •,  where  doth  it 
appear,  by  any  conftitution  of  our  Saviour,  that 
this  authority  was  derived  to  his  fucceflbrs  ?  And  if 
it  were,  why  to  his  fucceflTors  at  Rome,  rather  than 
at  Antioch,  where  he  was  firft,  and  unqueftionably 

bifhop  ? 


profejjfon  of  the  true  7'eUgion,  94^" 

bilhop  ?  They  muft  acknowledge,  that  when  he  was  S  E  R  m; 
bifhop  of  Antioch,  he  was  the  fupreme  head  and 
pallor  of  the  whole  chriftian  church  •,  and  then  the 
ftile  muft  have  been,  the  Antiochian  catholick  church, 
as  it  is  now  the  Roman  catholick.  But  do  they  find 
any  footfteps  of  fuch  a  ftile  in  ecclefiaftical  hiftory  ? 

2.  To  make  good  this  proportion,  that  the  Ro- 
man church  is  the  catholick  church,  they  are  in 
confequence  obliged  to  affirm  and  believe,  that  the 
churches  of  Afia,  which  were  excommunicated  by 
the  bifhops  of  Rome,  for  not  keeping  eafter  as 
they  did  •,  and  the  churches  of  Afia  and  Africa, 
which  were  excommunicated  by  the  fame  bifhop, 
upon  the  point  of  rebaptizing  hereticks  ;  that  all 
thefe,  by  being  turn'd  out  of  the  communion  of  the 
Roman  church,  were  alfo  cut  off  from  the  catholick 
church,  and  from  a  poiTibility  of  falvation.  This 
the  church  of  Rome  themfelves  will  not  affirm  ;  and 
yet,  if  to  be  caft  out  of  the  communion  of  the  Ro- 
man and  the  catholick  church  be  all  one,  they  muft 
affirm  it. 

3.  In  confequence  of  this  propofition,  that  the 
church  of  Rome  is  the  catholick  church,  they  ought 
to  hold,  that  all  baptifm  out  of  the  communion  of 
their  church  is  void  and  of  none  effedb.  For  if  it  be 
good  ;  then  it  makes  the  perfons  baptized,  members 
of  the  catholick  church ;  and  then  thofe  that  are  out 
of  the  communion  of  the  Roman  church,  may  be 
true  members  of  the  catholick  church  •,  and  then  the 
Roman  and  the  catholick  church  are  not  all  one. 
But  the  church  of  Rome  holds  the  baptifm  of  here- 
ticks, and  of  thofe  that  are  out  of  the  communion 
of  their  church,  to  be  good  ;  which  is  a  demonftra- 
tion,  that  the  Roman  church  neither  is  the  catholick 
church  i  nor  if  Ihe  believe  copf^ftently,  cao  fhe  think 
herfeif  to  be  fo.  4-  I^^ 


Q  ^  6  ^f  conjlancy  in  the 

E  R  M.  4.  In  confequence  of  this  propofition,  all  the 
Chriftians  in  the  world,  which  do  not  yield  fubjec- 
tion  to  the  bifliop  of  Rome,  and  acknowledge  his 
fupremacy,  are  no  true  parts  of  the  catholick  church, 
nor  in  a  polTibihty  of  falvation.  And  this  does  not 
only  exclude  thofe  of  the  reform' d  religion  from 
being  members  of  the  catholick  church  •,  but  the 
Greeks,  and  the  eaflern  churches,  (i.  e.)  four  of  the 
five  patriarchal  churches  of  the  chriftian  world  •,  which 
taken  together,  are  really  greater  than  thofe  in  com- 
munion with  the  church  of  Rome.  And  this  the 
diurch  of  Rome  does  affirm,  concerning  all  thofe 
churches  and  Chriftians,  which  refufe  fubjedlion  to 
the  bifhop  of  Rome,  that  they  arc  out  of  the  com- 
munion of  the  catholick  church,  and  a  capacity  of 
falvation.  But  furely  it  is  not  poffible,  that  the  true 
catholick  church  of  Christ  can  have  fo  little  cha- 
rity as  this  comes  to  -,  and  to  a  wife  man  there  needs 
no  other  demonftration  than  this,  that  the  church 
of  Rome  is  fo  far  from  being  the  whole  chriftian 
church,  that  'tis  a  very  arrogant  and  uncharitable 
part  of  it. 

5.  And  laftly.  In  confequence  of  the  truth  of  this 
propofition,  and  of  the  importance  of  it  to  the  fal- 
vation of  fouls,  and  to  the  peace  and  unity  of 
the  chriftian  church,  they  ought  to  produce  exprefs 
mention  of  the  Roman  cathohck  church,  in  the  an- 
cient creeds  of  the  chriftian  church.  For  if  this  pro- 
pofition, that  the  Roman  church  is  the  catholick, 
be  true  \  it  was  always  fo,  and  always  of  the  great- 
eft  importance  to  the  falvation  of  men,  and  the  peace 
and  unity  of  the  chriftian  church  :  and  if  it  were  fo, 
and  always  believed  to  be  fo,  by  the  chriftian  church, 
as  they  pretend ;  what  reafon  can  be  imagined,  why 
the  ancient  chriftian  church  fhould  never  fay  fo,  nor 
I  put 


LXII. 


profejjion  of  the  true  religion,  947 

put  an  article  of  fuch  confequence  and  importance  S  E  R  M. 
in  exprefs  words  in  their  creeds  -,  nor  why  they 
fhould  not  have  ufed  the  ftile  of  Roman  cathoHck, 
as  familiarly  then,  as  they  do  now  in  the  Roman 
church  ?  A  plain  evidence  that  this  is  a  new  ftile 
which  they  ufe,  when  they  give  themfelves  the  title 
of  the  Roman  catholick  church  •,  and  that  the  anci- 
ent chriftian  church  knew  better,  than  to  call  one 
part  of  the  catholick  church,  the  whole.  I  am  fure, 
that  iEneas  Sylvius  (who  was  afterwards  pope  Pius 
the  fecond)  fays,  that  before  the  council  of  Nice, 
little  refpe6i:  was  had  to  the  Roman  church.  But 
how  does  this  confift  with  their  prefent  pretence, 
that  the  Roman  church  is,  and  always  hath  been  the 
catholick  church  •,  and  that  the  bifhop  of  Rome  is 
by  Christ's  appointment,  the  fupreme  paftor,  and 
vifible  head  of  the  whole  chriftian  church  ?  Is  it 
poflible  that  this  fhould  be  believed  in  the  chriftian 
church  before  the  council  of  Nice  \  and  yet  little 
refpe6t  to  be  had  at  that  time  to  the  Roman  church } 
This  indeed  was  faid  by  ^neas  Sylvius,  before  he 
fat  in  the  infallible  chair  •,  but  is  never  the  lefs  true 
for  that. 

Fifthly,  the  next  ftep  of  their  method  is,  that  the 
Roman  church  is  infallible  -,  and  by  this  means  they 
have  a  certain  remedy  againft  herefy,  and  a  judge 
of  controverfies,  from  which  there  is  no  appeal, 
which  we  want  in  our  church.  And  this  is  a  glo- 
rious privilege  indeed,  if  they  could  prove  that  they 
had  it,  and  that  it  would  be  fo  certain  a  remedy 
againft  herefy,  and  give  a  final  decifion  to  all  con- 
troverfies. But  there  is  not  one  tittle  of  all  this,  of 
which  they  are  able  to  give  any  tenable  proof :  For, 

I.    All  the  pretence  for  their  infallibility  relies 
upon  the  truth  of  the  former  propofition,  that  the 

church 


LXII. 


948  Of  conjlancy  in  the 

S  J3^^-  church  of  Rome  is  the  catholick  church,  and  that 
they  fay  is  infallible  :  and  I  have  already  fhcwn,  that 
that  propofition  is  not  only  deflitute  of  any  good 
proof  \  but  is  as  evidently  falfe,  as  that  a  part  of  a 
thing  is  the  whole. 

2.  But  fuppofing  it  were  true,  that  the  Roman 
Church  were  the  catholick  church  ♦,  yet  it  is  neither 
evident  in  itfelf,  nor  can  be  proved  by  them,  that 
the  catholick  church  of  every  age  is  infallible,  in  de- 
ciding all  controverfies  of  religion.  It  is  granted  by 
all  Chriftians,  that  our  Saviour  and  his  apollles 
were  infallible,  in  the  delivery  of  the  chriilian  doc- 
trine, and  they  proved  their  infallibility  by  miracles  ; 
and  this  was  neceffary  at  lirft  for  the  fecurity  of  our 
faith :  but  this  do6lrine  being  once  delivered  and 
tranfmitted  down  to  us  in  the  holy  fcriptures,  writ- 
ten by  the  evangelifls  and  apoflles,  who  were  infalli- 
bly afTifled  by  the  Holy  Ghoft  ;  we  have  now  a  cer- 
tain and  infallible  rule  of  faith  and  pradice,  which, 
with  the  afliflance  and  inftru6lion  of  thofe  guides  and 
pallors  which  Christ  hath  appointed  in  his  Church, 
is  fufficiently  plain  in  all  things  neceifary.  And  as 
there  is  no  evidence  of  the  continuance  of  infallibi- 
lity in  the  guides  and  paftors  of  the  church,  in  the 
ages  which  followed  the  apoftles ;  becaufe  miracles 
are  long  fince  ceafed  :  fo  there  is  no  need  of  the  con- 
tinuance of  it,  for  the  prefervation  of  the  true  faith 
and  religion  ;  becaufe  God  hath  fufficiently  pro- 
vided for  that,  by  that  infallible  rule  of  faith  and 
manners  which  he  hath  left  to  his  church  in  the 
holy  fcriptures,  which  are  every  way  fufficient  and 
able  to  make  both  paftors  and  people  wife  unto  fal- 
vation. 

3.  As  for  a  certain  remedy  againft  herefy,  it  is 
certain  God  never  intended  there  Ihould  be  any ; 

no 


profejjion  of  the  true  religion,  949 

no  more  than  he  hath  provided  a  certain  remedy  ^  ^  ^^' 
againft  fin  and  vice ;  which  furely  is  every  whit  as 
contrary  to  the  chriftian  religion,  and  therefore  as 
fit  to  be  provided  againft,  as  herefy  :  but  it  is  certain 
in  experience,  that  God  hath  provided  no  certain 
and  effedual  remedy  againft  fin  and  vice  :  for  which 
I  can  give  no  other  reafon,  but  that  God  does  that 
which  he  thinks  beft  and  fitteft,  and  not  what  we 
are  apt  to  think  to  be  fo. 

Bcfides  that  -infallibility  is  not  a  certain  remedy 
againft  herefy.  The  apoftles  were  certainly  infalli- 
ble ;  and  yet  they  could  neither  prevent  nor  extin- 
guifti  herefy  ;  which  never  more  abounded  than  in 
the  apoftles  times.  And  St.  Paul  exprefly  tells  us, 
I  Cor.  i.  19.  "  That  there  muft  be  herefies  \  that 
"  they  which  are  approved  may  be  made  manifeft.'* 
And  St.  Peter,  the  2d  epiftle  ii.  i.  "  That  there 
"  Ihould  be  falfe  teachers  among  Chriftians,  who 
"  ftiould  privily  bring  in  damnable  herefies  \  and 
"  that  many  fliould  follow  their  pernicious  ways.'* 
But  now  if  there  muft  be  herefies  ^  either  the  church 
muft  not  be  infallible,,  or  infallibility  in  the  church 
is  no  certain  remedy  againft  them. 

I  proceed  to  the  next  ftep  they  make,  viz. 

Sixthly,  that  Christ  hath  always  a  vifible  church 
upon  earth  •,  and  that  they  can  ftiew  a  church,  which, 
from  the  time  of  Christ  and  his  apoftles,  hath  al- 
ways made  a  vifible  profeflion  of  the  fame  dodrines 
and  pradlices  which  are  now  believed  and  pradifed 
in  the  church  of  Rome :  but  that  we  can  ftiew  no 
vifible  church,  that  from  the  time  of  Christ  and 
his  apoftles  hath  always  oppofed  the  church  of 
Rome,  in  thofe  doftrines  and  practices  which  we  now 
revile  and  find  fault  with  in  their  church. 

Vol.  V,  8  P  That 


LXII. 


g^o  Of  con  flamy  in  the 

SERM.  That  Christ  hath  ahvays  had,  and  ever  fh all 
have  to  the  end  of  the  world,  a  vifible  church,  pro- 
fefling  and  pradifing  his  true  faith  and  religion,  is 
agreed  on  both  fides :  but  we  fay  that  he  hath  no 
where  promifed,  that  this  fhould  be  free  from  all 
errors  and  corruptions  in  faith  and  pradlice.  This 
the  churches  planted  by  the  apoftles  themfelves  were 
not,  even  in  their  times,  and  during  their  abode 
amongft  them  ♦,  and  yet  they  were  true  parts  of  the 
chriftian  catholick  church.  In  the  following  ages, 
errors  and  corruptions  and  fuperftitions  did  by  de- 
grees creep  in  and  grow  up,  in  feveral  parts  of  the 
church  ;  as  St.  Auilin,  and  other  of  the  fathers 
complain  of  in  their  times.  Since  that,  feveral  famous 
parts  of  the  chriftian  church,  both  in  Afia  and  Afri^ 
ca,  have  not  only  been  greatly  corrupted,  but  have 
apoftatized  from  the  faith  •,  fo  that  in  many  places 
there  are  hardly  any  footfteps  of  Chriftianity  among 
them.  But  yet  ftill  Christ  hath  had  in  all  thefe 
ages  a  vifible  church  upon  earth  -,  though  perhaps  no 
part  of  it  at  all  times  free  from  fome  errrors  and  cor- 
ruptions ;  and  in  feveral  parts  of  it,  great  corrup- 
tions both  in  faith  and  pra6lice  ♦,  and. in  none  I  think 
more  and  longer,  than  in  the  church  of  Rome,  for 
all  ihe  boafts  herfelf  like  old  Babylon,  Ifa.  xlvii.  7,  8. 
"  That  fhe  is  a  lady  for  ever  \  and  fays  in  her  heart, 
*'  lam,  and  none  elfe  befides  me  ;"  and  like  the 
church  of  Laodicea,  Rev.  iii.  17.  which  faid,  "  I 
*'  am  rich,  and  increafed  with  goods,  and  have  need 
*'  of  nothing  j"  when  the  fpirit  of  God  faith,  that 
*'  fhe  was  wretched,  and  miferable,  and  poor,  and 
^^  blind,  and  naked  ;  and  knew  it  not." 

Thus  the  church  of  Rome  boafts  ;  that  ihe  hath 
5n  all  ages  been  the  true  vifible  church  of  Christ, 
(and  none  befides  her)  free  from  all  errors  in  doc- 

^rinCj 


profejjion  of  the  true  religzo?t,  951 

trine^  and  corruptions  in  pradlice  ;  and  that  fromSERlvr. 
the  age  of  Christ  and  his  apoflles,  fhe  hath  al-  , 
ways  profefTed  th.^  fame  dodrines  and  pradices  which 
fhe  does  at  this  day.  Can  any  thing  be  more  fhame- 
lefs  than  this  ?  Did  they  always  beheve  tranfiibftan- 
tiation  ?  Let  their  pope  Gelafius  fpeak  for  them  ; 
who  exprefly  denies,  that  in  the  facrament  there  is 
any  fubfcantial  change  of  the  bread  and  wine  into  thd 
body  and  blood  of  Christ.  Was  this  always  an 
article  of  their  faith,  and  ncceflary  to  be  believed  by 
all  Chriflians  ?  Let  Scotus,  and  feveral  other  of  their, 
fchoolmen  and  learned  writers,  fpeak  for  them.  Was 
purgatory  always  believed  in  the  Roman  church,  as 
it  is  now  defined  in  the  council  of  Trent  ?  Let  fe- 
veral of  their  learned  men  fpeak.  In  what  father ; 
in  what  council  before  that  of  Trent,  do  they  find 
Christ  to  have  inflituted  juft  feven  facraments,  nei- 
ther more  nor  lefs  ?  and  for.  pradices  in  their  reli^ 
gion,  they  themfelves  will  not  fay,  that  in  the  an- 
cient chriftian  church  the  fcriptures  were  withheld 
from  the  people,  and  lock'd  up  in  an  unknown 
tongue;  and  that  the  pviblick  fervice  of  God,  the 
prayers  and  leiTons  were  read,  and  the  facraments 
celebrated,  in  an  unknown  tongue  ;  and  that  the  fa- 
crament of  the  Lord's  fupper  was  given  to  the  peo- 
ple only  in  one  kind.  Where  do  they  find  in  holy 
fcripture,  or  in  the  dodtrine  and  pra6lice  of  the  an- 
cient chriflian  church,  any  command  or  example  for 
the  worfhip  of  images  \  for  the  invocation  of  faints 
and  angels  and  the  blefTed  virgin  ;  which  do  now 
make  a  great  part  of  their  religion  ?  Nay,  is  not  the 
dodrine  of  the  fcriptures,  and  of  the  ancient  fathers 
plainly  againfl  all  thefe  pradices  ?  With  what  face  then 
can  it  be  faid,  that  the  church  of  Rome  hath  made 
a  conftant  vifible  profefTion  of  the  fame  faith  and 
8  P  2  pradics 


Of  conjiancy  hi  the 

practice  in  all  ages,  from  the  time  of  Christ  and 
his  apoftles  ?  Or  would  the  primitive  church  of  Rome, 
if  it  fhould  now  vifit  the  earth  again,  own  the  prefent 
church  of  Rome  to  be  the  fame  in  all  matters  of  faitk 
and  pradice,  that  it  was  when  they  left  it  ? 

And  whereas  they  demand  of  us,  to  fhew  a  vifi- 
ble  church  from  the  time  of  Christ  and  his  apoftles, 
that  hath  always  oppofed  the  church  of  Rome,  in 
thofe  points  of  dodtrine  and  pradtice  which  we  obje(5t 
to  them  ',  what  can  be  more  impertinent  than  this  de- 
mand ?  When  they  know  that  in  all  thefe  points  we 
charge  them  with  innovations  in  matters  of  faith  and 
pradice,  and  fay  that  thofe  things  came  in  by  de- 
grees, feveral  ages  after  the  apoftles  time,  fome  foon- 
er,  fome  later  •,  as  we  are  able  to  make  good,  and 
have  done  it.  And  would  they  have  us  ftiew  them  a 
vifible  church,  that  oppofed  thefe  errors  and  corrup- 
tions in  their  church,  before  ever  they  appeared? 
This  we  do  not  pretend  to  ftiew.  And  fuppofing 
they  had  not  been  at  all  oppofed,  when  they  appeared, 
nor  a  long  time  after,  not  till  the  reformation  ^  yet 
if  they  be  errors  and  corruptions  of  the  chriftian  doc- 
trine, and  contrary  to  the  holy  fcriptures,  and  to  the 
faith  and  practice  of  the  primitive  church ;  there  is 
no  prefcription  againft  truth.  It  is  never  too  late, 
for  any  church  to  rejed:  thofe  errors  and  corruptions, 
and  to  reform  itfelf  from  them. 

The  bottom  of  all  this  matter  is,  they  would  have 
us  to  fhew  them  a  fociety  of  Chriftians,  that  in  all 
ages  hath  preferved  itfelf  free  from  all  fuch  errors  and 
corruptions,  as  we  charge  them  withal ;  or  elfe  we 
deny  the  perpetual  vifibility  of  the  catholick  church. 
No  fuch  matter.  We  fay  the  church  of  Christ 
hath  always  been  vifible  in  every  age  fince  Christ's 
time ;  and  that  the  feveral  focieties  of  Chriftians, 
I  pro- 


profejjion  of  the  true  religion »  9^3 

profeffing  the  chriftian  do6lrine  and  laws  of  Christ,  ^^  ^  ^• 
have  made  up  the  cathoUck  church  ;  foine  parts 
whereof  have  in  feveral  ages  fallen  into  great  errors 
and  corruptions  ;  and  no  part  of  the  catholick,  into 
more  and  greater,  than  the  church  of  Rome  ;  (o  that 
it  requires  the  utmofl  of  our  charity  to  think  that  they 
are  a  true,  though  a  very  unfound  and  corrupt  pare 
of  the  catholick  church  of  Christ. 

We  acknowledge  likewife,  that  we  were  once  in- 
volved in  the  like  degeneracy ;  but  by  the  mercy  of 
God,  and  pious  care  and  prudence  of  thofe  that  were  in 
authority,  are  l-^appily  refcuedout  of  it :  and  though  we 
were  not  out  of  the  catholick  church  before  -,  yet  fince 
our  reformation  from  the  errors  and  corruptions  of  the 
church  of  Rome,  we  are  in  it  upon  better  terms,  and 
are  a  much  founder  part  of  it ;  and  I  hope  by  the  mercy 
and  goodnefs  of  God,  we  fhall  for  ever  continue  fo. 

So  that  to  the  perpetual  vifibility  of  Christ's 
church,  it  is  not  neceflary,  that  the  whole  chriftian 
church,  or  indeed  that  any  part  of  it  fhould  be  free 
from  all  errors  and  corruptions.  Even  the  churches 
planted  by  the  apoftles  in  the  primitive  times  were 
not  fo.  St.  Paul  reproves  feveral  do6lrines,  and  prac- 
tices in  the  church  of  Corinth,  and  of  Colofle,  and 
of  Galatia  ;  and  the  fpirit  of  God,  feveral  things  in 
the  feven  churches  of  Afia  :  and  yet  all  thefe  were 
true  parts  and  members  of  the  catholick  church  of 
Christ,  notwithftanding  thefe  faults  and  errors  ; 
becaufe  they  all  agreed  in  the  main  and  efTential  doc- 
trines of  Chriftianity.  And  when  more  and  greater 
corruptions  grew  upon  the  church,  or  any  part  of  it ; 
the  greater  reafon  and  need  there  was  of  a  reforma- 
tion. And  as  every  particular  perfon  hath  a  right  to 
reform  any  thing  that  he  finds  amifs  in  himfelf,  fo  far 
as  concerns  himfelf  j  fd  much  more  every  national 

church 


Of  conjlancy  in  the 

church  hath  a  power  within  itfelf,  to  reform  itfelf 
from  all  errors  and  corruptions,  and  by  the  fandlion 
of  the  catholick  authority  to  confirm  that  reformation ; 
which  is  our  cafe  here  in  England.  And  whatever 
part  of  the  church,  how  great  and  eminent  foever, 
excludes  from  her  communion  fuch  a  national  church, 
for  reforming  herfelf  from  plain  errors  and  corrup- 
tions, clearly  condemned  by  the  word  of  God,  and 
by  the  do6lrine  and  pra6tice  of  the  primitive  chriflian 
church,  is  undoubtedly  guilty  of  fchifm.  And  this 
is  the  truth  of  the  cafe  between  us  and  the  church  of 
Rome.  And  no  blind  talk  about  a  perpetual  vifibie 
church  can  render  us  guilty  of  fchifm,  for  making  a 
real  reformation  ;  or  acquit  them  of  it,  for  calling  us 
out  of  their  communion  for  that  caufe. 

Seventhly,  and  laftly,  (to  mention  no  more)  they 
pretend  that  we  delude  the  people,  by  laying  too  much 
ftrefs  upon  the  fcripture,  and  making  it  the  only  rule 
of  faith  and  manners :  whereas  fcripture  and  tradition 
together  make  up  the  entire  rule  of  faith  -,  and  not 
fcripture  interpreted  by  every  man's  private  fancy, 
but  by  tradition  carefully  prefer ved  in  the  church.  So 
that  it  ought  to  be  no  v/onder,  if  feveral  of  their 
dodrines  and  practices  cannot  be  fo  clearly  made  out 
by  fcripture,  or  perhaps  feem  contrary  to  it,  as  it  may 
be  expounded  by  a  private  fpirit ;  but  not  as  inter- 
preted by  the  tradition  of  the  church,  which  can  on- 
ly give  the  true  fenfe  of  fcripture.  And  therefore  they 
are  to  underftand,  that  feveral  of  thofe  do6trines  and 
pradices,  which  we  objed  againft,  are  moft  clearly 
proved  by  the  tradition  of  their  church,  which  is  of 
equal  authority  with  fcripture. 

In  this  objedion  of  theirs,  which  they  defign  for 
the  cover  of  all  their  eiTors  and  corruptions,  there  are 
feveral  things  diftinftly  to  be  confidered,  which  I  ihall 
do  as  briefly  as  I  can.  Firft, 


frofejjion  of  the  true  reUgio7t.  per 

Firft,  Whereas  it  is  fuggefted,  that  we  delude  the  ^  E  R  M. 
people,  by  laying  too  much  ftrefs  upon  the  fcriptures,  ^^^^' 
(which  certainly  we  cannot  well  do,  if  it  be  the  word 
of  God)  it  ought  to  be  confidered,  whether  they  do 
not  delude  and  abufe  them  infinitely  more,  in  keep- 
ing the  fcriptures  from  them,  and  not  fuffering  them 
to  fee  that  which  they  cannot  deny  to  be  at  leaft  a 
confiderable  part  of  the  rule  of  chriflian  dodlrine  and 
pradice.  Doth  it  not  by  this  dealing  of  theirs  ap- 
pear very  fufpicious,  that  they  are  extremely  afraid 
that  the  people  fhould  examine  their  dodrine  and 
pradice  by  this  rule  ?  For  what  other  teafon  can  they 
have  to  conceal  it  from  them  ? 

Secondly,  Whereas  they  affirm,  that  fcripture  alone 
is  not  the  rule  of  chriflian  faith  and  pradice,  but  that 
fcripture,  and  oral  tradition  preferved  in  the  church, 
and  delivered  down  from  hand  to  hand,  make  up  the 
entire  rule  ;  I  would  fain  know  whence  they  learned 
this  new  dodrine  of  the  rule  of  faith.  I  know  that 
the  council  of  Trent  declares  it  for  the  rule  they 
intend  to  proceed  upon  and  make  ufe  of,  for  the  con- 
firmation and  proof  of  their  following  determinations 
and  decrees.  But  did  any  of  the  ancient  councils  of 
the  chriflian  church  lay  down  this  rule,  and  proceed 
upon  it  ?  Did  not  Conilantine  the  emperor,  at  the 
opening  of  the  iirfl  general  council,  lay  the  bible  be- 
fore them,  as  the  only  rule,  according  to  which  they 
were  to  proceed ;  and  this  with  the  approbation  of 
all  thofe  holy  fathers  that  were  afTembled  in  that  coun- 
cil ?  And  did  not  following  councils  proceed  upon 
the  fame  rule  ?  Do  any  of  the  ancient  fathers  ever 
mention  any  rule  of  chriflian  faith  and  pradlice,  be- 
fides  the  holy  fcriptures,  and  the  ancient  creed ;  which, 
becaufe  it  is  an  abridgment  of  the  necefTary  articles 
of  chriflian  faith  contained  in  the  holy  fcriptures,  is 

by 


LXII. 


g^6  Of  co7tflancy  in  the 

S  1'^  R  M.  by  them  frequently  called  the  rule  of  faith?  Do  not 
the  fame  fathers  frequently  and  exprefly  fay,  that  the 
fcriptures  are  a  perfedl  rule,  and  that  all  things  arc 
plainly  contained  in  them,  which  concern  faith  and 
life  ;  and  that  whatever  cannot  be  proved  by  tefli- 
mony  of  fcripture,  is  to  be  rejeded  ?  All  this  I  am 
fure  lean  make  good,  by  innumerable  exprefs  teflimo- 
nies  of  the  ancient  fathers,  which  are  well  known  to 
thofe  that  are  verfed  in  them.  By  what  authority 
then  hath  the  council  of  Trent  fet  up  this  new  rule, 
unlcnown  to  the  chriftian  church  for  1 500  years  ? 
And  who  gave  them  this  authority  ?  The  plain  truth 
is,  the  necelTity  of  it  for  the  defence  of  the  errors  and 
corruptions  which  they  had  embraced,  and  were  re- 
folved  not  to  part  with,  forced  them  to  lengthen  out 
the  rule  ;  the  old  rule  of  the  holy  fcriptures  being  too 
fhort  for  their  purpofe. 

Thirdly,  Whereas  they  pretend  that  holy  fcripture, 
as  expounded  by  a  private  fpirit,  may  not  feem  fo 
favourable  to  fome  of  their  dodrines  and  pradices  ; 
yet,  as  interpreted  by  tradition,  which  can  only  give 
the  true  fenfe  of  fcripture,  it  agrees  very  well  with 
them :  I  fuppofe  they  mean,  that  whereas  a  private 
fpirit  would  be  apt  to  underftand  fome  texts  of  fcrip- 
ture, as  if  people  were  to  fearch  and  read  the  fcrip- 
ture ;  tradition  interprets  thofe  texts  in  a  quite  other 
fenfe,  that  people  are  not  to  be  permitted  to  read  the 
holy  fcriptures.  A  private  fpirit  would  be  apt  to  un- 
derftand St.  Paul's  difcourfe,  in  the  14th  of  the  ift 
to  the  Corinthians,  to  be  againft  celebrating  prayer 
and  the  fervice  of  God  in  an  unknown  tongue,  as 
being  contrary  to  edification,  and  indeed  to  common 
itnit ,  for  he  fays,  "  If  one  ftiould  come,  and  find 
"  them  fpeaking  and  praying  in  an  unknown  tongue, 
*'  will  they  not  fay,  ye  are  mad .?'!  But  now  tradi- 
tion, 


profejjiofi  of  the  true  religion, 

tion,  which  only  knows  how  to  give  the  true  fenfe, 
can  reconcile  this  difcourfc  of  St.  Paul  veiy  eafily 
with  the  pradice  of  the  church  of  Rome  in  this  mat- 
ter. And  fo  likewife  the  epiftle  of  St.  Paul  to  the  Co- 
lofllans,  with  the  worHiip  of  angels  ;  and  the  epiftle 
to  the  Hebrews,  with  offering  the  propitiatory  facri- 
iice  of  Christ  in  the  mafs  a  thoUland  times  every 
day.  And  to  give  but  one  inftance  more  ;  whereas 
a  man  by  his  private  fpirit  would  be  very  apt  to  un- 
derftand  the  fecond  commandment  to  forbid  all  wor-^ 
fhip  of  images ;  tradition  difcovers  the  meaning  of 
this  commandment  to  be,  that  due  veneration  is  to  be 
given  to  them.  So  that  at  this  rate  of  interpret- 
ing fcripture  by  tradition,  it  is  impolTible"  to  fix  any 
objedion  from  fcripture^  upon  any  do6lrine  or  prac- 
tice which  they  have  a  mind  to  maintain. 

Fourthly,  Whereas  they  pretend  the  tradition  of 
their  church,  delivered  from  the  mouth  of  Christ^ 
or  dictated  by  the  holy  Spirit,  and  brought  down  to 
them,  and  preferved  by  continual  fuccelTion  in  the 
church,  to  be  of  equal  authority  with  the  word  of 
God  ;  for  fo  the  council  of  Trent  fays,  "  that  the 
*'  holy  fynod  doth  receive  and  venerate  thefe  tradi- 
"  tions  with  equal  pious  affection  and  reverence,  as 
"  they  do  the  written  word  of  God  :"  this  we  mull 
declare  againft  as  unreafonable  in  itfelt,  to  make  tra- 
dition, conveyed  byword  of  mouth  from  one  to  ano- 
ther, through  fo  many  ages,  and  hable  to  fo  many 
miftakes  and  mifcarriages^  to  be^  at  the  diftance  of 
1 500  years,  of  equal  certainty  and  authority  v/ith  the 
holy  fcriptures,  carefully  preferved  and  tranfmitted 
down  to  us  ;  becaufe  this  (as  I  iliid  before)  is.  to  make 
common  rumor  and  report  of  equal  authority  and 
certainty  with  a  written  record.  And  not  only  fo  •, 
but  hereby  they  make  the  fcriptures  an  imperfcd:  rule ; 

Vol.  V.  8  Q^  contrary 


2. 


958  Of  conjlancy  in  the 

E  R  M.  contrary  to  the  declared  judgment  of  the  ancient  fa- 
thers and  councils  of  the  chriftian  church  j  and  fo, 
in  truth,  they  fet  up  a  new  rule  of  faith,  whereby 
they  change  the  chriftian  religion.  For  a  new  rule 
of  faith  and  religion  maizes  a  new  faith  and  religi- 
on. This  we  charge  the  church  of  Rome  with, 
and  do  challenge  them  to  ftiew  this  new  rule  of 
faith,  before  the  council  of  Trent ;  and  confe- 
quently  where  their  religion  was  before  that  council ; 
to  fhew  a  religion,  conlifting  of  all  thofe  articles, 
which  are  defined  by  the  council  of  Trent  as  neceffary 
to  falvation,  and  eftabliilied  upon  this  new  rule,  pro- 
fefled  by  any  chriftian  church  in  the  world  before  that 
time.  And  as  they  have  pitched  upon  a  new  rule  of 
faith  ;  fo  it  is  eafy  to  fee  to  what  end.  For  take  pope 
Pius  IV.  his  creed,  and  we  may  fee  where  the  old  and 
new  religion  parts  •,  even  at  the  end  of  the  twelve  ar- 
ticles of  the  apoftles  creed,  which  was  the  ancient 
chriftian  faith  ;  to  which  are  added  in  pope  Pius  his 
creed  twelve  articles  more^  defined  in  the  council  of 
Trent,  and  fupported  only  by  tradition.  So  that  as 
the  fcripture  anfwers  for  the  twelve  old  articles,  which 
are  plainly  contained  there  ;  fo  tradition  is  to  anfwer 
for  the  twelve  new  ones.  And  therefore  the  matter 
was  calculated  very  exadly,  when  they  make  tradi- 
tion juft  of  equal  authority  with  the  fcriptures  -,  be- 
caufe  as  many  articles  of  their  faith  were  to  be  made 
good  by  it,  ^nd  rely  upon  it,  as  thofe  which  are 
proved  by  the  authority  of  fcripture.  But  that  tra- 
dition is  of  equal  authority  with  the  fcriptures,  we 
have  nothing  in  the  whole  world  for  it,  but  the  bare 
aflertion  of  the  council  of  Trent. 

I  fhould  now  have  added  fome  Other  confiderations, 
tending  to  confirm  and  eftablifli  us  in  our  religion,  a- 
gainft  the  pretences  and  infinuations  of  feducing  fpi- 
rits :  but!  fhall  proceed  no  farther  at  prefent.     SER-- 


959 

S  E  R  M  O  N     LXIII. 

Of  Conftancy  in  the  ProfeiTion  of  the 
true  ReHgion. 


H  E  B.    X.  23. 

Let   lis  hold  faft  the  profejfion  of  our  faith  without 
wavering  •,  for  he  is  faithful  that  promifed. 

THESE  words  contain  an  exhortation  "  to  hold  S  E  R  M. 
T  YTT r 
"  faft  the  profelTion  of  our  faith  without  wa-  v_^,^^^^ 

"  vering,"  and  an  argument  or  encouragement  there-  The  fixth 
to,  becaufe  "  he  is  faithflil  that  promifed.''  By  [^^f^"^"^^^ 
the  exhortation  to  "  hold  faft  the  profeiTion  of  our 
"  faith  without  wavering,"  is  not  meant,  that  thofe 
who  are  capable  of  examining  the  grounds  and  rea- 
fons  of  their  religion  fhould  blindly  hold  it  faft  againft 
the  beft  reafons  that  can  be  offered  -,  becaufe  upon 
thefe  terms,  every  man  muft  continue  in  the  religion 
in  which  he  happens  to  be  fixt  by  education,  or  an 
ill  choice,  be  his  religion  true  or  falfe,  without  exa- 
mining and  looking  into  it,  whether  it  be  right  or 
wrong  •,  for  till  a  man  examines,  every  m.an  thinks 
his  religion  right.  That  which  the  apoftle  here 
exhorts  Chriftians  to  hold  faft  is  the  ancient  faith, 
of  which  all  Chriftians  make  a  folemn  profeffion  in 
their  baptifm  ;  as  plainly  appears  from  the  context. 
And  this  ,  "  profeiTion  of  our  faith,"  we  are  to  hold 
in  the  following  inftances,  v/hich  I  fhall  but  briefly 
mention,  without  enlarging  upon  them, 

8  0^2  I.  We 


LXIil. 


960  Of  conflancy  in  the 

^t'J^tA^'  '•  ^^  ^^^  "  ^^  ^^^^^^  ^^^^  ^^^^  profefilon  of  our 
''  faith"  againll  the  confidence  of  men,  without  fcrip- 
ture  or  reafon  to  fupport  that  confidence. 

2.  And  much  more,  againll  the  confidence  of 
men  contrary  to  plain  fcripture  and  reafon,  and  to 
the  common  fenfc  of  mankind. 

3.  Againft  all  the  temptations  and  terrors  of  the 
world,  againft  the  temptations  of  fadiion  and  ex- 
ample, and  of  worldly  intereft  and  advantage,  and 
againft  all  terrors  and  fufterings  of  perfecution. 

4.  Againft  all  vain  promifes  of  being  put  into  a 
iater  condition,  and  groundlefs  liopes  of  getting  to 
licaven  upon  eafier  terms  than  the  gofpel  has  pro- 
pofed  in  fome  other  church  and  religion. 

Laftly,  we  are  "  to  hold  faft  the  profefTion  of  our 
"  faith  without  wavering,"  againft  all  the  cunning 
arts  and  infinuations  of  bufy  and  difputing  men, 
whofe  defign  it  is  to  unhinge  men  from  their  religion, 
and  to  make  profelytcs  to  their  party  and  fadlion. 

But  without  entring  into  thcfe  particulars,  I  ftiall 
in  order  to  our  eftabliftiment  in  the  reformed  religion 
which  we  profefs,  in  oppofition  to  the  errors  and 
■corruptions  of  the  church  of  Rome,  apply  myfelf  at 
this  time,  to  m.ake  a  ftiort  comparifon  betwixt  the 
religion  which  we  profefs,  and  that  of  the  church  of 
Rome,  that  we  may  difcern  on  which  fide  the  ad- 
vantage of  truth  lyes  ;  and  in  making  this  compari- 
fon, I  fliall  infift  upon  three  things,  which  will  bring 
the  matter  to  an  iflue,  and  are,  I  think,  fufficient  to 
determine  every  fober  and  confiderate  man,  which  of 
thefc  he  ought  in  reafon,  and  with  regard  to  the 
fafety  of  his  foul,  to  embrace  \  and  they  are  thefe. 

I.  That  we  govern  our  belief  and  pra6lice  in  mat- 
ters of  religion,  by  the  true  ancient  rule  of  chrifti- 
anity,  the  word  of  God  contained  in  the  holy  fcrip- 

tures  : 


profejjion  of  the  true  religion »  961 

tiires  :  but  the  church  of  Rome,  for  the  maintenance  S  E  R  M. 
of  their  errors  and  corruptions,  have  been  forced  to 
devife  a  new  rule,  never  owned  by  the  primitive 
church,  nor  by  the  ancient  fathers  and  councils  of  it. 

II.  That  the  dodlrines  and  practices  in  difference 
betwixt  us  and  the  church  of  Rome,  are  either  con- 
trary to  this  rule,  or  deflitute  of  the  warrant  and 
authority  of  it,  and  are  plain  additions  to  the  ancient 
chriftianity,  and  corruptions  of  it. 

III.  That  our  religion  hath  many  clear  advantages 
of  that  of  the  church  of  Rome,  not  only  very  con- 
fiderable  in  themfelves,  but  very  obvious  and  difcern- 
able  to  an  ordinary  capacity,  upon  the  firfh  propofal 
of  them.     I  fnall  be  as  brief  in  thefe  as  I  can. 

I.  That  we  govern  our  belief  and  practice  in 
matters  of  reHgion,  by  the  true  ancient  rule  of  chri- 
ftianity, the  word  of  God  contained  in  the  holy  fcrip- 
tures  :  but  the  church  of  Rome,  for  the  maintaining 
of  their  errors  and  corruptions,  have  been  forced  to 
devife  a  new  rule,  never  owned  by  the  primitive 
church,  nor  by  the  ancient  councils  and  fathers  of 
it ;  that  is,  they  have  joined  with  the  word  of  God, 
contained  in  the  holy  fcriptures,  the  unwritten  tra- 
ditions of  their  church,  concerning  feveral  points  of 
their  faith  and  practice,  which  they  acknowledge 
cannot  be  proved  from  fcripture,  and  thefe  they  call 
the  unwritten  word  of  God  •,  and  the  council  of 
Trent  hath  decreed  them  to  be  of  equal  authority 
with  the  holy  fcriptures,  and  that  they  do  receive 
and  venerate  them  with  the  fame  pious  affection  and 
reverence  •,  and  all  this,  contraiy  to  the  exprefs  de- 
claration and  unanimous  confent  of  all  the  ancient 
councils  and  fathers  of  the  chriftian  church,  (as  I 
have  already  fhewn  0  and  this  never  declared  to  be 
a  point  of  faith,  till  it  was  decreed,  not  much  above 

ahun- 


Of  conjlancy  in  the 

a  hundred  years  ago,  in  the  council  of  Trent.  And 
this  furcly,  if  any  thing,  is  a  matter  of  great  confe- 
quence,  to  prefume  to  alter  the  ancient  rule  of  chrif- 
tian  dodrine  and  pra6bicc,  and  to  enlarge  it,  and  add 
to  it,  at  their  plcafure.  But  the  church  of  Rome  hav- 
ing made  fo  great  a  change  in  the  do6lrine  and  prac- 
tice of  chriftianity,  it  became  confequently  neceflliry 
to  make  a  change  of  the  rule :  and  therefore  with 
great  reafon  did  the  council  of  Trent  take  this  into 
confideration  in  the  firft  place,  and  put  it  in  the  front 
of  their  decrees,  becaufe  it  was  to  be  the  foundation 
and  main  proof  of  the  following  definitions  of  faith, 
and  decrees  of  pra6lice,  for  which,  without  this  new 
rule,  there  had  been  no  colour. 

II.  The  dodlrines  and  pradlices  in  difference  be- 
twixt us,  and  the  church  of  Rome,  are  either  contra- 
ry to  the  true  rule,  or  deftitute  of  the  warrant  and  au- 
thority of  it,  and  plain  additions  to  the  ancient  chrif- 
tianity, and  corruptions  of  it.  The  tiaith  of  this  will 
befl  appear,  by  inftancing  in  fom.e  of  the  principal 
doctrines  and  practices  in  difference  betwixt  us. 

As  for  their  two  great  fundamental  dodlrines,  of  die 
fupremacy  of  the  bifhop  of  Rome  over  all  theChriftians 
in  the  world, and  the  infallibility  of  their  church,there  is 
not  one  word  in  fcripture  concerning  thefe  privileges  \ 
nay  it  is  Httle  lefs  than  a  demonftration  that  they  have 
no  fuch  privileges,  that  St.  Paul  in  a  long  epiffle  to  the 
church  of  Rome  takes  no  notice  of  them,  that  the 
church  of  Rome  either  then  was,  or  was  to  be  foon 
after,  the  mother  and  miftrefs  of  all  churches,  which 
is  now  grown  to  be  an  article  of  faith  in  the  church 
of  Rome  \  and  yet  it  is  hardly  to  be  imar^ined,  that 
he  could  have  omitted  to  take  notice  of  fuch  remark- 
able privileges  of  their  bifhops  and  church,  above  any 
in  the  world,  had  he  known  they  had  belonged  to 

them. 


profejjton  of  the  true  religion, 

them.  So  that  in  all  probability  he  was  ignorant  of 
thofe  mighty  prerogatives  of  the  church  of  Rome  •, 
otherwife  it  cannot  be,  but  that  he  would  have  writ- 
ten with  more  deference  and  fubmiflion  to  this  feat  of 
infallibility,  and  center  of  unity  ;  he  would  certainly 
have  paid  a  greater  refpe6l  to  this  mother  and  mif- 
trefs  of  all  churches,  where  the  head  of  the  church, 
and  vicar  of  Christ  either  was  already  feated,  or  by 
the  appointment  of  Christ  was  defigned  for  ever  to 
fix  his  throne  and  eflabHfh  his  refidence  -,  but  there 
is  not  one  word,  or  the  leaft  intimation  of  any  fuch 
thing  throughout  this  whole  epiftle,  nor  in  any  other 
part  of  the  new  teftament. 

Befides  that  both  thefe  pretended  privileges 
are  omitted,  by  plain  fadl  and  evidence  of  things 
themfelves  ;  their  fupremacy,  in  that  the  far  greateft 
part  of  the  chriftian  church,  neither  is  at  this  day, 
nor  can  be  fhewn  by  the  records  of  any  age,  ever  to 
have  been  fubjed  to  the  bifnop  of  Rome,  or  to  have 
acknowledged  his  authority  and  jurifdidion  over 
them  :  and  the  infallibility  of  the  pope,  whether  with 
or  without  a  general  council,  about  which  they  ftill 
differ,  though  infallibility  was  devifed  on  purpofe, 
to  determine  all  differences  -,  I  fay,  this  infallibility, 
wherever  it  is  pretended  to  be,  is  plainly  confuted 
by  the  contradiftory  definitions  of  feveral  popes  and 
councils  •,  for  if  they  have  contradided  one  another, 
as  is  plain,  beyond  all  contradi6lion,  in  feveral  in- 
ftances,  then  there  muft  of  neceffity  be  an  error  on 
one  fide ;  and  there  can  be  no  fo  certain  demonftra- 
tion,  that  any  one  is  infallible,  as  evident  error  and 
miftake  is  of  the  contrary. 

Next,  their  concealing  both  the  rule  of  religion, 
and  the  pradice  of  it  in  the  worfhip  and  fervice  of 
God,  from  the  people,  in  an  unknown  tongue  ; 

and 


LXIIf. 


^64  Of  confiancy  in  the 

S  ER  M.  mid  their  adminiflhng  the  coinmunion  to  the  people 
in  one  kind  only,  contrary  to  clear  fcripture,  and 
the  plain  inftitiition  of  our  blefied  Saviour.  And 
then  their  worfhip  of  images,  and  invocation  of  an- 
gels and  faints,  and  the  blefled  virgin,  in  the  fame 
folcmn  manner,  and  for  the  fanie  blelTings  and  benc^ 
fits  which  we  beg  of  God  himfelf ;  contrary  to  the 
exprefs  word  of  God,  which  commands  us  "  to 
"  worfliip  the  Lord  our  God,  and  to  ferve  him 
"  only  ;"  and  which  declares,  that  as  there  is  but 
''  one  God,"  fo  there  is  but  "  one  mediator  between 
''  God  and  man,  Christ  Jesus  ;"  but  one  media- 
tor, not  only  of  redemption,  but  of  intercellion  too  ; 
for  the  apoftle  there  fpeaks  of  a  mediator  of  in- 
terceflion,  by  whom  only  we  are  to  offer  up  our 
prayers,  which  are  to  be  put  up  to  God  only  •,  and 
which  exprefly  forbids  men  to  worfhip  any  image  or 
likenefs.  And  the  learned  men  of  their  own  church 
acknowledge,  that  there  is  neither  precept  nor  exam- 
ple for  thefe  practices  in  fcripture,  and  that  they  were 
not  ufed  in  the  chrillian  church  for  feveral  ages  \  and 
this  acknowledgment  we  think  very  confiderable, 
fince  fo  great  a  part  of  their  religion,  efpecially  as  it 
is  pra6lifed  among  the  people,  is  contained  in  thefe 
points.  For  the  fervice  of  God  in  an  unknown 
tongue,  and  withholding  the  fcriptures  from  the  peo- 
ple, they  do  not  pretend  fo  much  as  one  teftimony  of 
any  father  for  the  firit  600  years  •,  and  nothing 
certainly  can  be  more  unreafonable  in  it  felf,  than 
to  deny  people  the  beil  means  of  knowing  the  will 
of  God,  and  not  to  permit  them  to  underftand 
what  is  done  in  the  pubUck  worfhip  of  God,  and  what 
prayers  are  put  up  to  him  in  the  church. 

The  two  great  dodtrines  of  tranfubftantiation  and 

purgatory  are  acknowledged  by  many  of  their  own 

^  learned 


profejjton  of  the  true  religion.  965 

learned  writers,  to  have  no  certain  foundation  in  fcrip-  ^  ^^}f^ 
ture:  and  that  there  are  feven  facraments  of  the 
chriftian  religion,  though  it  ht  now  made  an  article 
of  faith  by  the  council  of  Trent,  is  a  thing  which  can- 
not be  fhewn  m  any  council  or  father  for  above  a 
thoufand  years  after  Christ.  And  we  find  no  men- 
tion of  this  number  of  the  facraments,  till  the  age  of 
Peter  Lombard  the  father  of  the  fcooimen. 

That  the  church  of  Rome  is  the  mother  and  mif- 
trefs  of  all  churches,  though  that  alfo  be  one  of  the 
new  articles  of  pope  Pius  IV.  his  creed,  which, 
their  priefls  are  by  a  folemn  oath  obliged  to  believe 
and  teach ;  yet  it  is  moft  evidently  faife.  That  fhe 
is  not  the  mother  of  all  churches  is  plain,  becaufe  Je- 
rufalem  was  certainly  fo  ;  for  there  certainly  was  the 
firfl  chriftian  church,  and  from  thence  all  the  chrif- 
tian churches  in  the  world  derive  themfelves  :  that 
file  is  not,  (though  fhe  fain  would  be)  the  miftrefs  of 
all  churches,  is  as  evident,-  becaufe  the  greateft  pare 
of  the  chriftian  church  does  at  this  day,  and  always 
did,  deny  that  fhe  hath  any  authority  or  fupremacy 
over  them.  Now  thefe  are  the  principal  matters  in 
difference  betwixt  us  \  and  if  thefe  points,  and  a  few 
more,  be  pared  off  from  popery,  that  which  remains 
of  their  religion,  is  the  fame  with  ours,  that  is,  the 
true  ancient  chriftianity. 

III.  I  ihall  fhew  that  our  religion  hath  many  clear 
advantages  of  theirs,  not  only  very  confiderable  in 
themfelves,  but  very  obvious  and  difcernible  to  an 
ordinary  capacity,  upon  the  very  firft  propofal  of 
them  ;  as, 

I .  That  our  religion  agrees  perfectly  with  the  fcrip- 
tures,  and  all  points  both  of  our  belief  and  pradice, 
efteemed  by  us  as  necelTary  to  falvation,  are  there 
contained,  even  our  enemies  themfelves  being  judges. 

Vol.  V.  8  R  "     W^ 

2 


966  Of  conflancy  in  the 

S  E  R  M.  We  "  worfhip  the  Lord  our  God,  and  him  only'* 
do  we  "  ferve."  We  do  not  fall  down  before  ima- 
ges and  worfliip  them  :  we  addrefs  all  prayers  to 
God  alone,  by  the  only  mediation  and  interceffion  of 
his  fon  Jesus  Christ,  as  he  himfelf  hath  given  us 
commandment,  and  as  St.  Paul  doth  plainly  dired, 
giving  us  this  plain  and  fubftantial  reafon  for  it,  be- 
caufe  as  there  is  but  "  one  God,"  fo  there  is  but 
*'  one  mediator  between  God  and  man,  the  man 
*'  Christ  Jesus." 

The  publick  worfhip  and  fervice  of  God  is  per- 
form'd  by  us  in  a  language  which  we  underftand,  ac- 
cording to  St.  Paul's  exprefs  order  and  diredion, 
and  the  univerfal  practice  of  the  ancient  church,  and 
the  nature  and  reafon  of  the  thing  itfelf.  We  admi- 
nifler  the  facrament  of  the  Lord's  fupper  in  both 
kinds,  according  to  our  Saviour's  example  and  plain 
inftitution,  and  tlie  continual  praftice  of  all  thechrif- 
tian  churches  in  the  world,  for  above  a  tlioufand 
years. 

2.  We  beheve  nothing  as  neceffary  to  falvation, 
but  what  hath  been  owned  in  all  ages  to  be  the  chrif- 
tian  dodtrine,  and  is  acknowledged  fo  to  be  by  the 
church  of  Rome  it  felf ;  and  we  receive  the  whole 
faith  of  the  primitive  chriftian  cliurch,  (viz.)  what- 
ever is  contained  in  the  apoftles  creed,  and  in  the  • 
explications  of  that  in  the  creeds  of  the  four  firfl  gene- 
ral councils.  By  which  it  plainly  appears,  that  all  the 
points  of  faith  in  difference  betwixt  us  and  the  church 
of  Rome  are  mere  innovations  and  plain  additions  to 
the  ancient  chriftian  faith  :  but  all  that  we  believe,  is 
iicknowledged  by  them  to  be  undoubtedly  the  anci- 
ent chriftian  faith. 

3.  There  is  nothing  wanting  in  our  church  and 
religion,  whether  in  matter  of  faith  or  pradlice,  which 

either 


profejfion  of  the  true  religion.  967 

either  the  fcripture  makes  necelTary  to  falvatlon,  or  SE  R^M. 

was  fo  efteerned  by  the  chrillian  church  for  the  firfl 

five  hundred  years  \  and  we  trufl,  that  what  was  fuf- 

ficient  for  the  falvation  of  Chriflians  in  the  beft  ages 

of  chriftianity,  for  five  hundred  years  together,  may 

be  fo  ftill ;  and  we  are  very  well  content  to  venture 

our  falvation  upon  the  fame  terms  that  they  did. 

4.  Our  religion  is  not  only  free  from  all  idolatrous 
worfhip,  but  even  from  all  fufpicion  and  probable 
charge  of  any  fuch  thing  :  but  this  the  church  of 
Rome  is  not^  as  is  acknowledged  by  her  moft  learn- 
ed champions,  and  as  no  man  of  ingenuity  can  deny  ; 
and  the  reafon  v/hich  the  learned  men  give,  why  the 
worfliip  of  images  and  the  invocation  of  angels  and 
faints  departed  were  not  pradifed  in  the  primitive 
church,  for  the  firft  three  hundred  years,  is  a  plain 
acknowledgment  that  thefe  practices  are  very  liable 
to  the  fufpicion  of  idolatry  •,  for  they  fay,  that  the 
Chriflians  did  then  forbear  thofe  pra6lices,  becaufe 
they  feemed  to  come  too  near  to  the  pagan  idolatry, 
and  left  the  heathen  fnould  have  taken  occafion  to 
have  juftified  themfelves,  if  thefe  things  had  been 
pradifed  among  Chriftians  \  and  they  cannot  now  be 
ignorant,  what  fcandal  they  give  by  thefe  pra6tices 
both  to  the  Jews  and  Turks,  and  how  much  they 
alienate  them  from  chriftianity  by  this  fcandal ;  nor 
can  they  chufe  but  be  fenfible,  upon  how  great  difad- 
vantage  they  are  in  defending  thefe  pradlices  from  the 
charge  of  idolatry,  and  that  by  all  their  blind  diftinc- 
tions,  with  which  they  raife  fuch  a  cloud  and  duft, 
they  can  hardly  make  any  plaufible  and  tolerable  de- 
fence of  themfelves  from  this  charge  ;  infomuch  that 
to  fecure  their  ov/n  people  from  difcerning  their  guilt 
in  this  matter,  they  have  been  put  upon  that  ftiame- 
ful  ihift  of  leaving  out  the  fecond  commandment  in 
8  R  2  their 


9  6  S  Of  conjiancy  in  the 

^T^nr^^  their  common  catechifms  and  manuals,  left  the  peo- 
ple feeing  fo  plain  a  law  of  God,  againft  fo  common 
a  pradice  of  their  church,  Hiould  upon  that  difcovery 
have  broken  off  from  them. 

5.  Nor  is  our  religion  incumbered  with  fuch  an 
endlefs  number  of  fuperftitious  and  troublefom  obfer- 
vances,  as  theirs  infinitely  is,  even  beyond  the  number 
of  the  Jewifh  ceremonies,  to  the  great  burden  and 
fcandal  of  the  chriftian  religion,  and  the  diverting  of 
mens  minds  from  the  fpiritual  part  of  religion,  and 
the  more  weighty  and  neceffary  duties  of  the  chriflian 
life  ;  fo  that,  in  truth,  a  devout  paftor  is  fo  taken  up 
with  xht  external  rites  and  little  obfer vances  of  his 
religion,  that  he  hath  little  or  no  time  to  make  him- 
iM  a  good  man,  and  to  cultivate  and  improve  his 
mind  in  true  piety  and  virtue. 

6.  Cur  religion  is  evidently  more  charitable  to  all 
Chriftians  that  differ  from  us,  and  particularly  to 
them,  who,  by  their  uncharitablenefs  to  us,  have 
done  as  much  as  is  pofifible  to  difcharge  and  damp 
our  charity  towards  them.  And  charity,  as  it  is  one 
of  the  moft  eflential  marks  of  a  true  Chriftian,  fo  it 
is  likewife  the  beft  mark  and  ornament  of  a  trvie 
church  ;  and  of  all  things  that  can  be  thought  of,  me- 
thinks  the  want  of  charity  in  any  church  ftiould  be  a 
motive  to  no  man  to  fall  in  love  with  it,  and  to  be 
fond  of  it's  communion. 

7.  Cur  religion  doth  not  clafti  and  interfere  with 
any  of  the  great  moral  duties,  to  which  all  mankind 
ftand  obliged  by  the  law  and  light  ofnauire  ;  as  fi- 
delity, mercy,  and  truth.  We  do  not  teach  men  to 
break  faith  with  heretics  or  infidels  ;  nor  to  deftroy 
and  extirpate  thofe  who  differ  from  us,  with  fire  and 
fword  :  no  fuch  tiling  as  equivocation  or  mental  re- 
fervation,  or  any  other  artificial  way  of  falftiood,  is 

either 


profejjionofthe  true  religion,  969 

either  taught  or  maintained,  either  by  the  do6lrine  or  S  E  R  M. 

T  YTIT 

by  the  cafuifts  of  our  church.  C^^ 

8.  Our  religion  and  all  the  dodtrines  of  it  are  per- 
fedly  confiftent  with  the  peace  of  civil  government, 
and  the  welfare  of  human  fociety.  We  neither  ex- 
empt the  clergy  from  fubjedion  to  the  civil  powers  ; 
nor  abfolve  fubje<5ls  upon  any  pretence  whatfoever 
frorn  allegiance  to  their  princes  ;  both  which  points, 
the  necefTity  of  the  one,  and  the  lawfulnefs  of  the  o- 
ther,  have  been  taught  and  fliffly  maintained  in  the 
church  of  Rome,  not  only  by  private  dodors,  but  by 
popes  and  general  councils. 

9.  The  dodrines  of  our  religion  are  perfe6lly  free 
from  all  fufpicion  of  a  worldly  intereft  and  defign  5 
whereas  the  greateft  part  of  the  erroneous  do6lrines, 
with  which  we  charge  the  church  of  Rome,  are  plain- 
ly calculated  to  promote  the  end  of  worldly  greatnefs 
and  dominion. 

The  pope's  kingdom  is  plainly  of  this  world ;  and 
the  dodrines  and  maxims  of  it,  like  fo  many  fervants, 
are  ready  upon  all  occafions  to  fight  for  him.  For 
moil  of  them  do  plainly  tend,  either  to  the  eftablifh- 
ment  and  enlargement  of  his  authority  ♦,  or  to  the 
magnifying  of  the  priefts,  and  the  giving  them  a 
perfed:  power  over  the  confciences  of  the  people,  and 
the  keeping  them  in  a  flavifh  fubjedion  and  blind  o- 
bedience  to  them.  And  to  this  purpofe  do  plainly 
tend  the  dodrines  of  exempting  the  clergy  from  the 
fecular  power  and  jurifdi6lion  ♦,  the  dodtrine  of  tran- 
fubftantiation ;  for  it  muft  needs  m^ake  the  prieft  a 
-great  man  in  the  opinion  of  the  people,  to  believe 
that  he  can  make  God,  as  they  love  to  exprefs  it, 
without  all  reafon  and  reverence.  Of  the  like  tenden- 
cy is  the  communicating  of  the  laity  only  in  one  kind, 
thereby  making  it  the  fgle  privilege  of  the  priefl  to 
2  receive 


LXIII. 


970  Of  cmjlancy  in  the 

S  E  R  M.  receive  the  facrament  in  both  :  the  withholding  the 
fcripture  from  the  people,  and  celebrating  the  fervice 
of  God  in  an  unknown  tongue:  the  doclrine  of  an 
implicit  faith,  and  abfolute  refignation  of  their  judg- 
ments to  their  teachers  :  thefe  do  all  diredly  tend  to 
keep  the  people  in  ignorance,  and  to  bring  them  to 
a  blind  obedience  to  the  dictates  of  their  teachers.  So 
likewife  the  necefTity  of  the  intention  of  the  prieft,  to 
the  faving  virtue  and  efficacy  of  the  facraments  ;  by 
which  doctrine,  the  people  do  upon  the  matter  de- 
pend as  much  upon  the  good  v/ill  of  the  prieft,  as 
upon  the  mercy  of  God  for  their  falvation.  But  above 
all,  their  do6lrine  of  the  necelTity  of  auricular  and 
private  confefTion  of  all  mortal  fins  committed  after 
baptifm,  with  all  the  circumftances  of  them  to  the 
prieft  i  and  this  not  only  for  the  eafe  and  diredion 
of  their  confciences,  but  as  a  neceiTary  condition  of 
having  their  fins  pardoned  and  forgiven  by. God  :  by 
which  means  they  make  themfelves  mafters  of  all  the 
fecrets  of  the  people,  and  keep  them  in  awe  by  the 
knowledge  of  their  faults,  fcire  volimt  fecreta  domus 
atqm  inde  timeri.  Or  elfe  their  dodrines  tend  to  filthy 
lucre,  and  the  enriching  of  their  church.  As  their 
do6lrines  of  purgatory  and  indulgences,  and  their 
prayers  and  maffes  for  the  dead,  ,and  many  more  doc- 
trines and  pradices  of  the  like  kind  plainly  do. 

10.  Our  religion  is  free  from  all  difingenuous  and 
difhoneft  arts  of  maintaining  and  fupporting  itfelf. 
Such  are  clipping  of  ancient  authors,  nay  and  even 
the  authors  and  writers  of  their  own  church,  when 
they  fpeak  too  freely  of  any  point  j  as  may  be  ^tQn 
in  their  indices  expurgatorii  wliich  much  againft  tlieir 
wills  have  been  brought  to  light.  To  which  I  only 
add  thefe  three  grofs  forgeries,  which  lye  all  at  their 
doors,  and  they  cannot  deny  them  to  be  fo. 

I.  The 


frofejjion  of  the  true  religion.  971 

1 .  The  pretended  canon  of  the  council  of  Nice  in  S  E  R  M. 
the  cafe  of  appeals,  between  the  church  of  Rome  and 
the  African  church  •,  upon  which  they  infilled  a  great 
while  very  confidently,  till  at  lail  they  were  convinced 
by  authentick  copies  of  the  canons  of  that  council. 

2.  Conftantine's  donation  to  the  pope,  which  they 
kept  a  great  flir  with,  till  the  forgery  of  it  was  dif* 
covered. 

g.  The  decretal  epiftles  of  the  ancient  popes ;  a 
large  volume  of  forgeries  compiled  by  Ifidore  Mer- 
cator,  to  countenance  the  ufurpations  of  the  bifhop 
of  Rome,  and  of  which  the  church  of  Rome  made  a 
great  ufe  for  feveral  ages,  and  pertinaciouily  defended 
the  authority  of  them,  till  the  learned  men  of  their  own 
church  have  at  lad  been  forced  for  very  fhame  to  dif- 
claim  them,  and  to  confefs  the  impofture  of  them.  A 
like  infbance  whereto  is  not  I  hope  to  be  lliewn  in  any 
chriflian  church.  This  is  that  which  St.  Paul  calls 
}cvQeioCy  "  the  Height  of  men,"  fuchas  gamefters  ufe 
at  dice ;  for  to  alledge  falfe  and  forged  authors  in 
tills  cafe,  is  to  play  with  falfe  dice,  when  the  falva- 
tion  of  mens  fouls  lyes  at  flake. 

1 1 .  Our  religion  has  this  mighty  advantage,  that 
it  doth  not  decline  trial  and  examination,  which  to 
any  man  of  ingenuity  mufl  needs  appear  a  very  good 
fign  of  an  honefl  caufe ;  but  if  any  church  be  fhy  of 
having  her  religion  examined,  and  her  dodlrines  and 
pra6lices  brought  into  the  open  light,  this  gives  jufl 
ground  of  fufpicion  that  fhe  hath  fome  diflrufl  of 
them  ;  for  truth  doth  not  feek  corners,  nor  Ihun  the 
light.  Our  Saviour  hath  told  us  who  they  are  that 
"  love  darknefs  rather  than  Hght,  viz.  they  whofe 
*'  deeds  are  evil  J  for  every  one,"  faith  he,  "  that 
*'  doth  evil  hateth  the  light;  neither  cometh  he  to- 
*'  the  light,  left  his  deeds  Ihould  be  reproved  and 

^*  made 


LXIII. 


972  Of  co^iftancy  in  the 

^?_?_^*  "  made  manifeft."  There  needs  no  more  to  render 
a  religion  fufpeded  to  a  wife  man,  than  to  fee  thofe 
who  profefs  it,  and  make  fuch  proud  boafts  of  the 
truth  and  goodnefs  of  it,  fo  fearful  that  it  fhould  be 
examined  and  looked  into,  and  that  their  people  lliould 
take  the  liberty  to  hear  and  read  what  can  be  faid  a- 
gainft  it. 

12.  We  perfuade  men  to  our  religion  by  human 
and  chriftian  ways,  fuch  as  our  Saviour  and  his  a- 
poftles  ufed,  by  urging  men  with  the  authority  of 
God,  and  with  arguments  fetcht  from  another  world, 
the  promife  of  eternal  life  and  happinefs,  and  the 
threatning  of  eternal  death  and  mifery,  which  are  the 
proper  arguments  of  religion,  and  which  alone  are 
fitted  to  work  upon  the  minds  and  confciences  of 
men.  The  terror  and  torture  of  death  may  make 
men  hypocrites,  and  awe  them  to  profefs  with  their 
mouths  what  they  do  not  believe  in  their  hearts  \  but 
this  is  no  proper  means  of  converting  the  foul,  and 
convincing  the  minds  and  confciences  of  men  ;  and 
thefe  violent  and  cruel  ways  cannot  be  denied  to  have 
been  pradifed  in  the  church  of  Rome,  and  fet  on  foot 
by  the  authority  of  councils,  and  greatly  countenanced 
and  encouraged  by  popes  themfelves  \  witnefs  the  ma- 
ny croifades  for  the  extirpation  of  hereticks,  the  {land- 
ing cruelties  of  their  inquifition,  their  occafional  maf- 
facres  and  perfecutions,  of  which  we  have  frefh  in- 
llances  in  every  age. 

But  thefe  methods  of  converfion  are  a  certain  fign 
that  they  either  diilruft  the  truth  and  goodnefs  of  their 
caufe,  or  elfe  that  they  think  truth  and  the  arguments 
for  it  are  of  no  force,  when  dragoons  are  their  Tatio 
ultima^  the  laft  reafon  which  their  caufe  relies  upon, 
^d  the  bell  and  moll  eifedual  it  can  afford. 
^gain,   we  hold  no  doctrines  in  defiance  of  the 

ff^nfes 


profejjion  of  the  true  religion.  573 

fenfcs  of  all  mankind  ;  fuch  as  is  that  of  tranfubftantia-  S  E  R  M, 

T  XITT 

tion,  which  is  now  declared  in  the  church  of  Rome  .^_  .'. 
to  be  a  neceflary  article  of  faith,  fo  that  a  man  can- 
not be  of  that  religion,  iinlefs  he  will  renounce  his 
fenfes,  and  believe  againft  the  clear  verdid  of  them 
in  a  plain  fenfible  matter :  but  after  this,  I  do  not  un- 
deriland  how  a  man  can  beheve  any  thing,  becaufe 
by  this  very  thing  he  deftroys  and  takes  away  the 
foundation  of  all  certainty.  If  any  man  forbid  me  to 
believe  what  I  fee,  I  forbid  him  to  believe  any  thing 
upon  better  and  furer  evidence,  '^x..  Paul  faith,  than 
"  faith  cometh  by  hearing  :"  but  if  I  cannot  rely 
upon  the  certainty  of  fenfe,  then  the  means  whereby 
faith  is  conveyed  is  uncertain  •,  and  we  may  fay  as  St. 
Paul  doth  in  another  cafe,  "  then  is  our  preaching 
**  vain,  and  your  faith  alfo  is  vain." 

Laftly,  (to  mention  no  more  particulars)  as  to  fe- 
veral  things  ufed  and  pradifed  in  the  church  of  Rome, 
we  are  on  much  the  fafer  fide,  if  we  fhould  happen  to 
be  miftaken  about  them,  than  they  are,  if  they  fhould 
be  miftaken  :  for  it  is  certainly  lawful  to  read  the 
fcriptures,  and  lav/ful  to  permit  to  the  people  the  ufe 
of  the  fcriptures  in  a  Icnown  tongue  •,  otherwife  we 
mufl  condemn  the  apoilles  and  the  primitive  church 
for  allowing  this  liberty.  It  is  certainly  lawful  to 
have  the  publick  prayers  and  fervice  of  God  cele- 
brated in  a  language  which  all  that  join  in  it  can  un- 
derfland.  It  is  certainly  lawful  to  adminider  the  fa- 
crament  of  the  Lord's  fupper  to  the  people  in  both 
kinds  i  othenvife  the  chrlfhian  church  would  not  have 
done  it  for  a  thoufand  years.  It  is  certainly  lawflil, 
not  to  worfliip  images,  not  to  pray  to  angels,  or 
faints,  or  the  bleiTed  virgin  •,  otherwife  the  primitive 
church  would  not  have  forborn  thefe  pradices  for 

Vol.  V.  §  S  three 

2. 


974  Of  C07ijlancy  in  the 

SE  RM.  three  hundred  years,  as  is  acknowledged  by  thofe  oF 
the  church  of  Rome. 

Suppofe  n  man  fliould  pray  to  God  only,  and  of- 
fer up  all  his  prayers  to  him  only  by  Jesus  Christ, 
without  making  mention  of  any  other  mediator  or 
intercefTor  with  God  for  us,  relying  herein  upon  what 
the  apoftle  fays  concerning  our  high  prieft,  Jesus 
the  Son  of  God,  Heb.  vii.  25.  "  That  he  is  able 
"  to  fave  them  to  the  uttermoll,  who  come  unto  God 
"  by  him,"  (i.e.)  by  his  mediation  and  intercefTion, 
*'  fince  he  ever  liveth  to  make  intercefiion  for  them  •,'* 
might  not  a  man  reafonably  hope  to  obtain  of  God 
all  the  bleffings  he  Hands  in  need  of,  by  addrefTing 
himfelf  only  to  him,  in  the  name  and  by  the  inter- 
cefTion of  that  "  one  mediator  between  God  and  man, 
*'  the  man  Christ  Jesus.^"  Nay,  why  may  not  a 
man  reafonably  think,  that  this  is  both  a  iliorter  and 
more  efFe6lual  way  to  obtain  our  requefts,  than  by 
turning  ourfelves  to  the  angels  and  faints,  and  im- 
portuning them  to  folicit  God  for  us  •,  efpecially  if 
We  iliould  order  the  matter  fo,  as  to  make  ten  times 
more  frequent  addrelTes  to  thefe,  than  we  do  to  God 
and  our  blefled  Saviour,  and  in  comparifon  of  the 
other,  to  negle6l  thefe.  We  cannot  certainly  think 
any  more  able  to  help  us  and  do  us  good,  than  the 
great  God  of  heaven  and  earth,  "  the  God"  (as  the 
Pfalmift  flyles  him)  "  that  hearcth  prayers,"  and 
therefore  "  unto  him  fhould  all  flefh  come."  We 
cannot  certainly  think  any  intercelTor  fo  powerful  and 
prevalent  with  God,  as  his  only  and  dearly  beloved 
Son,  ofTcring  up  our  prayers  to  God  in  heaven,  by 
virtue  of  that  mod  acceptable  and  invaluable  facrifice, 
•  which  he  offered  to  him  on  earth.  We  cannot  fure- 
]y' think,  that  there  is  fo  much  goodnefs  any  where 

as 


profejjion  of  the  true  religion^  57  p 

as  in  God  ;  that  in  any  of  the  angels  or  faints,  or  e-  ^  E  a  U, 
ven  in  the  bleifed  mother  of  our  Lord,  there  is  more     _^  _, ' 
mercy  and  compafTion  for  finners,  and  a  tenderer  uiSc 
of  our  infirmities,  than  in  the  Son  of  God,  who  "  is 
"  at  the  right  hand  of  his  Father,  to  appear  in  the 
"  prefence  of  God  for  us."     We  are  fure  that  God 
always  hears  the  petitions  which  we  put  up  to  him  ; 
and  fo  does  the  Son  of  God,  by  whom  w^e  put  them 
up  to  the  Father,  becaufe    he  alfo  is  God    bleffed 
for  evermore.     But  we  are  not  fure  that  the  angek 
and  faints  hear  our  prayers,  becaufe  we  are  fure  that 
they  are  neither  omnifcient  nor  omniprefent,  and  we 
are  not  fure,  nor  probably  certain,  that  our  prayers 
are  mad^  known  to  them  any  other  way,  there  being 
no  revelation  of  God  to  that  purpofe.     We  are  fure 
that  God  hath  declared  himfelfto  be  a  jealous  God, 
and  that  he  will  not  give  his  honour  to  another ;  and 
we  are  not  fure  but  that  prayer  is  part  of  the  honour 
which  is  due  to  God  alone ;  and  if  it  were  not,  we 
can  hai'dly  think  but  that  God  lliould  be  fo  far  from 
being  pleafed,  with  our  making  fo  frequent  ufe  of 
thofe  other   mediators  and   intercelTors,    and  from 
granting  our  defires  the  fooner  upon  that  account ; 
that  on  the  contrary  we  have  reafon  to  think,  he 
fhould  be  highly  offended,  when  he  himfelf  is  ready 
to  receive  all  our  petitions,  and  hath  appointed  a  great 
mediator  to  that  purpofe,  to  fee  more  addreffes  made 
to,  and  by  the  angels  and  faints  and  blelfed  virgin, 
than  to  himfelf  by  his  blelfed  Son  -,  and  to  fee  the 
worlhip  of  himfelf  almoft  joftled  out,  by  the  devotion 
of  people  to  faints  and  angels,  and  the  blelfed  mo- 
ther of  our  Lord;  a  thing  which  he  never  command- 
ed, and  which,  fo  far  as  appears  by  fcripture,  never 
came  into  his  mind.     I  have  been  the  longer  upon  this 
matter,  to  iliev/  how  unreafonable  and  needlefs  at  the 

8  S  2  belt. 


Of  conjlancy  in  the 

beft,  this  more  than  half  part  of  the  religion  of  the 
church  of  Rome  is  \  and  how  fafely  it  may  be  let 
alone. 

But  now  on  the  other  hand,  if  they  be  mifhaken 
in  thefe  things,  as  we  can  demonftrate  from  fcripture 
they  are,  the  danger  is  infinitely  great  on  that  fide ; 
for  then  they  oppofe  an  inflitution  of  Christ,  v/ho 
appointed  the  facrament  to  be  received  in  both  kinds  •, 
and  they  involve  themfelves  in  a  great  danger  of  the 
guilt  of  idolatry,  and  our  common  chriftianity  in  the 
fcandal  and  reproach  of  it ;  and  this  without  any  ne- 
ceflity,  fince  "God  hath  required  none  of  thefe  things 
*'  at  our  hands  j"  and  after  all  the  buflle  which  hath 
been  made  about  them,   the  utmoft  they  pretend 
(which  yet  they  are  not  able  to  make  good)  is,  that 
thefe  things  may  lawfully  be  done  •,  and  at  the  fame 
time  they  cannot  deny  but  that  if  the  church  had  not 
enjoined  them,  they  might  lawfully  be  let  alone. 
And  can  any  thing  be  more  unreafonable,  than  fo 
pertinacioufly  to  infift  upon  things  fo  hard,  I  may 
fay  impoflible  to  be  defended  or  excufed,  and  which 
by  their   own  acknowledgment  are  of   no    great 
weight  and  neceflity ;  in  which  we  are  certainly  fafe 
in  not  doing  them,  if  they  Ihould  prove  lawful  ^  but 
if  they  do  not  prove  fo,  they  are  in  a  moft  dangerous 
condition  \  fo  that  here  is  certain  fafety  on  the  one 
hand,  and  the  danger  of  damnation  on  the  other; 
which  is  as  great  odds  as  is  poflible  ? 

And  they  mufl  not  tell  us  that  they  are  in  no  dan- 
ger, becaufe  they  are  infallible,  and  cannot  be  mif- 
taken  ;  they  mufl  prove  that  point  a  great  deal  bet- 
ter than  they  have  yet  done,  before  it  can  figniiy 
any  thing  either  to  our  fatisfadion  or  their  fafety. 

I  might  have  infifted  more  largely  upon  each  of 

thefe  particulars,  any  one  of  which  is  of  weight  to 

2  incline 


<c 


profe£ion  of  the  true  religion.  97  7 

incline  a  man  to  that  religion,  which  hath  fuch  an  ad-  S  E  R  M. 

I  XITT 

vantage  on  it's  fide  ;  but  all  of  them  together  make 
fo  powerful  an  argument  to  an  unprejudiced  perfon, 
as  muft  almoft  irrefillibly  determine  his  choice  ^  for 
moll  of  the  particulars  are  fo  evident,  that  they  can- 
not upon  the  very  mention  and  propofal  of  them,  be 
denied  to  be  clear  advantages  on  our  fide. 

And  now,  to  ufe  the  words  of  St.  Peter,  "  I  te- 
flify  unto  you,  that  this  is  the  true  grace  of  God 
wherein  you  ftand,"  that  the  reformed  religion 
which  we  profefs,  and  which  by  the  gopdnefs  of  God 
is  by  law  eflablifhed  in  this  nation,  is  the  true  an- 
cient chriftianity,  '^  the  faith"  which  was  ^'  at  firil 
"  delivered  to  the  faints,"  and  which  is  conveyed 
down  to  us  in  the  writings  of  the  apoilles  and  the 
evangelifls  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour.  "  Remem- 
"  ber  therefore  how  ye  have  received  and  heard  j 
* '  and  hold  fall ;  for  he  is  faithM  that  hath  promifed,'  * 
which  is  the  fecond  part  of  the  text  •,  the  encourage- 
ment which  the  apollle  gives  us  "  to  hold  fall  the 
"  profelTion  of  our  faith  without  wavering  •,  he  is 
*'  faithful  that  hath  promifed"  to  give  us  "  his  holy 
"  Spirit  to  lead  us  into  all  truth,  to  ellablifh,  llrength- 
"  en  and  fettle  us"  in  the  profeffion  of  it,  to  fupport 
and  comfort  us  under  all  trials  and  temptations,  and 
"  to  feal  us  up  to  the  day  of  redemption  -,  and  he  is 
"  faithful  that  hath  promifed"  to  reward  our  con- 
flancy  and  fidelity  to  him  and  his  truth,  with  "  a 
■'  crown  of  everlalling  life  and  glory.  Wherefore 
"  my  beloved  brethren,  be  ye  fledfall  and  unmove- 
^'  able,"  and  ''  always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the 
**  Lord,  forafmuch  as  you  know  that  your  labour 
**  Ihall  not  be  in  vain  in  the  Lord  \  for  he  is  faith- 
^'  ful  that  hath  promifed  ;"  and  "  let  us  provoke  one 
*'  another  to  charity  and  good  works,"  which  are  the 

great 


pyg  I'he  chriflimi  life^ 

S  E  R  M.  great  ornament  and  glory  of  any  religion,  and  "  fo 
^lfL>  "  niuch  the  more,  becaufe  the  day  approacheth  in 
"  which  God  will  judge  the"  belief  and  lives  "  of 
"  men  by  Jesus  Christ,"  not  according  to  the 
imperious  and  uncharitable  didlates  of  any  church, 
but  "  according  to  the  gofpel  of  his  Son  j  to  whom 
"  with  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Ghoft  be  all  honour 
"  and  glory  now  and  for  ever." 
Now  the  God  of  peace  which  brought  again  from 
the  dead  the  great  ihepherd  of  the  llieep,  through 
the  blood  of  the  everlafting  covenant,  make  you 
perfedl  in  every  good  word  and  work  ;    working 
in  you  that  which  is  pleafing  in  his  fight.     And 
the  peace  of  God  which  pafleth  all  underftanding 
keep  your  hearts  and  minds  in  the  knowledge  and 
love  of  God,  and  of  his  Son  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord. 


SERMON     LXIV. 

The  chriftian  life,  a  life  of  faith. 


2  Cor.  V.  7. 

For  we  walk  ly  faith ^  not  hy  fight, 

IN  the  latter  part  of  the  former  chapter,  the  apof- 
tle  declares  what  it  was  that  was  the  great  flip- 
port  of  Chriflians,  under  the  perfecutions  and  fuffer- 
ings  which  befcl  them,  viz.  the  afTurance  of  ablef- 
fed  refurreftion  to  another  life,  verfe  14.  "  Know- 

"  ing 


LXIV. 


a  life  of  faith.  *  579 

*'  ing  that  he  which  raifed  up  the  Lord  Jesus,  ^J-^^^^- 
"  Hiall  raife  up  us  alfo  by  Jesus  ;  for  which  caufe," 
faith  he,  verfe  16.  "  we  faint  not  \  but  though  our 
"  outward  man  perifh,  our  inward  man  is  renewed 
"  day  by  day  j"  that  is,  though  our  bodies,  by  rea- 
fon  of  the  hardlliips  and  fufferings  which  we  under- 
go, are  continually  decaying  and  declining  \  yet  our 
rhinds  grow  every  day  more  healthful  and  vigorous, 
and  gain  new  ilrength  and  refolution,  by  contem- 
plating the  glory  and  rev/ard  of  another  world,  and 
as  it  were  feeding  upon  them  by  faith  ♦,  "  for  our 
"  light  affli6lion  which  is  but  for  a  moment,  work- 
"  eth  for  us  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight 
"  of  glory,  whilft  we  look  not  at  the  things  which 
"  are  feen,  but  at  the  things  which  are  not  feen.'* 

And  herefumes  the  fame  argument  again  at  the 
beginning  of  this  chapter;  "  for  we  know,  that  if 
"  our  earthly  houfe  of  this  tabernacle  were  dilTolved, 
"  we  have  a  building  of  God,  a  houfe  not  made 
"  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens  ;"  that  is,  we 
are  firmly  perfuaded,  that  when  v/e  die,  we  lliall  but 
exchange  thefe  earthly  and  periihing  bodies,  thefe 
houfes  of  clay,  for  a  heavenly  manfion,  which  will 
never  decay  nor  come  to  ruin  :  from  whence  he  con- 
cludes, verfe  6.  "  Therefore  we  are  always  confi- 
^'  dent,"  3-ctpoSvT2g  Sv  zs-dvrcTey  therefore  whatever 
happens  to  us,  we  are  always  of  good  courage,  and 
fee  no  reafon  to  be  afraid  of  death  ;  "  knowing  that 
*'  whilft  we  are  at  hom.e  in  the  body,  we  are  abfent 
"  from  the  Lord  ;"  that  isfmce  our  continuance  in 
the  body  is  to  our  difadvantage,  and  while  we  live, 
we  are  abfent  from  our  happinefs  ;  and  when  we  die, 
we  fhall  then  enter  upon  the  poiTefTion  of  it.  That 
which  gives  us  this  confidence  and  good  courage  is 
our  fcuth  J  for  though  we  be  not  actually  polTeft  of 

this 


gSo  The  chrijlian  life^ 

S  E  R  M.  this  happlnefs  which  we  fpeak  of,  yet  wc  have  a 
firm  perfuafion  of  the  reality  of  it,  which  is  enough 
to  fupport  our  fpirits,  and  keep  up  our  courage  under 
all  afflictions  and  adverfities  whatfoever,v€rfe  7  \ ''  for 
*'  we  walk  by  faith,  not  by  fight." 

Thefe  words  come  in  by  way  of  parenthefis,  in 
which  the  apoflle  declares  in  general,  wJiat  is  the 
fwaying  and  governing  principle  of  a  chriftian  life ; 
not  only  in  cafe  of  perfecution  and  afflidiion,  but  un- 
der all  events^  and  in  every  condition  of  human  life^ 
and  that  is,  faith  ;  in  oppofition  to  fight  and  prefent 
enjoyment :  "  we  walk  by  faith,  and  not  by  fight." 
*'  We  walk  by  faith  j"  whatever  principle  fways  and 
governs  a  man's  life  and  adions,  he  is  faid  to  walk 
and  live  by  it.  And  as  here  a  Chriftian  is  faid  "  to 
"  walk  by  faith,"  fo  elfewhere  "  the  juft"  is  faid  to 
"  live  by  faith."  Faith  is  the  principle  which  ani- 
mates all  his  refolutions  and  adtions. 

And  "  not  by  fight."  The  word  is,  e^^^^g-,  which 
fignifies  the  thing  itfelf  in  prefent  view  and  pofTef- 
iion,  in  oppofition  to  a  firm  perfuafion  of  things  fu- 
ture and  invifible.  Sight  is  the  thing  in  hand,  and 
faith  the  thing  only  in  hope  and  expediation.  Sight 
is  a  clear  view  and  apprehenfion  of  things  prefent  and 
near  to  us ;  faith  an  obfcure  difcovery  and  apprehen- 
fion of  things  at  a  diftance :  fo  the  apoftle  tells  us, 
2  Cor.  xiii.  12."  Now  we  fee  through  a  glafs  darkly ;" 
this  is  faith  :  "  but  then  face  to  fice,"  this  is  prefent 
light,  as  one  man  fees  another  face  to  face  •,  and  thus 
likewife  the  fame  apoftle  diftinguidieth  betwixt  hope 
and  fight,  Rom.  viii.  24,  25.  ''  Hope  that  is  feen, 
"  is  not  hope ;  for  what  a  man  fees,  why  doth  he 
*'  yet  hope  for  it  ?  but  if  we  hope  for  that  which 
**  we  fee  not,  then  do  we  with  patience  wait  for  it.", 
Sight  is  pofTeftion  and  enjoyment ;  faith  is  the  firm 

perfuafion 


a  life  of  faith,  98 1 

|)erfilarion  and  expedlation  of  a  thing  ;  and  tliis  the  ^^  R  ^* 
apoftle  tells  us  was   the  governing  principle   of  a  , 
Chriftian's  life,  "  for  we  walk  by  faith,  and  not  by 
"  fight;"  from  which  words  I  fhall  obferVe  thele 
three  things. 

I.  That  faith  is  the  governing  principle,  and  that 
which  bears  the  great  fway  in  the  life  and  adions 
of  a  Chriftian  •,  "we  walk  by  faith ;"  that  is,  we 
order  and  govern  our  lives  in  the  power  and  virtue 
of  this  principle. 

II.  Faith  is  a  degree  of  aflent  inferior  to  that  of 
fenfe.  This  is  fufHciently  intimated  in  the  oppofition 
betwixt  faith  and  fight.  He  had  faid  before,  than 
*'  whilil  we  are  at  home  in  the  body,  we  are  abfenc 
*'  from  the  Lord  ;"  and  gives  this  as  a  reafon  and 
proof  of  our  abfence  from  the  Lord,  "  for  we  v/alk 
*'  by  faith,  and  not  by  fight ;"  that  is,-  while  we 
are  in  the  body,  we  do  not  fee  and  enjoy,  but  believe 
andexpecl ;  if  we  were  prefent  with  the  Lord,  then 
faith  would  ceafe^  and  be  turned  into  fight ;  but 
though  we  have  not  that  afilirance  of  another  world, 
which  we  fiiall  have  when  we  come  to  fee  and  enjoy 
thefe  things,  yet  we  are  firmly  perfuaded  of  them. 

III.  Notwithftanding  faith  be  an  inferior  degree? 
of  afiTurance,  yet  'tis  a  principle  of  fufficient  power  to- 
govern  our  lives  ;  "  we  walk  by  faith;"  it  is  fuch- 
an  afiTurance  as  hath  an  influence  upon  our  lives. 

I.  That  faith  is  the  governing  principle,  and  that 
which  bears  the  great  fway  in  the  life  and  a(5lions  of 
a  Chrifl:ian.  "  We  walk  by  faith  -,"  that  is,  we  or- 
der and  govern  our  lives  in  the  power  and  virtue  of 
this  principle.  AChrifl:ian's  life  confifiis  in  obediences 
to  the  will  of  God  ;  that  is,  in  a  readinefs  to  do  what 
he  commands,  and  in  a  willingnefs  to  fufFer  what  he 
calls  us  to  •,  and  the  great  arguments  and  encourage-^. 

Vol.  V,  8  T  ments 


g^2  ^he  chrijiian  lifey 

S  ERM.  ments  hereto,  are  fuch  things  as  are  the  obie(5ls  of 
_  _  ,  faith,  and  not  of  fenfe  ;  fuch  things  as  are  ab- 
fent  and  future,  and  not  prefcnt  and  in  pofTefTion. 
For  inilance,  the  belief  of  an  invifible  God,  of  afe- 
cret  power  and  providence,  that  orders  and  governs 
all  things,  that  can  blefs  or  blaft  us,  and  all  our  de- 
figns  and  undertakings,  according  as  we  demean' 
our  felves  towards  him,  and  endeavour  to  improve 
our  felves  to  him  •,  the  perfuafion  of  a  fecret  aid 
and  influence  always  ready  at  hand,  to  keep  us  from 
evil,  and  to  frrengthen  and  afiift  us  to  that  which  is 
good  ',  ■  more  efpecially  the  firm  belief  and  expecta- 
tion of  the  happinefs  of  heaven,  and  the  glorious 
rewards  of  another  world,  which  though  they  be  now 
at  a  diftance,  and  invifible  to  us,  yet  being  grounded 
upon  the  promife  of "  God  that  cannot  lie^"  fhall 
certainly  be  made  good. 

And  this  faith,  this  firm  perlliafiori  of  abfent  and 
invifible  things,  the  apollle  to  the  Hebrews  tells  us, 
was  the  great  principle  of  the  piety  and  virtue  of 
good  men  from  the  beginning  of  the  world.  This 
he  calls,  chap.  xi.  verie  i.  the  viroqctriq^  or  "  the 
"  confident  expectation  of  things  hoped  for,  and  the 
*'  proof  or  evidence  of  things  notfeen,"  viz.  a  firm 
perfuafion  of  the  being  and  providence  of  God,  and 
of  the  truth  and  faithfulnefs  of  his  promifes.  Such 
was  the  faith  of  Abel,  he  believed  '*-  that  there  v/as 
*'  a  God,  and  that  he  was  a  reward er  of  thof^  that 
"  faithfully  ferve  him."  Such  was  the  faith  of 
Noah,  who  being  warned  of  God,  of  things  at  a 
great  diftance,  and  not  feen  as  yet,  notwithftanding 
believed  the  divine  prediction  concerning  the  flood, 
and  prepared  an  ark :  fuch  alfo  was  the  faith  of 
Abraham,  concerning  a  numerous  pofterity  by  Ifaac^ 
and  the  inheritance  of  the  land  of  Canaan  \  and  fuch 

likewife 


a  life  of  faith.  983 

likewife  was  the  faith  of  Mofes,  he  did  as  firmly  be-  SE  RM. 
lieve  the  invifible  God,  and  the  recompence  of  re- 
ward, as  if  he  had  beheld  them  with  his  eyes. 

And  of  this  recompence  of  reward^  we  Chriflians 
have  a  much  clearer  revelation,  and  much  greater  af- 
furance,  than  former  ages  and  generations  had  ;  and 
the  firm  belief  and  perfuafion  of  this,  is  the  great 
motive  and  argument  to  a  holy  life  ;  ''  the  hope 
"  which  is  fet  before  us"  of  obtaining  the  happinefs, 
and  the  fear  of  incurring  the  mifery,  of  another  world.. 
This  made  the  primitive  Chriftians,  with  fo  much 
patience  to  bear  the  fufferings  and  perfecutions,  with 
fo  much  coniliancy  to  venture  upon  the  dangers  and 
inconveniencies  which  the  love  of  God  and  reUgion 
expofed  them  to. 

Under  the  former  difpenfation  of  the  law,  though, 
good  men  received  good  hopes  of  the  rewards  of 
another  life,  yet  thefe  things  were  but  obfcurely  re- 
vealed to  them,  and  the  great  inducements  to  obe- 
dience were  temporal  rev/ards  and  punifiiments  \.  the 
promifes  of  long  life,  and  peace,  and  plenty,  and 
profperity,  in  that  good  land  which  God  had  given 
them,  and  the  threatnings  of  war,  and  famine,  and 
peftilence,  and  being  delivered  into  captivity.  But 
now,  under  "  the  gofpel,  life  and  immortality  are 
"  brought  to  light  i"  and  the  great  arguments  that 
bear  fv/ay  with  Chriflians,  are  the  promifes  of  ever- 
lafling  life,  and  the  threatnings  of  eternal  mifery  •,  and 
the  firm  belief  and  perfuafion  of  thefe  is  now  the 
great  principle  that  governs  the  lives  and  adlions  of 
good  men  :  for  v/hat  v/ill  not  men  do,  that  are  really, 
perfuaded,  that  as  they  do  demean  them.felves  in  this 
world,  it  will  fare  with  them  in  the  other  ?  that 
*'  the  wicked  fiiall  go.  into  everlafi:ing  punifiiment^ 
"  and  the  righteous  into  life  eteraal."  I  proceed 
to  the  S  T  z  II.  Ob- 


984  ^he  chrijitan  life^ 

6ERM.  II.  Obfervation,  namely,  that  faith  is  a  degree  of 
aflent,  inferior  to  that  of  fenfe,  this  is  intimated  in 
the  oppofition  betwixt  faith  and  fight  -,  "we  walk 
^'  by  faith,"  and  "  not  by  fight ;"  that  is,  we  believe 
thefe  things,  and  are  confidently  perfuaded  of  the 
truth  of  them,  though  we  never  faw  them,  and  con- 
fequently  cannot  polTibly  have  that  degree  of  afTu- 
rance  concerning  the  joys  of  heaven,  and  the  tor- 
ments of  hell,  which  thofe  have  who  enjoy  the  one 
and  endure  the  other. 

There  are  different  degrees  of  afiTurance  concerning 
4:hings  arifing  from  the  different  degrees  of  evidence 
we  have  for  them.  The  highefl:  degree  of  evidence 
we  have  for  any  things  is  our  own  fenfe  and  experi- 
ence ;  and  this  is  fo  firm  and  itrong,  that  it  is  not 
to  be  fhaken  by  the  utmoft  pretence  of  a  rational  de- 
monftration  \  men  will  truil  their  own  fenfes  and  ex- 
perience, againft  any  fubtilty  of  reafon  whatfoever : 
but  there  are  inferior  degrees  of  affurance  concerning 
things,  as  the  teftimony  and  authority  of  perfons  eve- 
ry way  credible  :  and  this  aflurance  we  have  in  this 
ftate  concerning  the  things  of  another  world,  we  be-  - 
lieve  with  great  reafon,  that  we  have  the  tefti- 
jmony  of  God  concerning  them,  which  is  the  highefl: 
kind  of  evidence  in  itfelf  \  and  we  have  all  the  rea- 
fonable  afiTurance  we  can  defire,  that  God  hath  tefi:i- 
fied  thefe  things,  and  this  is  the  utmofi:  afiTurance 
which  things  future  and  at  a  difi:ance  are  capable  of. 
But  yet  it  is  an  unreafonable  obfiiinacy  to  deny, 
that  this  falls  very  much  fiiort  of  that  degree  of  af- 
furance  which  thefe  perfons  have  concerning  thefe 
things,  who  are  now  in  the  other  world,  and  have 
the  fenfe  and  experience  of  thefe  things.  And  this  is 
not  only  intimated  here  in  the  text,  in  the  oppofition 
$)f  faith  and  fight,  but  is  plainly  exprefi:  in  other  texts 

of 


a  life  of  faith.  '985 

of  fcripture,  i  Cor.  xiii.  9,  10.  "  We  know  now  SERM. 
*'  but  in  part  •,  but  when  that  which  is  perfect  is 
*'  come,  that  which  is  in  part  fhall  be  done  away." 
That  degree  of  knowledge  and  aflurance  which  we 
have  in  this  Hfe  is  very  imperfedl,  in  comparifon  to 
what  we  fliall  have  hereafter,  and  ver.  12.  "  We 
*'  now  fee  as  through  a  glafs  darkly,  cv  dmyfJLctri^ 
"  as  in  a  riddle,"  in  which  there  is  always  a  great 
deal  of  obfcurity  •,  all  which  expreffions  are  certainly 
intended  by  way  of  abatement  and  diminution  to  the 
certainty  of  faith  ^  becaufe  it  is  plain,  by  "  that  which 
*'  is  in  any  part"  or  "imperfe(5l,"the  apoille  means 
faith  and  hope,  which  he  tells  us  Ihall  ceafe,  when 
''  that  which  is  perfedl,"  meaning  viHon  and  fight, 
is  come.  We  fee  hkewife  in  experience,  that  the 
faith  and  hope  of  the  bell  Chriftians  in  this  life  is  ac- 
companied with  doubting  concerning  thefe  things, 
and  all  doubting  is  a  degree  of  uncertainty.  But  thofe 
bleffed  fouls  who  are  enter' d  upon  the  pofleflion  of 
glory  and  happinefs,  and  thofe  miferable  wretches 
who  lye  groaning  under  the  wrath  of  God  and  the 
feverity  of  his  juftice,  cannot  pollibly,  if  they  would, 
have  any  doubt  concerning  the  truth  and  reality  of 
thefe  things. 

But  however  contentious  men  may  difpute  againil 
common  fenfe,  this  is  fo  plain  a  truth,  that  I  will  not 
labour  in  the  farther  proof  of  it  -,  nor  indeed  is  it 
reafonable,  while  we  are  in  this  ftate,  to  exped  that 
degree  of  aiTurance  concerning  the  rewards  and  pu- 
nifhments  of  another  life,  which  the  light  and  fenfi- 
ble  experience  of  them  would  give  us  -,  and  that  upon 
thefe  two  accounts ; 

1 .  Becaufe  our  prefent  ftate  will  not  admit  it ;  and 

2.  If  i;  would,  it  is  not  reafonable  we  fhould 
have  it. 

2  I.  Our 


LXIV. 


"986  ^he  chriftian  life^ 

SE^RM.  I.  Our  prefent  ftate  will  not  admit  it.  For  while 
we  are  in  this  world,  it  is  not  poiTible  we  fhould 
have  that  fenfible  experiment  and  trial  how  things  are 
in  the  other.  The  things  of  the  other  world  are  re- 
mote from  us,  and  far  out  of  fight,  and  we  cannot 
have  any  experimental  knowledge  of  them,  till  we 
our  felves  enter  into  that  flate.  Thofe  who  are  al- 
ready pad  into  it  know  how  things  are  ;  thofe  happy 
fouls  who  live  in  the  reviving  prefence  of  God,  and 
are  pofTelTed  of  thofe  joys  which  we  cannot  now  con- 
ceive, underfland  thefe  things  in  another  manner, 
and  have  a  more  perfed  afTurance  concerning  them, 
than  it  is  pofTible  for  any  man  to  have  in  this  world  j 
and  thofe  wretched  and  miferable  fpirits  who  feel  the 
vengeance  of  God,  and  are  plunged  into  the  horrors 
of  eternal  darknefs,  do  believe  upon  irrefiftible  evi- 
dence, and  have  other  kind  of  convi61:ions  of  the 
reaUty  of  that  flate,  and  the  infupportable  mifery  of 
it,  than  any  man  is  capable  of  in  this  world. 

2.  If  our  prefent  (late  would  admit  of  this  high 
degree  of  afTurance,  it  is  not  fit  and  reafonable  that 
we  fhould  have  it.  Such  an  over-powering  evidence 
would  quite  take  away  the  virtue  of  faith,  and  much 
lefTen  that  of  obedience.  Put  the  cafe  that  every  man, 
fome  confiderable  time  before  his  departure  out  of 
this  life,  were  permitted  to  vifit  the  other  world,  to 
affure  him  how  things  are  there,  to  view  the  manfions 
of  the  bleffed,  and  to  furvey  the  dark  and  loathfom 
prifons  of  the  damned,  to  hear  the  lamentable  outcries 
of  miferable  and  defpairing  fouls,  and  to  fee  the  in^- 
conceivable  anguifli  and  torments  they  are  in  >  after 
this,  what  virtue  would  it  be  in  any  man  to  believe 
thefe  things  ?  He  that  had  been  there  and  feen  them,  • 
could  not  difbelieve  them  if  he  would.  Paith  in  this 
cafe  would  not  be  virtue,  but  necelTity.  -And  there- 
fore 


a  life  of  faith.  987 

fore  it  IS  obfervable,  that  our  Saviour  doth  not  pro^  S  E  R  M. 
nounce  them  blefled,  who  beUeved  his  refurredtion, 
upon  the  forcible  evidence  of  their  own  fenfes,  but, 
*'  bleffed  are  they  that  have  not  feen,  and  yet  have 
♦'  believed."  They  might  be  happy  in  the  effeds 
of  that  faith,  but  there  is  no  praife,  no  reward  be- 
longs to  that  faith  which  is  wrought  in  man  by  fo  vi- 
olent and  irrefiflible  an  evidence.  It  was  the  great 
commendation  of  Abraham's  faith,  that  "  againft 
"  hope  he  believed  in  hope,'*  he  believed  the  pro- 
mife  of  God  concerning  a  thing  in  itfelf  very  impro- 
bable :  but  it  is  no  commendation  at  all  to  believe  the 
things  which  we  have  feen,  becaufe  they  admit  of  no 
manner  of  difpute ;  no  obje6lion  can  be  offered  to 
fhake  our  aflent,  unlefs  we  will  run  to  the  extremity 
of  fcepticifm  -,  for  if  we  will  believe  any  thing  at  all, 
we  mull  yield  to  the  evidence  of  fenfe.  This  does  fo 
violently  enforce  our  affent,  that  there  can  be  no  vir- 
tue in  fuch  a  faith. 

And  as  this  would  take  away  the  virtue  of  faith, 
fo  it  would  very  much  leflen  that  of  our  obedience. 
It  is  hardly  to  be  imagined,,  that  any  man  who  had 
feen  the  bleffed  condition  of  good  men  in  another 
world,  and  been  an  eye-witnefs  of  the  intolerable  tor- 
ments of  finners,  fhould  ever  after  be  tempted  know- 
ingly to  do  any  thing  that  would  deprive  him  of  that 
happinefs,  or  bring  him  into  that  place  of  torment. 
Such  a  fight  could  not  chufe  but  affedt  a  man  as  long 
as  he  lived ;  and  leave  fuch  impreiTions  upon  his  mind, 
of  the  indifpenfable  necefTity  of  a  holy  life,  and  of  the 
infinite  danger  of  a  wicked  courfe,  that  we  might 
fooner  believe  that  all  men  in  the  world  fhould 
confpire  to  kill  one  another,  than  that  fuch  a  man, 
by  confenting  to  any  deliberate  a6l  of  fin,  fhould  wil- 
fully throw  himfelf  into  thofe  flames :  no,  his  mind 

would 


988  "The  chrtjliari  life, 

S  E  R  M.  would  be  continually  haunted  with  thofe  furies  he  had 

I  XT  V 

'  feen  tormenting  finners  in  another  world,  and  the 
fearful  flirieks  and  outcries  of  miferable  fouls  would 
be  perpetually  ringing  in  his  ears ;  and  the  man  would 
have  fo  lively  and  terrible  an  imagination  of  the  dan-* 
ger  he  was  running  himfelf  upon,  that  no  temptation 
would  be  flrong  enough  to  conquer  his  fears,  and  to 
make  him  carelefs  of  his  life  and  adions,  after  he 
had  once  feen  how  "  fearful  a  thing  it  was  to  fall  into 
*'  the  hands  of  the  living  God  :"  fo  that  in  this  cafe, 
the  reafon  of  mens  obedience  would  be  fo  violent,  that 
the  virtue  of  it  muft  be  very  little  ;  for  what  praifc 
is  due  to  any  man,  not  to  do  thofe  things  which  none 
but  a  perfed  mad  man  would  do  ?  For  certainly  that 
man  muft  be  befides  himfelf,  that  could  by  any  temp- 
tation be  feduced  to  live  a  wicked  hfe,  after  he  had 
feen  the  flate  of  good  and  bad  men  in  the  other 
world  5  the  glorious  rewards  of  holinefs  and  virtue, 
and  the  difmal  event  of  a  vicious  and  finful  courfe* 
God  hath  defigned  this  hfe  for  the  trial  of  our  virtue, 
and  the  exercife  of  our  obedience ;  but  there  would 
hardly  be  any  place  for  this,  if  there  were  a  free  and 
eafy  pafTage  for  us  into  the  other  world,  to  fee  the 
true  ftate  of  things  there.  What  argument  would 
it  be  of  any  man's  virtue  to  forbear  finning  after  he 
had  been  in  hell,  and  feen  the  miferable  end  of  fin- 
ners ?  But  I  proceed  to  the 

III.  And  laft  obfervation  -,  namely,  that  notwith- 
ftanding  faith  be  an  inferior  degree  of  affent  -,  yet  it  is 
a  principle  of  fufficient  force  and  power  to  govern 
our  hves.  "  We  walk  by  faith,"  Now,  that  the 
behef  of  any  thing  may  have  it's  effed  upon  us,  it 
is  requifite  that  we  be  fatisfied  of  thefe  two  things. 

I.  Of  the  certainty,  and  2.  of  the  great  concern- 
ment of  the  thing.     For  if  the  thing  be  altogether 

uncer* 


a  life  of  faith.  989 

uncertain,  it  will  not  move  us  at  all,  we  fhall  do  no-  S  E  R  M/ 

LXIV 
thing  towards  the  obtaining  of  it,  if  it  be  good  ;  nor 

for  the  avoiding  and  preventing  of  it,  if  it  be  evil : 
and  if  we  are  certain  of  the  thing,  yet  if  we  appre- 
hend it  to  be  of  no  great  moment  and  concernment, 
fhall  be  apt  to  (light  it,  as  not  worth  our  regard  : 
but  the  rewards  and  punifhments  of  another  world, 
which  the  gofpel  propounds  to  our  faith,  are  fitted 
to  work  upon  our  minds^  both  upon  account  of  the 
certainty  and  concernment  of  them.     For, 

I.  We  have  fufficient  afilirance  of  the  truth  of  thefe 
things,  as  much  as  we  are  well  capable  of  in  this  flate. 
Concerning  things  future  and  at  a  difbance,  we  have 
the  didates  of  our  reafon  arguing  us  into  this  perfua- 
fion  from  the  confideration  of  the  juftice  of  the  divine 
providence,  and  from  the  promiscuous  and  unequal 
adminiflration  of  things  in  this  world  \  from  whence 
wife  men  in  all  ages  have  been  apt  to  conclude,  that 
there  will  be  another  ftate  of  things  after  this  life, 
wherein  rewards  and  punilliments  ihall  be  equally  di- 
ftributed.  We  have  the  general  confent  of  mankind 
in  this  matter :  and  to  afilire  us,  that  thefe  reafonings 
are  true,  we  have  a  moft  credible  revelation  of  thefe 
things,  God  having  fent  his  Son  from  heaven  to  de- 
clare it  to  us,  and  given  us  a  fenfible  demonftration 
of  the  thing,  in  his  refurre6lion  from  the  dead,  and 
his  vifible  afcenfion  into  heaven  ;  fo  that  there  is  no 
kind  of  evidence  wanting,  that  the  thing  is  capable 
of,  but  only  our  own  fenfe  and  experience  of  thefe 
things,  of  which  we  are  not  capable  in  this  prefent 
ftate.  And  there  is  no  objedtion  againil  all  this,  but 
what  will  bring  all  things  into  uncertainty,  which  do 
not  come  under  our  fenfes,  and  which  we  ourfelves 
have  not  feen. 

Nor  is  there  any  confiderable  intereft  to  hinder 
Vol.  V.  8  U  men 


ggo  77je  chrijliajt  life, 

^f  YTV  *  ^^^^^  ^^^^^^  ^^^^  belief  of  thefe  things,  or  to  make  them 
hefitate  about  them.  For  as  for  the  otiier  world,  if 
at  lafl  there  Ihoiild  prove  to  be  nc^fuch  thing,  our 
condition  after  death  will  be  the  fame  with  the  condi- 
tion of  thofe  who  difbelieve  thefe  things  ;  becaufe  all 
will  be  extinguiHied  by  death  :  but  if  things  fall  out 
Gtherwife  (as  mod  undoubtedly  they  will)  and  our 
fouls  after  this  life  do  pafs  into  a  Hate  of  everlafling 
happinefs  or  mifery,  then  our  great  intercfh  plainly 
lyes  in  preparing  ourfelves  for  this  ftate  •,  and  there 
is  no  other  way  to  fecure  the  great  concernments  of 
another  world,  but  by  believing  thofe  things  to  be 
true,  and  governing  all  the  adtions  of  our  lives  by 
this  belief  And  as  for  theinterells  of  this  life,  they 
are  but  fliort  and  tranfitory,  and  confequently  of  no 
confideration  in  comparifon  of  the  things  which  are 
eternal ;  (and  yet  as  I  have  often  told  you ;  fetting  a- 
fide  the  cafe  of  perfecution  for  religion,  there  is  no 
real  intereft  of  this  world,  but  it  may  be  as  well  pro- 
moted and  purfued  to  as  great  advantage,  nay,  ufu- 
ally,  to  a  far  greater,  by  him  that  believes  thefe 
things,  and  lives  accordingly,  than  by  any  other  per- 
fon  :  for  the  belief  of  the  rewards  and  punifhments  of 
another  world  is  the  greatefl  motive  and  encourage- 
ment to  virtue  \  and  as  all  vice  is  naturally  attended 
with  fome  temporal  inconvenience,  fo  the  pradice  of 
all  chriflian  virtues  doth  in  it's  own  nature  tend  both 
to  the  welfare  of  particular  perfons,  and  to  the  peace 
and  profperity  of  mankind. 

But  that  which  ought  to  weigh  very  much  with  us, 
is,  that  we  have  abundantly  more  afllirance  of  the  re- 
compence  of  another  v/orid,  than  We  have  of  many 
thin<^s  in  this  world,  which  yet  have  a  greater  influ- 
ence upon  our  actions,  and  govern  the  lives  of  the 
mofl  prudent  and  conllderate  men.     Men  generally 

hazard 


a  life  of  faith, 

hazard  their  lives  and  eftates  upon  terms  of  greater 
uncertainty,  than  the  afilirance  which  we  have  of  an- 
other world.  Men  venture  to  take  phyfick  upon  pro- 
bable grounds  ofthe  integrity  and  f]<:ill  of  their  phyii- 
cian  ;  and  yet  the  want  of  either  of  thefe  may  hazard 
their  lives  \  and  men  take  phyfick  upon  greater  odds  ; 
for  it  certainly  caufeth  pain  and  fxknefs,  and  doth 
but  uncertainly  procure  and  recover  health ;  the  pa- 
tient is  fure  to  be  made  fick,  but  not  certain  to  be 
made  well  \  and  yet  the  danger  of  being  worfe,  if 
not  of  dying,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  hope  of  fuc- 
cefs  and  recovery  on  the  other,  make  this  hazard  and 
trouble  reafonable.  Men  venture  their  whole  eflates 
to  places  which  they  never  faw ;  and  that  there  are 
fuch  places,  they  have  only  the  concurrent  teftimony 
and  agreement  of  men  •,  nay,  perhaps,  have  only 
fpoken  with  them  that  have  fpoken  with  thofe  that 
have  been  there.  No  merchant  ever  infifted  upon 
the  evidence  of  a  miracle  tx)  be  v/rought,  to  fatisiy 
him  that  there  were  fuch  places  as  the  Eail  and  Weft- 
Indies,  before  he  would  venture  to  trade  thither  : 
and  yet  this  alTurance  God  hath  been  pleafed  to 
give  the  world  of  a  ftate  beyond  the  grave,  and  of  a 
blefTed  immortality  in  another  hfe. 

Now  what  ca^i  be  the  reafon  that  fo  flender  evi- 
dence, fo  fmall  a  degree  of  alTurance  v/ill  ferve  to  en- 
courage rnen  to  feek  after  the  things  of  this  worM 
with  great  care  and  indufbry  \  and  yet  a  great  deal 
more  will  not  faffice  to  put  them  effeflually  upon 
looking  after  the  great  concernmeats  of  another  world, 
which  are  infinitely  more  confiderable  ?  No  other  rea- 
fon of  this  can  be  given,  but  that  men  are  partial  in 
their  affedions  towards  thefe  things.  It  is  plain  they 
have  not  the  fame  love  for  God  and  religion,  v/hich 
they  have  for  this  world  and  the  advantages  of  it-, 

8  U  2  and 


LXIV^. 


9p2  The  chrijltan  lifcy 

S  E  R  M.  and  therefore  it  is,  that  a  lefs  degree  of  aflu ranee  will 
engage  them  to  feek  after  the  one,  than  the  other  ; 
and  yet  the  reafon  is  much  ilronger  on  the  other  fide  : 
for  the  greater  the  benefit  and  good  is,  which  is  of- 
fered to  us,  we  fliould  be  the  more  eager  to  feek  af- 
ter it,  and  fliould  be  content  to  venture  upon  lefs 
probability.     Upon  exceflive  odds,  a  man  would  ven- 
ture upon  very  fmall  hopes  •,  for  a  mighty  advantage, 
a  man  would  be  content  to  run  a  great  hazard  of  his 
labour  and  pains  upon  Uttle  alTurance.  Where  a  man's 
life  is  concerned,  every  fufpicion  of  danger  will  make 
a  man  careful  to  avoid  it.     And  will  nothing  affright 
men  from  hell,  unlefs  God  carry  them  thither,  and 
fhew  them  the  place  of  torments,  and  the  flames  of 
that  fire  which  fha.ll  never  be  quenched } 

I  do  not  fpeak  this,  as  if  thefe  things  had  not  abun- 
dant evidence  •,  I  have  fhewn  that  they  have  ;  but  to 
convince  men,  how  unreafonable  and  cruelly  partial 
they  are  about  the  concernments  of  their  fouls,  and 
their  eternal  happinefs. 

2.  Suppofing -thefe  things  to  be  real  and  certain, 
they  are  of  infinite  concernment  to  us.  For  what 
can  concern  us  more,  than  that  eternal  and  unchange- 
able flate  in  which  we  muft  be  fixt  and  abide  for  ever } 
If  fo  vafl  a  concern  will  not  move  us,  and  have  no 
influence  upon  the  government  of  our  lives  and  ac- 
tions, we  do  not  defei-ve  the  name  of  reafonable  crea- 
tures. What  confideration  can  be  fet  before  men,, 
who  are  not  touched  with  the  fenfe  of  fo  great  an  in- 
terefl,  as  that  of  our  happy  or  miferable  being  to  all 
eternity }  Can  we  be  fo  folicitous  and  careful  about 
the  concernment  of  a  few  days  •,  and  is  it  nothing  to 
\is  what  becomes  of  us  for  ever  ?  Are  we  fo  tenderly 
concerned  to  avoid  poverty  and  difgrace,  perfecution 
and  fuffcring  in  this  world  j  and  fhall  we  not  much 

more 


a  life  of  faith,  99  i 

more  "  flee  from  the  wrath  which  is  to  come,"  and  en-  S  E  R  M. 
deavour  "  to  efcape  the  damnation  of  hell  ?'*  Are  the  Jf^^ 
flight  and  tranfitory  enjoyments  of  this  world  worth  fo 
much  thought  and  care  ?  And  is  an  eternal  inheritance 
in  the  heavens  not  worth  the  looking  after  ?  As  there  is 
no  proportion  betwixt  the  things  which  are  temporal 
and  the  things  which  are  eternal,  fo  we  ought  in  all 
reafon  to  be  infinitely  more  concerned  for  the  one 
than  for  the  other. 

The  proper  inference  from  all  this  difcourfe  is, 
that  we  would  endeavour,  to  flrengthen  in  ourfelves 
this  great  principle  of  a  chriftian  life,  the  belief  of  an- 
other world,  by  reprefenting  to  ourfelves  all  thofe  ar- 
guments and  confiderations  which  may  confirm  us  in 
this  perfuafion.  The  more  reafonable  our  faith  is, 
and  the  furer  grounds  it  is  built  upon,  the  more  firm 
it  will  abide,  when  it  comes  to  the  trial,  againft  all 
the  imprefTions  of  temptations  and  affaults  of  perfe- 
cution.  If  our  faith  of  another  world  be  only  a  llrong 
imagination  of  thefe  things,  ''  fo  foon  as  tribulation 
"  arifeth,  it  will  wither  \  becaufe  it  hath  no  root  in 
"  itfelf."  Upon  this  account  the  apoflle  fo  often  ex- 
horts Chriflians,  to  endeavour  "  to  be  eflabhfhed  in 
"  the  truth,  to  be  rooted  and  grounded  in  the  faith," 
that  when  perfecution  comes,  they  may  "  continue 
"  ftedfaft  and  unmovable."  This  firmnefs  of  our  be- 
lief will  have  a  great  influence  upon  our  lives  ;  if  we 
be  "  ftedfafl:  and  unmovable"  in  our  perfuafion  of 
thefe  things,  we  fhall  be  "  abundant  in  the  work  of  the 
^'  Lord."  The  apofl:le  joins  thefe  together,  i  Cor. 
y^r.  ^^,  "  Wherefore,  my  beloved  brethren,  be  ye 
''  iledfaft  and  unmovable,  always  abounding  in  the 
"  work  of  the  Lord,  forafmuch  as  ye  know  your 
"  labour  fhall  not  be  in  vain  in  the  Lord."  Sted- 
fafl  and  unmovable,  in  what }  In  the  belief  of  a 
2  bleflbd 


oo^  The  chriftian  lifc^ 

S  E  R  M.  blefTed  rcfurrefVion  ;  which  the  more  firmly  any  man 
^^^  '    believes,  the  more  adlive  and  induflrious  will  he  be 
in  the  work  and  fervice  of  God. 

And  that  our  faith  may  have  a  conflant  and  pow- 
erful influence  upon  our  lives,  we  fhould  frequently 
revolve  in  our  minds  the  thoughts  of  another  world, 
and  of  that  vaft  eternity  which  we  fhall  fliortly  launch 
into.  The  great  difad vantage  of  the  arguments  fetcht 
from  another  world,  is  this,  that  thefe  things  are  at 
a  diflance  from  us,  and  not  fenfible  to  us,  and  there- 
fore we  are  not  apt  to  be  fo  affected  with  them  ;  pre- 
fent  and  fenfible  things  weigh  down  all  other  confi- 
derations.  And  therefore  to  balance  this  difadvan- 
tage,  we  fhould  often  have  thefe  thoughts  in  our 
minds,  and  inculcate  upon  ourfelves  the  certainty  of 
thefe  things,  and  the  infinite  concernment  of  them ; 
we  fhould  reafon  thus  with  ourfelves  ;  if  thefe  things 
be  true,  and  will  certainly  be,  why  fhould  they  not 
be  to  me,  as  if  they  were  a^hially  prefent  ?  Why 
fhould  not  I  always  live,  as  if  heaven  were  open  to  my 
view,  and  ''  I  faw  Jesus  ftanding  at  the  right  hand 
"  of  God,"  with  crowns  of  glory  in  his  hands,  ready 
to  be  fet  upon  the  heads  of  all  thofe  who  continue 
faithful  and  obedient  to  him  ?  And  why  fhould  I  not 
be  as  much  afraid  to  commit  any  fin,  as  if  "  hell  were 
"  naked  before  me,"  and  I  faw  the  aflonilhing  mife- 
ries  of  the  damned  ? 

Thus  we  fhould,  by  frequent  meditation,  reprefent 
thefe  great  things  to  ourfelves,  and  bring  them  near- 
er to  our  minds,  and  oppofe  to  the  prefent  tempta- 
tions of  fenfe  the  great  and  endlefs  happincfs  and  mi- 
fery  of  the  other  world.  And  if  we  would  but  thus  ex- 
ercife  ourfelves  about  ^'  the  things  which  arc  not  feen," 
and  make  eternity  familiar  to  ourfelves,  by  a  frequent 
meditation  of  it,  we  fhould  be  very  little  moved  with 

prefent 


^  ¥^  ^f  fa^^h'  995 

prefent  and  fenfible  things ;  we  Ihould  walk  and  live 
by  faith,  as  the  men  of  the  world  do  by  fenfe,  and 
be  more  ferious  and  earneft  in  the  purfuit  of  our  great 
and  everlafting  intereft,  than  they  are  in  the  purfuit 
of  fenfual  enjoyments,  and  fhould  make  it  the  great 
bufinefs  of  this  prefent  and  temporal  life,  to  fecure  a 
future  and  eternal  happinefs. 


SERMON     LXV. 

* 

The  danger  of  apoftafy  from  the  true 
religion. 


H  E  B.    X.  38. 

But  if  any  man  draw  back,  my  foul Jhall  have  nopkafure 
in  him. 

THE  great  defign  of  this  epiftle,  (whoever  was  S  E  R  M. 
the  author  of  it,  which  I  fhall  not  now  en-  i_^^ 
quire  into)  is  plainly  this,  to  confirm  the  Jews,  who 
were  but  newly  converted  to  chriflianity,  in  the  fted- 
faft  profeflion  of  that  faith,  which  they  had  embraced, 
and  to  arm  them  againft  that  temptation,  which 
Chriftians  were  then  expofed  to,  viz.  the  fierce  and 
cruel  perfecutions,  which  threatened  thofe  of  that  pro- 
fefTion. 

And  to  this  purpofe,  he  reprefents  to  them  the  ex- 
cellency of  that  religion,  above  any  other  former  re- 
velation 


The  dangef  of  dpojiafy 

velation  that  God  hath  made  of  himfeJf  to  the  world  ; 
both  in  refpe6t  of  the  author  and  revealer  of  it,  who 
was  the  Son  of  God,  and  in  refpe<5t  of  the  revelation 
itfelf -,  which,  as  it  contains  better,  and  mOre  perfe6t 
dire6lions  for  a  good  life,  fo  likewife  more  powerful 
and  effedhial  motives  thereto,  better  promifes,  and 
more  terrible  threatnings,  than  were  annexed  to  the 
obfervation  of  the  Jewifh  law,  or  clearly  and  certain- 
ly difcoverable  by  the  light  of  nature.     From  thefe 
confiderations,  he  earneflly  perfuades  them,  all  along 
throughout  this  epiflle,  to  continue  conftant  in  the 
profeflion  of  this  faith,  and  not  to  fuffer  themfelves 
to  be  frighted  out  of  it  by  the  terror  of  perfecution ; 
chap.  ii.  ver.  i.  "  Therefore  we  ought  to  give  the 
"  more  earneft  heed  to  the  things  which  we  have 
*'  heard,  left  at  any  time  we  fhould  let  them  flip  ;" 
and  chap.  iv.  i.  "  Let  us  therefore  fear,  left  a  pro- 
"  mife  being  left  us,  of  entering  into  his  reft,  any  of 
"  you  fliould  come  fhort  of  it ;"  and  verfe  23.  of 
this  chapter,  ''  Let  us  hold  faft  the  profeflion  of  our 
*'  faith,  without  wavering ;"  and  to  encourage  them 
to   conftancy,     he   fets  before  them   the  glorious 
rewards  and  recompences  of  the  gofpel,  verfe  ^S* 
"  Caft  not  away  therefore  your  confidence,  t>jv  ttuo-' 
*'  Ivia-ioLV  vi>iU)Vy    your  free  and  open  profeflion  of 
"  chriftianity,  which  hath  great  recompence  of  re- 
"  ward." 

And  then  on  the  other  hand,  to  deter  them  itom 
apoftafy  from  this  profeflion,  he  reprefents  to  them 
the  horrible  danger  of  it,  here  in  the  text,  "  but  if 
"  any  man  draw  back,  my  foul  Ihall  have  no  plea* 
"  fure  in  him." 

I  fliall  briefly  explain  the  words,  and  then  profecute 
that  which  I  mainly  intended  in  them.  "  If  any  man 
"  draw  back,"  idv  vTro^ei^riTon  :  thefe  words,  with 

-  the 


from  the  true  religion, 

the  foregoing,  are  cited  out  of  the  prophet  Habak- 
kuk,  chap.  ii.  ver.  3,  4.  and  they  are  cited  by  the 
apoille,  according  to  the  tranflation  of  the  LXXII. 
which  differs  fomewhat  from  the  Hebrew  ;  and  the 
difference  arifeth  from  the  various  readings  of  the 
Hebrew  word,  which  is  rendered  by  the  LXXII,  "  to 
"  draw  back  ;"  but  by  the  change  of  a  letter  figni- 
fies  "  to  be  hfted  up,"  as  we  render  it  in  the  pro- 
phet ;  but  however  that  be,  the  apoille  follows  the 
tranflation  of  the  LXXII,  and  accommodates  it  to  his 
purpofe.  'EciV  yVo9«A)?T«,<,  "  if  any  man  draw 
"  back  •,"  the  word  fignifies  to  keep  back,  to  with- 
draw, to  fneak  and  (link  away  out  of  fear,  to  fail, 
or  faint  in  any  enterprize  :  and  thus  this  word  is  ren- 
der'd  in  the  new  teftament,  A6ls  xx.  20.  i^\v  vTre- 
^eiXdfjLyjy,  "  I  did  not  withhold,"  or  "  keep  back 
''  any  thing  that  was  profitable  for  you  -,"  and  fo  it 
isfaid  of  St.  Peter,  Gal.  ii.  12.  "  vTriTsXMv  iccvTcv^ 
"  he  flunk  away,"  or  "  withdrew  himfelf,  fearing 
'^  them  of  the  circumcifion  i"  and  the  Hebrew  word 
which  is  here  render' d  by  the  LXXII.  "  to  draw 
"  back,"  is  render'd  elfewhere  €>6A«V«i/,  which 
is  "  to  fail"  or  "  faint  j"  from  all  which  it  appears, 
that  by  "  drawing  back,"  the  apoftle  here  means, 
mens  quitting  their  profefllon  of  chriflianity,  and 
(linking  out  of  it,  for  fear  of  fuffering  for  it. 

"  My  foul  fhall  have  no  pleafure  in  him  :"  thefa 
words  are  plainly  a  [^Hcuirig,  and  lefs  is  faid  than  is 
meant ;  for  the  meaning  is,  that  God  will  be  ex- 
tremely difpleafed  with  them,  and  punifh  them  very 
feverely.  The  like  figure  to  this,  you  have  PfaL 
V.  4.  "  Thou  art  not  a  God  that  haft  pleafure  in 
''  wickednefs,"  which  in  the  next  verfe  is  explained, 
by  his  hatred  and  deteftation  of  thofe  who  are  guiky 
of  it,  "  thou  hateft  all  the  workers  of  iniquity."    So 

Vol.  V,  S  X  that 

3- 


^^8  'The  dafiger  of  apojiafy 

S  E  R  M.  that  the  plain  fenfe  of  the  words  is  this,  that  apoftafy 
*     from  the  profefiion  of  God's  true  rehgion,  is  a  thing 
highly  provoking  to  him,  and  will  be  mofl  feverely 
punilli'd  by  him. 

In  fpeaking  to  tliis  argument,  I  fliall  confider  thefe 
four  things. 

I.  The  nature  of  this  fin  of  apoftafy  from  religion. 

II.  The  feveral  fleps  and  degrees  of  it. 

III.  The  heinoufnefs  of  it. 

IV.  The  great  danger  of  it,  and  the  terrible  pu- 
nifhment  it  expofeth  men  to.  And  when  I  have  fpo- 
ken  to  thefe,  I  fhall  conclude  all  with  a  fliort  exhor- 
tation, "  to  hold  fad  the  profeflion  of  our  faith  with- 
"  out  wavering." 

I.  We  will  confider  the  nature  of  this  fm  of  apof- 
tafy from  religion  •,  and  it  confifts  in  forfaking  or  re- 
nouncing the  profelTion  of  religion,  whether  it  be  by 
an  open  declaration  in  words,  or  a  virtual  declaration 
of  it  by  our  adions  •,  for  it  comes  all  to  one  in  the 
fight  of  God,  and  the  different  manner  of  doing  it, 
does  not  alter  the  nature  of  the  thing.  He  indeed 
that  renounceth  religion,  by  an  open  declaration  in 
words,  offers  the  greateft  and  boldeft  defiance  to  it ; 
but  he  is  likewife  an  apoflate,  who  filently  withdraws 
himfelf  from  the  profeffion  of  it,  who  quits  it  for  his 
intereft,  or  for  fear  difowns  it,  and  fncaks  out  of  the 
profeflion  of  it,  and  forfakes  the  communion  of  thofe 
who  own  it.  Thus  Demas  was  an  apoflate,  in  quit- 
ting chriflianity  for  fome  worldly  interefl.  "  Demas 
^'  hath  forfaken  us,  having  loved  this  prefent 
*'  world,"  faidi  St.  Paul,  2  Tim.  iv.  10.  And  thofe 
whom  our  Saviour  defcribes,  Matt.  xiii.  20,  21. 
*'  Who  received  the  word  into  flony  ground,"  were 
apoftates  out  of  fear,  "  they  heard  the  word,  and 
3  ;^  with 


from  the  true  religion,  599 

*^  with  joy  receiv'd  it,  but  having  no  root  in  them-  S  E  R  M. 
"  felves,  they  endured  but  for  a  while,  and  when  tri- 
"  bulation  and  perfecution   arifeth   becaufe  of  the 
"  word,  prefently  they  fall  off." 

And  there  is  likewife  a  partial  apoftafy  frorn 
chrillianity,  when  fome  fundamental  article  of  it  is 
denied,  whereby,  in  effed:  and  by  confequence,  the 
whole  chriilian  faith  is  overthrown.  Of  this  Hyme- 
neus  and  Philetus  were  guilty,  of  whom  the  apoflle 
fays,  that  they  "  erred  concerning  the  truth,  faying 
"  that  the  rcfurre6i;ion  was  pafl  already,  and  thereby 
"  overthrew  the  faith  of  fome,"  2  Tim.  ii.  17,  18. 
that  is,  they  turned  the  refurredlion  into  an  allegory, 
and  did  thereby  really  defbroy  a  moil  fundamental 
article  of  the  chrifliah  religion. 

So  that  to  make  a  man  an  apoilate,  it  is  not  necef- 
iary  that  a  man  fhould  folemnly  renounce  his  baptifm, 
and  declare  chriftianity  to  be  falfe  ;  there  are  feveral 
other  ways  whereby  a  man  may  bring  himfelf  under 
this  guilt,  as  by  a  filent  quitting  of  his  religion,  and 
withdrawing  himfelf  from  the  communion  of  all  that 
profefs  it ;  by  denying  an  effential  dodlrine  of  chri- 
ftianity ;  by  undermining  the  great  end  and  defign 
of  it,,  by  teaching  dodrines  which  diredly  tend  to 
encourage  men  in  impenitence,  and  a  wicked  courfe 
of  hfe,  nay,  to  authorife  all  manner  of  impiety  and 
vice,  in  telling  men  that  whatever  they  do  they  can- 
not fm  \  for  which,  the  primitive  Chrillians  did  look 
upon  the  Gnofticks,  as  no  better  than  apoftates  from 
chriftianity  \  and  though  they  retained  the  name  of 
Chriftians,  yet  not  to  be  truly  and  really  fo.  And 
there  is  likewife  a  partial  apoftafy  from  the  chriftian 
religion  ;  of  which  I  Ihall  fpeak  under  the 

II.  Head  I  propofed,  which  was,  to  confider  the 
feveral  forts  and  degrees  of  apoftafy.   The  higheft  of 

8X2  all, 


I  o  o  o  'The  danger  of  apojlafy 

SER  M.  al],  IS  the  renouncing  and  forfaking  of  chrilliianity, 
or  of  fome  ellential  part  of  it,  which  is  a  virtual  apo- 
fbafy  from  it :  but  there  are  feveral  tendencies  towards 
this,  which  they  who  are  guilty  of  are  in  fome  de- 
gree guilty  of  this  fin.     As, 

1.  Indifferency  in  religion,  and  want  of  all  fort  of 
concernment  for  it  ♦,  when  a  man,  though  he  never 
quitted  his  religion,  yet  is  fo  little  concerned  for  it, 
that  a  very  fmall  occafion  or  temptation  would  make 
him  do  it  \  he  is  contented  to  be  reckoned  in  the 
number  of  thofe  who  profefs  it,  fo  long  as  it  is  the 
falhion,  and  he  finds  no  great  inconvenience  by  it : 
but  is  fo  indifferent  in  his  mind  about  it,  (like  Gallio, 
*'  who  minded  none  of  thofe  things" )  that  he  can  turn 
himfelf  into  any  other  fhape,  when  his  interefh  re- 
quires it  \  fo  that  though  he  never  adlually  deferted 
it,  yet  he  is  a  kind  of  apoflate,  in  the  preparation 
and  difpofition  of  his  mind :  and  to  fuch  perfons, 
that  title  which  Solomon  gives  to  fome,  may  fitly 
enough  be  applied,  they  are  '^^  backfliders  in  heart." 

2.  Another  tendency  to  this  fin,  and  a  great  de- 
gree of  it,  is  withdrawing  from  the  publick  marks 
and  teftimonies  of  the  profeffion  of  religion,  by  for- 
faking the  affemblies  of  Chriftians  for  the  worfhip 
and  fervice  of  God,  to  withdraw  ourfelves  from 
thofe,  for  fear  of  danger  or  fuffering,  is  a  kind  of 
denial  of  our  religion.  And  this  was  the  cafe  of 
fome  in  the  apoflles  time,  when  perfecution  grew 
hot,  and  the  open  profellion  of  chriflianity  dange- 
rous ;  to  avoid  this  danger,  many  appeared  not  in 
the  aflemblies  of  Chriftians,  for  fear  of  being  obferv- 
ed  and  brought  into  trouble  for  it.  This  the  apoftle 
taxeth  fome  for,  in  this  chapter,  and  fpeaketh  of  it 
as  a  lett  ng  go  our  profeffion,  and  a  kind  of  defert- 
ing  of  chri'lianity,  ver.  23,  25.  "  Let  us  hold  fail 

"  the 


from  the  true  religion,  looi 

"  the  profefTion  of  our  faith  without  wavering,  not  S  E  R  M. 

LXV 
"  forfaking  the  aflembling  of  ouifelves  together,  as 

"  the  manner  of  fome  is."  He  doth  not  fay,  they  had 

quitted  their  profelTion,  but  they  had  but  a  loofe  hold 

of  it,  and  were  filently  dealing  away  from  it. 

3.  Alight  temper  of  mind,  which  eafily  receives 
imprefTions  from  thofe  who  lye  in  wait  to  deceive 
and  feduce  men  from  the  truth.  When  men  are  not 
well  rooted  and  eftabliflied  in  religion,  they  are  apt 
*'  to  be  inviegled  by  the  crafty  infmuations  of  fedu- 
*'  cers,  to  be  moved  with  every  wind  of  dodlrine,'*' 
and  "  to  be  eafily  fhaken  in  mind,"  by  every  trifling 
piece  of  fophiilry,  that  is  confidently  obtruded  upon 
them  for  a  weighty  argument. 

Now  this  is  a  temper  of  mind  which  dilpofeth 
men  to  apoftafy,  and  renders  them  an  eafy  prey  to 
every  one  that  takes  a  pleafure  and  pride  in  making 
profelytes.  It  is  true  indeed,  a  man  fhould  always 
have  a  mind  ready  to  entertain  truth,  when  it  is  fair- 
ly propofed  to  him :  but  the  main  things  of  religion 
are  fo  plainly  revealed,  and  lye  fo  obvious  to  every 
ordinary  capacity,  that  every  man  may  difcern  them : 
and  when  he  hath  once  entertained  them,  ought  to 
be  fledfafl  and  unmovable  in  them,  and  not  fuffer 
himfelf  to  be  whiffled  out  of  them  by  an  infignifi- 
cant  noife  about  the  infallibility  of  a  vifible  church  ; 
much  lefs  ought  he  to  be  moved  by  any  man's  un- 
charitablenefs  and  pofitivenefs,  in  damning  all  that  arc 
not  of  his  mind. 

There  are  fpme  things  fo  very  plain,  not  only  in 
fcripturc,  but  to  the  common  reafon  of  mankind,  that 
no  fubtlety  of  difcourfe,  no  pretended  authority,  or 
even  infallibility  of  any  church,  ought  to  ftagger  us 
in  the  leafl  about  them  ;  as  that  we  ought  not,  or 
cannot  believe  any  thing  in  dired:  contradidion  to 

fenfe 


J  XV. 


100  2  72^  danger  of  apojiafy 

S E'^M-  fenfe and  reafbn ;  that  the  people  ought  to  read  and 
fludy  the  holy  fcriptures  ;  and  toferve  God  and  pray 
to  him  in  a  language  which  they  underfland ;  that 
they  ought  to  receive  thefacrament  as  our  Saviour 
iriflituted  and  appointed  it,  that  is,  in  both  kinds ; 
that  it  can  neither  be  our  duty,  nor  lawful  to  do  that 
which  God  hath  forbidden,  as  he  hath  done  the  wor- 
fhip  of  images  in  the  fecond  commandment,  as  plain- 
ly as  words  can  do  it.  Upon  any  one  of  thefe  points, 
a  man  would'  fix  his  foot,  and  fland  alone  againft  the 
whole  world. 

4.  Another  degree  of  apoftafy  is,  a  departure  from 
the  purity  of  the  chriftian  do(5lrine  and  worfliip,  in  a 
grofs  and  notorious  manner.  This  is  a  partial, 
though  not  a  total  apoftafy  from  the  chriftian  reli- 
gion, and  there  have  been,  and  are  ftill  fome  in  the 
world  who  are  juftly  charged  with  this  degree  of 
apoftafy  from  religion  \  namely  fuch,  as  though  they 
retain  and  profefs  the  belief  of  all  the  articles  of  the 
chriftian  faith,  and  worftiip  "  the  only  true  God," 
and  "  him  whom  he  hath  fent,  Jesus  Christ  i'* 
yet  have  greatly  perverted  the  chriftian  religion,  by 
iuperinducing,  and  adding  new  articles  of  faith,  and 
grofs  corruptions  and  fuperftidons  in  worftiip,  and 
impofmg  upon  men  the  belief  and  pradice  of  thefe, 
as  neceftary  to  falvation.  And  St.  Paul  is  my  war- 
rant for  this  cenfure,  who  chargeth  thofe  who  addeth 
to  the  chriftian  religion  the  neceftlty  of  circumcifton, 
and  obferving  the  law  of  Mofes,  and  thereby  per- 
verted the  gofpel  of  Christ,  as  guilty  in  fome  de- 
gree of  apoftafy  from  Chriftianity  \  for  he  calls  it, 
preaching  another  gofpel.  Gal.  i.  7,  8.  "  There  be 
*'  fome  that  trouble  you,  and  would  pervert  the 
*'  Gofpel  of  Christ  :  but  though  we,  or  an  angel 
^'  from  heaven,  preach  any  other  gofpel  to  you,  than 

''  that 


from  the  true  religion,  looj 

"  that  which  we  have  preached,  let  him  be  accurf-  SERM. 
*'  ed."  And  thofe  who  were  feduced  by  thefe 
teachers,  he  chargeth  them  with  having  in  fome  fort 
quitted  the  gofpel  of  Christ,  and  embraced  ano- 
ther golpel,  ver.  6.  ''  I  marvel  that  ye  are  fo  foon 
"  removed  from  him  that  called  you  into  the  grace 
''  of  Christ,  unto  another  gofpel."  So  that  they 
who  thus  pervert  and  corrupt  the  chriflian  dodlrine 
or  worihip,  are  plainly  guilty  of  a  partial  apoflafy 
from  chriflianity  •,  and  they  who  quit  the  purity  of 
the  chriflian  do6lrine  and  worihip,  and  go  over  to  the 
communion  of  thofe  who  have  thus  perverted  chri- 
flianity, are  in  a  moft  .dangerous  flate,  and,  in  the 
judgment  of  St.  Paul,  are  in  fome  fort  removed  un- 
to another  gofpel.     I  fhall  now  proceed  in  the 

III.  Place,  to  confider  the  heinoufnefs  of  this  fin. 
And  it  will  appear  to  be  very  heinous,  if  we  conli- 
der,  what  an  affront  it  is  to  Ggd,  and  how  great  a 
contempt  of  him.  When  God  hath  revealed  his 
will  to  mankind,  and  fent  no  lefs  perfon  than  "  his 
*'  own  Son"  out  of  his  own  bofom  to  do  it,  and 
hath  given  fuch  teflimonies  to  him  from  heaven,  by 
*'  figns  and  wonders,  and  divers  miracles  and  gifts 
"  of  the  Holy  Ghoft  ","  when  he  hath  tranfm/itted 
down  to  us,  fo  faithful  a  record  of  this  revelation, 
and  of  the  miracles  wrought  to  confirm  it,  in  the 
books  of  the  holy  fcriptures  ;  and  when  we  our  felves 
have  fo  often  declared  our  firm  belief  of  this  revela- 
tion :  yet  after  all  this  to  fall  from  it,  and  deny  it,  or 
any  part  of  it,  or  to  embrace  dodlrines  and  pradlices 
plainly  contrary  to  it ;  this  certainly  cannot  be  done 
withoyt  the  greateft  affront  and  contempt  of  the 
teilimony  of  God  himfelf ;  for  it  is  in  effedr,  and  by 
interpretation,  to  declare,  that  either  we  do  not  be- 
Kcve  what  God  fays,  or  that  we  do  not  fear  what 

he 


LXV. 


1004  ^f^  danger  of  apojlafy 

SER^M.  he  can  do.  So  St.  John  tells  us,  i  ep.  v.  10. 
"  He  that  believeth  not  God,  hath  made  him  a  liar, 
*'  becaufe  he  believeth  not  the  record  which  God 
"  hath  given  of  his  Son." 

And  all  along  in  this  epiftle  to  the  Hebrews,  the 
apoftle  fets  himfelf  to  aggravate  this  fin  \  calling  it 
*'  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief,  to  depart  from,  the  living 
"  God,"  chap.  iii.  12.  And  he  frequently  calls  it 
fo,  y^cLT  e|o;^jyV,  and  by  way  of  eminency,  as  being 
of  all  fins  the  greatefl:  and  moft  heinous,  chap.  x.  26. 
*'  If  we  fin  wilfully,  after  we  have  received  the  know- 
*'  ledge  of  the  truth."  That  the  apoftle  here  fpeaks 
of  the  fin  of  apoftafy,  is  plain  from  the  whole  fcope 
of  his  difcourfe  ^  for  having  exhorted  them  before, 
ver.  23.  "  to  hold  faft  the  profefTion  of  their  faith 
''  without  wavering,  not  forfaking  the  afi^embling 
•'  of  themfelves  together,"  he  immediately  adds, 
*'  for  if  we  fin  wilfully,  after  we  have  received  the 
''  knowledge  of  the  truth  •,"  that  is,  if  we  fall  off 
from  chriftianity,  after  we  have  embraced  it.  And 
chap.  xii.  i.  "  Let  us  lay  afide  every  weight,  and  the 
*'  fin  which  fo  eafily  befets  us,"  that  is,  the  great 
fin  of  apoftafy  from  religion,  to  which  they  were 
then  fo  ftrongly  tempted  by  that  fierce  perfecution 
which  attended  it ;  and  therefore  he  adds,  "  let  us 
"  run  with  patience  the  race  which  is  fet  before  us," 
that  is,  let  us  arm  ourfelves  with  patience  againft-  the 
fufi:erings  we  are  like  to  meet  with  in  our  chriftian 
courfe.  To  oppofe  the  truth,  and  refift  the  clear 
evidence  of  it,  is  a  great  fin,  and  men  are  juftly  con- 
demned for  it.  John  iii.  19.  "  This  is  the  condem- 
"  nation,  that  light  is  come  into  the  world,  and  men 
"  loved  darknefs  rather  than  light :"  but  to  defert 
the  truth  after  we  have  been  convinced  of  it,  to  fall 
off  from  the  profeflion  of  it,  after  we  have  embraced 


iti 


from  the  true  religion.  J005 

it,  is  a  much  greater  fin.  Oppofition  to  the  truth  S  E  R  iVf, 
may  proceed,  in  a  great  meafure,  from  ignorance  and 
prejudice,  which  is  a  great  extenuation  ;  a'nd  there- 
fore St.  Paul  tells  us,  that  after  all  his  violent  perfe- 
cution  of  chrillianity,  ''  he  found  mercy,  becaufe  he 
*'  did  it  ignorantly  and  in  unbehef."  To  revolt! 
from  the  truth,  after  we  have  made  profeiTion  of  it, 
"  after  we  have  known  the  way  of  righteoufnefs,  to 
*'  turn  from  the  holy  commandment;"  this  is  the 
great  aggravation.  The  apofcle  makes  wilfulnefs, 
an  ufual  ingredient  into  the  fin  of  apoftafy,  "  if  we 
*'  fin  wilfully,  after  we  have  received  the  knowledge 
"  of  the  truth." 

And  as  this  fin  is  one  of  the  greateft  affronts  to 
God,  fo  it  is  the  highefl  and  mofl  effedlual  diipa- 
ragement  of  religion  :  for  it  is  not  fo  much  confider- 
ed,  what  the  enemies  of  religion  fpeak  againft  it,  be- 
caufe "  they  fpeak  evil  of  the  things  which  the/ 
"  knew  not,"  and  of  which  they  have  had  no  trial 
and  experience  •,  but  he  that  falls  off  from  religion, 
after  he  hath  made  profelTion  of  it,  declares  to  the 
world,  that  he  hath  tried  it,  and  diflikes  it,  and  pre- 
tends to  leave  it,  becaufe  he  hath  not  found  that  truth 
and  goodnefs  in  it  which  he  expedted,  and  upon  long 
experience  of  it,  fees  reafon  to  prefer  another  religion 
before  it.  So  that  nothing  can  be  more  delpiteful 
-to  religion  than  this,  and  more  likely  to  bring  it 
into  contempt ;  and  therefore  the  apofiile  (ver.  29th 
of  this  chapter)  calls  it  a  "  trampling  underfoot  ths 
"  Son  of  God,  and  making  the  blood  of  the  cove- 
"  nant  a  profane  thing,  and  offering  defpite  to  the 
''  fpirit  of  grace  :"  for  we  cannot  put  a  greater 
fcorn  upon  the  Son  of  God,  who  revealed  this  doc- 
trine to  the  world  \  nor  upon  his  blood,  which  v/as 
ihed  to  confirm  and  feal  the  truth  of  it ;  and  upon 

Vol.  V.  8  Y  the 

3. 


LXV. 


1006  ^he  danger  of  apoftafy 

S  E  R  M.  the  Holy  Ghofl,  who  came  down  in  miraculous  gifts 
to  give  teftimony  to  it ;  than  notwithflanding  all 
this,  to  renounce  this  dodrine,  and  to  forfake  this 
religion.  But  we  fliall  yet  farther  fee  the  heinoufnefs 
of  this  fin,  in  the  terrible  punifhment  it  expofeth  men 
to  ;  which  was  the 

IV.  And  lall  thing  I  propofed  to  confider.  And 
this  is  reprefented  to  us  in  a  moil  terrible  manner^ 
not  only  in  this  epiille,  but  in  other  places  of  fcrip- 
ture.  This  fin  is  placed  in  the  higheft  rank  of  par- 
donable fins,  and  next  to  the  fin  againil  the  Holy 
Ghoil,  which  our  Saviour  declares  to  be  abfolutely 
unpardonable.  And  indeed  the  fcripture  fpeaks  very 
doubtfully  of  the  pardonablenefs  of  this  fin,  as  being 
near  akin  to  that  againfl;  the  Holy  Gholl,  being  faid 
to  be  an  "  offering  delpite  to  the  fpirit  of  grace." 
In  the  6th  chapter  of  this  epiflle,  ver.  4,  5,  6.  the 
apoftle  fpeaks  in  a  very  fevere  manner,  concerning 
the  ftate  of  thofe,  who  had  apoftatized  from  chrifti- 
anity,  after  the  folemn  profeffion  of  it  in  baptifm  •,  "it 
*'  is  impofllble  for  thofe  who  v/ere  once  enlightned" 
(that  is  baptized)  "  and  have  tailed  of  the  heavenly 
gift,"  (that  is  regeneration)  "  and  were  made  par- 
"  takers  of  the  Holy  Gholl,  and  have  tailed  the 
"  good  v/ord  of  God,  and  the  powers  of  the  world 
"  to  come,"  (that  is,  have  been  inilrucled  in  t\\(t 
chriftian  religion,  and  endowed  with  tlie  miraculous 
powers  of  the  gol|:)el  age,  for  the  Jews  ufed  to  call 
the  age  of  the  Meflias,  feculum  futurmn^  or,  the 
world  to  come)  *'  it  is  impoiTible  for  thofe 
*'  to  be  renewed  again  unto  repentance  ;"  where 
the  leail  we  can  underiland  by  impolTibie,  is,  that 
it  is  extremely  difficult  •,  for  fo  the  word  impof- 
fible  is  fometimcs  ufed  •,  as  when  our  Saviour  fays, 
"  it  is  impoiTible  for  a  rich  man  to  enter  into  the 


LXV. 


from  the  true  religion.  too/ 

**  kinp;dom  of  heaven."     And  ch.  x.  26.  the  apo-  S  E  R  M. 

file  fpeaking  of  the  fame  thing,  fays,  "  if  we  fin  wil- 

''  fully,  after  we  have  received  the  knowledge  of  the 

''  truth,  there  remains  no  morefacrifice  for  fin ;" 

that  is,  they  who  renounce  chriilianity,  fince  they  re^ 

jed  the  only  v/ay  of  expiation,  "  there  remains  no 

*'  more  facrifice  for  their  fins." 

St.  Peter  likewife  expreifeth  himfelf  very  feverely 
concerning  this  fort  of  perfons,  2  epifl.  ii.  20,  21. 
"  For  if  after  they  have  efcaped  the  pollutions  of  the 
*'  world,  through  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  and 
"  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,"  (that  is,  after  they 
have  been  brought  from  heathenifm  to  chriilianity) 
*'  they  are  entangled  therein  again,  and  overcome  ; 
*'  the  latter  end  is  worfe  with  them  than  the  begin- 
**  ning."  He  feems  loth  to  fay  how  fad  the  condi- 
tion of  fuch  perfons  is  -,  but  this  he  tells  them,  that 
it  is  much  worfe  than  when  they  were  heathens  before  ; 
and  he  gives  the  reafon,  "  for  it  had  been  better  for 
*'  them  not  to  have  known  the  way  of  righteoufnefs, 
*'  than  after  they  have  known  it,  to  turn  from  the 
"  holycommandment  delivered  unto  them."  And 
St.  John  calls  this  fin  of  apoflafy,  the  "  fin  unto 
"  -death  •,"  and  though  he  do  not  forbid  Chriftians 
to  pray  for  them  that  are  guilty  of  it ;  yet  he  will  not; 
fay,  that  they  fhould  pray  for  them,  i  epifb.  v.  16. 
*'  \i  any  man  fee  his  brother  fin  a  fin,  which  is  noC 
*'  unto  death,  he  fhall  afk,  and  he  fhall  give  him 
"  life,  for  them  that  lin  not  unto  death ;  there  is  a 
"  fin  unto  death,  I  do  not  fay,  that  hje  fliall  pray  for 
"  it."  Now  that  by  this  "  fin  unto  death,"  the  a- 
poftle  means  apoilafy  from  the  chriftian  religion  to 
idolatry,  is  mod  probable  from  what  follows,  ver.  1 8. 
"  we  know  that  v/hofoever  is  born  of  God  finneth 
**  not,"  (that  is,  this  fm  unto  death)  "  but  he  thac 

S  Y  2  ''  is. 


1 0  o  8  'The  danger  of  apoftafy 

S  E  R  M.  "  is  begotten  of  God  keepeth  himfelf,  and  the  wick- 
^^^^  "  ed  one  toiicheth  him  not,"  (that  is,  he  is  preferv- 
ed  from  idolatry,  unto  which  the  devil  had  feduced 
fo  great  a  part  of  mankind)  "  and  we  know  that  we 
"  are  of  God,  and  the  whole  world,  \v  rw  7rQvYi^S> 
'^  jcciTdi^  is  under  the  dominion  of  that  wicked  one," 
(viz.  the  devil,  whom  the  fcripture  elfewhere  calls 
*'  the  God  of  this  world  -,)  and  we  know  that  the 
"  Son  of  God  is  come,  and  hath  given  us  an  under- 
*'  {landing,  that  we  may  know  him  that  is  true,'* 
(that  is,  hath  brought  us  from  the  worfliip  of  falfe 
Gods,  to  the  knowledge  and  v/orfhip  of  the  true 
God  ;)  and  then  he  concludes,  "  little  children,  keep 
*^  your  felves  from  idols  ;"  v/hich  caution  hath  no 
manner  of  depend ance  upon  what  went  before  ;  un- 
lefs  we  underitand ''  the  fin  unto  death,"  in  this  fenfe  ; 
^nd  it  is  the  more  probable,  that  it  is  fo  to  be  under- 
llood,  becaufe  apofiafy  is  fo  often  in  this  epiille  to 
the  Hebrews,  called  ^'  the  fm,"  by  way  of  eminency, 
as  it  is  here  by  St.  John,  "  whofoever  is  born  of  God 
■'  finneth  not." 

So  that  at  the  vciy  bell,  the  fcripture  fpeaks  doubt- 
fully of  the  pardon  of  this  fin ;  however,  that  the 
punifhment  of  it,  unrepented  of,  fliall  be  very  dread- 
ful. It  feems  to  be  mildly  expreft  here  in  the  text, 
*'  If  any  man  draw  back,  my  foul  fhajl  have  no 
"  pleafure  in  him  :"  But  it  is  the  micre  fevere,  for 
being  expreft  fo  mildly,  according  to  the  intention  of 
the  figure  here  ufed  •,  and  therefore  in  the  next  words, 
this  cxprefTion  of  God's  taking  no  pleafure  in  fuch 
perfons,  is  explained  by  their  utter  ruin  and  perdi- 
tion ;  "  but  we  are  not  of  them  that  drawback  unto 
*'  perdition."  And  in  fcvcral  parts  of  this  epiftley 
t:here  are  very  fevere  parages  to  this  purpofe  -,  ch.  ii. 
•2,  3.  "  If  the  word  fpoken  by  angels  was  ftedfaft, 
^2  *'  and 


from  the  true  religion,  looa 

"  ^d  every  tranfgrefTion  and  difobedience  received  S  E  R  M. 
*'  a  jiift  recompence  of  reward  \  how  fhall  we  ef- 
"  cape,  if  we  negledl  fo  great  falvation  ?"  And  ch. 
X.  26,  27.  "  If  we  fin  wilfully,  after  we  have  re- 
"  ceived  the  knov/iedge  of  the  truth,  there  remain- 
"  eth  no  more  facrifice  for  fin  ;  but  a  certain  fearful 
''  looking  for  of  judgment,  and  fiery  indignation, 
"  which  fhall  devour  the  adverfary.  He  that  de- 
"  fpifed  Mofes  law,  died  without  mercy,  under  two 
"  or  three  witnefTes  *,  of  how  much  forer  punilhment, 
"  fuppofeye,  fhall  he  be  thought  worthy,  that  hath 
*'  trodden  under  foot  the  Son  of  God  !  &c.  For 
"  we  know  him  who  hath  faid,  vengeance  is  mine, 
"  I  will  recompenfe,  faith  the  Lord  :"  and  again, 
^'  the  Lord  fhall  judge  his  people.  It  is  a  fearful 
"  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  hving  God.'* 
What  can  be  more  fevere  and  terrible  than  thefe  ex- 
preffions  ? 

I  will  mention  but  one  text  more,  and  that  is  Rev, 
xxi.  8.  where,  in  the  catalogue  of  great  finners,  thofe 
who  apoftatize  from  religion,  out  of  fear,  do  lead 
the  van  ;  "he  that  overcometh  Ihall  inherit  all 
"  things,"  (which  is  elfewhere  in  this  book  expreft, 
by  continuing  faithful  unto  death.)  "  He  that  o- 
"  vercometh,  fhall  inherit  all  things ;  and  I  will  be 
"  his  God,  and  he  ihall  be  my  fon :  but  the  fearful, 
*'  and  unbelieving,  and  the  abominable,  and  v/hore- 
"  mongers,  and  forcerers,  and  idolaters,  and  all  11- 
"  ars,  fhall  have  their  part  in  the  lake,  which  burn- 
"  eth  with  fire  and  brimftone,  which  is  the  fecond 
"  death."  The  fearful,  and  unbelievers,  and  liars  ; 
that  is,  they  who  out  of  fear  who  relapfe  into  fidehty, 
and  abide  not  in  the  truth,  fhall  be  reckoned  in  the 
fif il  rank  of  offenders,  and  be  puniihed  accordingly. 

And  thys  I  have  done  with  the  four  things  1  pro- 
pounded 


LXV 


1 0 1  o  I'he  danger  of  apojlafy 

SE  RM.  pounded  to  fpeak  to,  from  thefe  words  ;  the  naturd 
of  apoftafy  ;  the  feveral  fteps  and  degrees  of  it ;  the 
heinous  nature  of  this  fin  ;  the  danger  of  it,  and  the 
terrible  punifhment  it  expofeth  men  to. 

And  is  there  any  need  now,  to  exhort  men  "  to 
*'  hold  faft  the  profeflion  of  faith,'*  when  the  dan- 
ger of  drawing  back  is  fo  evident,  and  fo  terrible  ? 
Or  is  there  any  reafon  and  occafion  for  it  ?  Certainly 
there  is  no  great  danger  amongfl  us,  of  mens  apo- 
jlatizing  from  chriilianity,  and  turning  Jews,  or 
Turks,  or  Heathens  \  I  do  not  think  there  is,  but 
yet  for  all  that,  we  are  not  free  from  the  danger  of 
apoftafy  \  there  is  great  danger  not  of  mens  apofta- 
tizing  from  one  religion  to  another,  but  from  religion 
to  infidelity  and  atheifm  ;  and  of  this  worft  kind  of 
apoftafy  of  all  other,  I  wifti  the  age  we  live  in  had 
not  afforded  us  too  many  inftances.  It  is  greatly  to  be 
lamented,  that  among  thofe  who  have  profeffed  chri- 
ftianity,  any  ftiould  be  found,  that  ftiould  make  it 
their  endeavour  to  undermine  the  great  principles  of 
all  religion  -,  the  behef  of  a  God,  and  his  providence ; 
and  of  the  immortality  of  the  fouls  of  men  ;  and  a 
ftate  of-  rewards  and  punilliments  after  this  life  •,  and 
to  bring  the  moft  ferious  matters  in  the  world  into 
contempt,  and  to  turn^them  into  jeft  and  railleiy. 
This  is  not  only  a  renouncing  of  chriftianity,  the  re- 
ligion which  God  hath  revealed,  but  even  of  the  re- 
ligion which  is  born  with  us,  and  the  principles  and 
ROtions  which  God  hath  planted  in  every  man's  mind ; 
this  is  an  impiety  of  the  firft  magnitude,  and  not  to 
be  mentioned  without  grief  and  horror  •,  and  this,  it 
is  to  be  feared,  hath  liad  a  great  hand  in  thofe  great 
calamities  which  our  eyes  have  feen  ;  and  I  pray  God 
it  do  not  draw  down  ftill  more  and  greater  judgments 
upon  this  nation :  but  I  hope  there  are  none  here  that 

need 


LXV. 


from  the  true  religioft,  r  e  1 1 

need  to  be  cautioned  againft  this  horrible  impiety,  ^^^j^' 
and  higheft  degree  of  "  apollafy  from  the  livingGoD :"  , 
that  which  people  are  much  more  in  danger  of,  is 
apollafy  from  the  purity  of  the  chriftian  dodlrine  and 
worfhip,  fo  happily  recovered  by  a  regular  reforma- 
tion, and  eftablillied  amongft  us  by  all  the  autho- 
rity that  laws,  both  ecclefiaftical  and  civil,  can  give 
it ;  and  which,  in  truth,  is  no  other,  than  the  ancient 
and  primitive  chriflianity  ;  I  fay,  a  defedion  from 
this,  to  thofe  grofs  errors  and  fuperilitions,  which  the 
reformation  had  pared  off,  and  freed  us  from.  I  do 
not  fay,  that  this  is  a  total  apollafy  from  chriflianity  5 
but  it  is  a  partial  apollafy  and  defection,  and  a  very 
dangerous  one ;  and  that  thofe,  who,  "  after  they  have 
"  received  the  knowledge  of  the  truth,"  fall  offfrorri 
it  into  thofe  errors  and  corruptions,  are  highly  guilty 
before  God,  and  their  condition  certainly  worfe,  and 
more  dangerous,  than  of  thofe  who  are  brought  up 
in  thofe  errors  and  fuperflitions,  and  never  knew  bet- 
ter ;  for  there  are  terrible  threatnings  in  fcripture  a- 
gainfl  thofe  who  fall  av/ay  from  the  truth,  which  they 
once  embraced,  and  v/ere  convinced  of ;  "  if  we  fin 
*"  wilfully,  after  we  have  received  the  knowledge  of 
"  the  truth,  &c."  and,  "  if  any  man  draw  back,  my 
"  foul  fhall  have  no  pleafure  in  him." 

God  confiders  every  man's  advantages  and  oppor- 
tunities of  knowledge,  and  their  difadvantages  like- 
wife  ;  and  makes  all  reafonable  allowances  for  them  ; 
and  for  men  to  continue  in  the  errors  they  have 
been  always  brought  up  in  ;  or,  v/hich  comes  much 
to  one,  in  errors  which  they  v/ere  led  into  by  princi-r 
pies  early  infufed  into  them,  before  they  were  in  any 
meafure  competent  judges  of  thofe  matters  ;  I  fay, 
for  fuch  perfons  to  continue  in  thofe  errors,  and  tQ 
oppofe  t^ad  rejed  the  contrary  truths,  againll  which, 

by 


I  o  1 2  ^he  danger  of  apojlafy 

SER  M.  by  their  education,  they  have  received  fo  flrong  and 
■^  violent  a  prejudice,  this  may  be  in  a  great  degree  ex- 

cufable,  and  find  pardon  with  God,  upon  a  general 
repentance  for  all  fins,  both  known  and  unknown, 
and  cannot  be  reafonably  charged  with  the  guilt  of 
this  great  fin  of  apollafy :  but  not  to  abide  in  the 
truth,  after  we  have  entertained  and  profefled  it,  hav- 
ing fufficient  means  and  advantages  of  knowing  it, 
hath  no  excufe. 

I  would  not  be  rafh  in  condemning  particular  pef- 
fons  of  any  fociety  or  communion  of  Chriflians,  pro- 
vided they  be  fincerely  devout,  and  juft,  and  fober, 
to  the  beft  of  their  knowledge  -,  I  had  much  rather 
leave  them  to  God,  whofe  mercies  are  great,  than  to 
pafs  an  uncharitable  cenfure  upon  them,  as  to  their 
eternal  ilate  and  condition  :  but  the  cafe  is  far  other- 
wife,  where  the  opportunities  of  knowledge  are  af- 
forded to  men,  and  "  men  love  darknefs  rather  than 
"  light ;"  for  they  who  have  the  means  and  advan- 
tages of  "  knowing  their  mafter's  will,"  are  anfwer- 
able  to  God  as  if  they  had  known  it ;  becaufe  if  they 
had  not  been  grody  negligent,  and  wanting  to  them- 
felves,  they  might  have  known  it. 

And  this,  I  fear,  is  the  cafe  of  the  generality  of  thofe 
who  have  been  bred  up  to  years  of  confideration 
and  choice  in  the  reformed  religion,  and  forfake  it ; 
becaufe  they  do  it  v/ithout  fufficient  reafon,  and  there 
are  invincible  objedions  againib  it  :  they  do  it  without 
fufficient  reafon  ;  becaufe  every  one  amongfl  us 
knows,  or  may  know  upon  very  little  enquiry,  that 
we  hold  all  the  articles  of  the  faith,  which  are  con- 
tained in  the  ancient  creeds  of  the  chriftian  church, 
and  into  which  all  Chriflians  are  baptized  •,  that  we 
inculcate  upon  men  the  neceffity  of  a  good  life,  and 
of  fincere  repentance,  and  perfcd  contrition  for  our 

fins^ 


from  the  true  religion »  i  ^  ^  3 

fins,  fuch  as  is  followed  with  real  reformation  and  S  E  R  M. 
amendment  of  our  li\ics5   and  that  without  this  no 
man  can  be  faved  by  any  device  whatfoever. 

Now  what  reafon  can  any  man  have  to  queftion^ 
whether  he  may  be  faved  in  that  faith  which  faved  the 
firfl  Chriftians,  and  by  believing  the  twelve  articles 
of  the  apoflles  creed,  though  he  cannot  fwallow  the 
twelve  articles  which  are  added  to  it  in  the  creed  of 
pope  Pius  IV.  every  one  of  which,  befides  many  and 
great  corruptions  and  fuperflitions  in  worfhip,  are  fo 
many  and  invincible  objedions  againft  the  commu- 
nion of  the  Roman  church,  as  I  could  particularly 
ihew,  if  it  had  not  been  already  done,  in  fo  many 
learned  treatifes  upon  this  argument  ?  What  is  there 
then,  that  fhould  move  any  reafonable  man  to  forfake 
the  communion  of  our  church,  and  to  quit  the  re- 
formed religion  ? 

There  are  three  things  chiefly  with  which  they  en- 
deavour to  amufe  and  atfright  weaker  minds. 

1 .  A  great  noife  of  infallibility,  which  they  tell  us 
is  fo  excellent  a  means  to  determine  and  put  an  end 
to  all  differences.  To  which  I  fhall  at  prefent  only 
objed;  this  prejudice  •,  that  there  are  not  wider  and 
hotter  differences  among  us,  about  any  thing  what^ 
foever,  than  are  amongft  them,  about  this  admira- 
ble means  of  ending  all  differences  \  as,  where  this 
infallibihty  is  feated,  that  men  may  know  how  to 
have  recourfe  to  it,  for  the  ending  of  differences. 

2.  They  endeavour  to  fright  men  with  the  danger 
of  fchifm.  But  every  man  knows,  that  the  guilt  of 
fchifm  lyes  at  their  door,  who  impofe  Unful  articles 
of  communion  •,  and  not  Upon  them,  who  for  fear  of 
finning  againft  God,  cannot  fubmit  to  thofc  articles ; 
which  we  have  done,  and  ftill  are  ready  to  make  good, 

Vol.  V.  '  8  Z  to 


I  o  1 4  ^f^^  danger  of  apoftafy^  &c. 

S  E  R  M.  to  be  the  cafe  betwixt  us  and  the  church  of  Rome. 
L^v-    But, 

3.  The  terrible  engine  of  all  is,  their  pofitive  and 
confident  damning  of  all  that  live  and  die  out  of  the 
communion  of  their  church.  This  I  have  fully  fpo- 
ken  to  upon  another  occafion,  and  therefore  fhall  on- 
ly fay  at  prefent,  that  every  man  ought  to  have  bet- 
ter thoughts  of  God,  than  to  believe,  that  he,  "  who 
"  delighteth  not  in  the  death  of  finners,'*  and 
''  would  have  all  men  to  be  faved,  and  come  to  the 
*'  knowledge  of  the  truth,"  will  confirm  the  fen- 
tence  of  fuch  uncharitable  men,  as  take  upon  them 
to  condemn  men  for  thofe  things,  for  which  our  Sa- 
viour in  his  gofpel  condemns  no  man.  And  of  all 
things  in  the  world,  one  would  think,  that  the  un- 
charitablenefs  of  any  church  fhould  be  an  argument 
to  no  man,  to  run  into  it's  communion. 

I  fhall  conclude  with  the  apoftle's  exhortation,  ver. 
23.  of  this  chapter,  "  let  us  hold  fail  the  profeflion 
*'  of  our  faith  without  wavering  ;  and  provoke  one 
''  another  to  charity  and  good  works  •,  and  fo  much 
*'  the  more,  becaufe  the  day  approacheth,  in  which 
*'  God  will  judge  the  faith  and  lives  of  men,  by  Je- 
sus Christ,  according  to  his  gofpel. 


cc 


SER- 


1015 

SERMON     LXVI. 

Of  felf-denial  and  fuiFering  for  Christ's 
fake. 


M  A  T  T  H.  XVI.  24. 

'then  faid  Jesus  unto  his  dijciples^  if  any  man  will  come 
after  me^  let  him  deny  himfelf^  and  take  up  his  crofs^ 
and  follow  me. 


1 


"^HEN  faid  Jesus  to  his  difciples,"  that  is,  §  e  R  M. 
upon  occafion  of  his  former  difcourfe  with    LXVI. 
them,  wherein  he  had  acquainted  them  with  his  ap-  xj^^firft 
preaching  paffion,  that  he  muft  fhortly  go  up  to  Je-  fermon  on 
rufalem,  and  there  fuffer  many  things  of  the  elders  ^^^^  ^'^''^'* 
and  chief  priefts  and  fcribes,  and  at  laft  be  put  to 
death  by  them  ;  "  then  faid  Jesus  unto  his  difciples, 
"  if  any  man  will  come  after  me,  let  him  deny  him- 
*'  felf,  and  take  up  his  crofs,  and  follow  me." 

"  If  any  man  v/iil  come  after  me,  or  follow  me  j'* 
that  is,  if  any  man  v/ill  be  my  difciple,  and  undertake 
the  profelTion  of  my  religion  ;  if  aay  man  chufe  and 
refolve  to  be  a  Chriftian ;  he  muft  be  fo  upon  thefe 
terms,  he  muft  "  deny  himfelf,  and  take  up  his  crofs 
"  and  follow  me  i"  he  muft  follow  me  in  felf-denial 
and  fuffering. 

In  the  handling  of  thefe  words,  I  ftiall  do  thefe 
four  things. 

I.  I  fhall  confider  the  way  and  method  which  our 
Saviour  ufeth  in  making  profelytes,  and  gaining 
men  over  to  his  religion.     He  offers  no  manner  of 

8  Z  2  force 


ioi6  Of  felf'denial  and 

E  R  M.  force  and  violence  to  compel  them  to  the  profefTion 

T  v\7  r  ...  .  .  . 

of  his  religion  \  but  fairly  offers  it  to  their  confide- 
ration  and  choice,  and  tells  them  plainly  upon  what 
terms  they  mull  be  his  difciples  •,  and  if  they  be  con- 
tented and  refolved  to  fubmit  to  thefe  terms,  well ; 
if  not,  it  is  in  vain  to  follow  him  any  longer  •,  for 
"  they  cannot  be  his  difciples." 

II.  I  fhall  endeavour  to  explain  this  duty  of  felf- 
denial,  exprefied  in  thefe  words,  "  let  him  deny  him- 
"  k%  and  take  up  his  crofs  and  follow  me." 

III.  I  fhall  confiderthe  flricl  and  indifpenfable  ob- 
ligation of  it,  whenever  we  are  called  to  it,  "  with- 
"  out  this  we  cannot  be  Christ's  difciples  •,  if  any 
"  man  will  come  after  me,"  or  "  be  my  difciple, 
^'  let  him  deny  himfclf " 

IV.  I  fhall  endeavour  to  vindicate  the  reafonable- 
nefs  of  this  precept,  of  felf-denial  and  fuffering  for 
Christ,  which  at  firft  appearance  may  feem  to  be 
fo  very  harfli  and  difficult  -,  and  I  fhall  go  over  thefe 
■particulars  as  briefly  as  I  can. 

I.  We  will  confider  the  way  and  method  which 
our  Saviour  here  ufeth  in  making  profelytes,  and 
gaining  mxn  over  to  his  religion.  He  offers  no  man- 
ner of  force  and  violence  to  compel  men  to  the  pro- 
fefTion of  his  religion  •,  but  fairly  propofeth  it  to  their 
confideration  and  choice,  telling  them  plainly  upon 
what  terms  they  muft  be  his  difciples ;  if  they  like 
them,  and  are  content,  and  refolved  to  fubmit  to 
them,  well ;  he  is  willing  to  receive  them,  and  own 
them  for  his  difciples  -,  if  not,  it  is  in  vain  to  follow 
him  any  longer  :  for  "  they  cannot  be  his  difciples." 
As  on  the  one  hand,  he  offers  them  no  worldly  pre- 
ferment and  advantage,  to  entice  them  into  his  reli- 
gion, and  to  tempt  them  outwardly  to  profefs  what 
they  do  not  inwardly  believe  •,  fo  on  the  other  hand, 

he 


ftiffering  for  Cyi^is^T' s  fake,  1017 

he  does  not  haul  and  drag;  them  by  force,  and  awe  S  E  R  M. 

LXVI 

them  by  the  terrors  of  torture  and  death  to  fign  the 
chriflian  faith,  though  mofl  undoubtedly  true,  and 
to  confefs  with  their  mouths,  and  fubfcribe  with  their 
hands,  what  they  do  not  beUeve  in  their  hearts.  He 
did  not  obtrude  his  facraments  upon  them,  and  plunge 
them  into  the  water  to  baptize  them,  whether  they 
would  or  no,  and  thruft  the  facrament  of  bread  into 
their  mouths .;  as  if  men  might  be  worthy  receivers 
of  that  bleffed  facrament^  whether  they  receive  it 
willingly  or  no. 

Our  bleffed  Saviour,  the  author  and  founder  of 
our  religion,  made  ufe  of  none  of  thefe  ways  of  vio- 
lence, fo  contrary  to  the  nature  of  man,  and  of  all 
^  religion,  and  efpecially  of  chriftianity,  and  fitted  on- 
ly to  make  men  hypocrites,    but  not  converts  ;  he 
only  fays,  "  if  any  man  will  be  my  difciple  i"  he 
ufeth  no  arguments,  but  fuch  as  are  fpiritual,  an(i 
proper  to  work  upon  the  minds  and  confciences  of 
men.  For  as  his  "  kingdom  was  not  of  this  world,'* 
fo  neither  are  the  motives  and  arguments  to  induce 
men  to  be  his  fubjedts,  taken  from  this  world  ;  but 
from  the  endlefs  rewards  and  punifhments  of  another. 
"  The  weapons"  which  he  made  ufe  of,  to  fubdue  men 
to  the  obedience  of  faith,  were  not  "  carnal ;"  and 
yet  they  were  ''  mighty  through  God,"  to  conquer 
the  obftinacy  and  infidelity  of  men.     This  great  and 
infallible  teacher,  who  certainly  came  from  God,  all 
that  he  does,  is  topropofe  his  reHgion  to  men,  with 
fuch  evidence  and  fuch  arguments  as  are  proper  to 
convince  men  of  the  truth  and  goodnefs  of  it,  and  to 
perfuade  men  to  embrace  it ;  and  he  acquaints  them 
likewife  with  all  the  worldly  difadvantages  of  it,  and 
the  hazards  and  fufferings  that  would  attend  it ;  and 
pow,  if  upon  full  confideration,  they  will  make  his 

religion 


LXVI. 


1018  Of  f elf -denial  and 

SE  R  M.  religion  their  free  choice,  and  become  his  difciples, 
he  is  willing  to  receive  them  \  if  they  will  not,  he 
underftands  the  nature  of  religion  better,  than  to  go 
about  to  force  it  upon  men,  whether  they  will  or  no. 
II.  I  fhall  endeavour  to  explain  this  duty  or  pre- 
cept of  felf-denial,  exprefled  in  thefe  words,  "  let  him 
''  deny  himfelf,  and  take  up  his  crofs."  Thefe  are 
difficult  terms,  for  a  man  "  to  deny  himfelf,  and 
*'  take  up  his  own  crofs,'*  that  is,  willingly  to  fub- 
mit  to  all  thofe  fufterings  which  the  malice  of  men 
may  inPiid:  for  the  fake  of  Christ  and  his  rehgion. 
For  this  exprefTion  of  "  taking  up  one's  crofs,"  is  a 
plain  allufion  to  the  Roman  cuflom,  which  was  this, 
that  he  that  was  condemned  to  be  crucified,  was  to 
take  his  crofs  upon  his  flioulders,  and  to  carry  it  to 
the  place  of  execution  ;  this  the  Jews  made  our  Sa- 
viour to  do,  as  we  read,  John  xix.  17.  till  that 
being  ready  to  faint  under  it,  and  left  he  ihouid  die 
av/ay  before  he  was  nailed  to  the  crofs,  diey  compel- 
led Simon  of  Cyrene  to  carry  it  for  him,  as  is  de- 
clar'd  by  the  other  evangelifts  :  and  yet  he  tells  them, 
*'  they  that  will  be  his  difciples  muft  follow  him, 
"  bearing  their  own  crofs,"  that  is,  being  ready  (if 
God  call  them  to  it)  to  fubmit  to  the  like  futferings 
for  him  and  his  truth,  which  he  was  fhordy  to  un- 
dergo for  the  truth,  and  for  their  fakes. 

But  though  thefe  terms  feem  very  hard,  yet  they 
are  not  unreafonable,  as  I  fhall  fhew  in  the  conclufion 
of  this  difcourfe.  Some  indeed  liave  made  them  fo 
by  extending  this  felf-denial  too  far,  attending  more 
to  the  latitude  of  the  words,  than  to  the  meaning  and 
fcopeofour  Saviour's  difcourfe:  for  there  is  no 
doubt,  but  that  there  are  a  great  many  things,  which 
may  properly  enough  be  called  felf-denial,  which  yet 
our  Saviour  never  intended  to  oblige  Chriftians  to. 

It 


fnffering  for  Christ* s  fake.  1019 

It  is  no  doubt,  sreat  felf-denial,  for  a  man,  without  S  E  R  M. 
any  necefTity,  to  deny  himfelf  the  necefifary  fupports 
of  life ;  for  a  man  to  ftarve  and  make  away  himfelf: 
but  no  man  certainly  ever  imagined,  that  our  Savi- 
our ever  intended  by  this  precept  to  enjoin  this  kind 
of  felf-denial. 

It  is  plain  then,  that  there  is  no  reafon  nor  necef- 
fity  to  extend  this  precept  of  our  Saviour,  concern- 
ing felf-denial,  to  every  thing  that  may  properly 
enough  be  called  by  that  name  -,  and  therefore  this 
precept  muil  be  limited  by  the  plain  fcope  and  in- 
tendment of  our  Saviour's  difcourfe  ;  and  no  man 
can  argue  thus  ;  fuch  a  thing  is  felf-denial,  therefore 
our  Saviour  requires  it  of  his  difciples  :  for  our 
Saviour  doth  not  here  require  all  kinds  of  felf-de- 
nial ;  but  limits  it  by  his  difcourfe  to  one  certain 
kind,  beyond  which  felf-denial  is  no  duty  by  virtue  of 
this  text^  and  therefore  for  our  clearer  underftand- 
ing  of  this  precept  of  felf-denial,  I  ihall  do  thefe  two 
things : 

Firft,  remove  fome  forts  of  felf-denial,  which  are 
inftanced  in  by  fome,  as  intended  in  this  precept. 

Secondly,  I  ihall  fhew  what  kind  of  felf-denial  that 
is,  which  our  Saviour  here  intends. 

Firft,  there  are  feveral  things  brought  under  this 
precept  of  felf-denial,  which  were  never  intended  by 
our  Saviour.  I  fhall  inftance  in  two  or  three 
things,  which  are  moll:  frequently  infifted  upon,  and 
fome  of  them  by  very  devout  and  well -meaning 
men ;  as,  that  in  matters  of  faith,  we  fliould  deny 
and  renounce  our  own  fenfes  and  our  reafon ;  nay, 
that  we  ftiould  be  content  to  renounce  our  own  eter- 
nal happinefs,  and  be  willing  to  be  damned  for  the 
glory  of  God,  and  the  good  of  our  brethren.  But 
all  thefe  are  fo  apparently  and  grofly  unreafonable, 

that 


I  o  2  o  Of  f elf -denial  and 

S  E  R  M.  that  it  is  a  wonder  that  any  one  fhould  ever  take 
I XVI  • 
'  J  them  for  mftances  of  that  felf-denial  which  our  Sa- 
viour requires  ;  efpecially  confidering,  that  in  ail 
his  difcourfe  of  felf-denial,  he  does  not  fo  much  as 
glance  at  any  of  thefe  inftances,  or  any  thing  like  to 
them. 

I .  Some  comprehend  under  felf-denial^  the  deny- 
ing and  renouncing  our  own  fenfes  in  matters  of 
faith.  And  if  this  could  be  made  out  to  be  intend- 
ed by  our  Saviour  in  this  precept,  we  needed  not 
difpute  any  of  the  other  inftances.  For  he  that  re- 
nounceth  the  certainty  of  fenfe,  fo  as  not  to  beUeve 
what  he  fees,  may  after  this  renounce  and  deny  any 
thing.  For  the  evidence  of  fenfe  is  more  clear  and 
unqueftionable  than  that  of  faith,  as  the  fcripture  fre- 
quently intimates  •,  as  Johnxx.  29.  where  our  Savi- 
our reproves  Thomas,  for  refufmg  to  believe  his 
refurre6lion,  upon  any  lefs  evidence  than  that ,of  fenfe  ; 
*'  Becaufe  thou  haft  feen,  thou  haft  believed  :  bleffcd 
''  are  they  which  have  not  feen,  and  yet  have  believ- 
*'  edi"  which  plainly  fuppofeth  the  evidence  of 
fenfe  to  be  the  higheft  and  cleareft  degree  of  evi-' 
dence.  So  likewife  that  of  St.  Paul,  2  Cor.  v.  7. 
"  We  walk  by  faith,  and  not  by  fight  •,"  where  the 
evidence  of  faith,  as  that  which  is  more  imperfed  and 
obfcure,  is  oppofed  to  that  of  fight,  as  more  clear 
and  certain.  So  that  to  believe  any  article  of  faith, 
in  contradi6lion  to  the  clear  evidence  of  fenfe,  is  con- 
trary to  the  very  nature  of  affent,  which  always  yields 
to  the  greateft  and  cleareft  evidence. 

Befides  that  our  belief  of  religion  is  at  laft  refolv- 
ed  into  the  certainty  of  fenfe  :  fo  that  by  renouncing 
that,  we  deftroy  and  undermine  the  very  foundation 
of  our  faith.  One  of  the  plaineft  and  principal  proofs 
of  the  being  of  God  (which  is  the  firft  and  funda- 
3  mental 


fuffering  for  Ch  R  i  s  T  '^  fake.  i  g  2  r 

ni&ntal  article  of  all  religion)  relies  iipon  the  certain-  ^^  R  ^• 
ty  of  fenfe^  namely,  the  frame  of  this  vifible  v/orld, 
by  the  contemplation  whereof  we  are  led  to  the  ac- 
knowledgment of  the  invifible  author  of  it.  So  St. 
Paul  tells  us,  Rom.  i.  20.  that  "  the  invifible  things 
"  of  God  from  the  creation  of  the  world,  are  clearly 
*'  feen,  being  underflood  by  the  things  which  are 
''  made,  even  his  eternal  power  and  godhead." 

And  the  great  external  evidence  of  the  chriflian 
religion,  I  mean  miracles,  is  at  laft  refolved  into  the 
certainty  of  fenfe,  without  which  we  can  have  no  af- 
furance  that  any  miracle  was  wrought  for  the  con- 
firmation of  it. 

And  the  knowledge  likewife  of  the  chriflian  faith, 
is  conveyed  to  us  by  our  fenfes  ;  the  evidence  where- 
of if  it  be  uncertain,  takes  away  all  certainty  of  faith. 
*'  How  fhallthey  believe,"  faith  St.  Paul,  Rom.  x. 
14.  "  how  fhall  they  believe  in  him,  of  whom  they 
"  have  not  heard?"  And  ver.  17.  "  So  then  faith 
*^  Cometh  by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  word  of 
*'  God."  So  that  to  deny  and  renounce  our  fenfess 
in  matters  of  faith,  is  to  take  away  the  main  pillar 
and  foundation  of  it. 

2.  Others,  alm^oft  with  equal  abfurdity,  would; 
comprehend  under  our  Saviour's  precept  of  felf- 
denial^  the  denying  and  renouncing  of  our  reafon  in 
matters  of  faith.  And  this  is  felf-denial  with  a  wit- 
nefs,  for  a  man  to  deny  his  own  reaibn  ;  for  it  is  to 
deny  himfelf  to  be  a  man.  This  furely  is  a  very 
great  miftake,  and  though  the  ground  of  it  may  be 
innocent  ^  yet  the  confequence  of  it,  and  the  dif- 
courfes  upon  it,  are  very  abfurd. 

The  ground  of  the  miftake  is  this.  Men  think 
they  deny  their  own  reafon,  when  they  alTent  to  the 
revelation  of  Goo  in  luch  things,  as  their  ov/n  rea- 
fon could  neither  have  difcovered,  nor  is  able  to  give 

Vol,  y,  c;  A  the 


10  2  2  Of f elf -denial  and 

S  E  R  M.  xh^  reafon  of :  whereas  in  this  cafe,  a  man  is  fo  far 
from  denying  his  own  reafon,  that  he  does  that 
which  is  moil  agreeable  to  it.  For  what  more  rea- 
fonable  than  to  beheve  whatever  we  are  fufficiently 
affiir'd  is  reveal' d  to  us  by  God,  who  can  neither  be 
deceived  himfelf,  nor  deceive  us  ? 

But  though  the  ground  of  this  miflake  may  be  in- 
nocent, yet  the  confequences  of  it  are  moft  abfurd 
and  dangerous.  For  if  we  are  to  renounce  our  rea- 
fon in  matters  of  faith,  then  are  we  bound  to  believe 
without  reafon,  which  no  man  can  do  ;  or  if  he 
could,  then  faith  w^ould  be  unreafonable,  and  infide- 
lity reafonable.  So  that  this  inftance  likewife  of  felf- 
denial,  to  renounce  and  deny  our  own  reafon,  as  it  is 
no  where  expreft,  fo  it  cannot  reafonably  be  thought 
to  be  intended  by  our  Saviour  in  this  precept. 

3.  Nor  doth  this  precept  of  felf-denial  require 
men  to  be  content  to  renounce  their  own  eternal 
happinefs,  and  to  be  willing  to  be  damned  for  the 
glory  of  God,  and  the  good  of  their  brethren.  If 
this  were  the  meaning  of  this  precept,  we  might  juft- 
ly  fay,  as  the  difciples  did  to  our  Saviour,  in  ano- 
ther cafe,  "  this  is  a  hard  faying,  and  who  can  bear 
*'  it?"  The  very  thought  of  this  is  enough  to  make 
human  nature  to  tremble  at  it's  very  foundation.  For 
the  deepeft  principle  that  God  hath  planted  in  our 
nature  is  "  the  defire  of  our  own  prefervation  and 
*'  happinefs,"  and  into  this  the  force  of  all  laws,  and 
the  reafon  of  all  our  duty  is  at  laft  refolved. 

From  whence  it  plainly  follows,  that  it  can  be  no 
man's  duty  in  any  cafe  to  renounce  'his  own  happi- 
nefs, and  to  be  content  to  be  for  ever  miferable ;  be- 
caufc  if  once  this  be  made  a  duty,  there  will  be  no 
argument  left,  to  perfuade  any  man  to  it.  For  the 
moft  powerful  arguments,  that  God  ever  ufed,  to 

perfuade 


LXVI. 


fufferlngfor  Ch  R I  s  T  'i"  fake,  1023 

perfuade  men  to  any  thing,  are  the  promife  of  eter-  S  E  R  M. 
nal  happinefs,  and  the  terror  of  everlafling  torments : 
but  if  this  were  a  man's  duty,  to  be  content  to  be  mi- 
ferable  for  ever,  neither  of  thefe  arguments  would  be 
of  force  fufficient  to  perfuade  a  man  to  it. 

The  firft  of  thefe,  namely,  the  promife  of  eternal 
happinefs,  could  fignify  nothing  to  him  that  is  to  be 
eternally  miferable ;  becaufe  if  he  be  to  be  fo,  it  is 
impoffible  that  he  fhould  ever  have  the  benefit  of  that 
promife  :  and  the  threatning  of  eternal  mifery,  could 
be  no  argument  in  this  cafe  ;  becaufe  the  duty  is  juft 
as  difficult,  as  the  argument  is  powerful,  and  no  man 
can  be  moved  to  fubmit  to  any  thing  that  is  grievous 
and  terrible,  but  by  fomething  that  is  more  terrible  ; 
for  if  it  be  not,  it  is  the  fame  thing,  whether  he  fub- 
mit to  it  or  not  -,  and  then  no  man  can  be  content, 
to  be  eternally  miferable,  only  for  the  fear  of  being 
fo  J  for  this  would  be  for  a  man  to  run  himfelf  upon 
that  very  inconvenience  which  he  is  fo  much  afraid 
of;  and  'tis  madnefs  for  a  man  to  die  for  fear  of 
death,  ^is  novus  hie  furor  eft^  ne  moriare^  mori  ? 

By  this  it  plainly  appears,  how  unreafonable  it  is 
to  imagine,  that  by  this  precept  of  felf-denial,  our 
Saviour  fhould  require  men  to  renounce  everlaft- 
ing  happinefs,  and  to  be  content  to  be  miferable  for 
ever,  upon  any  account  whatfoever ;  becaufe  this  were 
to  fuppofe,  that  God  hath  impofed  that  upon  us  as  a 
duty,  to  oblige  us  v/hereto  there  can  be  no  argument, 
offer' d  that  can  be  powerful  enough. 

As  for  the  gloiy  of  God,  which  is  pretended  to 
be  the  reafon,  it  is  an  impoffible  fuppofition  ;  becaule 
it  cannot  be  for  the  glory  of  God,  to  make  a  creature 
for  ever  miferable,  that  ffiall  not  by  his  wilful  obfti- 
nacy  and  impenitence  defer ve  to  be  fo.  But  this  is 
only  caft  in  to  add  weight. 

9  A  2  T}ie 


Of  f elf -denial  and 

Tlic  other  reafon  of  the  good  and  flilvation  of  our 
brethren,  is  the  onh/  confideration  for  which  there  is 
any  manner  of  colour  from  fcripture  ;  and  two  in- 
Hances  are  alledged  to  this  purpofe,  of  two  very  ex- 
cellent perfons,  that  feem  to  have  defired  this,  and  to 
have  fubmitted  to  it  •,  and  therefore  it  is  not  fo  un- 
reafonable  as  wx  would  make  it,  that  our  Saviour 
fhouid  enjoin  it  as  a  duty.  The  inflances  alledged 
are  thefe.  Mofes  defired  of  God  that  he  might  be 
blotted  out  of  the  book  of  life,  rather  than  the  people 
of  Ifrael,  whom  he  had  conduced  and  governed  fo 
long,  fhouid  be  deflrroyed  :  and  in  the  new  teflament 
'^i,  Paul  tells  us,  that  "  he  could  wifh  that  himfelf 
*'  were  accurfed  from  Christ,  for  his  brethren  i" 
fo  earneil  a  defire  had  he  of  their  falvation. 

But  neither  of  thefe  inflances  are  of  force  fufficient 
to  overthrow  the  reafons  of  my  former  difcourfe  ; 
for  the  defire  of  Mofes  amounts  only  to  a  fiibmif- 
fion  to  a  temporal  death,  that  his  nation  might  be 
faved  from  a  temporal  ruin.  For  the  expreflion  of 
''  blotting  out  of  the  book  of  life,"  is  of  the  fame 
importance  with  thofe  phrafcs  fo  frequently  ufed  in 
the  old  teflament,  of  "  blotting  out  from  the  face  of 
"  the  earth,"  and  ^' blotting  out  one's  name  from 
"  under  heaven,"  which  fignify  no  more  th^n  tem- 
poral death  and  deftrudion  \  and  then  Mofes' swifli 
was  reafonable  and  generous,  and  fignifies  no  more, 
but  that  he  v/as  willing,  if  God  pleafed,  to  die  to 
fave  the  nation. 

As  for  ^t,  Paul's  wifli,  of  '^  being  accurfed  from 
^'  Christ,"  it  is  plainly  an  hyperbolical  exprefiion 
of  his  great  afredion  to  his  country-men  the  Jews, 
and  his  zeal  for  their  falvation,  which  was  fo  great, 
that  if  it  had  been  a  thing  reafonable  and  luvvlul,  he 
could  have  wifh'd  the  grcateil  evil  to  him.felf  for  their 

2  fakes  J 


fiiffering  for  Chvli^t's  fake.  1025 

fakes  ;  and  therefore  it  is  obferviible,  that  it  is  not  a  S  ERM. 

LXVT 

pofitive  and  abfolute  wifh,  but  exprefs*d  in  the  ufual 
form  of  ufhering  in  an  hyperbole  •,  I  could  wifh,  jufl 
as  we  are  wont  to  fay,  when  we  would  exprefs  a  thing' 
to  the  height,  which  is  not  fit,  nor  intended  to  be 
done  by  us,  I  could  wifh  fo  or  fo ;  I  could  even  af- 
ford to  do  this  or  that  •,  which  kind  of  fpeeches  no  man 
takes  for  a  flrid  and  precife  declaration  of  Our  minds, 
but  for  a  figurative  exprefTion  of  a  great  paflion. 

And  thus  I  have  done  with  the  firfh  thing  I  propofed 
for  the  explication  of  this  precept,  or  duty  of  felf-de- 
iiial,  which  was  to  remove  fome  forts  of  felf-denial, 
v/hich  by  fome  are  frequently  inilanced  in,  as  intended 
by  our  Saviour  in  this  precept,  I  proceed  now  to  the 

Second  thing  I  propofed,  which  is  to  declare  pofi- 
tively,  what  that  fclf-denial  is,  which  our  Saviour 
here  intends  •,  and  'tis  plainly  this,  and  nothing  but 
this  j  that  we  fhould  be  willing  to  part  with  all 
earthly  comforts  and  conveniencies,  to  quit  all  our 
temporal  interefts  and  enjoyments,  and  even  life  it- 
felf,  for  the  fake  of  Christ  and  his  religion-,  this 
cur  Saviour  means,  by  "  denying  our  felves  :'* 
and  then  (which  is  much  the  fame  v/ith  the  otlier) 
that  v/e  fhould  be  vv^illing  to  bear  any  temporal  incon- 
venience and  fuffering  upon  the  fame  account ;  this 
is  "  to  take  up  our  crofs  and  follow  him." 

And  that  this  is  the  full  m.eaning  of  thefe  two 
phrafes,  of  "  denying  our  felves,"  and  ''  taking  up 
"  our  crofs,"  will  clearly  appear,  by  confidering  the 
particular  inflances,  v/hich  our  Saviour  gives  of 
this  feif-denial,  v/hcnevcr  he  hath  cccafion  to  fpeak  of 
it,  by  which  you  will  plainly  fee,  that  thefe  expref- 
fions  amount  to  no  more  than  I  have  faid.  E- 
ven  here  in  the  text,  after  our  Saviour  had  told 
his  difciples,  that  "  he  that  v/culd  come  after  him, 

''  muft 


I  o  2  6  Of  f elf 'denial  and 

S  E  R  M.  «  muH;  deny  himfelf,  and  take  up  his  crofs  ;"  it  fol- 
^ _\  lows  immediately,  "  for  whofoever  will  fave  his  life, 
"  fhall  lofe  it ;  and  whofoever  will  lofe  his  life  for 
"  my  fake,  fhall  find  it."  You  fee  here,  that  he 
inflanceth  in  parting  with  our  lives  for  him,  as  the 
higheft  piece  of  felf-denial,  which  he  requires.  And 
he  himfelf  elfewhere  tells  us,  "  that  greater  love 
'*  than  this  hath  no  man,  that  a  m^an  lay  down  his 
*'  hfe  for  his  friend."  Elfewhere  he  inftancfeth  in 
quitting  our  neareft  relations  for  his  fake,  Luke  xiv. 
26,  27.  "  If  any  man  come  to  me,  and  hate  not  his 
*'  father,  and  mother,  and  wife,  and  children,  and 
*'  brethren,  and  fifters,  yea  and  his  own  life  alfo,  he 
*'  cannot  be  my  difciple  \  and  whofoever  doth  not 
*^  bear  his  crofs  and  come  after  me,  he  cannot  be 
*'  my  difciple." 

Which  expreffions,  of  "  hating  father  and  mo- 
*'  ther,  and  other  relations,  and  even  life  itfelf,"  are 
not  to  be  underilood  rigoroufly,  and  in  an  abfolute 
ienfe,  but  comparatively  ;  for  it  is  an  Hebrew  man- 
ner of  fpeech,  to  exprefs  that  abfolutely,  which  is 
meant  only  comparatively ;  and  fo  our  Saviour  ex- 
plains himfelf  in  a  parallel  text  to  this,  Matt.  x.  o^^j^ 
38.  "  He  tliat  lovetli  father  and  mother  more  than 
*'  me,  is  not  worthy  of  me  ;  he  that  loveth  fon  or 
*'  daughter  more  than  me,  is  not  worthy  of  me  •, 
*'  and  he  that  talceth  not  his  crofs,  and  followeth 
*'  after  me,  is  not  worthy  of  me."  In  another  place, 
our  Saviour  inflanceth  in  quitting  our  eftates  for 
his  fake.  Matt.  xix.  29,  "  Every  one  that  fhall  for- 
*'  fake  houfes,  or  brethren,  or  fifters,  or  father,  or 
"  mother,  or  wife,  or  children,  or  lands,  for  my 
**•  names  fake  j"  by  all  which  it  appears  that  this  felf- 
denial  which  our  Saviour  here  requires  of  his  dif- 
<-iples,  is  to  be  extended  no  farther,  than  to  a  readi- 

ntfs" 


ftiffertng  fo7'  Christ's  fake,  1027 

nefs  and  willingnefs,  whenever  God  fhall  call  us  to  S  E  R  M. 
it,  to  quit  all  our  temporal  interefts  and  enjoyments, 
and  even  life  itfelf,  the  deareft  of  all  other,  and  to 
fubmit  to  any  temporal  inconvenience  and  fuffering 
for  his  fake.  And  thus  much  for  the  explication  of 
the  precept  here  in  the  text.     I  proceed  in  the 

III.  Place,  to  confider  the  ftricl  and  indifpenfable 
obligation  of  this  precept  of  felf-denial,  and  fuffering 
for  Christ  and  his  truth,  rather  than  to  forfake  and 
renounce  them,  "  if  any  man  will  come  after  me,'* 
or  "  be  my  difciple,  let  him  deny  himfelf,  and  take 
''  up  his  crofs  and  follow  me ;"  that  is,  upon  thefe 
terms  he  muft  be  my  difciple,  in  this  manner  he  muft 
follow  me  ;  and  in  the  text  I  mentioned  before,  he 
declares  again,  that  he  that  is  not  ready  to  quit  all 
his  relations  and  even  hfe  itfelf,  for  his  fake,  ''  is  not 
"  worthy  of  him,  and  cannot  be  his  difciple  ;"  and 
"  whofoever  doth  not  bear  his  crofs,  and  come  after 
"  him,  cannot  be  his  difciple  j"  fo  that  we  cannot' 
be  the  difciples  of  Christ,  nor  be  worthy  to  be  call- 
ed by  his  name,  if  we  be  not  ready  thus  to  deny  our 
felves  for  his  fake  :  and  not  only  fo  •,  but  if  for  fear 
of  the  crofs,  or  of  any  temporal  fufferings,  we  jfhould 
renounce  and  deny  him  •,  he  threatens  "  to  deny  us 
**  before  his  Father  which  is  in  heaven,"  (i.  e.)  to  de- 
prive us  of  eternal  life,  and  to  fentence  us  to  everlalling 
mifery.  Matt.  x.  32.  "  Whofoever  Ihall  confefs  me 
"  before  men,  him  will  I  confels  before  my  Father 
"  which  is  in  heaven  :  but  whofoever  fhall  deny  me 
"  before  men,  him  will  I  alfo  deny  before  my  Father 
*'  which  is  in  heaven  •,"  and  Mark  viii.  38.  '^  Who- 
*'  foever  fhall  be  afhamed  of  me,  and  of  my  words, 
*'  in  this  adulterous  and  finfiil  generation,  of  hirri 
"  alfo  fhall  the  Son  of  man  be  afhamed,  when  he 
^  Cometh  in  the  glory  of  his  Father,  with  his  holy 

^' angels  i" 


1028  Of  f elf 'denial  and 

S  E  R  M.  «  ano;els  ;"  that  is.  when  he  cometh  to  iudge  t'he 

I  XVI  O  -'  ,        ^  J         D 

world,  they  fhall  not  be  able  to  iland  in  that  judg- 
ment \  for  that  by  his  "  being  ailiamed  of  them," 
is  meant,  that  they  fhall  be  condemned  by  him,  is 
plain  from  what  goes  before,  ver.  26,  27.  "  What 
"  liiall  it  profit  a  man,  if  he  fliall  gain  the  whole 
*'  world,  and  lofe  his  own  foul  ?  or  what  fhall  a  man 
*'  give  in  exchange  for  his  foul?"  and  then  it  fol- 
lows, "  whofoever  therefore  fliall  be  ailiamed  of  me 
*'  and  of  my  words." 

But  becaufe  fome  have  the  confidence  to  tell  the 
world,  that  our  Saviour  doth  not  require  thm 
much  of  Chrifbians  •,  but  all  that  he  obligeth  us  tOy 
is  to  believe  in  him  in  our  hearts,  but  not  to  make 
any  outward  profefTion  of  his  religion,  when  the  ma-^ 
giftrate  forbids  it,  and  we  are  in  danger  of  fuffcring 
for  it ;  I  fliall  therefore  briefly  examine  what  is  pre- 
tended for  fo  flrange  an  alTcrtion,  and  fo  dlre6lly 
contrary  to  the  whole  tenor  of  the  gofpel,  and  to  the 
exprefs  words  of  our  Saviour. 

The  author  of  the  book  called  the  Leviathan  tells 
us,  that  we  are  not  only  not  bound  to  confefs 
Christ,  but  we  are  obliged  to  deny  him,  in  cafe  the 
magiflrate  requireth  us  fo  to  do.  His  words  are  thefe  v 
''  What  if  the  fovereign  forbid  us  to  beUeve  in 
*'  Christ  ?"  He  anfwers,  "  fuch  forbidding  is  of 
"  no  effed,  becaufe  belief  and  unbelief  never  follow 
*'  mens  commands.  But  what,  (fays  he)  if  we  be 
*'  comm.anded  by  our  lawful  prince  to  fay  with  our 
*'  tongues,  we  believe  not  j  muft  we  obey  fuch  com- 
*'  mands?"  To  this  he  anfwers,"  that  profeiTioa 
*'  with  the  tongue  is  but  an  external  thing,  and  no 
*'  more  than  any  other  gefture,  whereby  we  fignify 
*^  our  obedience,  and  wherein  a  Chriilian^  holding- 
f'  firmly  in  his  heart  the  faith  of  Christ,  hath  the 

*'  fam« 


fufferi?ig  fof'  Christ's  fake.  1029 

^'  fame  liberty  which  the  prophet  Eiifha  allowed  to  ^  f;''  /^^° 

*'  Naaman.     But  what  then  (fays  he)  Hiall  I  anfwer  ,J^^ 

"  to  our  Saviour,"   faying,  "  v/hofoever  denieth  , 

"  me  before  men,  him  will  I  deny  before  my  Father 

"  which  is  in  heaven?"  His  anfwer  is,  "That  we 

"  may  fay,  that  whatfoever  a  fubjed  is  compell'd  to 

"  in  obedience  to  his  fovereign,  and  docs  it  not  in 

"  order   to  his    own   mind,    but  the  law  of  his 

"  country,    the  adlion  is    not   his,    but   his  fove- 

"  reign's ;    nor  is   it  he  that  in  this  cafe  denies 

"  Christ  before  men,  but  his  governor,  and  the 

^'  lav/s  of  his  country." 

But  can  any  man,  that  in  good  earneft  pays  any 
degree  of  reverence  to  our  blefled  Saviour  and  his 
religion,  think  to  baffle  fuch  plain  words  by  fo  fri- 
volous an  anfwer  ?  There  is  no  man  doubts,  but  if 
the  magiilrate  ihould  command  mien  to  deny 
Christ,  he  would  be  guilty  of  a  great  fin  in  fo  do- 
ing :  but  if  "  we  mull  obey  God  rather  than  men,'* 
and  every  man  mud  "  give  an  account  of  himfelf  to 
"  God  •,"  how  will  this  excufe  him  that  denies 
Christ,  or  breaks  any  other  commandment  of  Go  d^ 
upon  the  comm.and  of  the  magiilrate  ?  And  to  puE 
the  matter  out  of  all  doubt,  that  our  Saviour  for- 
bids all  that  will  be  his  difciples,  upon  pain  of  dam- 
nation, to  deny  him,  though  the  magiilrate  Ihould 
command  them  to  do  fo ;  it  is  very  obfervable,  that 
in  that  very  place,  where  he  fpeaks  of  confefTing  or 
denying  him  before  men,  he  puts  this  veiy  cafe  of 
their  being  brought  before  kings  and  governors  for 
confelling  him.  Matt.  x.  17.  "  Beware  (fays  he)  of 
"  men,  for  they  will  deliver  you  up  to  the  councils, 
"  and  they  will  fcourge  you  in  their  fyr agogues  ; 
"  and  ye  fhall  be  brought  before  governors  and 
"  kings  for  my  fake^  for  a  teilimony  againft  them 

Vol.  V,  9  B  ''  and 

3- 


1030  Of  f elf 'denial  and 

"  and  the  Gentiles.'"     But  what  teftimony  would 
this  be  againil  them,  if  Chriilians  were  bound  to  de- 
ny Christ  at  their  command  ?  But  our  Saviour 
goes  on,  and  teJIs  them  how  they  ouglit  to  demean 
themfelves,   when  they   were  brought  before  kings 
and  governors,  ver.  19.  "  But  when  they  fhall  deli- 
"  ver  you  up,  take  ye  no  thought  how, 'or  what  ye 
"  Ihall  fpeak  ;  for  it  fhall  be  given  you  in  that  very 
''  hour  what  ye  fhall  Ipeak.*'     But  what  need  of 
any  fuch  extraordinary  afTiftance  in  the  cafe,  if  they 
had  nothing  to  do,  but  to  deny  him,  when  they  v/ere 
required    by  the  magiltrate  to   do  it  ?    And  then 
(proceeding  in  the  fame  difcourfe)  he  bids  them, 
ver.  28.  "  Not  to  fear  them  that  can  kill  the  body, 
*'  and  after  that  have  no  more  that  they  can  do  :" 
that  is,  not  to  deny  him,  for  fear  of  any  temporal 
punifhment  or  fuffering  the  magiflrate  could  inflidl 
upon  them  ;  "  but  to  fear"  and  obey  "  him,  who 
*'  can  deftroy  body  and  foul  in  hell."     And  upon 
this  difcourfe  our  Saviour  conckides,  ver.  32,  33. 
*'  Whofoever  therefore  fhall  confefs  me  before  men, 
''  him  will  I  confefs  alfo  before  my  Father  which  is 
*'  in  heaven:  but  whofoever  fnall  deny  me  before 
"  men,  him  will  I  alfo  deny  before  my  Father  which 
*'  is  in  heaven."     And  now  can  any  thing  be  plain- 
er, than  that  our  Saviour  requires  his  difcipies  to 
make  confcffion  of  him  before  kings  and  governors, 
and  not  to  deny  him  for  fear  of  any  thing  v/hich  they 
can  do  to  them } .  But  let  us  enquire  a  little  farther, 
and  fee  how  the  apoftles,  who  received  this  precept 
from  our  Saviour  himfelf,  did  underftand  it.  Adls 
iv.  14.  we  find  Peter  and  John  fummoned  before  the 
Jewifh  magifcrates,  who  "  ftri6lly  commanded  them 
*'  not  to  fpeak  at  all,  nor  teach  in  the  name  of  Je- 
"  sus.     But  Peter  and  John  anfwered  and  faid  unto 

"  them, 


Suffering  for  Chkist's  fake.  103  i 

"  them,  whether  it  be  rio-ht  in  the  fie;ht  of  God,  to  S  E  RM. 
*'  hearkenuntoyou,  more  than  unto  God,  judge  ye." 
And  when  they  ilill  perHfied  in  their  courfe,  not- 
withftanding  the  command  of  the  magiftrate,and  were 
called  again  before  the  council,  chap.  v.  28.  and 
"  the  high  pried  aflced  them,  faying,  did  we  not 
''  flraitly  command  you,  that  you  fhould  not  teach 
"  in  this  name  ?  and  behold  ye  have  filled  Jerufalem 
^'  with  your  do6lrine ;"  they  return  them  again  the 
fame  anfwer,  ver.  29.  "  Then  Peter  and  the  other 
"  apoftles  anfwered  and  faid,  we  ought  to  obey  God 
"  rather  than  men." 

And  let  any  man  now  judge,  whether  our  Savi- 
our did  not  oblige  men  to  confefs  him  even  before 
magiflrates,  and  to  obey  him  rather  than  men.  And 
indeed,  how  can  any  man  in  reafon  think,  that  the 
great  king  and  governor  of  the  world  fhould  inveft 
any  man  with  a  power  to  control  his  authority,  and 
to  obhge  men  to  difobey  and  renounce  him,  "  by 
"  whom  kings  reign,  and  princes  decree  judgment  ? 
This  is  a  thing  fo  unreafonable,  that  it  can  hardly  be 
imagined,  that  any  thing  but  downright  maUce  againfl 
God  and  rehgion  could  prompt  any  man  to  advance 
fuch  an  affertion. 

I  fhould  now  have  proceeded  to  the  fourth  and 
laft  particular,  which  I  propofed  to  fpeak  to  •,  name- 
ly, to  vindicate  the  reafonablenefs  of  this  precept  of 
felf-denial  and  fuiFering  for  Christ,  which  at  lirft 
appearance  may  feem  to  be  fo  very  harfh  and  difR- 
cult.  But  this,  together  with  the  application  of  this 
difcourfe,  fhall  be  referved  to  another  opportunity. 


9B2  SER- 


103  a 


Of  fclf-denial  ani 


SERMON     LXVII. 

Of  felf-denial  and  fiiiFering  for  Christ's 
fake. 


C(. 


MATTH.  XVI.  24. 

^Ijen  [aid.  Jesus  unto  his  dtjciples^  ^f^-^y  ^^^^^  '^'^"^^  (^0772^ 
after  me,  let  him  deny  hwifclf  and  take  up  his  crofs.^ 
and  follow  me. 

\^xvn  ■  ''  ^T^HEN  faid  Jesus  to  his  difciples,"  that  is, 
.jL      upon  occafion  of  his  former  difcourfe  with 
^hem,  concerning  his  approaching  paffion,  and  that 
he  muil  fliortly  go  up  to  Jerufalem,  and  there  fuifer 
many   things   of  the  elders  and  chief  priefts    and 
fcribes,  and  at  lait  be  put  to  death  by  them  ;  "  then 
faid  Jesus  unto  his  difciples,  if  any  man  will  come 
after  me  j"  that  is,  if  any  man  will  be  my  difciple, 
and  undertake  the  profeflion  of  my  religion  ;  he  muil 
do  it  upon  thefe  terms  of  felf-denial  and  fufFering. 

In  the  handling  of  thefe  words,  I  proceeded  ia 
this  method. 

Firll,  I  confidered  the  way  which  our  Saviour  here 
ufeth  in  making  profclytes,  and  gaining  men  over 
to  his  religion.  He  offers  no  manner  of  force  and 
violence  to  compel  men  to  the  profefTion  of  it-, 
but  fairly  propofeth  it  to  their  confideration  and 
choice,  telling  them  plainly  upon  what  terms  they 
muil  be  his  difciples  \  if  they  like  them,  and  be  re- 
folved  to  fubmit  to  them,  well  ;  if  not,  'tis  in  vain 
to  follow  him  any  longer ;  for  they  "  cannot  be  his 
"  diiciples."     And  to  ufe  any  other  way  than  this 


tQ 


fiiffering  for  ChristV  fake.  ^^33 

to  gain  men  over  to  religion,  is  contrary  both  to  the  S  E  R  m; 
nature  of  man,  who  is  a  reafonable  creature  -,  and  to  ^^^^fL^ 
the  nature  of  religion,  which,  if  it  be  not  our  free 
choice,  cannot  be  religion. 

Secondly,  I  explained  this  duty  or  precept  of  felf- 
denial,  expreffed  in  thefe  words,  ■ '  let  him  deny  him- 
*'  felf,  and  take  up  his  crofs  •,"  which  phrafe  of  "  tak- 
*'  ing  up  one's  crofs,' '  is  an  allufion  to  the  Roman  cu- 
flom,  whicJi  was,  that  the  malefactor  that  was  to  be 
crucified,  was  to  take  up  his  crofs  upon  his  fhoulders, 
and  to  carry  it  to  the  place  of  execution. 

Now  for  our  clearer  underflanding  of  this  precept 
of  felf-denial,  I  told  you,  that  it  is  not  to  be  extend- 
ed to  every  thing  that  may  properly  be  called  by  that 
name,  but  to  be  limited  by  the  plain  fcope  and  in- 
tendment of  our  S  A  VI  our's  difcourfe  *,  and  therefore 
I  did  in  the 

Firft  place  remove  feveral  things  which  are  inftan- 
ced  in  by  fome,  as  intended  and  required  by  this  pre- 
cept.    As, 

1.  That  we  fhould  deny  and  renounce  our  own 
fenfe  in  matters  of  faith.  But  this  I  fhewed  to  be  ab- 
furd  and  impoffible ;  becaufe  if  we  do  not  believe 
what  we  fee,  or  will  believe  contraiy  to  what  we  fee, 
we  deftroy  all  certainty,  there  being  no  greater  than 
that  of  fenfe.  Befides,  that  the  evidence  of  faith  be- 
ing lefs  clear  and  certain  than  that  of  fenfe,  it  is  con- 
trary to  the  nature  of  alTent,  which  is  always  fwayed 
and  born  down  by  the  greateft  and  cleared  evidence. 
So  that  we  cannot  aflfent  to  any  thing  in  plain  contra- 
diction to  the  evidence  of  fenfe. 

2.  Others  would  comprehend  under  this  precept,, 
the  denying  of  our  reafon  in  matters  of  faith  ;  which 
is  in  the  next  degree  of  abfurdity  to  the  other  •,  becaufe 
no  man  can  believe  any  thing,  but  upon  fome  reafon  or 

odieri 


I  o  3  4  ^f  filf' denial  and 

SERM.  other  ;  and  to  believe  without  any  reafon,  or  againft 
^^      *   reafon,  is  to  make  faith  unreafonable,  and  inHdelity 
reafonable. 

3.  Others  pretend,  that  by  virtue  of  this  precept, 
men  ought  to  be  content  to  renounce  their  own  eter- 
nal happinefs,  to  be  miferable  for  ever,  for  the 
glory  of  God,  and  the  falvation  of  their  brethren. 
But  this  I  fhewed  cannot  be  a  duty,  for  this  plain  rea- 
fon \  becaufe  if  it  were,  there  is  no  argument  left 
powerful  enough  to  perfuade  a  man  to  it.  And  as 
for  the  two  fcripture  inilances  alledged  to  this  pur- 
pofe  \  Mofes  his  wiih,  of  being  "  blotted  out  of  the 
*'  book  of  life"  for  the  people  of  Ifrael,  fignifies  no 
more  than  a  temporal  death  ;  and  St.  Paul's,  of  be- 
ing "  accurfed  from  Christ  for  his  brethren,"  is 
only  an  hyperbolical  cxpreffion  of  his  great  pafTion 
and  zeal  for  the  falvation  of  his  countrymen  ;  as  is  evi- 
dent from  the  form  of  the  expreflion,  fuch  as  is  com- 
monly ufed  to  ulher  in  an  hyperbole  ♦,  "  I  could  wifh." 
And  in  the 

Second  place,  I  ftiewed  pofitively,  that  the  plain 
meaning  of  this  precept  of  felf-denial  is  this,  and  no- 
thing but  this ;  that  we  fliould  be  willing  to  part  with 
all  our  temporal  interefls  and  enjoyments,  and  even 
life  itfelf  for  the  fake  of  Christ  and  his  religion. 
This  is,  "  to  deny  ourfelves."  And  then,  that  we 
fliould  be  willing  to  bear  any  temporal  inconvenience 
and  fuffering  upon  the  fame  account.  This  is  "to 
*'  take  up  our  crofs."  And  this  I  fhewed  from  the 
inflances  which  our  Saviour  gives  of  felf-denial, 
whenever  he  had  occafion  to  difcourfe  of  it. 

Thirdly,  I  confidered  the  ftrid:  and  indifpenfable 
obligation  of  this  precept  of  felf-denial,  rather  than 
to  forfake  Christ  and  his  religion.  Without  this 
difpofition  and  refolution  of  mind  we  *'  cannot  be 

''  his 


ftiffering  for  Ch r  i  s  T V  fake,  ^  o  3  5 

''  his  difciples  •,  and  if  we  deny  him  before  men;  he  SER?«f- 
"  will  alfo  deny  us  before  his  Father  which  is  in  hea-     ' 
"  ven."     And  this  confeflion  of  him  and  his  truth 
we  are  to  make  before  kings  and  governors,  and  not- 
withftanding  their  commands  to  the  contrary,  which 
are  of  no  force  againft  the  laws  and  commands  of 
God. 
■    Thus  far  I  have  gone.     There  remains  only  the 

Fourth  and  laft  particular,  which  I  propofed  to 
fpeak  to  ;  viz.  to  vindicate  the  reafonablenefs  of  this 
felf-denial  and  fuffering  for  Christ,  which  at  Hrit 
appearance  may  feem  to  be  fo  very  difficult.  And 
this  precept  cannot  be  thought  unreafonable,  if  we 
take  into  confideration  thefe  three  things. 

I.  That  he,  who  requires  this  of  us,  hath  himfelf 
given  us  the  greateft  example  of  felf-denial  that  ever 
was.  The  greateft  in  itfelf,  in  that  he  denied  him- 
felf more,  and  fuffered  more  grievous  things,  than 
it  is  pofTible  for  any  of  us  to  do  :  and  fuch  an  exam- 
ple as,  in  the  circumftances  of  it,  is  moft  apt  and 
powerful  to  engage  and  oblige  us  to  the  imiitation  of 
it,  becaufe  all  his  felf-denial  and  fufftrings  were  for 
our  fakes. 

If  we  confider,  that  he  hath  promifed  all  needful 
fupplies  of  his  grace,  to  enable  us  to  the  difcharge 
of  this  difhcult  duty  of  felf-denial  and  fuffering,  and 
to  fupport  and  comfort  us  therein. 

III.  He  hath  aflured  us  of  a  glorious  reward  of  ail 
our  fuiferings  and  felf-denial,  beyond  the  proportion 
of  them,  both  in  the  degree  and  duration  of  it.  I 
iliall  go  over  thefe  as  briefly  as  I  can. 

I.  If  we  confider,  that  he,  who  requires  us  thus 
to  deny  ourfelves  for  him,  hath  given  us  the  greateft 
example  of  felf-denial  that  ever  was.  Our  Saviour 
knowing  how  unwelcome  this  dodrine  of  felf-denial 

and 


ir  o  3  6  Of  f elf  ^denial  and 

S  E  R  M.  and  fuffering  mull  needs  be  to  his  difciples,  and  \\o^ 
hardly  this  precept  would  go  down  with  them,  to 
Iweeten  it  a  little,  and  take  off  the  harfhnefs  of  it^ 
and  to  prepare  their  minds  the  better  for  it,  he  tells 
them  firft  of  his  own  fufferings,  that  by  that  means 
he  might,  in  fome  meafure,  reconcile  their  minds  to 
it,  when  they  faw  that  he  required  nothing  of  them 
but  what  he  was  ready  to  undergo  himfelf,  and  to 
give  them  the  example  of  it.  And  upon  this  occa- 
fion  it  was,  that  our  Saviour  acquaints  them  with 
the  hard  and  difficult  terms  upon  which  they  muil  be 
his  difciples :  ver.  21.  the  evangelift  tells  us,  that 
*'  Jesus  began  to  fhew  unto  his  difciples,  how  that 
*'  he  mull  go  unto  Jerufalcm,  and  fuffer  many  things 
*'  of  the  elders,  and  chief  priells,  and  fcribes,  and 
''  be  killed.  Then  faid  Jesus  unto  his  difciples^" 
that  is,  immediately  upon  this  difcourfe  of  his  own 
fufferings,  as  the  fittell  time  for  it,  he  takes  t^at  op- 
portunity to  tell  them  plainly  of  their  own  fufferings, 
and  that  unlefs  they  were  prepared  and  refolved  to 
deny  themfelves  fo  far,  as  to  fuffer  all  manner  of  per- 
secution for  his -fake  and  the  profeffion  of  his  religion, 
they  could  not  be  his  difciples.  "  If  any  man  will 
*'  come  after  me,  let  him  deny  himfelf,  and  take  up 
*'  hiscrofs,  and  follow  me,"  that  is,  let  him  reckon 
and  refclve  upon  following  that  example  of  felf-denial 
and  fuffering  in  which  I  will  go  before  him.  Now 
the  conjfideration  of  this  example  of  felf-denial  and 
fuffering,  which  our  Saviour  hath  given  us,  hath 
great  force  in  it  to  reconcile  us  to  this  difficult  duty, 
and  to  fhew  the  reafonablenefs  of  it. 

1 .  In  that  he,  who  requires  us  thus  to  deny  our- 
felves,  hath  himfelf  in  his  own  perfon,  given  us  the 
greateft  example  of  felf-denial  that  ever  was.     And, 

2.  Such  an  example  as,  in  all  the  circumftances  of 
3  it. 


fiiffering  for  Christ's  fake.  1^37 

k,   IS  moil:  apt  and  powerful  to  engage  and  oblige  us  ^p|^ji^' 
to  the  imitation  of  it  •,  bccaule  all  his  felf-denial  and 
fufferings  were  for  our  fakes. 

I.  He,  who  requires  us  thus  to  deny  ourfelves, 
hath  himfelf  in  his  ovm  perfon  given  us  the  greateft 
example  of  felf-dcnial  that  ever  was  -,  in  that  he  de- 
nied himfelf  more,  and  fuffered  more  grievous  thingSj 
than  any  of  us  can  do.  He  bore  the  infupportable 
load  of  ail  the  fins  of  all  mankind,  and  of  the  wrath 
and  vengeance  due  to  them.  "  Never  was  forrow 
"  like  to  his  forrow,  wherewith  the  Lord  afflidted 
"  him  in  the  day  of  his  fierce  anger.  He  was  de- 
"  fpifed  and  rejeded  of  men  •,  a  man  of  forrows,  and 
"  acquainted  with  grief  j  his  vifage  was  marred 
"  more  than  any  man's,  and  his  form  more  than  the 
"  fonsofmen."  (i.e.)  He  underwent  more  afflic^ 
tion,  and  had  more  contempt  poured  upon  him,  than 
ever  was  upon  any  of  the  fons  of  men :  and  yet  he 
endured  all  this  with  incredible  patience  and  meeknefs, 
with  the  greateft  evennefs  and  conilancy  of  mind,  and 
with  the  moil  perfecl  lubniifnon  and  refignation  of 
himfelf  to  the  will  of  God,  that  can  be  imagined. 

Such  an  example  as  this  Ihould  be  of  great  force 
to  anin^ate  us  with  the  like  courage  and  refolution, 
in  leiTer  dangers  and  difticukies.  To  fee  "  the  cap^ 
''  tain  of  our  falvation"  going  before  us,  and  lead- 
ing us  on  fo  bravely^  and  "  made  perfed  by"  greater 
"  fufferings"  than  we  can  ever  be  called  to,  or  are 
any  ways  able  to  undergo,  is  no  fmali  argument  and 
encouragement  to  us,  to  "  take  up  our  crofs  and 
"  follow  him."  The  confideration  of  the  unknown 
fufferings  of  the  Son  of  God,  fo  great  as  We  cannot 
well  conceive  of  them,  fhould  make  all  the  afiiidlions 
and  fufferings  that  can  befal  us,  not  only  tolerable, 
but  eafy  to  us.     Upon  this  confideration  it  is,  that 

Vol.  V,  Q  C  the 


1038  Of  Jelf-denial  and 

S  E  R  M.  |-}^e  apoille  animates  Chriftians  to  patience  in  their 
chriflian  courie,  notwithftanding  all  the  hardfhips  and 
fufferings  that  attended  it,  Heb.  xii.  2.  "  Let  us  run 
"  with  patience  the  race  which  is  fet  before  us,  look- 
*'  ing  unto  Jesus  the  author  and  finiflier  of  our 
"  faith,  who  endured  the  crofs,  and  defpifed  the 
''  fliame.  For  confider  him,  who  endured  fuch  con- 
*'  tradition  of  finners  againft  himfelf,  left  ye  alfo 
''  be  weary  and  faint  in  your  minds." 

And  this  example  is  more  powerful  for  our  encou- 
ragement, becaufe  therein  we  fee  the  world  conquer- 
ed to  our  hands,  and  all  the  terrors  and  temptations 
of  it  baffled  and  fubdued,  and  thereby  a  cheap  and 
eafy  vidlory  over  it  obtained  for  us.  By  this  confide- 
ration,  our  Saviour  endeavours  to  infpire  his  difci- 
ples  with  chearfulnefs  and  courage  in  this  great  con- 
fii.6l,  John  xvi.  33.  "^  In  the  world  ye  lliall  have  tri- 
"  bulation  :  but  be  of  good  chear,  I  have  overcome 
"  the  world." 

2.  This  exam^ple  of  our  Saviour  is  fuch  as,  in 
all  the  circumftances  of  it,  is  moft  apt  and  powerful 
to  engage  and  oblige  us  to  the  imitation  of  it  ;  be- 
caufe all  his  felf-denial  and  fufferings  were  for  our 
fakes  in  pity  and  kinanefs  to  us,  and  wholly  for  our 
benefit  and  advantage.  We  are  apt  to  have  their  ex- 
ample in  great  regard,  from  whom  we  have  received 
great  kindnefs  and  mighty  benefits.  This  pattern  of 
felf-denial  and  fuffering,  which  our  religion  propofeth 
to  us,  is  tlie  example  of  one,  whom  we  have  reafon 
to  efteem,  and  love,  and  imitate,  above  any  perfon 
in  the  world.  It  is  the  example  of  our  Lord  and 
mafter,  of  our  fovereign  and  our  Saviour,  of  the 
founder  of  our  religion,  and  of  "  the  author  and  fi- 
*'  niiher  of  our  faith  :"  and  furely  fuch  an  example 
muft  needs  carry  authority  with  it,  and  command  our 

imitation. 


Lxvir. 


fufferingfor  Ch  R  i  s  T  'i  fake.  1039 

imitation.  It  is  the  example  of  our  befl  friend,  and  ^^^  R^^^- 
greatefl  benefador ;  of  him,  who  laid  down  his  life 
for  us,  and  fealed  his  love  to  us  with  his  deareft 
blood,  and  even  when  we  were  bitter  enemies  to  him, 
did,  and  fuffered  more  for  us,  than  any  man  ever 
did  for  his  bed  friend.  If  we  fhould  be  reduced  to 
poverty  and  want,  let  us  confider  him,  "  who  being 
"  Lord  of  all,  had  not  where  to  lay  his  head  ;  who 
"  being  rich,  for  our  fakes  became  poor,  that  wc 
"  through  his  poverty  might  be  made  rich."  If  it 
fhould  be  our  lot  to  "  be  perfecuted  for  righteoufnefs 
"  fake,"  and  exercifed  with  fulferings  and  reproaches ; 
\ti  us  "  look  unto  Jesus  the  author  and  finifher  of 
"  our  faith,  who  endured  the  crofs  and  defpifed  the 
"  fliame"  for  our  fakes.  In  a  word,  can  we  be  dif- 
contented  at  any  condition,  or  decline  it  in  a  good 
caufe ;  when  we  confider  how  contented  the  Son  of 
God  was,  in  the  meanefl  and  mofl  deflitute  •,  how 
meek  and  patient  in  the  moil  afRidled  and  fuffering 
condition  ;  how  he  welcomed  all  events,  ^nd  was  fo 
perfectly  refigned  to  the  will  of  his  heavenly  Father, 
that  whatever  pleafed  God,  pleafed  him  ? 

Andfurely  in  no  cafe  is  example  more  neceflliry  than 
in  this,  to  engage  and  encourage  us  in  the  difcharge 
of  fo  difficult  a  duty,  fo  contrary  to  the  bent  and  in- 
clination of  flefh  and  blood.  A  bare  precept  o{{^i- 
denial,  and  a  peremptory  command  to  facrihce  our 
own  wills,  our  eafe,  our  pleafure,  our  reputation, 
yea,  and  life  itfelf,  to  the  glory  of  God,  and  the 
maintenance  of  his  truth,  would  have  founded  very 
harfh  and  fevere,  had  not  the  practice  of  all  this  been 
mollified  and  fweetned  by  a  pattern  of  fo  much  advan- 
tage \  by  one  who  in  all  thefe  refpeds  denied  himfelf, 
much  more  than  it  is  polTible  for  us  to  do  •,  by  one 
who  might  have  infifted  upon  a  greater  right,  who 

9  C  2  abafed 


1040  Of  felf -denial  and 

S  E  R  M.  abafed  himfelf,  and  {looped  from  a  greater  height  and 
dignity ;  who  was  not  forced  into  a  condition  of 
meannefs  and  poverty,  but  chofe  it  for  our  fakes  •, 
who  fubmitted  to  fuffering,  though  he  had  never  de- 
ferved  it.  Here  is  an  example  that  hath  all  the  argu- 
ment, and  all  the  encouragement  that  can  be,  to  the 
imitation  of  it. 

Such  an  example  is  of  greater  force  and  authority 
than  any  precept  or  law  can  be  ;  fo  that  well  might 
our  Lord,  thus  going  before  us,  command  us  to 
follow  him,  and  fay,  "  if  any  man  will  come  after 
"  me,  let  him  deny  himfelf,  and  take  up  his  crofs 
"  and  follow  me."  For  if  he  thus  denied  himfelf, 
well  may  v/c,  who  have  much  lefs  to  deny,  but  much 
more  caufe  and  reafon  to  do  it.  He  did  it  volunta- 
rily, and  of  choice ;  but  it  is  our  duty.  He  did  it 
for  our  fakes,  we  do  it  for  our  own.  His  own  good- 
nefs  moved  him  to  deny  himfelf  for  us  ^  but  gratitude 
obligeth  us  to  deny  ourfelves  in  any  thing  for  him. 
M^e  did  not  in  the  lead  deferve  any  thing  from  him ; 
but  he  hath  wholly  merited  all  this,  and  infinitely 
more  from  us.  So  that  fuch  an  example  as  this  is, 
in  all  the  circumflances  of  it,  cannot  but  be  very  pow- 
erful and  efiedual  to  oblige  us  to  the  imitation  of  it. 
But  the  reafonablenels  of  this  precept  will  yet  farther 
appear,  if  we  confider  in  the 

Third  place,  that  God  hath  promifed  to  all  fincere 
Chriftians  all  needful  fuppUes  of  his  grace,  to  enable 
them  to  the  difcharge  of  this  difficult  duty  of  felf- 
denial,  and  to  fupport  and  comfort  them  therein. 
For  the  fpirit  of  Chri  st  dwells  in  Chriftians,  and  the 
fame  glorious  power  that  raifed  up  Jesus  from  the 
dead,  works  mightily  in  them  that  believe  ;  Epb,,  i. 
19.  "  That  ye  may  know,"  (faith  St.  Paul,  fpeak- 
ing  in  general  to  all  Chriftians)  "  what  is  the  exceed- 

"  ing 


fiifferingfor  CnVii^T's  fake.  1041 

**  ing  greatnefs  of  his  power  to  us-ward,  who  be-  ^  E  R  M. 
*'  lieve,  according  to  the  working  of  his  mighty 
*'  power  which  he  wrought  in  Christ,  when  he 
*'  raifed  him  from  the  dead."  Of  ourfelves  we 
are  very  weak,  and  the  temptations  and  terrors  of 
the  world  very  powerful ;  but  there  is  a  principle  re- 
fiding  in  every  true  Chriflian,  able  to  bear  us  up  a- 
gainft  the  world,  and  the  power  of  all  it's  tempta- 
tions. "  Vv^hatfoever  is  born  of  God"  (faith  St. 
John)  "  overcometh  the  world  ;  and  this  is  the  vic- 
"  tory  that  overcometh  the  world,  even  our  faith, 
"  Ye  are  of  God,  litfie  children,  and  have  overcome ; 
"  becaufe  greater  is  he  that  is  in  you,  than  he  that  is 
/'  in  the  world." 

And  this  grace  and  flrength  was  afforded  to  the 
firft  Chriflians  in  a  moil  extraordinary  manner,  for 
their  comfort  and  fupport  under  fufferings  ;  fo  that 
they  were  "  ftrengthened  with  all  might,  according 
"  to  God's  glorious  power,  unto  all  long-fuffering 
"  with  joy fulnefs,"  as  St.  Paul  prays  for  the  Coloffi- 
ans,  ch.  i.  11.  And  thefe  "  confolations  oftheipi- 
"  rit  of  God,"  this  "  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghoft,"  was 
not  peculiarly  appropriated  to  the  firil  times  of  chri- 
ftianity  ;  but  is  frill  afforded  to  all  fincere  Chriflians, 
in  fuch  degree  as  is  neceflary,  and  convenient  for 
them.  And  whenever  God  exercifeth  good  men 
with  trials  more  than  human,  and  fuch  fufferings  as 
are  beyond  the  ordinary  rate  of  human  flrength  and 
patience  to  bear,  he  hath  promifed  to  endue  them 
with  more  than  human  courage  and  refolution.  So 
St.  Paul  tells  the  Corinthians,  i  Cor.  x.  13.  "  He 
"  is  faithful  that  hath  promifed,  who  will  not  fuffer 
"  you  to  be  tempted  above  what  ye  are  able,  but 
*'  will  with  the  temptation  aifo  make  a  way  to  efcape, 
*'  that  ye  may  be  able  to  bear  it."  And  why  Ihould 

wc 


1042  Of  f elf 'denial  and 

Se  R  M.  we  be  daunted  at  any  fuffering ;  if  God  be  pleafed 
'    to  encreafe  our  ftrength,  in  proportion  to  the  fliarp- 
nefs  of  our  fufferings  ? 

And  blefTed  be  God  many  of  our  perfecuted  bre- 
thren at  this  day  have  remarkably  found  this  com- 
fortable afiiftance  and  fupport  \  though  many  like- 
wife  have  fallen  througii  fear  and  weaknefs ;  as  it  alfo 
happened  in  the  primitive  times.  But  where-ever 
this  promife  is  not  made  good,  it  is,  (as  I  have  for- 
merly faid)  by  reafon  of  fome  fault  and  failing  on  our 
part.  Either  men  were  not  fincere  in  the  profeiTion 
of  the  truth,  and  then  no  wonder,  if  "  when  tribu- 
*'  lation  and  perfecution  arifeth,  becaufe  of  the  word, 
*'  they  are  offended  and  fall  off."  Or  elfe  they  were 
too  confident  of  themfelves,  and  did  not  feek  God's 
grace  and  affiilance,  and  rely  upon  it  as  they  ought  ; 
and  thereupon  God  hath  left  them  to  themfelves  (as 
he  did  Feter)  to  convince  them  of  their  own  frailty 
and  rafli  confidence ;  and  yet  even  in  that  cafe,  when 
there  is  truth  and  fmcerity  at  the  bottom,  there  is  no 
reafon  to  doubt,  but  that  the  goodnefs-of  God  is 
fuch,  as  by  fome  means  or  other  to  give  to  fuch  per- 
fons  (as  he  did  to  Peter)  the  opportunity  of  recover- 
ing themfelves  by  repentance,  and  a  more  ftedfaft  re- 
folution  afterwards. 

Fourthly,  if  we  confider  in  the  iafl  place,  that  our 
Saviour  hath  affured  us  of  a  glorious  and  eternal 
reward  of  all  our  felf-denial  and  fufferings  for  him  ; 
a  reward  infinitely  beyond  the  proportion  of  our  fuf- 
ferings, both  in  the  degree  and  duration  of  it.  Now 
the  clear  difcovery  of  this  is  peculiarly  owing  to  the 
chrillian  religion,  and  "  the  appearance  of  our  Lord 
*'  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  who  hath  abolilli- 
*'  ed  death,  and  brought  life  and  immortality  to 
J'  light  by  the  gofpel. 

2  And 


fufferingfor  Cn'Sii ^t's  fake,  1043 

And  as  our  bleffed  Saviour  hath  aflured  us  of  ^  E  R  M. 
this  blefled  (late  of  good  men  in  another  world ;  fo  ^ 
hath  he  hkewife  afifur'd  us,  that  greater  degrees  of 
this  happinefs  fliall  be  the  portion  of  thofe  who  fuffer 
for  him  and  his  truth.  Matt.  v.  10,  11,  12.  "  Blef- 
"  fed  are  they  which  are  perfecuted  for  righteoufnefs 
"  fake  ;  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Blef- 
"  fed  are  ye  when  men  fnall  revile  you,  and  perfe- 
*'  cute  you,  and  fpeak  all  manner  of  evil  againftyou 
"  falOy,  for  my  name's  fake.  Rejoice  and  be  ex- 
"  ceeding  glad  ;  for  great  is  your  reward  in  heaven.'* 
And  nothing  furely  can  be  more  reafonable,  than  to 
part  with  things  of  fmall  value,  for  things  infinitely 
greater  and  m.ore  confiderable  ;  to  forego  the  tranfient 
pleafures  and  enjoyments,  and  the  imperfed  felicities 
of  this  world,  for  the  folid,  and  perfe6l,  and  perpe- 
tual happinefs  of  a  better  hfe  j  and  to  exchange  a 
fhort  and  miferable  life,  for  eternal  hfe  and  blefled- 
nefs  •,  in  a  word,  to  be  content  to  be  driven  home, 
to  be  baniih'd  out  of  this  world  into  our  own  native 
country,  and  to  be  violently  thruft  out  of  this 
"  vale  of  tears,"  into  thofe  regions  of  blifs,  where 
are  "  joys  unfpeakable  and  full  of  glory." 

This  confideration  St.  Paul  tells  us  fupported  the 
primitive  Chriitians,  under  their  iharpeft  and  heavieft 
fufferings,  2  Cor.  iv.  16.  "  For  this  caufe"  (fays  he) 
"  we  faint  not,  becaufe  our  light  afiiidtion,  which  is 
"  but  for  a  moment,  worketh  for  us  a  far  more  ex- 
*'  ceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory  ;  whilft  we 
"  look  not  at  the  things  which  are  feen,  but  at  the 
*'  things  which  are  not  feen  ;  for  the  things  which 
*'  are  feen  are  temporal,  but  the  tilings  which  are  not 
"  feen  are  eternal."  So  that  our  fufferings  bear  no 
iT^ore  proportion  to  the  reward  of  them,  than  linite 
does  to  infinite,  than  temporal  to  eternal,  between 
which  there  is  no  proportion.  All 


LXVII. 


1 044  Of  f elf 'denial  and 

S_E  R  M.  All  that  now  remains,  is  to  draw  foine  ufeful  in-* 
ferences  from  what  hath  been  difcourfed,  concerning 
this  great  and  difficult  duty  of  felf-denial  for  the  fake 
of  Christ  and  his  religion  ;  and  they  fliall  be  thefe 
following. 

I.  To  acknowledge  the  great  goodnefs  of  God  to 
us,  that  all  thefe  laws  and  commands,  even  the 
hardeft  and  fevereft  of  them,  are  fo  reafonable. 

God,  as  he  is  our  maker,  and  gave  us  our  beings, 
hath  an  entire  and  fovereign  right  over  us,  and  by 
virtue  of  that  right,  might  have  impofed  very  hard 
things  upon  us,  and  this  without  the  giving  account 
to  us  of  any  of  his  matters,  and  without  propounding 
any  reward  to  us,  fo  vafbly  difproportionable  to  our 
obedience  to  him.  But  in  giving  laws  to  us,  he  hath 
not  made  ufe  of  this  right.  The  mod  fevere  and 
rigorous  commands  of  the  gofpel  are  fuch,  that  we 
fhall  be  infinitely  gainers  by  our  obedience  to  them. 
If  we  deny  our  felves  any  thing  in  this  world  for 
Christ  and  his  religion,  we  iliall,  in  the  next,  be 
confidered  for  it  to  the  utmoft,  not  only  far  beyond 
what  it  can  deferve,  but  beyond  what  we  can  con- 
ceive or  imagine  ;  for  this  perifhing  life,  and  the 
tranfitory  trifles  and  enjoyments  of  it,  we  fhall  re- 
ceive "  a  kingdom  which  cannot  be  fhaken,  an  un- 
"  corruptible  crown  which  fadeth  not  away,  eternal 
''  in  the  heavens."  For  thefe  are  faithful  fayings, 
and  we  fhall  infallibly  find  them  true,  "  if  that  we 
''  fuffer  with  Christ,  we  fhall  alfo  reign  with  him ; 
*'  if  we  be  perfecuted  for  righteoufnefs  fake,  great 
*'  fhall  be  our  reward  in  heaven ;"  if  we  part  with 
our  temporal  life,  v/e  fhall  be  made  partakers  of  eter- 
nal life.  He  that  is  firmly  perfuaded  of  the  happi- 
nefs  of  the  next  world,  and  believes  "  the  glory  which 
[^  ihall  then  be  revealed,*'  hath  no  reafon  to  be  fo 

much 


fuffering  for  Cukist's  fake.  1^45 

much  offended  at  the  fufferings  of  this  prefent  time,  SI-:  k  M. 
fo  long  as  he  knows  and  believes,  that  "  thefe  hght 
"  afflidions,  which  are  but  for  a  moment,  will  work 
*'  for  him  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight 
"  of  glory." 

II.  Seeing  this  is  required  of  every  Chriftian,  to 
be  always  in  a  preparation  and  difpofition  of  mind  to 
deny  our  felves,  and  to  take  up  our  crofs  ;  if  we  do 
in  good  earneft  refolve  to  be  Chriflians,  we  ought  to 
fit  down  and  ccnfider  well  with  our  felves,  what  our 
religion  will  cofc  us,  and  whether  we  be  content  to 
come  up  to  the  price  of  it.  If  we  value  any  thing 
in  this  vv^orld  above  Christ  and  his  truth,  "  we  are 
"  not  worthy  of  him."  If  it  come  to  this,  that  we 
mud  either  renounce  him  and  his  religion,  or  quit 
our  temporal  interells  ;  if  we  be  not  ready  to  forego 
thefe,  nay,  and  to  part  even  with  life  it  felf,  rather 
than  to  forfake  him  and  his  truth  j  "  we  are  not 
"  worthy  of  him."  Thefe  are  the  terms  of  our 
chriftianity,  and  therefore  we  are  required  in  baptifm 
folemnly  to  renounce  the  world  :  and  our  Saviour, 
from  this  very  confidtration,  infers,  that  all  who  take 
upon  them  the  profeffion  of  his  religion,  fiiould  con- 
fider  feriouily  beforehand,  and  count  the  cofi:  of  it, 
Luke  xiv.  28.  "  Which  of  you  (fays  he)  intending 
*'  to  build  a  tov/ei,  fitteth  not  down  firif,  and  count- 
"  eth  the  coil,  whether  he  have  fuificient  co  finilhi 
"  it  ?  Or  what  king  going  to  war  with  another  king, 
"  doth  not  fit  down  and  confult,  whether  with  ten 
"  thoufmd  he  be  able  to  meet  him  that  comerh 
"  againft  him  with  tv/enty  thoufand  .^  So  likewiff, 
"  whofoever  he  be  that  forfaketh  not  all  he  hath, 
"  cannot  be  my  difcipie."  You  fee  the  terms  upon 
which  we  are  Chriflians ;  we  muil  always  be  prepar- 
ed in  the  refolution  of  our  minds   to  deny  ounelves. 

Vol.  V.  9  D  and 

3. 


J  G  4  6  Of  felf -denial  and 

E  R  M.  and  take  up  our  crofs,  though  we  are  not  adlually  put 
upon  this  trial. 

III.  What  hath  been  faid  is  matter  of  great  com- 
fort and  encouragement  to  all  thofe  who  deny  them- 
felves,  and  fuffer  upon  fo  good  an  account :  of 
whom,  God  knows,  there  are  too  great  a  num- 
ber at  this  day,  in  feveral  parts  of  the  world  •,  fome 
under  adual  fufferings,  fuch  as  cannot  but  move 
compalTion  and  horror  in  all  that  hear  of  them  •,  o- 
thers  who  are  fled  hither,  and  into  other  countries, 
for  refuge  and  fhelter  from  one  of  thefharpeil  perfe- 
cutions  that  perhaps  ever  was,  if  all  the  circumftances 
of  it  be  duly  confidered.  But  not  to  enlarge  upon 
fo  unpleafant  a  theme,  they  who  fuffer  for  the  truth 
and  righteoufnefs  fake,  have  all  the  comfort  and  en- 
couragement, that  the  beft  example,  and  the  greatefb 
and  moft  glorious  promifcs  of  God  can  give.  They 
have  the  beft  example  in  their  view,  "  Jesus,  the 
"  author  and  finifher  of  their  faith,  who  endured  the 
"  crofs,  and  dcfpifed  the  fhame."  So  that  how 
great  and  terrible  foever  their  fufferings  be,  they  do 
but  tread  in  the  fteps  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  of  the 
beft  and  holicft  man  that  ever  was  •,  and  he,  who  is 
their  great  example  in  fuiTering,  will  iikewife  be  their 
fupport,  and  "  their  exceeding  great  reward." 

So  that  though  fuffering  for  Chr  isr  be  accounted 
great  felf-denial,  and  he  is  gracioufly  pleafed  fo  to  ac- 
cept it,  becaufe  in  denying  things  prefent  and  fenfible, 
for  things  future  and  invifible,  we  do  not  only  de- 
clare our  affedion  to  him,  but  our  great  faith  and 
con^dence  in  him,  by  ftiewing  that  we  rely  upon  his 
word,  and  venture  all  upon  the  fecurity  which  he 
Oilers  us  in  another  world  ;  yet  according  to  a  right 
eftimate  of  things,  and  to  thofe  who  *'  walk  by  faith 
"  and  not  by  fight,"  this  wliich  we  call  felf-denial, 

is. 


LXVII. 


fufferi72gfor  CnRis>T's  fake,  1047 

is,  in  truth  and  reality,  but  a  more  commendable  fort  ^  E  R  M. 
of  felf-love,  becaufe  we  do  herein  mod  effectually 
confult,  and  fecure,  and  advance  our  own  happinefs. 

IV.  And  lafily,  fince  God  hath  been  pleafed  for 
fo  long  a  time  to  excufe  us  from  this  hardeft  part  of 
felf-denial,  let  us  not  grudge  to  deny  ourfelves  in  leffer 
matters,  for  the  fake  of  his  truth  and  religion  j  to 
mifs  a  good  place,  or  to  quit  it  upon  that  account ; 
much  lefs  let  us  think  much  to  renounce  our  vices, 
and  to  thwart  our  evil  inclinations  for  his  fake.  As 
Naaman's  fervant  faid  to  him,  concerning  the  means 
prefcribed  by  the  prophet  for  his  cure,  "  if  he  had 
"  bid  thee  do  fome  great  thing,  wouldeft:  thou  not 
"  have  done  it?  How  much  more,  when  he  hath 
"  only  faid,  wafh  and  be  clean  ?"  So  fince  God  im- 
pofeth  no  harder  terms  upon  us,  than  repentance  and 
reformation  of  our  lives,  we  fhould  readily  and  thank- 
fully fubmit  to  them. 

This,  I  know,  is  difficult  to  fome,  to  "  mortify 
"  their  earthly  members,"  to  "  crucify  the  tielh, 
"  with  the  affedions  and  lulls  of  it ;"  'tis  like  "  cut- 
"  ting  off  a  right  hand,  and  plucking  out  a  right 
"  eye."  Som.e  are  fo  ftrongly  addi6led  to  their  luffs 
and  vices,  that  they  could  with  more  eafe  defpife  life 
in  many  cafes,  than  thus  deny  themfelves.  But  in 
taith,  there  is  no  more  of  felf-denial  in  it,  than  a 
man  denies  hinifelf  when  he  is  mortally  fick  and 
wounded,  in  being  content  to  be  cured,  and  willing 
to  be  well.  This  is  not  at  all  to  our  temporal  pre- 
judice and  inconvenience,  and  it  diredlly  conduceth 
to  our  eternal  happinefs  ;  for  there  is  no  man  that 
lives  a  holy  and  virtuous  life,  and  in  obedience  to 
the  laws  of  God,  that  can  lightly  receive  any  preju- 
dice by  it  in  this  world.  Since  God  doth  not  call 
us  to  fuffer^  we  fhould  do  fo  much  the  more  for 
5  D  2  him. 


104!?  Of  felf 'denial  and ^  &c. 

him.  Since  he  doth  not  put  us  to  tcftify  our  love 
to  him,  by  laying  down  our  lives  for  him,  we  fhould 
fnev'  it  by  a  greater  care  to  keep  his  commandments. 

God  was  pleafed  to  cxcrcife  the  firft  Chriftians 
v/ith  great  fuffcrings,  and  to  try  their  love  and  con- 
llancy  to  him  and  his  truth,  in  a  very  extraordinary 
manner,  by  fcverity  and  contempt,  by  '*  the  fpoiling 
*'  of  their  goods,"  and  "  the  lofs  of  all  things  ;  by 
"  bonds  and  irnprifonments  \  by  cruel  mockings  and 
*'  fcourgings  •,"  by  the  extremity  of  torments,  and 
by  "  refilling  even  unto  blood  ;  by  being  killed  for 
"  his  fake  all  the  day  long,  and  appointed  as  fheep 
*'  for  the  (laughter."  God  was  pleafed  to  make 
their  way  to  heaven  very  fharp  and  painful,  and  to 
"  hedge  it  in,"  as  it  were  "  with  thorns  on  every 
*'  fide,"  fo  that  they  could  not,  but  "  through  mia- 
*'  ny  tribulations,  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven." 

Thus  we  ought  all  to  be  in  a  readinefs  and  refolu- 
tion  to  fubmit  to  this  duty,  if  God  fhould  think  fit  at 
any  time  of  our  lives  to  call  us  to  it.  But  if  he  be 
pleafed  to  cxcufe  us  from  it,  and  "  to  let  this  cup  pals 
"  from  us,"  (vv^hich  may  lawfully  be  our  earneft 
prayer  to  God,  fince  we  have  fo  good  a  pattern  for 
it)  there  will  be  another  duty  incumbent  upon  us, 
which  will  take  up  the  whole  man,  and  the  whole 
time  of  our  life,  and  that  is  "  to  ferve  him  without 
"  fear,  in  holinefs  and  righteoufnefs  before  him  all 
"  the  days  of  our  lives." 


SER- 


1049 

SERMON     LXVIII. 

Prcach'd  at  Whitehall  before  the  family, 
Nov.  I.  1686. 

Good  men  ftrangers  and  fojourners 
upon  earth. 

HEB.    XL    13. 

And  confejjed  that  they  were  ftrangers  and  pilgrims  en 
the  earth. 

The  whole  verfe  runs  thus ; 

Thefe  all  died  in  faith ^  not  having  received  the  promifes^ 
but  having  feen  them  afar  off^  and  were  perfuaded 
of  them^  and  embraced  them^  and  confejfed  that  they 
were  ftrangers  and  pilgrims  on  the  earth. 

TH  E  apoftle  having  declared  at  the  latter  end  S  E  R  M. 
of  the  foregoing  chapter,  that  faith  is  the  ^^^111. 
great  principle  whereby   good  men  are  adied,  and  The  firft 
whereby  they  are  fupported  under  all  the  evils  and  ^^r/non  on 
fufFerings  of  this  life,  verfe  38.  "  Now  thejuft  fhall  ^^^'^^^^• 
"  live  by  faith  ;"  in  this  chapter  he  makes  it  his  main 
bufinefs,   to  fet  forth  to  us  at  large  the  force  and 
power  of  faith  ;  and  to  this  purpofe,  lie  firft  tells  us 
what  kind  of  faith  he  means  j  viz.  a  firm  perfuafion 
of  things  not  prefent  and  vifible  to  lenfe,  but  invifible 
and  future  J  ver,  i,  '^^  Now  faith  (faith  he)  is  the 


1050  Good  men  fir  angers  mid 

S  E  R  M.  "  confident  expe6lation  of  things  hoped  for,  and  the 
"  evidence  of  things  not  fecn."  Faith  reprcfents  to 
us  the  reality  of  things  which  arc  invifible  to  fenfe, 
as  the  exiftence  of  Go  13  and  his  providence  •,  and  of 
tilings  which  are  at  a  great  diftance  from  us,  as  the 
future  flate  of  rewards  and  punifhments  in  another 
world. 

And  then  he  proceeds  to  fhew,  by  particular  and 
famous  inftances,  that  the  firm  belief  and  perfuafion 
of  thefe  things,  was  the  great  principle  of  the  piety 
and  virtue  of  the  faints  and  of  good  men  in  all  ages  of 
the  world  -,  by  this  Abel  and  Enoch  and  Noah  ;  A- 
braham,  Ifaac  and  Jacob  -,  Jofeph  and  Mofes,  and  all 
the  famous  heroes  of  the  old  teftament  "  obtained  a 
^'  good  report,"  and  "  pleafed  God,"  and  did  all 
thofe  eminent  a6ts  of  obedience  and  felf-denial  which 
are  recorded  of  them.  They  "  believed  the  being 
"  of  God,  and  that  he  is  a  rewarder  of  them  that 
*'  diligently  feek  him."  They  dreaded  his  threat- 
nings,  and  relied  upon  his  promifes  of  future  and 
invifible  good  things.  They  lived  and  died  in  a  full 
perfuafion  and  confidence  of  the  truth  of  them  ; 
though  they  did  not  live  to  fee  them  actually  fulfilled 
and  accomplifhed.  "  All  thefe"  (faith  he,  fpeaking 
of  thofe  eminent  faints  which  he  had  inflanced  in 
before)  "  died  in  faith  ,  not  having  received 
*'  the  promifes,  but  having  feen  them  afar  off,  and 
"  were  perfuaded  of  them,  and  embraced  them." 
This  is  fpoken  with  a  more  particular  regard  to  A- 
braham,  Ifaac  and  Jacob,  to  whom  the  promifes  of 
the  conquefl  and  pofTeinon  of  a  fruitful  land  were 
made,  and  of  a  numerous  offspring,  among  whom 
fhould  be  the  MefTias,  in  whom  all  the  nations  of 
the  earth  fhould  be  blelTed. 

Thefe 


fojourners  upon  earth,  105 1 

Thefe  promifes  they  did  not  live  to  fee  accom-  ^.^^j^- 
piifh'd  and  made  good  in  their  days  ;  but  they  hear- 
tily believed  them,  and  rejoiced  in  the  hope  and  ex- 
pectation of  them,  as  if  they  had  embraced  them  in 
their,  arms,  and  been  put  into  the  adlual  polIefTion  of 
them  :  "  and  they  confefled,  that  they  were  pilgrims 
"  and  flrangers  in  the  earth." 

This  faying  and  acknowledgment  more  particu- 
larly  and  immicdiately  refers  to  thofe  fayings  of  the 
patriarchs  Abraham  and  Jacob,  which  v/e  find  re- 
corded. Gen.  xxiii.  4.  where  Abraham  fays  to  the  fons 
of  Heth,  "  lam  a  ftranger  and  fojourner vv^ith you  •," 
and  Gen.  xlvii.  9.  where  Jacob  fays  to  Pharaoh, 
"  The  days  of  the  years  of  my  pilgrimage  are  an 
"  hundred  and  thirty  years  ;  few  and  evil  have  the 
"  days  of  the  years  of  my  life  been."  Thefe  good 
men  were  "  flrangers  and  fojourners"  in  a  land, 
which  was  promifed  to  be  theirs  afterwards.  They 
dwelt  in  it  themfelves  as  ftrangers,  but  were  in  ex- 
pe<flation  that  it  v/ouid  one  day  become  the  inheri- 
tance of  their  pofterity. 

Now  in  this,  as  by  a  type  and  fhadow,  the  apoille 
reprefents  to  us  the  condition  of  good  men,  while 
they  are  pafling  through  this  v,^orld»  They  are 
"  pilgrims  and  flrangers  in  the  earth  i"  they  travel 
up  and  down  the  world  for  a  time,  as  the  patriarchs 
did  in  the  land  of  Canaan  •,  but  are  in  expectation  of 
a  better  and  more  fettled  condition  hereafter  ;  "  they 
"  defire  a  better  country,"  that  is,  an  heavenly,  fays 
the  apoflle  at  the  i6th  verfe  of  this  chapter. 

That  which  I  defign  from  thefe  words  is  to  repre- 

fenc  to  us  our  prefent  condition  in  this  world,  and 

to  awaken  us  to  a  due  fenfe  and  ferious  confideration 

of  it.     It  is  the  fame  condition,  that  all  the  faints  and 

Jioly  men  that  are  gone  before  us  were  in,  in  this 

^  VvOiid, 


1052  Good  men  fir  angers  and 

\  Y  \  iT*  ^^^^^'  ^"^  every  one  of  us  may  fay  with  David, 
Pfal.  xxxix.  12.  "  I  am  a  ftranger  with  thee,  and  a 
"  fojourner,  as  all  my  fathers  were."  It  is  a  condi- 
tion very  troubkfom  and  very  unfettled,  fuch  as  that 
of  ''  pilgrims  and  flrangers"  ufeth  to  be.  This  we 
muft  all  acknowledge,  if  we  judge  rightly  of  our  pre- 
fent  ftate  and  condition.  "  They  confefTed,  that 
"  they  were  flrangers  and  pilgrims  on  the  earth :"  but 
yet  it  was  not  without  the  hope  and  expe6lation  of  a 
better  and  happier  condition  in  reverfion.  So  it  fol- 
lows juft  after;  "  they  that  fay  fuch  things,"  (that 
is,  "  that  confefs  themfelves  to  be  flrangers  and  pil- 
*^  grims  on  the  earth)  declare  plainly,  that  they  feek 
*'  a  country."  This  bore  up  the  patriarchs  under 
all  the  evils  and  troubles  of  their  pilgrimage,  that 
they  expeded  an  inheritance,  and  a  quiet  and  fettled 
pofTefiion  of  that  good  land  which  God  had  promifed 
to  them.  Anfwerably  to  which,  good  men  do  ex- 
pert, after  "  the  few  and  evil  days  of  their  pilgri- 
*'  mage"  in  this  world  are  over,  a  bleffed  inheri- 
tance in  "  a  better  country,"  that  is,  "  an  heavenly  ;" 
and  with  blelTed  Abraham,  the  fatlier  of  the  faithful, 
they  "  look  for  a  city  which  hath  foundations,  whofe 
*'  builder  and  maker  is  God,"  as  it  is  faid  of  that 
good  patriarch  at  the  tenth  verfe  of  this  chapter. 

It  is  very  frequent,  not  only  in  fcripture,  but  in 
other  authors,  t-o  reprefent  our  condition  in  this  world, 
by  that  of  pilgrims  and  fojourners  in  a  foreign  coun- 
try:  for  the  mind  which  is  the  man,  and  our  immor- 
tal fouls,  which  are  by  far  the  mofl  noble  and  excel- 
lent part  of  ourfelves,  are  the  natives  of  heaven,  and 
but  "  pilgrims  and  ftrangers"  here  on  the  earth  \  and 
when  the  days  of  our  pilgrimage  fhall  be  over,  are 
defigned  to  return  to  that  heavenly  country  from 
which  they.came,  and  to  which  they  belong.     And  ' 

therefore 


Jhjourners  upoii  earth, 

therefore  the  apoflle  tells  us,  Phil.  iii.  20.  that  Chri- 
llians  have  relation  to  heaven  as  their  native  place  and 
country,  Y\^cav  yct^  to  TxroAhsvpta.  h  i^^avoig  J'sra^- 
;^€f,  *'  our  converfation  is  in  heaven,"  fo  we  render 
the  words  ;  but  they  properly  fignify,  that  Chriftians 
are  members  of  that  city  and  fociety  which  is  above ; 
and  though  they  converfe  at  prefent  here  below, 
while  they  are  palTing  through  this  world,  yet  hea- 
ven is  the  country  to  whidi  they  do  belong,  and  whi- 
ther they  are  continually  tending,  fedes  ubi  fata  quie- 
tas  oftendunt^  where  a  quiet  habitation,  and  a  perpe- 
tual reft  is  defigned  and  prepared  for  them.  This  ac- 
knowledgment David  makes  concerning  himfelf,  and 
all  the.,  people  of  God,  i  Chron.  xxix.  15.  "  For 
*'  we  are  ftrangers  before  thee,  and  fojourners,  as 
"  were  all  our  fathers.  Our  days  on  the  earth  are  as 
*'  a  fhadow,  and  there  is  none  abiding."  So  Jike- 
wife  St.  Peter,  i  Pet.  i.  17.  "  Pafs  the  time  of  your 
^'  fojourning  here  in  fear;"  and  chap.  ii.  ver.  11. 
"  Dearly  beloved,  I  befeech  you,  as  ftrangers  and 
"  pilgrims  abftain  from  fleftily  lufts." 

And  not  only  the  infpired  writers  of  holyfcripture, 
but  heathen  authors,  do  frequently  make  ufe  of  this 
allufton.  Plato  t^lls  us,  it  was  a  common  faying, 
and  almoft  in  every  man's  mouth,  TrapiTncvjij^ici  ng 
i<Tiv  0  fSio;^  the  life  of  man  is  a  kind  of  pilgrimage. 
And  Tully,  in  his  excellent  difcourfe  de  fene^lute^ 
(concerning  old  age)  brings  in  Cato  defcribing  our 
pafTage  out  of  this  world,  not  as  a  departure  from 
our  home,  but  Hke  a  man  leaving  his  inn,  in  which 
he  hath  lodged  for  a  night  or  two,  ex  vita  ifta  difcedo^ 
tanquam  ex  hofpitio^  non  tanqiiam  ex  domo  \  commorandi 
enim  natura  diverforium  nohis^  non  haUtandi  dedit : 
"  When  I  leave  this  world  (fays  he)  I  look  upon  my 
^*  felf  as  departing  out  of  an  inn,  and  not  as  quitting 

Vol.  V.  9  E  *'  mine 

4^ 


1 05+'  Good  jnen  fir  angers  and 

E^RM  tc  j-Qii-i(^  own  home  and  habitation-,  nature  having 
"  aillgned  this  world  to  us  as  a  place  to  fojourn,  but 
"  not  to  dwell  in."  Which  is  the  fame  with  what 
the  apofhle  fays  in  the  text,  concerning  the  patriarchs, 
*'  they  confcfTed  that  they  were  pilgrims  and  ftran- 
*'  gers  on  the  earth  ♦,"  and  concerning  all  Chriilians, 
chap.  xiii.  14.  "  Here  we  have  no  continuing  city  \ 
*'  but  we  feek  one  to  come." 

But  I  do  not  intend  to  follow  the  metaphor  too 
clofe,  and  to  vex  and  torture  it,  by  purfuing  all  thofe 
little  parallels  and  fim/ilitudes,  which  a  lively  fancy 
might  make  or  find,  betwixt  the  condition  of  llran- 
gers  and  pilgrims,  and  the  life  of  man  during  his  a- 
bode  and  pafiage  through  this  world.  I  v/iy  infiit 
only  upon  two  things,  which  feem  plainly  to  be  de- 
figned  and  intended  by  this  metaphor,  ajid  they  are 
thefe  ; 

I.  That  our  condition  in  this  world  is  ven^- trouble - 
fom  and  unfettled  ;  *'  they  confefled  that  they  were 
"  fbrangers  and  pilgrims  on  the  earth." 

II.  It  implies  a  tendency  to  a  future  fettling,  and 
the  hopes  and  expe6i:ation  of  a  happier  condition,  in- 
to which  we  ihall  enter  when  we  go  out  of  this  world. 
For  fo  it  follows  in  the  very  next  words  after  the 
text ;  "  they  confefTed  that  they  were  ftrangers  and 
*'  pilgrims  on  the  earth :  for  they  that  fay  fuch  things, 
"  declare  plainly,  that  they  feek  a  country.  They 
*'  that  fay  fuch  things  ;"  that  is,  they  that  acknow- 
ledge themfelves  to  have  lived  in  fuch  a  reftlcfs  and 
uncertain  condition  in  this  world,  travelling  from  one 
place  to  another,  as  the  patriarchs  Abraham,  ifaac, 
and  Jacob  did,  and  yet  pretend  to  be  perfaaded  of 
tlie  goQdnefs  pf  God,  ^ind  the  faithfulnefs  of  his  pro- 
mife,  in  which  he  folemnly  declared  himfelf  to  be 
their  God,  do  hereby  plainly  fliew,  that  they  exped 

foniQ 


fojourners  upon  carih*  I<^55 

fome  happier  condition  hereafter,  wherein  that  great  S  K  R  M. 
promife  of  God  will  be  made  good  to  them  to  the 
full. 

And  thefe  are  two  very  weighty  and  ufeful  confi- 
derations,  that  we  fliould  both  underftand  our  pre- 
fent  condition  in  this  world,  and  our  future  hope  and 
expe6lation  after  our  departure  out  of  it,  that  fo  we 
may  demean  ourfelves  fuitably  to  both  thefe  condi^ 
tions  ;  both  as  it  is  fit  for  thofe  who  look  upon  them- 
felves  "  as  pilgrims  and  fojourners"  in  this  world, 
and  likewife,  as  it  becomes  thofe  who  "  feek  and  ex-^ 
"  peel  a  better  country,"  and  hope  to  be  made  par- 
takers of  a  bleffed  immortality  in  another  world.  I 
Hiall  briefly  fpeak  to  both  thefe  ;  and  then  fliew  what 
effecl  and  influence  the  ferious  meditation  of  thefe  two 
points  ought  to  have  upon  every  one  of  us. 

I.  That  our  condition  in  this  world  is  very  trouble- 
fom  and  unfettled.  This  I  take  to  be  principally  in- 
tended in  the  metaphor  of  "  fbrangers  and  pilgrims," 
Such  was  the  life  of  the  patriarchs,  which  is  here 
fpoken  of  in  the  text  ♦,  they  had  no  conftant  abode 
and  fixt  habitation,  but  were  continually  wandering 
from  one  kingdom  and  country  to  another  ;  in  which 
travels  they  were  expofed  to  a  great  many  hazards 
and  dangers,  aflii6lions  and  miferies,  aftronts  and  in- 
juries, as  we  read  at  large  in  the  hifl^^ory  of  their  tra^ 
vels  in  the  old  teftament.  And  fuch  is  our  condition 
in  this  world ;  it  is  often  troublefom,  and  always  un- 
certain and  unfettled. 

It  is  often  very  troublefom.  Not  to  infill  upon 
the  weak  condition  of  infancy  and  childhood,  the 
helplefnefs  of  that  fl:ate,  and  infufficiency  of  it  for  it's 
own  prefervation,  and  the  fupply  of  it's  natural  wants 
and  neceflities  ;  not  to  mention  the  dangerous  vanity 
and  defperate  folly  of  youth,  nor  the  infirmities  and 

9  E  2  con- 


IC56  Good  men  Jlrmigers  and 

S  E  R  M .  contempts,  the  many  tedious  and  wearifom  days  and 
nights  that  old  age  is  commonly  grieved  and  afflided 
withal,  to  that  degree,  as  to  make  life  not  only  iin- 
pleafant,  but  almoft  an  intolerable  burden  to  us.  Not 
to  dwell  upon  thefe,  which  yet  take  up  and  poflefs  a 
great  fliare  and  portion  of  our  lives :  if  we  look  up- 
on man  in  his  befl  ftate,  we  fliall  find  him,  as  Da- 
vid hath  long  fince  pronounced  on  him,  to  be  "  al- 
"  together  vanity."  We  need  not  go  a  pilgrimage, 
and  travel  into  remote  countries,  to  make  life  more 
troublefom  and  uneafy.  In  what  part  of  the  world 
foever  we  are,  even  that  which  we  improperly  call 
our  own  home  and  native  country,  we  fhall  meet 
with  trouble  and  inconvenience  enough  to  convince 
us,  that  we  are  but  ftrangers  in  it.  More  efpecially 
good  men  are  peculiarly  liable  to  a  great  many  evils 
and  fufferings  upon  account  of  their  piety  and  virtue. 
*'  They  are  not  of  the  world'*  (as  our  bleffed  Savi- 
our tells  his  difciples,  John  XV.  19.)  and  "  becaufe 
"  they  are  not  of  the  world,  therefore  the  world 
"  hateth  them,"  and  taketh  all  opportunities  and 
occafions  to  vex  and  perfecute  them  in  one  kind  or 
other,  either  by  doing  all  manner  of  evil  to  them, 
or  by  fpeaking  all  manner  of  evil  of  them. 

But  fuppofe  we  efcape  trouble  upon  this  account ; 
there  are  abundance  of  common  and  natural  inconvc- 
niencies,  which  render  human  hfe  very  uneafy.  For 
either  we  mufl  live  alone,  or  in  the  company  and  fo- 
ciety  of  others  :  one  of  thefe  two  is  neceflary  and 
unavoidable.  Suppofe  we  would  live  alone;  how 
few  are  there  that  can  enjoythemfelves  tolerably  alone 
for  any  confiderable  time  ?  For  though  there  be  a 
great  deal  too  much  of  felf-love  in  mankind,  and 
men  are  generally  extremely  fond  of  therniclves  ;  yet 
I  know  not  how  it  happens,  (^thougii  fo  ii  is)  that  very 

few 


LXVIII. 


Jojoiirners  upon  earth,  ^^57 

few  men  in  the  world  care  for  their  own  company,  S  E  R  M. 
or  cm  endure,  for  any  con ficier able  time,  to  converfe 
onJyv.vn  themifelves ;  nay,  for  the  mofl  part,  they 
are  fooncr  glutted  with  themfelves,  and  furfeited  of 
their  own  converfation,  than  with  the  woril  company 
they  can  meet  with  •,  a  (^rewd  fign,  as  one  would 
think^  that  they  knew  fomething  worfe  by  themfelves 
than  of  any  body  tKe,  or  at  leafl  they  know  it  more 
certainly.  It  is  a  wife  and  deep  faying  of  Ariflotle, 
"  whoever  affedls  to  be  alone,  muft  be  rj  -9-erV,  rj 
"  ^^d^'^v,  either  a  God  or  a  wild  beaft  -,"  either  he 
mufl  be  fufficient  f^r  himfelf,  and  want  nothing  -,  or 
of  fo  wild  and  favage  a  difpofition,  as  to  defcroy 
every  thing  that  is  weaker,  and  to  run  away  from 
every  thing  that  is  flronger  than  himfelf.  Now  man 
is  neither  good  enough  to  be  contented  and  fatisfied 
with  himfelf,  nor  bad  enough  to  hate  and  avoid  every 
body  elfe  ;  and  therefore  he  mull  enter  into  fociety, 
and  keep  company  with  other  men. 

And  if  we  go  abroad  into  the  world,  and  try  the 
converfation  of  men,  it  cannot  but  grieve  us  to  fee 
a  great  many  things,  which  yet  we  muft  fee  every 
day ;  the  cenforioufnefs,  and  uncharitablenefs,  and 
infincerity  of  men  one  towards  another  ^  to  fee  with 
what  kindnefs  they  will  treat  one  another  to  the  face, 
and  hov^  hardly  they  will  ufe  them  behind  their  backs. 
If  there  were  nothing  elfe,  this  one  naughty  quality, 
fo  common  and  reigning  among  mankind,  were  e- 
nough  to  make  an  honeft  and  true  hearted  man,  one 
that  loves  plainnefs  and  fincerity,  to  be  heartily  fick 
of  the  world,  and  glad  to  Ileal  off  the  flage,  where 
there  is  nothing  native  and  fincere,  but  all  perfonated 
and  adled  ;  where  the  converfation  of  a  great  part  of 
men  is  all  defigning  and  infidious,  full  of  flattery  and 
falfhood,  of  good  words  and  ill  offices ;  "  one  fpeak- 

"  eth 


L\'VJII. 


)  o  c  8  Good  men  fir  angers  aiid 

S  K  R  M.^  "  ^^^  peaceably  to  his  neighbour  with  his  mouth,  but 
"  in  his  heart  he  heth  in  wait,"  as  it  is  in  the  prophet, 
Jer.  ix.  8.  And  when  a  man  hath  done  all  the  good 
turns  he  can,  and  endeavoured  to  oblige  every  man, 
and  not  only  to  live  inoffenfively,  but  exemplarily  ; 
he  is  fairly  dealt  withal,  and  comes  off  upon  good 
terms,  if  he  can  but  efcape'ihe  ill  words  of  men  for 
doing  well,  and  obtain  a  pardon  for  thofe  things  which 
truly  deferve  praife. 

But  fetting  afide  thefe,  and  the  like  melancholy 
confiderations ;  when  we  are  in  the  health  and  vi- 
gour of  our  age,  when  our  blood  is  warm,  and  our 
Ipirits  quick,  and  the  humours  of  our  body  not  yet 
turned  and  foured  by  great  difappointments,  and 
grievous  lofTes  of  our  eftates,  or  neareft  friends  and 
relations,  by  a  long  courfe  of  afflictions,  by  many 
crofs  events  and  calamitous  accidents  -,  yet  we  arc 
continually  liable  to  all  thefc  :  and  the  perpetual  fear 
and  dan2;er  of  them  is  no  fmall  trouble  and  uneafi- 
nefs  to  our  minds,  and  does  in  a  great  meafure  rob  us 
of  the  comfort,  and  eat  out  the  pleafure  and  fweet- 
nefs  of  all  our  enjoyments  ^  and,  by  degrees,  the  evils 
•we  fear  overtake  us  ;  and  as  one  afflidion  and  trou- 
ble goes  off,  another  fucceeds  in  the  place  of  it,  like 
Job's  meffengers,  whofe  bad  tidings  and  reports  of 
calamitous  accidents  came  fo  thick  upon  him,  that 
they  overtook  one  another. 

If  we  have  a  plentiful  fortune,  we  are  apt  to  abufe 
it  to  intemperance  and  luxury  •,  and  this  naturally 
breeds  bodily  pains  and  difeafes,  which  take  away  all 
the  comfort  and  enjoyment  of  a  great  eflate.  If  we 
have  health,  it  may  be  we  are  afflicted  with  loffes, 
or  deprived  of  friends,  or  crofs'd  in  our  interefts  and 
defigns,  and  one  thing  or  other  happens  to  impede 
or  interrupt  the  contentment  and  happinefs  of  our 

lives. 


fojourners  upon  earth,  "^^59 

lives.  Sometimes  an  unexpe(5led  ftorm,  or  feme  ^A^,J^" 
other  fudden  calamity,  fweepeth  away,  in  an  inflant, 
all  that  which  with  fo  much  induftry  and  care  w^e 
have  been  gathering  many  years.  Or  if  an  eftate 
Hand  firm,  our  children  are  taken  away,  to  whole 
comfort  and  advantage  all  the  pains  and  endeavours 
of  our  lives  were  devoted.  Or  if  none  of  thefe  hap- 
pen, (as  it  is  very  rare  to  efcape  moft,  or  fome  of 
them)  yet  for  a  demonfhration  to  us  that  God  intend- 
ed this  world  to  be  uneafy,  to  convince  us  that  a  per- 
fedl  Hate  of  happinefs  is  not  to  be  had  here  below, 
we  often  fee  in  experience,  that  thofe  who  feem  to  be 
in  a  condition  as  happy  as  this  world  can  put  them 
into,  by  the  greateft  accommodations  towards  it,  are 
yet  as  far  or  farther  from  happinefs,  as  thofe  who  are 
deilitute  of  moft  of  thofe  things  wherein  the  greateft 
felicity  of  this  world  is  thought  to  confift.  Many 
times  it  fo  happens,  tliat  they  who  have  all  the  furni- 
ture and  requifites,  all  the  materials  and  ingredients 
ofav/orldly  fehcity  at  their  command,  and  in  their 
power,  yet  have  not  the  fkill  and  abihty  out  of  all  thefe 
to  frame  a  happy  condition  of  Hfe  to  themfelves.  They 
have  health,  and  friends,  and  reputation,  and  eftate 
in  abundance,  and  all  outward  accommodations  that 
heart  can  wifh  •,  and  yet  in  the  midft  of  all  thefe  cir- 
cumftances  of  outward  felicity,  they  are  uneafy  in 
their  minds,  and  as  the  wife  man  exprefleth  it,  ''  in 
*  ■  their  fufficiency  they  are  in  ftreights,"  and  are  as  it 
were  furfeited  even  with  happinefs  itfelf,  and  do  fo 
fantaftically  and  unaccountably  naufeate  the  good  con- 
dition they  are  in,  that  though  they  want  nothing  to 
make  them  happy,  yet  tliey  cannot  think  themfelves 
fo  ;  though  they  have  nothing  in  the  world  to  mo- 
left  and  difguft  them,  yet  they  can  make  a  ftiift  to 
create  as  much  trouble  to  themfelves,  out  of  nothing, 
J  as 


I  o  6  o  Good  men  Jlr angers  and 

S  E  R  M.  as  they  who  have  the  real  and  fubflanftial  caufcs  of 
^^;^"^;  difcontent. 

Which  plainly  fhews,  that  we  are  not  to  look  for 
happinefs  here  •,  'tis  not  to  be  found  in  this  land  of 
the  living  ;  and  after  our  enquiries  after  it,  we  ihall 
fee  fuiTicient  reafon  to  take  up  Solomon's  conclufion, 
that  "  all  is  vanity  and  vexation  of  fpirit ;"  which  is 
much  the  lame  with  that  aphorifm  of  David  his  fa- 
ther, which  I  mentioned  before,  that "  man  in  his  beft 
*'  eftate  is  altogether  vanity." 

But  what  happinefs  foever  our  condidon  in  this 
world  is  capable  of,  'tis  moil  affuredly  full  of  uncer- 
tainty and  unfettlement ;  we  cannot  enjoy  it  long, 
and  every  moment  we  are  in  danger  of  being  depriv- 
ed of  it.  Whatever  degree  of  earthly  felicity  we  are 
poiTefs'd  of,  we  have  no  fecurity  that  it  fhall  conti- 
nue. There  is  nothing  in  this  world,  but,  when  we 
are  as  fure  of  it  as  this  world  can  make  us,  may  be 
taken  away  from  us  by  a  thoufand  accidents.  But 
fuppofe  it  to  abide  and  continue  •,  we  ourfelves  Ihall 
be  taken  away  from  it.  We  muft  die,  and  "  in  that 
''  very  day"  all  our  enjoyments  and  hopes,  as  to  this 
world,  will  perifli  with  us ;  for  here  is  no  abiding 
place,  "  we  have  no  continuing  city  ;"  fo  that  it  is 
in  vain  to  defign  a  happinefs  to  our  felves  in  this 
world,  when  we  are  not  to  flay  in  it,  but  only  travel 
and  pafs  through  it. 

And  this  is  the  firft  •,  our  condition  in  this  world 
is  very  troublefom  and  unfettled. 

II.  Our  condition  in  this  world  being  a  flate  of  pil- 
grimage, doth  imply  a  tendency  to  future  fettlement, 
and  the  hopes  and  expedation  of  a  happier  condition 
hereafter.  And  fo  the  apoftle  reafons  immediately 
after  the  text  -,  "  they  confeffed  that  they  were  pil- 
"  grims  and  ftrangers  on  the  earth  j  for  they  that 

^'  fay 


fojourners  upon  earth,  to6t 

^  fay  fuch  things,  declare  plainly  that  they  feek  a  S  £  R  M. 
"  country;"  that  is,  they  who  acknowledge  them- 
felves  to  be  "  pilgrims  and  ftrangers  in  the  earth,'* 
and  yet  withal  profefs  to  be  perfuaded  of  the  good- 
nefs  of  God  and  the  fidelity  of  his  promife,  "  do 
'  '^  plainly  declare,  that  they  feek' '  another ' '  country . ' ' 
This  is  fpoken  of  Abraham,  Ifaac,  and  Jacob,  who 
acknowledged  themfelves  to  be  "  ftrangers  and  pil- 
"  grim.s  in  the  earth  •/'  and  thereby  "  declared,  that 
*'  they  fought"  another  "  country."  Now,  fays 
the  apoftie,  this  cannot  be  the  country  from  whence 
they  hrft  came,  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,  ver.  15.  "  And 
'*"  truly,  if  they  had  been  mindful  of  that  country 
*'  fr6m  whence  they  came  out,  they  might  have  had 
''  an  opportunity  of  returning  thither."  And  there- 
fore he  concludes,  that  the  country  which  they  fought 
was  a  better  country  than  any  in  this  world,  ver.  16. 
^'  But  now  they  defire  a  better  country  -,  that  is,  an 
"  heavenly.  Therefore  God  is  not  alliamed  to  be 
*'  called  their  God  -,  for  he  hath  prepared  for  them 
*'  a  city."  This  plainly  refers  to  that  famous  de- 
claration or  promife  of  God  to  the  patriarchs,  of  be- 
ing their  God  -,  "I  am  the  God  of  Abraham,  the 
"  God  of  Ifaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob."  Now  cer- 
tainly this  promife  of  God  did  fignify  fome  very  great 
bleffing  and  advantage  to  thofe  faithful  fervants  of 
God  above  others.  This  was  not  made  good  to 
them  in  this  world  •,  for  "  they  confelTed,  that  they 
''  were  pilgrims  and  ftrangers  in  the  earth."  Where 
then  is  the  bleiTing  fpoken  of  and  fignified  by  the  great 
words  of  that  promife  that  "  God  was  their  God  r* 
They  met  with  no  fuch  condition  in  this  Vv^orld,  as 
was  anfwerable  to  the  greatnefs  of  the  promife.  From 
hence  the  apoftie  argues,  that  they  JKad  a  firm  per  ui- 
fion  of  a  future  happinefs  •,  "  for  they  that  fay  fuch 
Vol.  V.  5  F  "  things 


I  o  6  2  Good  men  Jlr angers  and 

E  R  M.  «'  things  declare  plainly,  that  they  feek  a  better  coun- 
"  try  ;  that  is,  an  heavenly.  Wherefore  God  is  not 
'^  afhamed  to  be  called  their  God,  fince  he  hath  pre- 
"  pared  for  them  a  city."  And  though  the  pro- 
mile  of  God  to  Abraham  did  immediately  defign  the 
land  of  Canaan,  and  the  earthly  Jerufalem  •,  yet  the 
apoflle  extends  it  to  that  which  was  typified  by  it  •,  viz. 
"  an  heavenly  country,"  the  "  Jerufalem  which  is 
''  above,"  which,  at  the  loth  verfe  of  this  chapter, 
is  called  "a  city  which  hath  foundations,  whofe  build- 
''  er  and  maker  is  God."  And  nov/,  feeing  God 
•hath  defigned  and  prepared  fo  great  a  happincfs  for 
them  in  another  world,  well  might  he  be  called 
"  their  God,"  notwithfbanding  that  they  were 
*'  ftrangers  and  pilgrims  on  the  earth  ;"  that  is, 
though  the  full  meaning  and  importance  of  this  pro- 
mife  was  not  made  good  to  them  in  this  world,  yet 
it  was  accompliHi'd  to  the  full  in  the  happinefs  which 
was  defigned  for  them  in  another  life.  ''  And  God 
"  need  not  be  afhamed  to  be  called  their  God  ;"  im- 
plying, that  if  nothing  had  been  meant  by  it  beyond 
this  world,  this  promife,  of  God's  being  "  their  God," 
would  have  fallen  lliamefully  fhort  of  what  it  feemed 
to  import.  And  this  I  conceive  to  be  the  true  rea- 
fon,  why  our  Saviour  lays  fo  much  weight  upon 
this  promife,  as  to  pitch  upon  it  for  the  proof  of  the 
refurredion  ;  that  is,  of  a  future  ftate  of  happinefs 
in  another  world. 

There  are  many  confiderations  apt  to  perfuadc 
good  men  of  another  life  after  this  •,  as,  that  man-^ 
kind  is  generally  poflefs'd  with  this  hope  and  per- 
fuafion  ;  and  that  the  more  wife  and  virtuous  men 
have  been,  the  niore  plainly  have  they  apprehended 
the  hopes  of  immortality,  and  the  better  have  they 
been  contented  to  leave  tliis  world,  as  if,  feeing  far- 
ther 


fojourners  upon  earth.  1^63 

ther  than  other  men,  they  had  a  clearer  profpefl:  of  S  F  R  M. 
the  happinefs  they  were  entring  upon  :  but  above  all, 
that  God  hath  made  our  condition  in  this  world  fo 
troublefom  and  unfettled,  as  if  he  had  defigned  on 
purpofe  to  make  us  feek  for  happinefs  elfewhere,  and 
to  elevate  and  raife  our  minds  to  the  hopes  and  ex- 
pe6lation  of  a  condition  better  and  more  durable, 
than  any  that  is  to  be  met  with  in  this  world  \  which, 
confidering  the  goodnefs  of  God,  and  his  gracious 
providence  and  care  of  good  men,  is  a  thing  of  itfelf 
extremely  credible. 

Having  thus,  as  briefly  as  I  could,  difpatched  the 
two  particulars  which  I  propounded  to  fpeak  to  for 
the  explication  of  the  text,  I  fhould  now  fhew  what 
influence  thefe  confiderations  ought  to  have  upon  our 
lives  and  pradice. 

And  if  this  be  our  condition  in  this  world,  and 
thefe  our  hopes  and  expectations  as  to  another  life  ; 
if  we  be  "  pilgrims  and  flrangers  on  the  earth  ;"  and 
"  look  for  a  better  country,  that  is,  an  heavenly  ;'* 
this  ought  to  have  a  great  influence  upon  us  in  thefe 
following  refpeds,  which  I  Ihall  at  prefent  but  very 
briefly  mention. 

1 .  Let  us  intangle  and  incumber  ourfelves  as  little 
as  we  can  in  this  our  pilgrimage  j  let  us  not  ingage 
our  afl"e61:ions  too  far  in  the  pleafures  and  advantages 
of  this  world  ;  for  we  are  not  to  continue  and  fettle 
in  it,  but  to  pafs  through  it.  A  little  will  ferve  for 
our  paiTage  and  accommodation  in  this  journey  ;  and 
beyond  that,  why  fliould  we  fo  earneftly  covet  and 
feek  more  ? 

2.  If  we  be  "  pilgrims  and  flirangers  ;"  then  it 
concerns  us  to  behave  ourfelves  blamelefly  and  inof- 
fenfively,  remembering,  that  the  eyes  of  people  are 
upon  us,  and  that  thofe  among  whom  we  live  will  be 

9  F  2  very 


1064  (^ood  men  Jtr angers  and 

^r  v^'^Jf  ^^*y  curious  and    obfcrvant  of  our  manners   and 

i-iX  V  111. 

I  carriage. 

3.  Let  us  be  chearful  and  patient  under  the  trou- 
bles and  affli6lions  of  this  prefent  life.  They  who 
are  in  a  flrange  country,  muft  expe6l  to  encounter 
many  injuries  and  afiVonts,  and  to  be  put  to  great 
difficulties  and  hazards,  which  vve  Ihould  endeavour 
to  bear  with  that  chearfulnefs,  as  men  that  are  upon 
a  journey  life  to  bear  foul  ways  and  bad  weather, 
and  inconvenient  lodging  and  accommodations. 

4.  The  confideration  of  our  prefent  condition  and 
future  hopes  fhould  fet  us  above  the  fondnefs  of  life, 
and  the  (laviOi  fear  of  death.  For  our  minds  will 
never  be  raifed  to  their  true  pitch  and  height,  till  we 
have  in  fome  good  meailire  conquered  thefe  two  paf- 
fions,  and  made  them  fubject  to  our  reafon.  As  for 
this  prefent  life,  and  the  enjoyments  of  it,  what  do 
we  fee  in  them,  that  fhould  make  us  fo  ftrangely  to 
dote  upon  them  r  ^/^  lucis  miferi  tarn  dira  ctipido ! 
This  world,  at  the  belt,  is  but  a  very  indifferent 
place :  and  he  is  the  wifeil  man  that  bears  himfelf 
towards  it  with  the  moft  indifferent  affedion  ;  that 
is  always  willing  to  leave  it,  and  yet  patient  to  ftay 
in  it  as  long  as  God  pleafes. 

5.  We  ihould  always  prefer  our  duty  and  a  good 
confcience  before  all  the  world  ;  becaufe  it  is  in  truth 
more  valuable,  if  our  fouls  be  immortal,  and  do  fur- 
vive  in  another  world.  For  (as  our  Saviour  ar- 
giies)  '^  What  is  a  man  profited,  if  he  gain  the 
**  whole  world,  and  lofe  his  own  foul  ?  Or  what 
*'  f-  all  a  man  give  in  exchange  for  his  foul  ?*'  And 
thus  ^H.  ;'^aul  rcafoncd  with  himfelf,  from  the  belief 
of  "  iv  ^r.rredlion  of  the  jufl  and  unjuft.  For  this 
*'  ca  .)fe  'faith  he)  i  exercife  my  felf  alway  to  have 
^'  a  conf.  i.  xj  void  of  offence  both  toward  God  and 
^'  toward  man.''  Laftly, 


fojotirners  upon  earth,  ^ob^ 

Laflly,  If  we  be  fojoiirners  and  travellers,  we  IKouId  S  E  R  M. 
often  think  of  our  end,  and  carefully  mind  the  way 
to  it.  Our  end  is  everlafting  happinefs  -,  and  the  way 
to  it  is  a  conllant  and  fmcere  and  univerfal  obedience 
to  the  commandments  of  God.  When  the  young 
man  in  the  gofpel  enquired  of  our  Saviour  the  way 
to  eternal  happinefs,  faying,  "  good  mafter,  what 
"  good  thing  fhall  I  do,  that  I  may  inherit  eternal 
"  Life  ?"  His  anfwer  to  him  was,  "  if  thou  wilt 
*'  enter  into  life,  keep  the  commandments.'*  We 
may  eafily  miftake  our  way ;  for  "  flrait  is  the  gate, 
"  and  narrow  is  the  way  that  leads  to  life,  and  few 
"  there  be  that  find  it."  Therefore  we  fhould  of- 
ten pray  to  God,  as  David  does,  Pfal.  cxix.  19. 
*'  I  am  a  ftranger  in  the  earth,  hide  not  thy  com- 
"  mandments  from  me."  And  Pfalm  cxxxix.  23, 
24.  "  Search  me,  O  God,  and  know  my  heart  j  try 
"  me,  and  know  my  thoughts  \  and  fee  if  there  be 
"  any  wicked  way  in  me,  and  lead  me  in  the  way 
"  everlafting." 


SER- 


10 66  G$od  men  Jirangers  and 

S  E  R  M  O  N     LXIX. 

Good  men  ftrangers  and  fojourners 
upon  earth. 

HEB.   XI.    13. 

And  confejjed  that  they  were  Jirangers  and  pilgrims  on 
the  earth. 

The  whole  verfe  runs  thus  -, 

^heje  all  died  in  faith ^  not  having  received  the  promifes^ 
but  having  feen  them  afar  off^  and  were  perfuaded 
of  them^  and  embraced  them,  and  eonfejfed  that  they 
were  Jirangers  and  pilgrims  on  the  earth, 

S  E  R  M.  X  Have  lately  in  this  place  (upon  a  particular  day 

LXIX.     Jl^    an^j  occafion,  begun  to  handle  thefe  words  ;  I 

^Y\i^^^^  ^^11  briefly  give  you  the  heads  of  what  hath  been 

fecond       already  delivered,  and  proceed  to    what  remains. 

And  that  which  I  defigned  from  this  text  was,  to  re- 

prefent  our  prefent  condition  in  this  world,   and  to 

awaken  our  minds  to  a  due  fenfe  and  confideration  of 

it.  It  is  the  fame  condition  that  all  the  faints  and  holy 

men  that  have  gone  before  us  were  in,  in  this  world  ^ 

and  we  may  all  of  us  fay  with  David,  Pfal.  xxxix. 

12.  "  I  am  a  ftranger  with  thee,  and  a  fojourner,  as 

"  all  my  fathers  were." 


fermon  on 
this  text. 


fojourners  upon  earth.  1067 

It  is  very  frequent,  not  only  in  fcripture,  but  in  SERM. 
other  authors,  to  reprefent  our  condition  in  this 
world,  by  that  of  '*  pilgrims  and  fojourners"  in  a  far 
coi^ntry.  For  the  mind,  which  is  the  man,  and  our 
immortal  fouls,  which  are,  by  far,  the  moft  noble 
and  excellent  part  of  our  felves,  are  the  natives  of 
heaven,  and  but  "  pilgrims  and  ftrangers"  here 
on  the  earth  ;  and  when  the  days  of  our  pilgrimage 
fhall  be  accomplifhed,  are  defigned  to  return  to  that 
"  heavenly  country"  from  which  they  came,  and  to 
which  they  belong.  And  for  the  explication  of  tliis 
metaphor,  I  infilled  only  upon  two  things,  which 
feem  plainly  to  be  defigned  and  intended  by  it. 

I.  That  our  condition  in  this  world  is  very  trou* 
blefom  and  unfettled  -,  "  they  confefTed  that  they 
*'  were  pilgrims  and  llrangers  on  the  earth." 

II.  It  implies  a  tendency  to  a  future  fettlement, 
and  the  hopes  and  expedlation  of  a  happier  condition, 
into  which  we  fhall  enter  when  we  go  out  of  this 
world. 

And  thefe  I  told  you  are  two  very  weighty  and 
ufeful  confiderations  j  that  we  ihould  both  underftand 
our  prefent  condition  in  this  world,  and  our  future 
hopes  and  expedation  after  our  departure  out  of  it ; 
that  fo  we  may  demean  ourfelves  fuitably  to  both 
thefe  conditions  •,  both  as  is  fit  for  thofe  who  look 
on  themfelves  as  "  pilgrims  and  fojourners"  in  this 
world  •,  and  likewife,  as  it  becomes  thofe  who  "  feek 
"  and  expecl  a  better  country,"  and  hope  to  be  par- 
takers of  a  bkf'.ed  imm.ortality  in  another  world. 

I.  That  our  coixlition  in  this  world  is  very  trou- 
blefom  and  unfettled  ;  and  this  is  principally  intend- 
ed by  the  metaphor  of  "  pilgrims  and  ftrangers." 
Such  was  the  life  of  the  patriarchs  here  fpoken  of  in 
tlie  text  i  they  had  no  conilant  abode  and  fixt  habi- 
tation. 


io68  Good  men  Ji rangers  and 

SERM.  tation,  but  were  continually  wandering  from  one 
kingdom  and  country  to  another  ;  in  which  travels 
they  were  expofed  to  a  great  many  dangers  and  fuf- 
ferings,  affronts  and  injuries  ;  as  we  read  at  large  in 
the  hiflory  of  their  travels  in  the  old  tefbament. 
And  fuch  is  our  condition  in  this  world  ;  it  is  often 
troublefom,  and  always  uncertain,  and  unfettled ;  fo 
that  whatever  degree  of  worldly  felicity  any  man  is 
poffeft  of,  he  hath  no  fecurity  that  it  fhall  continue 
for  one  moment. 

II.  Our  condition  in  this  world  being  a  ilate  of 
pilgrimage,  it  implies  a  tendency  to  a  future  fettle- 
ment,  and  the  hopes  and  expe6bation  of  a  happier 
condition,  into  which  we  fhall  enter  fo  foon  as  we 
leave  this  world.  For  fo  it  follows  immediately  after 
the  text  *,  "  they  confelfed  that  they  were  pilgrims 
'^  and  flrangers  on  the  earth  •,  for  they  that  fay  fuch 
*'  things,  declare  plainly  that  they  feek  a  country. 
''  They  that  fay  fuch  things,"  that  is,  they  that  ac- 
knowledge themfelves  to  have  lived  in  fuch  a  refllefs 
and  uncertain  condition  in  this  world,  travelling  from 
one  place  to  another,  as  the  patriarchs  Abraham, 
Ifaac  and  Jacob  did  ;  and  yet  pretend  to  be  perfuad- 
ed  of  the  goodnefs  of  God,  and  the  faithfulnefs  of 
his  promife,  in  which  he  fo  folemnly  declares  himJelf 
to  be  their  God  •,  do  hereby  plainly  fhew,  that  they 
expedl  fome  happier  condition  hereafter,  wherein 
that  great  promife  of  God  will  be  made  good  to 
them  to  the  full  -,  fo  that  he  need  "  not  be  ailiamed 
''  to  have  been  called  their  God." 

Having  handled  at  large  thefe  two  particulars,  I 
come  now  to  fliew  what  influence  the  confideration 
of  them  ought  to  have  upon  our  lives  and  prad:ices. 
And  if  this  be  our  condition  in  this  world,  and  thefe 
our  hopes  and  expectations,  as  to  another  life,  if  we 

be 


fsjourfters  upon  earth.  1069 

be  "  pilgrims  and  ftrangers  in  the  earth,"  and  "  look  ^^  ^tv^ 
"  for  a  better  country,"  that  is,  "  an  heavenly  •," 
this  ought  to  have  a  great  influence  upon  us  in  thefe 
following  refpedls,  which  I  did  but  briefly  mention 
before  ;  but  fhall  now  profecute  and  prefs  more 
largely. 

I.  Let  us  entangle  and  incumber  ourfelves  as  Httle 
as  we  can  in  this  our  pilgrimage :  let  us  not  engage 
our  affedlions  too  far  in  the  pleafures  and  advantages 
of  this  world,  becaufe  we  are  not  to  ftay  in  it,  but  to 
pafs  through  it.  Upon  this  confideration  the  apoille 
St.  Peter  doth  fo  earneflly  exhort  Chriflians  to  pre- 
ferve  themfelves  from  flefhly  lulls,  i  Pet.  ii.  11. 
"  Dearly  beloved,  I  befeech  you,  as  flrangers  and 
"  pilgi'ims,  to  abflain  from  flefhly  lufls,  which  war 
"  againft  the  foul."  The  gratifying  of  our  inordi- 
nate lufts,  and  our  carnal  and  fenfual  inclinations,  is 
diredly  oppofite  both  to  the  nature  of  our  immortal 
fpirits,  and  to  their  great  defign  and  bufinefs  in  this 
world.  Flefhly  lufls  do  not  only  pollute  and  defile, 
but  even  quench  and  extinguifh  our  diviner  part,  and 
do  work  the  ruin  and  defiru6lion  of  it ;  they  fink 
our  affedlions  into  the  mud  and  filth  of  this  world, 
and  do  entangle  and  detain  them  there  ;  in  a  word, 
they  do  wholly  indifpofe  and  unfit  us  for  that  pure 
and  Ipiritual  and  divine  life,  which  alone  can  qualify, 
us  for  our  heavenly  country  and  inheritance.  And 
therefore  while  our  fouls  are  fqjourning  in  this  world, 
we  fhould  abftain  from  them,  and  preferve  ourfelves 
unfpotted  and  untainted  by  them,  as  being  altogether 
unufeful,  and  perfe6^tiy  contrary  to  the  lav/s  and  man- 
ners of  our  heavenly  country.  If  we  wallow  in  bru- 
^ifh  and  filthy  lulls,  as  we  pafs  through  this  world  ; 
our  native  country,  v/hen  our  fouls  think  to  return 
to  it,  will  rejecl  us.  and  call  us  out :  when  we  com.e  to 

Vol.  V.  ^  G  heaven's 

4- 


LXIX. 


1070  Good  men  Jlr angers  and 

^J^^R^J^-  heaven's  gate,  and  knock  there,  expe6ling  to  be  ad- 
mitted, and  fliall  cry, ''  Lord,  Lord,  open  unto  us ;" 
he  will  bid  us  to  "  depart  from  him,  becaufe  we  have 
"  been  workers  of  iniquity."  Nothing  that  is  unclean 
can  enter  into  heaven.  He  who  is  to  receive  us  in- 
to thofe  blefTed  manfions,  hath  declared  it  to  be  his 
immutable  refolution  and  decree,  that  "  without  ho- 
"  hnefs,  no  man  ihall  fee  the  Lord."  And  there- 
fore as  ever  we  hope  to  fee  God,  in  that  happy  and 
blifsful  ftate,  we  muft  "  cleanfe  ourfelves  from  all 
^'  filthinefs  of  flefli  and  fpirit,  and  perfed:  holinefs  in 
"  the  fear  of  God  ;"  that  having  rendered  ourfelves 
as  like  him  as  we  can  in  this  world,  we  may  be  ca- 
pable of  the  blefied  fight  and  enjoyment  of  him  in 
the  other. 

And  as  for  the  advantages  in  this  world,  let  us 
not  purfue  them  too  eagerly.  We  may  take  the  con- 
veniencies  which  fairly  offer  themfelves  to  us,  and  be 
content  to  want  what  we  cannot  honeftly  have,  and 
without  going  out  of  the  way  of  our  duty  •,  confider- 
ing  that  we  are  travellers,  and  that  a  little  will  ferve 
for  ourpaflage  and  accommodation  in  our  pilgrimage. 
And  beyond  that,  why  fliould  we  fo  earneftly  covet 
more,  and  trouble  ourfelves  for  that  which  is  not  ne- 
ceflliry  to  our  journey  ?  Why  fliould  we  at  any  time 
deal  unjuflly  to  attain  any  of  this  world's  goods .? 
They  will  (land  us  in  flead  for  fo  little  a  while,  that 
we  can  have  no  temptation  to  injure  or  opprefs  any 
man,  to  break  the  peace  of  our  confciences,  and  to 
wound  our  fouls  for  the  attaining  of  them.  If  the 
^''*)rovidence  of  God  offer  them  to  us,  and  bring  them 
to  our  hands,  in  the  ufe  of  hqneft  diligence  and  law- 
ful means  •,  as  we  are  not  to  refufe  them,  fo  neither 
iwe  we  to  fet  our  hearts  upon  them,  nor  to  fuffer  our 


^ffedions  to  be  entangled  in  them. 


The 


fojourners  upon  earth.  1 071 

The  wlfeft  ufe  we  can  make  of  them,  will  be,  to  S  R  R  M. 
do  like  thofe  who  traffick  in  foreign  parts,  to  con- 
fign  our  eftates  into  our  own  native  country,  to  fend 
our  treafures  before  us  into  the  other  world,  that  we 
may  have  the  benefit  of  them  when  we  come  there. 
And  this  we  may  do  by  alms  and  charity.  What- 
ever we  fpend  upon  the  flefli,  we  leave  behind  us,  and 
it  will  turn  to  no  account  to  us  in  our  own  country : 
but  whatever  we  lay  out  for  the  relief  of  the  poor,  is 
fo  much  treafure  laid  out  and  fecured  to  ourfelves, 
againft  another  day.  So  our  bleifed  Saviour  af- 
fures  us,  Luke  xii.  33.  That  "  giving  of  alms  is 
"  providing  for  ourfelves  bags  that  wax  not  old,  a 
''  treafure  in  the  heavens  that  faileth  not." 

II.  If  we  be  pilgrims  and  ilrangers,  then  it  con- 
cerns us  to  behave  ourfelves  with  great  caution,  and 
to  live  blamelefly  and  inoffenfively ;  remembring  that 
the  eyes  of  people  are  upon  us,  and  that  thofe  among 
whom  we  fojourn,  v/ill  be  very  prying  and  curious  and 
narrow  obfervers  of  our  manners  and  carriage.  They 
that  are  in  a  ftrange  country,  are  not  wont  to  take 
that  liberty  and  freedom,  which  the  natives  of  the 
place  may  do,  but  to  keep  a  perpetual  guard  upon 
themfelves,  knowing  how  ftriclly  they  are  obferved, 
and  that  they  live  among  thofe  who  bear  no  good 
will  to  them,  and  that  every  bad  thing  we  do,  re- 
fledis  upon  our  nation,  and  is  a  reproach  to  the  coun- 
try to  which  we  belong.  "  Ye  are  not  of  the  world  •,'* 
(fays  our  Lord)  "  if  ye  were  of  the  world,  the  world 
"  would  love  it's  own  :  but  ye  are  not  of  the  world ; 
"  therefore  the  world  hateth  you."  Upon  this  ac- 
count the  apoflle  chargeth  Chriflians  to  be  "  harm- 
*'  lefs  and  blamelefs,"  and  "  as  it  becomes  the  fons 
"  of  God  to  be,  in  the  midft  of  a  crooked  and  perverfe 
"  nation,  amongwhom  we"  fhould"lliine  as  lights." 
*^  9  G  2  The 


IC72  Good  men  Jlr angers  and 

S  E  R  M .  The  fame  argument  St.  Peter  ufeth,  i  Pet.  ii.  11,12. 
"  I  befeech  you,  as  pilgrims  and  ftrangers,  to  abflain 
''  from  fleflily  lufts,  having  your  Gonverfation  honeft 
"  among  the  Gentiles  •,"  that  is,  confideringthat  you 
are  among  ftrangers  and  enemies,  and  therefore  ought 
to  be  very  .careful  to  bring  no  fcandal  upon  your  holy 
profefTion,  among  thofe  who  will  be  ready  to  take 
all  advantages  againft  you.  Particularly,  we  who 
pretend  to  the  fame  heavenly  country,  muft  be  kind 
to  one  another  •,  and  whilft  we  live  among  ftrangers 
liave  no  quarrels  amongft  ourfelves.  In  a  ft  range 
coiintry,  it  ufeth  to  be  a  mighty  endearment  of  men 
to  one  another,  that  they  are  of  the  fame  country, 
and  fellow  citizens,  and  this  alone  is  commonly 
fjffxient  to  unite  their  affeftions,  and  link  their 
intereft  together.  But  how  little  of  this  is  to  be 
feen  am.ong  Chriftians !  How  ftiamefully  do  they 
quarrel  among  themfelves, .  in  the  midft  of  enemies 
and  ftrangers  ?  As  if  they  had  no  relation  to  one  an- 
other, and  never  expedled  to  meet  at  laft  in  the  fame 
country,  and  there  to  live  together  for  evei-. 

III.  Let  us  be  as  patient  and  chearful  as  we  can, 
under  all  the  troubles  and  afflidions  which  we  meet 
with  in  this  life.  They  who  are  in  ftrange  countries 
muft  expedt  to  encounter  i-pany  injuries  and  affronts, 
and  to  be  put  to  great  difficulties  and  hardftiips. 
Thofe  which  are  lighter  and  more  tolerable,  we  muft 
bear  with  chearfulnefs.  Upon  a  journey  men  ufe  to 
put  on  all  the  pleafantnefs  they  can,  and  to  make 
fport  of  all  the  inconveniencies  of  the  ways  and  wea- 
ther, and  little  crofs  accidents  that  befal  them :  and 
thus,  if  we  had  but  the  art  and  wifdom  to  do  it, 
many  of  the  lefler  inconveniencies  of  human  life 
might  well  enough  be  played  off",  and  made  matter 
rather  of  mirth  and  diverfton,  than  of  melanc'hcly 
and  ferious  trouble.  But 


LXIX. 


fojourners  upo?i  earth.  1073 

But  there  are  fome  evils  and  calamities  of  human  S_E_.^_!^- 
life,  that  are  too  heavy  and  ferious  to  be  jelled  with- 
al, and  require  the  great  eft  confideration,  and  a  ve- 
ry great  degree  of  patience  to  fupport  us  under  them, 
and  enable  us  to  bear  them  decently  •,  as  the  lofs  of 
friends  and  deareft  relations ;  as  the  lofs  of  an  only 
fon,  grown  up  to  be  well  fixt  and  fettled  in  a  virtuous 
courfe,  and  promifing  all  the  comfort  to  his  parents 
that  they  themfelves  can  wilh  :  thefe  certainly  are 
fome  of  the  greateft  evils  of  this  world,  and  hardeft  to 
be  born.  For  men  may  pretend  what  they  will  to  phi- 
lofophy,  and  contempt  of  the  world,  and  of  the  pe- 
riOiing  comforts  and  enjoyments  of  it  \  to  the  extir- 
pation of  their  paffions,  and  an  infenfibility  of  thefe 
things,  which  the  weaker  and  undifciplined  part  of 
mankind  keep  fuch  a  waiHng  and  lamentation  about : 
but  when  all  is  done,  nature  hath  framed  us  as  we  are, 
and  hath  planted  in  our  nature  ftrong  incHnations  and 
affedions  to  our  friends  and  relations  •,  and  thefe  af- 
fe<^ions  are  as  naturally  moved  upon  fuch  occafions, 
and  pluck  every  ftring  of  our  hearts  as  violently,  as 
extreme  hunger  and  thirft  do  gnaw  upon  our  ftomachs. 

And  therefore  it  is  foolifh  for  any  man  to  pretend 
to  love  things  mightily,  and  to  rejoice  greatly  in  the 
enjoyment  of  them  \  and  yet  to  be  fo  eafily  content- 
ed to  lofe  them,  and  to  be  parted  from  them.  This 
is  to  feparate  things  which  nature  hath  ftrongly  link- 
ed together.  Whatever  we  mightily  love,  does 
thereby  in  fome  fort  become  part  of  ourfelves  -,  and 
it  cannot  hang  loofe  to  us,  to  be  feparated  and  di- 
vorced from  us  v/ithout  trouble ;  no  more  than  a 
limb,  that  is  vitally  and  by  flirong  ligaments  united 
to  the  body,  can  be  lopt  off  when  we  pleafe,  or 
rent  from  the  body  without  pain.  And  whoever 
pretends  to  have  a  mighty  affedion  for  any  thing, 
2  and 


1074  Good  men  Jira?2gers  and 

SERM.  and  yet  at  the  fame  time  does  pretend  that  he* can 
^^^_^  contentedly,  and  without  any  great  fenfe  or  fignifica- 
tion  of  pain,  bear  the  lofs  of  it,  does  not  talk  like 
a  philofopher,  but  like  an  hypocrite  ;  and  under  a 
grave  pretence  of  being  a  wife,  is  in  truth,  an  ill- 
natured  man.  For  moil  certainly,  in  proportion  to 
our  love  of  any  thing,  will  be  our  trouble  and  grief 
for  the  lofs  of  it. 

So  that  under  thefe  great  and  heavier  flrokes,  wc 
had  need  both  of  faith  and  patience.  And  indeed, 
nothing  but  the  firm  belief  of  "  a  better  country,"  that 
is,  "  an  heavenly,"  of  another  life  after  this,  and  a 
bleffed  immortality  in  another  world,  is  fufficient  to 
fupport  a  man  in  the  "  few  and  evil  days  of  his  pil- 
''  grimage,"  and  to  fuilain  his  fpirit  under  the  great 
evils  and  calamities  of  this  life.  But  this  fully  an- 
fwers  all,  "  that  the  afflidions  and  fufferings  of  this 
''  prefent  time,  are  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with 
*'  the  glory  which  fliall  be  revealed  in  us."  Nay, 
that  if  we  bear  thefe  affiidions  patiently,  and  with  a 
due  fubmiflion  to  the  will  of  God  (efpecially  our  fuf- 
ferings for  his  truth  and  caufe)  it  will  certainly  in- 
creafe  our  happinefs  in  the  other  world,  and  "  work 
•^^  for  us  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of 
^'  glory." 

IV.  The  confideration  of  our  prqfent  condition 
and  of  our  future  hopes,  fliould  fet  us  above  the 
fondnefs  of  life,  and  the  flavilli  fears  of  death.  For 
our  minds  will  never  be  raifed  to  their  true  pitch  and 
heighth,  till  we  have  in  fome  good  meafure  con- 
quered thefe  two  paflions,  and  made  them  fubjed:  to 
our  reafon. 

As  for  this  prefent  life,  and  the  enjoyment  of  it ; 
what  is  it  that  we  fee  in  them,  that  fhould  make  us 
fo  ftrangely  to  dote  vipon  them  ?  Shia  hds  miferis  tarn 

dira, 


LXIX. 


fojotirners  upon  earth.  '^^7S 

dira  cupido !  This  world  at  the  beft  is  but  a  very  in-  ^^^^^^^^• 
different  place,  and  he  is  the  wifeft  man  that  bears 
himfelf  towards  it  with  the  mofl  indifferent  mind  and 
affedion  -,  that  is,  always  willing  to  leave  it,  and 
yet  patient  to  ftay  in  it  as  long  as  God  pleafeth. 
And  as  for  death,  though  the  dread  of  it  be  na- 
tural, yet  why  fhould  the  terrors  of  it  be  fo  very 
furprizing  and  amazing  to  us,  after  we  have  confi- 
dered,  that  to  a  good  and  pious  foul,  it  is  no  other 
but  the  gate  of  heaven,  and  an  entrance  into  eternal 
life  ?  We  are  apt  to  wonder  to  fee  a  man  undaunted 
at  the  approach  of  death,  and  to  be  not  only  con- 
tented, but  chearful,  at  the  thoughts  of  his  depar- 
ture out  of  this  world,  this  fink  of  fin,  an4  vale  of 
milery  and  forrow.  Whereas,  if  all  things  be  duly 
confidered,  it  is  a  greater  wonder  that  men  are  fo 
patient  to  live,  and  that  they  are  not  glad  of  any 
f^ir  excufe  and  opportunity  of  getting  out  of  this 
ftrange  country,  and  retiring  home,  and  of  ridding 
themfelves  of  the  troubles  and  inconveniencies  of  Hfe. 
For,  confidering  the  numerous  troubles  and  calami- 
ties we  are  liable  to  in  a  long  pilgrimage,  there  are 
really  but  three  confiderations  that  I  can  readily  think 
of,  that  can  make  this  world,  and  our  prefent  condi- 
tion in  it,  in  any  good  meafure  tolerable  to  a  wife 
man  ;  viz.  That  God  governs  the  world  ♦,  that  we 
are  not  alv/ays  to  fbay  in  it ;  that  there  is  a  happinefs 
defigned  and  referved  for  us  in  another  place,  which 
will  abundantly  recompenfe  and  make  amends  to  us 
for  all  the  troubles  and  fufferings  of  this  life. 

And  yet  it  is  flrange  to  fee  how  fafl  mofl  men 
cling  to  life,  and  that  even  in  old  age ;  how  they 
catch  at  every  twig  that  may  but  hold  them  up  a  Ht- 
tje  while  ;  and  how  fondly  they  hanker  after  a  mife- 
rable  life,  when  there  is  nothing  more  of  pleafure  to 

be 


LXIX. 


1076  Good  men  Jlr angers  arid 

S  EJ^^-  be  enjoyed,  nothing  more  oF  fatisfadtion  to  bfe  ex- 
pefted  and  hoped  for  in  it.  When  they  are  juft  put- 
ting into  the  port,  and,  one  would  think,  fliould 
rejoice  at  their  very  hearts,  that  they  fee  land  ;  yet 
how  glad  would  they  be  then  of  any  crofs  wind,  that 
would  carry  them  back  into  the  fea  again  ?  As  if  they 
loved  to  be  toft,  and  were  fond  of  ftorms  and  tem^ 
pefts. 

Nay,  the  very  bed  of  us,  even  after  we  have  made 
that  acknowledgment  of  David  ;  "  I  am  a  ftranger 
"  and  a  fojourner  with  thee,  as  all  my  fathers  were  ♦,'* 
are  apt  with  him  to  be  ftill  importuningGoD  for  a  little 
longer  life  \  "  O  fpare  me  a  little,  that  I  may  reco- 
''  verftrength,  before!  go  hence,  and  be  no  more.'* 
And  when  God  hath  granted  us  this  requeft,  then 
we  would  be  fpared  yet  a  little  longer. 

But  let  us  remember,  that  God  did  not  defign  us 
to  continue  always  in  this  world  •,  and  that  he  hath 
on  purpofe  made  it  fo  uneafy  to  us,  to  make  us  will- 
ing to  leave  it :  and  that  fo  long  as  we  linger  here 
below,  we  are  detained  from  our  happinefs  ;  "  while 
"  we  are  prefent  in  the  body,  we  are  abfent  from  the 
"  Lord."  This  confideration  made  St.  Paul  fo 
*'  defirous  to  be  dilTolved,"  becaufe  "  he  knew,  that 
*'  when  his  earthly  houfe  of  tliis  tabernacle  was  dif- 
*'  folved,  he  fhould  have  a  much  better  habitation, 
*^'  a  building  of  God,  an  houfe  not  made  with  hands, 
*'  eternal  in  the  heavens."  This  was  that  which 
made  him  fo  full  of  joy  and  triumph,  at  the  thought* 
of  his  leaving  the  world  :  2  Tim.  iv.  6.  ''  I  am  now 
*'  ready"  (fays  he)  '*  to  be  offered  up,  and  the  time 
*'  of  my  departure  is  at  hand  \  I  have  fought  a  good 
"  fight,  I  have  finiflied  my  courfe,  I  have  kept  the 
"  faith  ;  henceforth  there  is  laid  up  for  me  a  crown 
"  of  righteoufnefs,  which  God  the  righteous  judge 
*'  fhall  give  me  in  that  day."  Nay, 


fojourners  upon  earth.  1077 

Nay,  the  confideration  of  this  (though  but  obfcure-  S  E  R  M. 
iy  apprehended  by  them)  did  raife  the  fpirits  of  the 
wifer  and  better  heathen,  and  fill  them  with  great 
joy  and  comfort  at  the  thoughts  of  their  dilfolution. 
With  what  conftancy  and  evennefs  of  mind  did  Socra- 
tes receive  the  fentence  of  death  ?  And  with  what  ex- 
cellent difcourfe  did  he  entertain  his  friends  juil  be- 
fore he  drank  off  the  fatal  cup,  and  after  he  had 
taken  it  down,  whilft  death  was  gradually  feizing  up- 
on him  ?  One  can  hardly,  without  a  very  fenfible  tran- 
sport, read  Cato's  difcourfe  concerning  his  death,  as 
it  is  reprefented  by  Tully  in  his  book  of  old  age. 
"  I  am"  (fays  he)  "  tranfported  with  a  defire  of  fee- 
"  ing  my  forefathers,  thofe  excellent  perfbns  of  whom 
*'  I  have  heard,  and  read,  and  written  •,  and  now  I 
''  am  going  to  them,  I  v/ould  not  willingly  be  drawn 
"  back  into  this  world  again  •,  quodfi  quis  Bens  mihi 
*'  largiatur^  ut  ex  hac  atate  repuerefcam^  13  in  amis 
*'  vagiam^  valde  re  at  fern.  If  fome  God  would  offer 
*'  me,  at  this  age,  to  be  a  child  again,  and  to  cry 
*'  in  the  cradle,  I  would  earneflly  refufe  it,  and  upon 
"  no  terms  accept  it.  And  now  that  my  race  is  al- 
*'  moft  run,  and  my  courfe  jufl  finifhed,  how  loth 
*'  fhould  I  be  to  be  brought  back,  and  made  to  be- 
"  gin  again  ?  For  what  advantage  is  there  in  life  ? 
*'  Nay  rather,  what  labour  and  trouble  is  there  not 
"  in  it  ?  But  let  the  benefit  of  it  be  what  it  will, 
"  there  is  certainly  fomemeafure  of  life,  as  well  as  of 
"  other  things,  and  men  ought  to  know  when  they 
"  have  enough  of  it"  0  frceclarum  diem^  cum  in 
illud  animorum  con/ilium  coetumque  proficifcar^  ^  cum  ex 
hac  turha  ^  coUuvione  difcedam,  "  O  blelTed  and  glo- 
*'  rious  day,  when  I  Ihall  go  to  that  great  council 
"  and  affembly  of  fpirits,  and  have  got  out  of  this 
"  crowd  and  rabble !  And  if  a  heathen,  who  had  but 
,  Vol.  V.  9H  fome 


1078  Good  men  Jlr angers  and 

S  E  R  M.  fome  obfcure  glimmerings  of  another  life,  and  of  the 
^^^^'  blefled  ftate  of  departed  fouls,  could  fpeak  thus  chear- 
fully  of  death  ♦,  how  much  more  may  we,  who  have 
a  clear  and  undoubted  revelation  of  thefe  things,  and 
to  whom  '^  life  and  iminortality  are  brought  to  light 
"  by  the  gofpel." 

V.  We  ihould  always  prefer  our  duty  and  the  keep- 
ing of  a  good  confcience  before  all  the  world  •,  be- 
caufe  it  is,  in  truth,  infinitely  more  valuable,  if  fo  be 
our  fouls  be  immortal,    and  do  furviv  t  in  another 
world,  and  we  muft  there  give  a  fcri6t  account  of  all 
the  adions  done  by  us  in  this  life,  and  receive  the 
fentence  of  eternal  happinefs  or  mifery,  "  according 
"  to  the  things  done  in  the  bcdy,  whether  they  be 
*'  good,  or  whether  they  be  evil."     For  as  our  Sa- 
viour argues  concerning  the  cafe  of  denying  him 
and  his  truth,  to  avoid  temporal  fufFering  and  death  -, 
"  what  is  a  man  profited,  if  he  fhall  gain  the  whole 
^'  world,   and  lofe  his  own  foul  ?    Or  what  fhall  a 
*'  man  give  in  exchange  for  his  foul  ?"  When  we 
are  tempted  by  temporal  interefl  and  advantage,  or 
by  the  fear  of  prefent  lofs  and  fuffering,  to  deny  or 
diflemble  our  religion,  to  do  any  thing  that  is  finful 
in  any  kind,  and  contrary  to  our  duty  and  confcience, 
let  us  aflc  ourfelves,   what  will  be  the  profit  and  ad- 
vantage of  it  ?  What,  if  for  fear  of  men,  and  what 
they  can  do  to  me,  I  incur  the  wrath  and  difpleafure 
of  Amighty  God  ?    This  is  infinitely  more  to  be 
dreaded  •,  and  his  frowns  are  a  thoufand  times  more 
terrible,  than  the  bittereft  wrath  and  cruelleft  malice 
of  men.     What,  if  to  preferve  this  frail  and  mortal 
body,  I  fhall  evidently  hazard  the  lofs  of  my  immortal 
foul  \  and  to  efcape  a  temporal  inconvenience,  I  for^ 
feit  everlafling  happinefs,  and  plunge  myfelf  into  e» 
ternal  mifery  ^nd  ruin  ?  Would  not  this  be  a  wild 

bargain^ 


fojoiirners  upon  earth,  1079 

bargain  and  a  mad  exchange,  for  any  temporal  advan-  S  E  R  M. 
tage  to  lofe  the  things  that  are  eternal  ?   And  for  the 
pleafing  of  ourfelves  for  a  little  while,  to  make  our 
felves  milerable  for  ever  ? 

If  we  confefs  ourfelves  to  be  "  pilgrims  andftran- 
"  gers  on  the  earth,"  and  are  perfuaded  of  the  pro- 
mifes  of  God  concerning  an  "  heavenly  country," 
where  we  hope  to  arrive  after  "  the  few  and  evil  days 
"  of  our  pilgrimage"  are  over-,  let  us  not,  by  com^ 
plying  with  the  humours  of  flrangers,  and  the  vici- 
ous culloms  and  prav^ices  of  an  evil  world,  bar  our- 
felves of  our  hopes,  and  banifh  ourfelves  from  that 
happy  place,  to  which  we  all  profefs  we  are  going. 

We  pretend  to  be  travelling  towards  heaven :  but 
if  we  "  make  fhipwreck  of  faith  and  a  good  confci- 
"  ence,"  we  deftroy  our  own  hopes  of  ever  arriv- 
ing at  that  happy  port.  We  do  not  live  up  to  our 
expe6tation  of  a  future  happinefs  ;  if  the  unfeen  glo- 
ries of  another  world  do  not  raife  us  above  all  the 
temptations  and  terrors  of  fenfe.  Our  faith  and  hope 
have  not  their  due  and  proper  influence  upon  us,  if 
they  do  not  govern  our  lives  and  adlions,  and  make 
us  ftedfaft  in  the  profefTion  of  our  holy  religion,  and 
in  the  confcientious  pra61:ice  of  it.  St.  Paul  reafoned 
himfelf  into  this  holy  refolution,  from  the  hopes  of 
a  blefied  refurredion,  A6ts  xxiv.  15,  16.  "1  have 
"  hope,"  fays  he,  "  towards  God,  that  there  fhaii 
**  be  a  refurredion  of  the  dead,  both  of  the  juil  and 
*'  unjuil ;  \v  rijod  l\  for  this  caufe  therefore,  I  ex- 
*'  ercife  myfelf  always  to  have  a  confcience  void  of 
*'  offence,  towards  God,  and  towards  men." 

VI.  And  laftiy,  if  we  be  fojourners  and  travel- 
lers in  this  world ;  we  ihould  often  think  of  our 
end,  and  carefully  mind  the  way  to  it.  Our  end  is 
cverlafting  happinefs,  and  the  dired  way  to  it  is  by 

9  H  2  a  con-' 


I  o  8  o  Good  men  Jlr angers  and 

r'^Tv?*  ^  conflant  and  fincerc  and  univerfal  obedience  to  the 
laws  and  commandments  of  God.  And  this  in  it- 
felf  is  fo  plain  a  way,  that  a  fincere  and  honeft  man 
can  hardly  err  in  it.  And  therefore  we  muft  not  fuf- 
fer  ourfelves  to  be  led  and  trained  out  of  it,  upon  any 
pretence  whatfoever  •,  not  by  the  wildfire  of  pretend- 
ed illuminations  and  enthufiafms  •,  nor  by  the  confi- 
dent pretence  of  an  infallible  guide,  that  will  needs 
fliew  us  another  way,  and  perfuade  us  to  follow  him 
blindfold  in  it.  Let  us  not  quit  the  infallible  rule 
of  God's  word,  to  follow  any  guide  whatfoever.  "  If 
^'  an  apoftle,  or  an  angel  from  heaven,  preach  any 
*'  other  dodlrine"  and  way  to  heaven,  ''  let  him  be 
*'  accurfed."  He  who  is  "  the  way,  and  the  truth, 
*'  and  the  life,"  when  he  was  confulted  with  about  the 
way  to  eternal  happinefs,  knew  no  other  but  this. 
For  wlien  the  young  man  aflced  him  •,  "  good  mafter, 
''  what  good  thing  fhall  I  do,  that  I  may  inherit  eter- 
*'  nal  life  ?"  His  anfwer  was,  "  if  thou  wilt  enter 
"  into  hfe,  keep  the  commandments."  It  is  tme  in- 
deed, that  by  reafon  of  our  corrupt  inclinations  within, 
and  powerful  temptations  without,  this  way  (efpeci- 
ally  at  our  firft  fetting  out)  is  rugged  and  difficult. 
So  our  Lord  hath  forewarned  us,  telhng  us,  that 
''  fbrait  is  the  gate,  and  narrow  is  the  way  that  lead- 
"  cth  to  life,"  and  that  "  there  be  few  that  find  it  j" 
therefore  wc  fhould  "  ilrive  to  enter  in,"  take  great 
care  and  pains  to  difcern  the  right  way,  and  to  over- 
come the  difficulties  of  our  firft  entrance  into  it ;  and 
fhould  often  pray  to  God  as  David  did,  Pfal.  cxix. 
19.  "  I  am  a  ftranger  in  the  earth  ;  hide  not  thy 
"  commandments  from  me  i"  and  Pfal.  cxxxix.  23, 
24.  "  Search  me,  O  God,  and  know  my  heart ;  try 
"  me,  and  know  my  thoughts  ;  and  fee  if  there  be 
^'  any  wicked  way  in  mc  5  and  lead  me  in  the  way 
I '  evcrlafting, ' '  Thus, 


fojourners  upon  earth,  1 08 1 

•  Thus,  if  we  would  always  have  our  end  in  our  S  E  R  M. 
eye ;  it  would  both  be  a  direction  to  us  in  our  way, 
and  an  encouragement  to  quicken  our  pace  in  it ; 
there  beiftg  no  more  powerful  motive  to  a  good  life, 
than  to  be  alTured,  that,  '^  if  we  have  our  fruit  unto 
*'  holinefs,  our  end  fhall  be  everlafting  hfe."  , 


SERMON     LXX. 

The  prefence  of  the  MejfTias,  the  glory 
of  the  fecond  temple. 


HAGGAI  II.  6,  7,  8,9. 

For  thus  faith  the  Lord  of  hofts^yet  once^  it  is  a  little 
"uohile^  and  I  will  Jhake  the  heavens^  ayid  the  earthy 
and  the  fea^  and  the  dry  land ;  and  I  will  fhake  all 
nations^  and  the  defire  of  all  nations  fhall  come^  and 
I  will  fill  this  hoiife  with  glory ^  faith  the  Lord  of 
hofls,  "Thefther  is  mine^  and  the  gold  is  mlne^  faith 
the  Lord  of  hofls,  The  glory  of  this  latter  houfc 
fhall  he  greater  than  of  the  former^  faith  the  Lord 
of  hofls  5  and  in  this  place  I  will  give  feace^  faith 
the  Lord  of  hofls, 

TH  E  author  of  this  prophecy  was  the  firft  of 
the  three  proph-ts,  which  God  fent  to  the 
people  of  Ifrael  after  the  captivity  ^  and  this  pro- 
phecy contains  feveral  melTages  frora  God,  to  the 

priocesa 


I  o  8  2  'The  pre  fence  of  the  Mejjlas, 

SERM.  princes,  and  elders,  and  people  of  Ifrael,  in  which  lie 
■  reproves  their  flacknefs  and  negligence  in  the  build- 
ing of  the  temple,  and  encourageth  them  thereto,  by 
the  promife  of  his  afTiftance  •,  and  tells  them,  that 
however  in  refpedt  of  the  magnificence  of  the  build- 
ing, and  the  rich  ornaments  in  it,  it  fliould  be  incom- 
parably fhort  of  Solomon's  temple,  (which  fome  that 
were  then  alive  had  feen  in  it's  glory)  yet  in  other 
refpedls  it  fliould  far  excel  it  \  for  the  time  would 
come,  that  this  fecond  temple  ihould  be  graced  with 
the  prefence  of  the  Meffias,  which  would  be  a  great- 
er glory  to  it,  than  all  the  riches  of  Solomon's  temple. 

And  this  is  fully  exprelTed  in  the  words  which  I 
have  read  unto  you,  "  thus  faith  the  Lord  of  hofts, 
"  yet  once,  it  is  a  little  while,  and  I  will  fliake  the 
*'  heavens,  and  the  earth,  and  the  fca,  and  the  dry 
''  land  :  and  I  will  lliake  all  nations,  and  the  defire 
*'  of  all  nations  fhall  come,  and  I  will  fill  this  lioufe 
*'  with  glory,  faith  the  Lord  of  hofts.  The  filver 
^'  is  mine,  and  the  gold  is  mine,  faith  the  Lord  of 
*'  hofls.  The  glory  of  this  latter  houfe  fhall  be 
*'  greater  than  of  the  former,  faith  the  Lord  of 
*'  hofbs  ^  and  in  this  place  will  I  give  peace,  faith 
*'  the  Lord  of  hofts." 

Now,  that  it  is  fome  very  great  thing  which  is 
here  foretold  and  promifed,  for  the  honour  of  this 
fecond  temple,  no  man  can  doubt,  that  confiders  in 
what  a  folemn  manner  it  is  here  exprefs'd  ;  this  great 
and  glorious  title,  "  the  Lord  of  hofts,"  being  no 
lefs  than  five  feveral  times  ufed  within  the  compafs  of 
thefe  four  verfes  \  the  like  inftance  whereto  is  not, 
perhaps,  in  the  whole  bible  :  "  thus  faith  the  Lord 
"  of  hofts,  yet  once,  it  is  a  little  while,  and  I  will 
*'  fhake  the  heavens,  and  the  earth,"  ver.  6.  "And 
^  I  will  fill  this  houfe  with  glory,  faith  the  Lord  of 

-      i'  hofts,'* 


the  glory  of  the  fecond  temple,  1083 

•'  hofts,"  ver.  7.  "  The  filver  is  mine,  and  the^ER  M, 
"  gold  is  mine,  faith  the  Lord  of  holts,"  ver.  8. 
And  twice  ver.  9.  "  The  glory  of  this  latter  houfe 
"  fhall  be  greater  than  of  the  former,  faith  the  Lord 
*'  of  hoils  ;  and  in  this  place  will  I  give  peace,  faith 
''  the  Lord  of  hofbs."  So  that  by  the  folemn 
manner  of  exprefling  it,  we  may  imagine,  that  it  is 
fome  very  great  thing  which  is  fpoken  of,  and  fuch 
as  the  like  had  never  been  before  -,  and  fuch  was 
"''  the  incarnation  and  coming  of  the  MefTias." 

I  know  that  the  modern  Jews  will  by  no  means 
have  this  text  to  be  underilood  of  the  Mefiias,  and 
not  without  caufe  ^  for  he  that  is  fpoken  of  in  the  text, 
was  to  come  into  the  fecond  temple,  which  hath 
now  been  deftroyed  above  1 600  years  ago  -,  and  they 
do  not  believe  the  MefTias  to  be  yet  come ;  and 
therefore  whatever  fhift  they  make,  they  mud  inter- 
pret this  text,  of  fome  other  perfon  than  the  MelTias : 
but  then  it  is  plain  for  what  reafon  they  do  fo,  it  being 
evident  from  their  ^wn  Talmud,  that  thp  ancient 
Jews  did  underiland  it  of  the  Meffias  ;  but  being 
hardened  in  their  unbelief,  they  pervert  all  thofe  texts 
whereby  they  might  be  convinc'd,  that  Jesus  our 
bleifed  Saviour  was  the  true  Meffias. 

And  indeed,  whoever  carefully  confiders  the  feve*- 
ral  expreffions  and  circumftances  of  this  prediction, 
cannot  underfland  it  of  any  other.  To  make  this 
evident,  I  ihall  explain  the  feveral  expreffions  in  the 
text,  "  thus  faith  the  Lord  of  hofts,  yet  once,  it  is 
"  a  little  while."  "  Yet  a  little  while,"  fo  it  is  in 
the  Hebrew,  "  yet  once  more,"  fo  the  LXXII  ren- 
der it,  and  fo  it  is  quoted  from  the  LXXII  in  the 
new  teflament,  Heb.  xii.  26.  and  this  fenfe  the  He- 
brew word  may  lil^ev/ife  bear,  and  our  tranflation  of 
the  text  takes  them  both  in,  *'  yet  once  it  is  a  little 
"  while/'     ^  ^  If 


1084  ^^^^  prefence  of  the  MeJJias^ 

S  E  R  M.  If  we  take  the  words  in  the  firft  fenfe,  "  yet  a  lit- 
"  "  tie  while/'  they  fignify,  that  God  was  then  be- 
ginning thofe  changes  in  the  world,  which  were  to 
precede  and  make  way  for  the  coming  of  the  Mef- 
fias.  This  indeed  was  not  till  about  four  hundred 
years  after  •,  but  a  great  while  before  that  time  God 
began  thofe  changes  in  the  world,  which  were  to 
prepare  the  way  for  his  coming  •,  and  confidcring  the 
long  time  which  was  paft  from  the  firft  promife  made 
to  Abraham,  four  hundred  years  in  comparifon  of 
that  may  feem  but  a  little  while.  But  I  rather  choofe 
the  latter  fenfe  of  this  phrafe,  "  yet  once  more  ;" 
becaufe  the  Hebrew  will  bear  it,  and  becaufe  it  is  fo 
quoted  in  the  new  teflament  -,  as  if  the  prophet  had 
faid,  that  God  had  before  done  a  great  thing  in  the 
world,  and  accompanied  with  great  miracles,  viz. 
*'  the  giving  of  the  law  by  Mofes,"  which  was  at- 
tended with  great  commotions,  both  in  Egypt,  by 
bringing  the  people  of  Ifrael  out  from  thence  with  a 
mighty  hand,  and  by  deftroying  the  nations  before 
them.,  whofe  land  God  gave  them  for  a  pofiefTion  ; 
but  now  he  would  do  one  greater  thing  mc-re,  "  the 
*'  fending  of  the  Meffias,"  and  the  "  planting  of  his 
*'  religion  in  the  world  i"  in  order  whereunto  there 
fhould  be  much  greater,  and  more  univerfal  com- 
motions and  changes  in  the  world,  and  more  and 
greater  miracles  wrought  •,  "  yet  once  more,  and  I 
"  will  fliake  the  heavens,  and  theeardi,  and  the  fea, 
^'  and  the  dry  land,  and  I  will  ihake  all  nations." 
From  which  words  the  apoftle  to  the  Hebrews  ar- 
gues the  abolifhing  of  the  JewiHi  difpenfation,  and 
the  bringing  in  of  another  that  fhould  be  unaltera- 
ble, Heb.  xii.  27.  '*  And  this  word,  yet  once  more, 
"  (fays  the  apoililc)  fignines  the  removing  of  thofe 
"  things  that  are  fliaktn,  that  thofe  thirgs  which 
1  .V.  cannot 


the  glory  of  the  fecond  temple.  i  o  8 1 

*'  cannot  be  fhaken  may  remain,"     And  this  I  ihall  S  ^^^^• 
have  occafion  to  explain  more  fully  in  the  following 
parts  of  this  difcourfe. 

"  Yet  once  more  I  will  fhake  the  heavens  and 
"  the  earth,"  &c.     For  the  imderftanding  whereof 
we  are  to  cdnfider,  that  the  Hebrews  have  no  one 
word  whereby  to  exprefs  the  world,  and  therefore 
they  do  it  by  art  enilmeration  of  the  principal   parts 
of  it.     So  Gen.  i.  when  Mofes  would  exprefs  the 
creation  of  the  world,  he  fays,  '*  in  the  beginning 
"  God  created  the  heaven  and  the  earth."     Andfo 
St.  Peter,  when  he  would  ejcprefs  the  revolution  of 
all  things,  after  the  univerfal  conflagration  of  the 
world,  calls  it,  "  a  new  heaveQ,  and  a  new  earth,'* 
2  Pet.  iii.  13.   "  Neverthelefs  we,  according  to  his 
*'  promife,  look  for  new  heavens,  and  a  new  earth  •," 
that  is,  a  new  world,  a  quite  other  frame  and  ftate  of 
things,  than  that  which  we  now  fee.     And  fo  the 
prophet  here  in  the  text,  to  exprefs  the  great  commo- 
tions and  changes,  that  fhould  be  in  the  world  before 
the  coming  of  the  Meffias,  fays,  that  God   ''  will 
"  Ihake  the  heavens,  and  the  earth,  and  the  fea,  and 
"  the  dry  lands-,"  that  is,  he  would  caufe  great  re- 
volutions in  the  world  \  there  fhould  be  great  wars 
and  confufions,  and  the  emipifes  of  the  world  fhould 
pafs  from  one  hand  to  another.     And  thus  we  find 
this  very  expreflion  interpreted,  ver.  21,  22.  of  this 
chapter,  "  I  will  fliake  the  heavens  and  the  earth, 
"  and  I  will  overthrow  the  throne  of  kingdoms,  and 
"  I  will  deflroy  the  ilrength  of  the  kingdoms  of  the 
*'  nations."     And  to  fhew  that  by  "  fhaking  the 
*'  heavens  and  the  earth,"  is  meant  great  changes 
in  the  world,  and  as  it  were  an  univerfal  commiOiion 
of  it,  he  adds  in  the  text,  by  way  of  farther  expli- 
cation, "  and  I  will  fhake  all  nations," 

Vol.  V.  9  I  Ar4 

4- 


1 0  8  6  T^he  prefence  of  the  MeJJias^ 

SER  M.  And  then  it  follows,  "  and  the  defire  of  all  na- 
*'  tions  fhall  come."  This  we  (as  the  ancient  Jews 
alfo  did)  take  to  be  a  plain  character  and  defcription 
of  the  MefTias,  he  is  "  the  defire  of  all  nations  j"  he 
whom  all  nations  had  reafon  to  defire,  becaufe  of 
thofe  great  blefTings  and  benefits  which  he  was  to 
bring  to  the  world.  Thus  interpreters  generally  un- 
dcrftand  thefe  words,  and  it  is  very  true  the  Mefilas 
was  fo :  but  this  does  not  feem  to  be  the  true  im- 
portance of  this  phrafe  ;  for  the  Hebrev/  word  figni- 
fies  expe6lation  as  well  as  defire,  and  fo  I  Ihould  ra- 
ther choofe  to  render  it,  "  the  expe6lation  of  all 
"  nations  fhall  come  y"  which  fignifies  that  about 
the  time  of  the  coming  of  the  Mefllas,  not  only  the 
Jews,  but  other  nations,  Ihould  be  in  a  general  ex- 
pe6lation  of  fome  great  prince  then  to  appear  \  which 
was  moil  eminently  accomplifhed  in  our  blefiTed  Sa- 
viour, as  I  ihall  lliew  by  and  by. 

"  And  I  will  fill  this  houfe  with  glory,  faith  the 
"  Lord  ofhofls,"  fpeaking  of  the  fecond  temple, 
which  was  then  in  building,  which  though  it  fell  ve- 
ry much  lliort  of  Solomon's,  in  point  of  flate  and 
magnificence  •,  yet  by  being  honoured  with  the  pre- 
fence of  the  Mefllas,  it  ihould  be  much  more  glori- 
ous than  Solomon's  temple.  "  The  filver  is  mine, 
*'  and  the  gold  is  mine,  faith  the  Lord  of  hofts  j" 
not  that  God  wanted  the  command  of  gold  and  fil- 
ver, to  have  made  the  fecond  temple  equal  to  Solo- 
mon's in  outward  glory  and  fplendor ;  he  could  eafi- 
ly  have  made  it  fo  in  that  refpefl  -,  and  Jofephus  tells 
us,  that  not  long  before  the  time  of  our  Saviour's 
coming,  Herod  had  built  and  beautified  it  to  that 
degree,  that  in  fome  refpefts  it  excelled  Solomon's  ; 
and  of  this  fome  underiland  the  next  words,  "  the 
"  glory  of  this  latter  houfe  fhall  be  greater  than  of 

"  the 


the  glory  of  the  fecond  temple,  1087 

*'  the  former  -,"  namely,  that  this  was  accompliflied  SE  R  M. 
in  that  beauty  and  magnificence  which  was  added 
to  it,  when  it  was  re-edified  by  Herod  the  great : 
but  however  that  be,  this  is  certain,  that  it  was  much 
more  glorious  in  another  refpe6l,  namely,  that  it  en- 
tertained the  "  MefTias,  the  great  expectation  and 
*'  blefTing  of  all  nations." 

"  And  in  this  place  will  I  give  peace,  faith  the 
"  Lord  of  hods.'*  Some  underitand  this,  of  that 
univerfal  peace  which  was  tliroughout  the  world, 
when  our  Saviour  was  born  in  the  reign  of  Au- 
guflus  Csefar.  Others  with  great  probability  inter- 
pret this  of  the  Meffias  himfelf,  who  is  called  he-re 
by  the  name  of  peace  \  and  fo  fome  of  the  ancient 
Jews  underftood  it  *,  "  in  this  place  will  I  give  peace," 
that  is,  the  Meffias.  For  the  Hebrew  word  fignifies 
all  kind  of  happinefs,  and  fo  it  includes  all  thofe  blef- 
fings  and  benefits,  that  happinefs  and  falvation  which 
the  Meffias  brought  to  the  world.  And  this  will 
appear  very  probable,  if  we  confider,  how  frequent- 
ly in  fcripture  this  title  is  given  to  the  Meffias.  Ifa. 
ix.  6.  he  is  called  "  the  prince  of  peace  j"  and  Zach. 
ix.  10.  it  is  faid  of  him,  "  that  he  iliould  fpeak 
"  peace  to  the  nations ;"  and  the  apoftle  to  the  He- 
brews, parallels  him  with  Melchifedech  in  this  parti- 
cular, "  that  he  was  king  of  Salem,"  that  is,  "  king 
"  of  peace  ;  and  which  is  very  little  different  from 
this,  he  is  frequently  in  fcripture  called  falvation, 
which  fignifies  the  happinefs  of  being  refcued  and 
delivered  from  all  kind  of  evil  \  as  peace  fignifies  all 
kind  of  good,  Ifa.  xlix.  6.  "  I  v/ill  alfo  give  thee 
"  for  a  light  to  the  Gentiles,  that  thou  may  eft  be  my 
"  falvation  to  the  end  of  the  earth :"  and  Luke  ii. 
30.  when  Simeon  had  our  blelTed  Saviour  in  his 
arms,  when  he  was  firft  brought  into  the  temple,  he 

9  I  2  calls 


I  o  8  8  ^he  pre  fence  of  the  Mefias^ 

S  E  R  M.  ,calls  him  the  falvation  of  God  -,  "  mine  eyes"  (faith 
he  to  God)  "  have  feen  thy  falvation  -,"  and  John 
iv.  22.  ''  falvation  is  of  the  Jews,"  that  is,  the  Mef- 
fias  was  to  be  of  that  nation,  But  which  is  more 
exprefs,  Christ  is  called  "  our  peace,"  Eph,  ii.  14', 
nay,  he  is  exprefly  called  peace,  or  the  peace,  Mic, 
V.  5.  "  and  this  man  (fpeaking  of  the  Meflias)  Ihall 
*'  be  the  peace,"  that  is,  one  of  his  names  or  titles 
fhall  be  peace.  So  that  I  make  Uttle  doubt,  but 
that  in  this  exprelTion  in  the  text,  of  "  giving  peace," 
is  meant,  giving  the  Meflias  ;  and  that  this  is  ren- 
der'd  as  the  reafon,  why  the  glory  of  the  fecond 
temple  fhould  be  greater  than  of  the  firft,  becaufe  in 
that  place  the  Meflias  fliould  appear,  and  remarka- 
bly fliew  hinifelf.  God  could  have  given  this  fe- 
cond temple,  if  he  had  thought  fit,  as  much  out- 
ward glory  and  beauty  as  that  of  Solomon's  build- 
ing •,  for  "  filver  and  gold  are  his,"  and  all  the 
riches  of  the  world  are  at  his  command  \  but  he  chofe 
to  put  a  far  greater  honour  upon  it  than  that  of  fil- 
ver and  gold,  and  to  make  it  much  more  glorious  in 
another  refpe6t,  "  the  glory  of  this  latter  houfc  fliall 
*'  be  greater  than  of  the  former  ♦,  becaufe  in  this 
*'  place  I  will  give  the  Meflias  the  peace,"  and  hap- 
pinefs  and  falvation  of  mankind,  and  incomparably 
the  greatefl:  blefllng  that  tvtv  was  given  to  the  world. 

The  words  being  thus  explained,  it  will  now  be 
more  eafy  to  fhew,  how  the  feveral  parts  of  this 
predidion  do  agree  to  our  blefl^ed  Saviour,  and  to 
no  other, 

I.  That  there  fliould  be  great  changes  and  com- 
motions in  the  world  before  his  coming  •,  *'  I  will 
^'  fliake  the  heavens,  and  the  earth,  and  the  fea,  and 
*'  the  dry  land,  and  I  will  fliake  all  nations  -,"  and 
then  he  fliould  come. 

II.  That 


the  glory  of  the  fecond  temple,  1089 

II.  That  about  the  time  of  his  coming,  the  world  SE  R  M. 
fhould  be  in  a  general  expectation  of  him  ;  "  and  , 
*'  the  expectation  of  all  nations  fhall  come." 

III.  That  he  fhould  come  during  the  continuance  of 
the  fecond  temple  ;  for  it  was  his  coming  that  fhould 
fill  that  houfe  with  glory,  and  in  that  place  the  Mef- 
fias,  who  is  called  peace,  is  promifed  to  be  given ; 
''  and  in  this  place  will  I  give  peace,  faith  the  Lord 
"  of  hofts." 

IV.  That  this  coming  of  the  MefTias  fhould  be  the 
iafl  difpenfation  of  God  for  the  falvation  of  men,  and 
confequently  fhould  be  perpetual  and  unalterable : 
^'  yet  once  more,  and  I  will  fhake  the  heavens  and 
"  the  earth ;  yet  once  more,"  from  whence  the  a- 
poftle  to  the  Hebrews  argues,  that  the  gofpel  fhould 
be  a  perpetual  and  unalterable  difpenfation.  Of  thefc 
I  fhall  fpeak  feverally,  and  as  briefly  as  I  can. 

I.  Here  is  a  prediction  of  great  changes  and  com- 
motions in  the  world,  before  the  coming  of  the  Mef- 
fias ;  "  thus  faith  the  Lord  of  hofts,  I  will  fhakc 
"  the  heavens,  and  the  earth,  and  the  fea,  and  the 
"  dry  land,  and  I  will  fhake  all  nations,  and  the  de- 
"  fire  of  all  nations  fhall  come  ;"  plainly  fignifying 
hereby,  that  before  the  coming  of  the  MefTias  (who 
is  here  called  "  the  defire  and  expectation  of  all  na- 
"  tions" )  there  fliould  be  very  great  commotions  and 
changes  in  the  world,  that  the  empire  of  the  world 
fhould  be  overturned  ;  for  fo  I  have  told  you,  that 
this  exprefTion  of  "  fhaking  the  heavens,  and  the 
"  e^rth"  is  explained,  verfe  21.  of  this  chapter,  "  I 
"  will  fhake  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  and  will  o- 
''  ver throw  the  throne  of  kingdoms."  And  this 
was  fulfilled  in  a  moft  remarkable  manner,  between 
the  time  of  this  prophecy,  and  .the  coming  of  our 
t>lefled  Saviour,  during  which  time  (though  it  was 

but 


LXX. 


1  o  9  Q  -  ^he  prefence  of  the  Mejfias^ 

S  E  R  M/  but  four  hundred  years)  there  happened  greater  com- 
motions, and  much  more  confiderable  revolutions, 
in  the  great  kingdoms  of  the  world,  than  had  done 
in  above  two  thoufand  years  before,  and  in  almoft 
one  thoufand  feven  hundred  years  fince  ,  fo  that  it  is 
no  wonder,  that  the  prediction  of  thefe  things  is  by 
God  himfelf  exprefs'd  in  fo  very  folemn  a  manner, 
as  I  obferved  before. 

At  the  time  of  this  prophecy,  the  empire  of  the 
world  was  newly  tranflated  from  the  AfTyrians  to 
the  Medes  and  Perfians  •,  and  not  long  after,  the 
Grecians  under  Alexander  the  great  quite  overthrew 
the  Perfian  empire,  and  that  by  as  fudden  a  change 
as  was  ever  perhaps  made  in  the  world,  pofTefTing 
themfelves  by  fo  fwift  and  Ipeedy  a  conquefl  of  a 
great  part  of  the  then  known  world,  as  if  to  pafs 
through  it,  and  to  conquer  it,  had  been  all  one. 

After  the  death  of  Alexander,  the  empire  of  the 
Grecians  was  fhared  among  his  great  captains,  whom 
the  Romans  by  degrees  conquered,  be£des  a  great 
many  other  kingdoms  which  Alexander  never  faw, 
and  fome  of  them  perhaps  had  never  heard  of  And 
at  laft  the  empire  of  the  world,  in  all  it's  greatnefs 
and  glory,  was  polTefs'd  by  Auguftus,  in  whofe  time 
our  blefled  Saviour  was  born. 

So  that  here  were  mighty  commotions  in  the 
world,  wonderful  changes  of  kingdoms  and  empires, 
before  the  coming  of  the  MefTias ;  far  greater,  and  of 
much  larger  extent,  than  thofe  that  were  in  Egypt 
and  Paleftine,  at  the  bringing  of  the  children  of 
Ifrael  out  of  Egypt,  and  the  giving  of  the  law  from 
m.ount  Sinai.  And  thefe  did  not  only  go  before  the 
corning  of  the  MelTias,  but  they  made  way  for  the 
more  eafy  propagating  of  his  dodtrine  and  religion  ; 
for  the  Grecians,  and  efpccially  the  Romans,  fettled 

their 


the  glory  of  the  feco7id  temple.  i  o  9 1 

their  conquefts  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  in  a  good  mea-  S  E  R  M. 
lure  to  propagate  their  language  among  the  nations 
which  they  conquered  ;  and  particularly  the  Romans 
did  make  the  ways  for  travel  and  commerce  much 
more  eafy  and  commodious  than  ever  they  were  be- 
fore, by  employing  their  armies,  when  they  had  no 
other  work,  to  make  high-ways,  for  the  convenience 
of  palTage  from  the  ilation  of  one  legion  to  another  •, 
the  benefit  and  efFe6t  whereof  we  in  England  enjoy 
to  this  day  -,  (a  pattern  to  all  princes  and  ftates  that 
have  neceflary  occafion  for  armies,  how  to  employ 
them  ;)  and  this  very  thing  proved  afterwards  a  migh- 
ty advantage  for  the  more  eafy  and  fpeedy  ipreading 
of  chriftianity  in  the  world. 

II.  Another  part  of  this  prophecy  is,  that  about 
the  time  of  the  coming  of  the  Meffias,  the  world 
fhould  be  in  a  general  expedlation  of  him  j  "  and 
*'  the  expe6t:ation  of  ail  nations  Hiall  come  :"  and  I 
doubt  not  but  this  character  of  the  Meffias  is  taken 
out  of  that  famous  prophecy  concerning  him.  Gen. 
xlix.  10.  "  The  fcepter  fhall  not  depart  from  Judah, 
"  tillShiloh  come,"  (and  by  Shiloh  the  ancient  Jews 
generally  under  flood  the  Meffias)  "  and  to  him  (hall 
"  the  gathering  of  the  people  be  ;"  or  as  it  is  ren-^ 
dered  by  the  Septuagint,  and  feveral  other  tranfla- 
tions,  "  and  he  fhall  be  the  expedation  of  the  na- 
*'  tions."  In  allufion  to  which  ancient  prophecy 
concerning  him,  he  is  here  in  the  text  called,  "  the 
"  expedation  of  all  nations  •,"  and  fo  by  the  prophet  | 
Malachi,  chap.  iii.  ver.  i.  "  and  the  Lord  whom  1 
"  ye  expedl,"  or  look  for,  "  Ihall  fuddeniy  come  f 
"  into  his  temple."  Now  this  part  of  the  predic- 
tion in  the  text,  was  ntoil  eminently  fulfilled  in  our 
blelTed  Saviour,  For  about  the  time  of  his  com- 
ing, the  Jews  were  in  a  general  expectation  of  him, 

as 


1092  ^he  prefence  of  the  MeJjlaSy 

S  E  R  M.  as  appears  not  only  from  that  ancient  and  general  tra- 
*  dition  of  theirs,  from  the  fchool  of  Elias,  "  that  at 
*^  the  end  of  the  fecond  two  thoufand  years  of  the 
"  world,  the  Meflias  fhould  come  •,"  (and  our  bleiTed 
Saviour's  coming  did  accordingly  happen  at  that 
time  *,)  but  likewife  from  that  particular  computation 
of  the  Jewifh  dod:ors,  not  long  before  our  Saviour's 
coming,  who,  upon  a  folemn  debate  of  the  matter, 
did  determine  that  the  MeiTias  would  come  within 
fifty  years.  And  this  is  farther  confirmed,  from  the 
great  jealoufy  which  Herod  had  concerning  "  a  king 
*'  of  the  Jews,"  that  was  expedled  to  be  born  about 
that  time  ^  and  from  that  remarkable  teflimony  in 
Jofephus,  who  tells  us,  "  that  the  Jews  rebelled  a- 
'^  gainft  the  Romans,  being  encouraged  thereto  by 
"  a  famous  prophecy  in  their  fcriptures,  that  about 
*'  that  time  a  great  prince  fhould  be  born  among 
*'  them,  that  fhould  rule  the  world  :"  and  Jofephus 
flattered  Vefpafian  fo  far,  as  to  make  him  believe  that 
he  was  the  man  \  and  thereupon  perfuaded  him  to 
deflroy  the  line  of  David,  out  of  which  the  tradition 
was,  that  the  MefTias  fhould  fpring  ;  as  if  the  ac- 
complifhment  of  a  divine  prediction  could  be  hinder- 
ed by  any  human  endeavour. 

And  this  was  not  only  the  general  expeftation  of 
the  Jews  about  that  time,  but  of  a  great  part  of  the' 
world  ;  as  appears  from  rhofe  two  famous  teflimo- 
nies  of  two  of  the  mofl  eminent  hiftorians,  Suetonius 
and  Taqitus.  The  words  of  Suetonius  are  thefe, 
Fercrebuerat  orlente  toto  vetus  ^  conftans  opinio^  ejje 
in  fatis^  ut  Judced  profe5ii  rerum  potirentur  :  "  there 
*'  was  an  ancient  and  general  opinion,famous  through- 
**  out  all  the  eaflern  parts,  that  the  fates  had  deter- 
**  mined,  that  there  fhould  come  out  of  Judea  thofe 
,  ^  that  fhould  govern  the  world  i"  and  h^  adds  whac 
^v  3  I  quoted 


the  glory  of  the  fec6nd  temple.  ^^93 

I  quoted  before  out  of  Jofephus,  id  Julei  ad  fe  tra-  S  ^^^• 
hentes  rebellarunt ;  "  that  the  Jews  taking  this  to 
*■*  themfelves,  did  thereupon  rebel.'*  Now  it  is  ve- 
ry remarkable,  that  the  very  words  of  this  tradition 
feem  to  be  a  verbal  tranQation  of  that  prophecy  in 
Micah,  "  that  out  of  Judah  iTiould  come  the  go- 
''  vernor  :"  utjudcea  profc^l  rerum  potirentur.  The 
other  teftimony  is  out  of  Tacitus  •,  and  his  words  are 
thefe,  (lib.  21.  §.  13.)  Pluribus  ferfuajio  inerat  aniiquis 
facer  do  turn  libris  contineri^  eo  ipfo  tempore  forCy  ut  valef 
ceret  oriensy  profe5i:que  Judced  rcrum  potirenter  :  "  a 
''  great  many  (  fays  he  )  were  poiTeifed  with  a 
^'  perfuafion  that  it  was  .contained  in  the  ancient 
*'  books  of  the  prieRs,  that  at  that  very  time  the 
"  eafc  fhould  prevail,  and  that  they  who  fhould  go- 
*'  vern  the  world,  were  to  come  out  of  Judea."  By 
the  ancient  books  of  the  priells,  he  in  all  probability 
means,  the  ancient  prophecies  of  fcripture  ;  for  the 
laft  expreflion  is  the  fame  with  that  of  Suetonius 
taken  out  of  the  prophet  Micah  ;  and  the  other, 
"  that  the  call  fhould  prevail,"  does  plainly  refer  to 
that  title  given  to  the  MelTias  by  the  prophet  Zachary, 
chap.  vi.  12.  where  he  is  called,  "  the  man  whofs 
^^  name  is  HOV/*  which  fignities  oriens  and  germen, 
both  the  "  eaft"  and  "  a  branch;''  our  tranQation 
hath  it,  "  the  manwhofe  name  is  the  branch  •,"  but 
it  might  as  well  be  rendered,  "  the  man  whofe  name 
"  is  the  eaft."  Thus  you  fee  this  charader  of  our 
Saviour  in  this  prophecy  mofl  literally  fiilfilledy 
that  he  was  "  the  expedation  of  all  nations."  I  pro- 
ceed to  the 

III.  Circumflance  of  this  predi6lion,  that  he  who 
is  here  foretold,  fhould  come  during  the  continuance 
of  this  fecond  temple  •,  becaufe  it  was  his  prefence, 
that  fhould  '*  fill  that  lioufe  with  glory  j"  and  itwas 

Vol.  V.  5  K  ifl. 

4- 


^he  prefence  of  the  Mejfias^ 

in  that  place  that  the  Meflias,  who  is  called  "  the 
*'  peace,"  is  promifed  to  be  given  ;  "  and  in  this 
"  place  will  I  give  peace  \  faith  the  Lord  of  holts.'* 
And  this  is  Ukewife  moft  exprefly  foretold  by  the  pro- 
phet Malachi,  chap.  iii.  i.  "  Behold,  I  will  fend 
"  my  mefTenger,  and  he  fhall  prepare  the  way  before 
"  me  i  and  the  Lord,  whom  ye  look  for,  fhall  fud- 
*'  denly  come  into  his  temple  ;  even  the  meflenger' 
**  of  the  covenant  whom  ye  delight  in,  behold  he 
"  fhall  come,  faith  the  Lord  of  hofts:"  And  ac- 
cordingly Jesus  our  blefled  Saviour  came  during 
the  fecond  temple ;  he  was  prefented  there  by  his  pa- 
rents, and  owned  by  Simeon  for  the  MefTias  \  he  dif- 
puted  there,  and  taught  frequently  there,  and  by  his 
prefence  "  filled  that  houfe  with  glory."  For  that 
the  Son  of  God  taught  pubUckly  there,  was  a  greater 
honour  to  it,  than  all  thefilver  and  gold  of  Solomon's 
temple. 

And  not  long  after  his  death  (according  to  his  ex- 

prefs  predid'ion)  this  fecond  temple  was  deilroyed  to 

the  ground  -,  "  fo  that  not  one  ftone  of  it  was  left 

"  upon  another."  And  when  fome  hundred  of  years 

after,    it  was  attempted  to  be  rebuilt  three  feveral 

times,  the  laft  whereof  was  by  Julian  the  apollate, 

in  oppofition  to  chriftianity,  and  to  our  Saviour's 

predidion  ;  fire  came  out  of  the  foundation,  and  de- 

ftroyed  the  workmen  ;  fo  that  they  defifted  in  great 

terror,  and  durrb  never  attempt  it  afterwards.     And 

this  not  only  the  chriftian  writers  of  that  age  in  great 

j  numbers  do  teftify,    but  Ammianus  Marcellinus  (a 

j  heathen  hiftorian  who  lived  in  that  time)  does  alfo 

'  give  us  a  very  particular  account  of  this  memorable 

.matter.     So  that  if  by  "  die  exped:ation  of  t'at  na- 

**'  tions"  be  here  meant  ^'   the  MefTias,"  (as  I  have 

plainly  fliewn)  then  he^  is  Ipng  fince  come,  and  was 

■     -  no 


the  glory  of  the  fecond  temple.       4        1095 

no  other  than  Tesus  our  blefled  Saviour,  who  ac-  ^  ER  M. 

LXX 
cording  to  this  prophecy,  "  was  to  fill  the  fecond 

''  temple  with  glory ;"  which  hath  now  been  demo- 
lifhed  above  one  thoufand  fix  hundred  years  ago,  and 
the  rebuilding  whereof  hath  been  fo  often  and  fo  re- 
markably hindered  from  heaven.  The  confideration 
of  all  which  were  fufHcient  to  convince  the  Jews  of 
their  vain  expedtation  of  a  MefTias  yet  to  come  •,  were 
they  not  fo  obflinately  rooted  and  fixed  in  their  infi- 
delity.^.   There  remains  now  the 

IV.  And  lafl  circumflance  of  this  prophecy,  viz. 
that  the  coming  of  the  MelTias  was  to  be  the  lafl  dif- 
penfation  of  God,  for  the  falvation  of  men ;  and 
confequently  was  to  be  perpetual  and  unchangeable : 
"  Yet  once  more,  and  I  will  fhake  the  heavens,  and 
"  the  earth,  and  tl^e  fea,  and  the  dry  land :  and  I 
"  will  fhake  all  nations,  and  the  expedlation  of  all 
**  nations  fhall  come."  Yet  once'more  ^  from  which 
words,  the  apoftle  to  the  Hebrews  argues  the  perpe- 
tuity of  the  gofpel,  and  that  it  was  the  difpenfation 
which  fhould  never  be  changed,  Heb.  xii.  27,  "  And ' 
*'  this  word,  yet  once  more,  fignifies,  the  removing 
^'  of  thofe  things  which  are  fhaken,  as  of  things  that 
*'  are  made,  that  thofe  things  which  cannot  be  fha- 
*'  ken  may  remain."  And  then  it  follows,  "  where- 
"  fore  we  receiving  a  kingdom  which  cannot  be 
"  moved,  &:c."  It  was  ufual  with  the  Jews  to  de- 
fcribe  the  times  of  the  gofpel,  by  "  the  kingdom  of 
"  the  MefTias  ;"  and  accordingly  the  apoftle  here 
calls  the  difpenfation  of  the  gofpel,  "  a  kingdom 
"  which  cannot  be  moved  :"  in  oppofition  to  the 
law,  which  was  an  imperfed  and  alterable  difpen- 
fation. For  this  is  plainly  the  fcope  of  the  apoflle's 
reafoning  -,  namely,  to  convince  the  Jews,  that  they 
were  now  under  a  more  gracious  and  perfect  difpen- 

^K  z  fation 


1096  ^he  prefence  of  the  MeJ/ias, 

^Lxx^'  ^^^*^°"  ^^^^  ^^^^  ^^  ^^^  ^^^'  ^^^*  ^^*    "  ^^  ''^^^  "^^ 
"  come  unto  the  mount,  that  might  be  touched, 

"  and  that  burned  with  fire  ;"  meaning  mount  Sinai, 
which  was  a  fenfible  htcral  mountain,  "  a  mountain 
*'  that  might  be  touched,"  in  oppofition  to  the  my- 
flical  and  fpiritual  mount  Sion  ;  by  which  the  dif- 
penfation  of  the  gofpel  is  defcribcd :  which  by  the 
way  prevents  the  objc6lion  of  it's  being  called  "  the 
*'  mountain  that  might  be  touched,"  when  it  was 
forbidden  to  be  touched  upon  pain  of  death  ;  "  Ye 
"  are  not  come  to  the  mount  that  might  be  touched  •," 
that  is,  I  am.  not  nowfpeaking  of  a  literal  and  fenfible 
mountain,  iuch  as  was  mount  Sinai,  from  whence 
the  law  was  given  •,  but  of  that  fpiritual  and  heaven- 
ly difpenfation  of  the  gofpel,  which  was  typified  by 
mount  Sion  and  by  Jemfalcm  ;  ''  but  ye  are  come 
*'  to  mount  Sion,  and  unto  the  city  of  the  living 
*'  God,  the  heavenly  Jerufalem,  and  to  Jesus  the 
"  Mediator  of  the  new  covenant."  And  then  he 
cautions  them  to  take  heed  how  they  reje6l  him  that 
came  from  heaven,  to  make  this  lafl:  revelation  of 
God  to  the  world;  which,  becaufe  of  the  clearnefs 
and  perfedion  of  it,  fhould  never  need  to  receive  a- 
ny  change,  ver.  25.  "See  that  ye  refufe  not  him 
"  that  fpeaketh  ;  for  if  they  efcaped  not,  who  refufed 
"  him  that  fpakc  on  earth,"  (viz.  Mofes,  who  de- 
Jivered  the  law  from  mount  Sinai  j  "  much  more  flaall 
^'  not  we  efcapc,  if  we  turn  away  from  him  that 
^^  ipeaketh  from  heaven  :  whofe  voice  then  fhook  the 
"  earth,"  (alluding  to  the  earthquake  at  the  giving 
of  the  law)  "but  now  he  hath  promifed,  faying,  yet 
"  once  more,  I  fliake  not  the  earth  only ;  but  alfo 
*'  heaven  ;"  that  is,  "  the  whole  world,"  in  order 
to  the  coming  of  the  Meflias,  and  the  planting  of  the 
gofpel  in  the  world  ;  and  then  he  argues  from  the 

words 


the  gtory  of  the  fecond  temple,  1097 

words  "  once  more,"  that  the  former  difpenfatlon  ^ E  R  M. 

fhould  be  removed,    to   make  way  for  that  wliicli  ^ ^'^ 

fhould  perpetually  remain. 

And  indeed  there  is  no  need  of  any  farther  revela- 
tion after  this  ;  nor  of  any  change  of  that  religion 
which  was  brought  from  heaven  by  the  Son  of  God  ; 
becaufe  of  the  perfe6tion  of  it,  and  it's  fitnefs  to  re- 
form the  world,  and  to  recover  mankind  out  of  their 
lapfed*  and  degenerate  condition,  and  to  bring  them 
to  happinefs  •,  both  by  the  purity  of  it's  dodlrine, 
and  the  power  of  it's  arguments  to  work  upon  the 
minds  of  men,  by  the  clear  difcovery  of  the  mighty 
rewards  and  punilhments  of  another  world. 

And  now  the  proper  inference  from  all  this  dif- 
courfe,  is  the  very  fame  with  that  v/hich  the  apofUe 
makes,  from  the  confideration  of  the  perfeftion  and 
excellency  of  this  revelation,  which  God  had  made 
to  the  world  by  his  Son.  "  See  that  ye  refufe  not 
"  him  that  fpeaketh :  for  how  ihall  we  efcape,  if 
"  we  turn  away  from  him  that  fpeaketh  from  hea- 
"  ven?"  And  at  the  28th  verfe  of  that  chapter, 
"  wherefore  v/e  receiving  a  kingdom  which  cannot 
"  be  moved,  let  us  have  grace,  whereby  we  may 
*'  ferve  God  acceptably,  with  reverence  and  godly 
"  fear  ;"  that  is,  let  us  live  as  becomes  thofe  to 
whom  God  hath  made  fo  clear  and  perfed  a  revela- 
tion of  his  will.  We  have  all  the  advantages  of  the 
divine  revelation  which  the  world  ever  had,  and  the 
laft  and  mofl  perfecl  that  the  world  ever  fhall  have  : 
We  have  not  only  Mofes  and  the  prophets,  but 
that  dofflrine  which  the  Son  of  God  came  down  from 
heaven  on  purpofc  to  declare  to  the  world.  God 
hath  vouchsafed  to  us  that  clear  and  complete  reve- 
lation of  his  Vv^ill,  which  he  denied  to  "  many  pro- 
*'  phets  and  righteous  men  ;  who  defired  to  fee  the 

''  things 


'i  o  9  8  ^he  prefence  of  the  Mejfias^ 

S  E  R  M.  «  which  we  fee,  but  could  not  fee  them  ;  and  to 
^*  hear  the  things  which  we  hear,  but  could  not  hear 
"  them."  There  were  good  men  in  the  world  under 
thofe  imperfed  revelations  which  God  made  to  them  •, 
but  we  have  far  greater  advantages,  and  more  pow- 
erful arguments  to  be  good  than  ever  they  had.  And 
as  we  ought  thankfully  to  acknowledge  thefe  blelfed 
advantages  ;  fo  ought  we  likewife,  with  the  greateft 
care  and  diligence,  to  improve  them. 

And  now  how  does  the  ferious  confideration  of 
this,  condemn  all  impenitent  finners  under  the  gof- 
pel,  who  will  not  be  reclaimed  from  their  fins,  and 
perfuaded  to  goodnefs,  by  all  that  God  can  do ;  by 
the  moft  plain  declaration  of  his  v/ill  to  the  world, 
by  the  mofl  perfe6t  precepts  and  diredions  for  a  good 
life  \  by  the  moft  encouraging  promifes  to  obedience, 
and  by  the  moft  fevere  threatnings  of  an  eternal  and 
unutterable  ruin^  in  cafe  of  difobedience  ;  "  by  the 
*'  wrath  of  God,  revealed  from  heaven,  againft  all 
''  ungodlinefs  and  unrighteoufnefs  of  men  j"  by  the 
terrors  of  the  great  day,  and  the  vengeance  of  eter- 
nal fire  i  by  the  wonderful  and  amazing  condefcen- 
fion  of  the  Son  of  God,  appearing  in  our  nature  ;  by 
his  merciful  undertaking  for  the  redemption  of  loft 
and  finful  man  ;  by  his  cruel  fuffcrings  for  our  fins, 
and  by  the  kindeft  offers  of  pardon  and  reconciliation 
in  his  blood,  and  by  the  glorious  hopes  of  eternal  life  ! 

What  could  God  have  done  more  for  us,  than  he 
hath  done  ?  What  greater  concernment  could  he  fnew 
for  our  falvation,  than  "  to  fend  his  own  Son,  his 
**  only  Son,  to  feek  and  fave  us  ?"  And  what  great- 
er demonftration  could  he  give  of  his  love  to  us,  than 
*'  to  give  the  Son  of  his  love  to  die  for  us  ?"  This  is 
the  laft  effort  that  the  divine  mercy  and  goodnefs  will 
make  upon  mankind.  So  the  apoftle  tells  us  in  the 
2  begin- 


the  glory  of  the  fecond  temple,  ^  ^99 

beginning  of  this  epiftle,  chap.  i.  i.  that  ^'  God  who  S  E  R  M. 
"  at  fundry  times,  and  in  divers  manners,  fpake  in 
^V  times  pail  unto  the  fathers,  by  the  prophets,  hath 
*'  in  thefe  laft  days,  fpoken  to  us  by  his  Son:"  and 
if  we  will  not  hear  him,  he  will  fpeak  no  morp ;  af- 
ter this  it  is  not  to  be  expe6led  that  he  fhould  make 
any  farther  attempts  for  our  recovery,  he  can  fend 
no  greater  and  dearer  perfon  to  us,  than  "  his  own 
"  Son."     If  we  defpife  him  •,-  whom  will  we  reve- 
rence ?    If  we  reje6t  him,    and  the  great  falvation 
which  he  brings  and  offers  to  us ;  we  have  all  the  rea- 
fon  in  the  world  to  believe  that  our  cafe  is  defperate, 
and  that  we  fhall  "  die  in  our  fins."  "  This  was  the 
*'  condemnation  of  the  Jews,  that  they  did  not  re- 
''  ceive  and  believe  on  him  whom  God  had  fent.'* 
And  if  we  who  profefs  to  believe  on  him,  and  to  re- 
ceive his  dodrine,  be  found  difobedient  to  it,  in  our 
lives,  we  have  reafon  to  fear  that  our  condemnation 
fhall  be  far  heavier  than  theirs :  for  fince  the  appea- 
rance of  "  the  Son  of  God"  for  the  falvation  of  men, 
''  the  wrath  of  God  is  revealed  from  heaven  againft 
"  all  ungodlinefs  and  unrighteoufnefs  of  men,"  e- 
Ipecially  againft  thofe  "  who  detain  the  truth  of  God 
"  in  unrighteoufnefs  ;"  that  is,  againft  thofe  who 
entertain  the  light  of  God's  truth  in  their  minds, 
but  do  not  fuffer  it  to  have  it's  proper  efFedt  and  in- 
fluence upon  their  hearts  and  lives  ;  and  make  that  a 
prifoner,    which  would  make  them   free.     So  our 
Lord  tells  us,  that  "  the  truth  fhall  make  us  free  ;'* 
but  if  "  after  we  have  received  the  knov/ledge  of  the 
"  truth,"  we  are  ftill  "  the  fervants  of  fin  ;"  our 
condemnation  is  much  worfe,  than  if  "  the  Son  of 
"  God"  had  never  come:  for  the  chriilian  rehgion 
hath  done  nothing  \  if  it  do  not  take  men  off  from 
their  fins,  and  teach  them  to  hve  well. 

Efpecially 


1 1 00  T'h^  prefe?2ce  of  the  M^Jjia^^ 

S  E  R  M.      Efpecially  at  this  time  when  we  are  celebrating 
■     '^  the  coming  of  this  Son  of  God,   to  deftroy  the 
'  works  of  the  devil,"  we  fhould  take  great  heed, 
that  we  be  not  found  guilty  of  any  impiety  or  wick- 
ednefs  ;  becaufe  this  is  dire6lly  contrary  to  the  main 
defign  "  of  the  grace  of  God,  which  brings  falva- 
"  tion,  and  hath  appeared  to  all  men,"  (and  the  ap- 
pearance whereof  we  do  at  this  time  commemorate) 
for  that  "  teacheth  men  to  deny  ungodlin.efs   and 
"  worldly  lufts,  and  to  live  foberly  and  righteoufly 
''  and  godHly  in  this  prefent  world :"  and  we  cannot 
gratify  the  devil  more,  than  by  fhewing  ourfelves 
more  diligent  than  ordinary  to  uphold  his  works,  at 
•'  this  very  time,"  when  "  the  Son  of  God  was  ma- 
*'  nifefted"  onpurpofe  "  to  dilfolve  them  : "  we  can- 
not poffibly  choofe  a  worfe,  a  more  improper  feafon 
to  fin  in,  than  when  we  are  celebrating  the  birth  of 
the  blefTed  Jesus,  who  came  ''  to  fave  us  from  ouf 
"  fins."     This  is,  as  if  a  fick  man,  for  joy  tliat  a  fa- 
mous phyfician  is  conie  to  his  houfe,  fhould  run  into 
all  manner  of  excefs,  and  fo  do  all  he  can  to  inflame 
his  difeafe,  and  make  his  cafe  dcfperate.     Not  but 
that  our  inward  joy  may  lawfully  be  accompanied 
with  all  outward  innocent  exprellions  of  it :  but  we 
cannot  be  truly  thankful,  if  we  allow  ouifelves  at 
this  time  in  any  thing   contrary  to  the  purity  and 
fobriety  of  the  gofpel.     It  is  matter  of  juft  and  fad 
complaint,  being  of  great  fcandal  to  our  Saviour, 
and  his  holy  religion,  that  fuch  irregular  and  cxt^-a- 
vagant  things  are  at  this  time  commonly  done  by 
many,  who  call  themfelves  Chriftians  •,  and  done  un- 
der a  pretence  of  doing  honour  to  the  memory  of 
Christ's  birth »,  as  if,  becaufe  the  Son  of  God  was 
at  this  time  made  man,  it  were  fit  for.  men  to  make 
diemfcjves  beafts. 

If 


the  glory  of  the  fecond  tempU.  1 1 0 1 

If  we  would   honour  him  indeed,  we  muft  take  S  ^^^^• 
care  that  our  joy  do  not  degenerate  into  fin  and  fen- 
fuaUty,  and  that  v^e  do  not  exprefs  it  by  leudnefs  and 
luxury,  by  intemperance  and  excefs,  by  prodigal  gam- 
ing, and  profufe  wafting  of  our  eftates,   "  as  the 
"  manner  of  fome  is ;"  as  if  we  intended  Uterally 
to  requite  our  Saviour,  "  who  being  rich,  for  our 
*'  fakes  became  poor."     This  is  a  way  of  "  parting^' 
"  with  houfes  and  land,  and  becoming  poor  for  his  ■ 
"  fake,"  iox  which  he  will  never  thank,  nor  reward  j 
us.     This  is  not  to  commemorate  the  coming  of  our 
Saviour,  but  to  contradict  it,  and  openly  to  declare 
that  we  will  uphold  "  the  works  of  the  devil,"  in  de- 
fpite  of  *''  the  Son  of  God,   who  came  to  deftroy^ 
''  them."     It  is  for  all  the  world  like  that  leud  and  "j 
fenfelefs  piece  of  loyalty,  too  much  in  fafhion  fbme  \ 
years  ago,  of  being  drunk  for  the  king.  Good  God!  *; 
that  ever  it  fhould  pafs  for  a  piece  of  religion  among 
Chriftians,  to  run  into  all  manner  of  excefs  for  twelve 
days  together,  in  honour  of  our  Saviour  !  A  great- 
er aggravation  of  fin  cannot  eafily  be  imagined,  than 
to  abufe  the  memory  of  the  greateft  bieiTing  that  ever 
was,  "  Christ  coming  into  the  world  to  take  away 
"  fin,"   into  an  opportunity  of  committing  it  j  this 
is  to  reprefent  the  Son  of  God  as  a  patron  of  fm  and 
licentioufnefs,  and  to  treat  him  more  contumeliouily 
than  the  Jews  did,  who  bowed  the  knee  to  him,  and 
mocked  him,  and  called  him  king,  and  fpat  upon 
him  •,    and,   under   a  pretence   of  rejoicing  for  his 
birth,  "  to  crucify  to  ourfelvcs  afrefn  the  Lord  of 
"  life  and  glory  •,  and  to  put  him  to  an  open  ihame." 

I  will  conclude  all  with  the  apoitle's  exhortation, 
Rom.  xiii.  12,  13,  14.  ''  Let  us  caft  olf  the  works 
*'  of  darknefs,  and  let  us  put  on  the  armour  of  liglv:, 
*^  Let  us  walk  decently  as  in  the  day  -,  not  in  rioting 
'    Vol.  V.  9  L  "'  aad 

4- 


I  I  o  2  The  prefence  of  the  MeJJias^  Sec. 

S  E  R  M.  "  and  dninkennefs,  not  in  chamberins;  and  wanton- 
"  nefs,  not  in  ftrife  and  envying.  But  put  ye  on 
"  the  Lord  Jssus  Christ,  and  make  not  provifion 
"  for  the  flefh  to  fulfil  the  lull  thereof" 

Now  to  our  moft  gracious  and  merciful  God,  the 

great  friend  and  lover  of  fouls,  who  regarded  us  in 

our  low  and  loft  condition,  and  caft  an  eye  of  pity 

upon  us,  when  "  we  were  in  our  blood,  and  no 

"  other  eye  pitied  us,"  and  when  we  had  loft  and 

ruined  our  felves,  was  pleafed  in  tender  compaflion 

to  mankind,  "  to  fend  his  only  begotten  Son  into 

*'  the  world  to  feek  and  fave  us,"  and  by  the  purity 

of  his  dodrine,  and  the  pattern  of  his  life,  and  the 

facrifice  of  his  death,  to  purchafe  eternal  life  for  us, 

and  to  dire6t  and  lead  us  in  the  way  to  it :  and  to  him 

alfo,  the  blelTed  Saviour  and  redeemer  of  mankind, 

who  came  down  from  heaven,  that  he  might  carry  us 

thither,  and  took  human  nature  upon  him,  that  we 

thereby  might  be  "  made  partakers  of  a  divine  na- 

''  ture  ;"  and ''humbled  himfelf  to  death,  even  the 

"  death  of  the  crofs,"  that  he  might  exalt  us  to 

glory  and  honour,  and  whilft  we  were  bitter  enemies 

to  him,  gave  fuch  a  demonftration  of  his  love  to  us, 

as  never  any  man  did  to  his  beft  friend :  "  Unto  him 

''  that  fittcth  upon  the  throne,  and  to  the  lamb  that 

"  was  flain,  to  God,  even  our  Father,  and  to  our 

"  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  firft  begotten  from  the 

"  dead,  and  the  prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth,  to 

**  him  who  hath  loved  us,  and  waftied  us  from  our 

"  fins  in  his  own  blood,  and  hath  made  us  kings  and 

"  priefts,  unto  God  and    his  Father,  to    him    be 

"  glory  and  honour,  dominion  and  power,  now  and 

"  forever.     Amen,'* 

SER. 


II03 


SERMON     LXXI. 


Preficbcd 
at  St.  Pe- 
ter's Corn- 
hill  on  rhe 
feaft  of 
the  an- 


Christ  Jesus,  the  only  mediator  be- 
tween God  and  men.  nunciation 

169!. 


I  T  I  M.  II.  5,  6. 

For  there  is  one  God,  and  one  mediator  between  God 
and  men ^  the  man  Christ  Jesus  j  who  gave  him- 
felf  a  ranfom  for  all, 

THESE  words  contain  in  them  thefe  four  ^r^S t^' 
proportions  ;  three  of  them  exprefs,  and  the  w— ^./--^ 
fourth  of  them  fufHciently  impHed  in  the  text.  The  firft 

I.  "  That  there  is  one  God."  th?sText?^ 

II.  "  That  there  is  one  mediator  between  God 
''  and  men  •,  Christ  Jesus." 

III.  "  That  he  gave  himfelf  a  ranfom  for  all." 

IV.  "  That  the  mediation  or  interceffion  of  Je- 
*'  sus  Christ,  is  founded  in  the  redemption  of 
"  mankind."  For  this  feems  to  be  the  reafon  why- 
it  is  added,  that  "  he  gave  himfelf  a  ranfom  for  all," 
to  fignify  to  us,  that  becaufe  "  he  gave  himfelf  a  ran- 
"  fom  for  all,"  therefore  he  intercedes  for  all.  In 
virtue  of  that  facriiice  which  he  offered  to  God  for 
the  falvation  of  men,  he  offers  up  our  prayers  to 
God  :  and  therefore  it  is  acceptable  to  him,  "  that 
"  we  fhould  pray  for  all  men."  This  feems  to  be 
the  true  connexion  of  the  apollle's  difcourfe,  and  the 
force  of  his  reafoning,  about  our  putting  up  "  pub- 
"  lick  prayers  for  all  men." 

9  L  2  I  have 


Christ  Jesus,  the  only 

I  Iiave  in  a  former  difcourfe  handled  the  firffc  of 

thcfe.     I  proceed  now  to  the 

See  a  fcr-      II.  That  "  there  is  one  mediator  between  God  and 

iTion  con-   cc  ^^^i^  ^^^  y^^^n  Christ  Jesus.*'     One  mediator, 

the' unity    that  is,  but  one  •,  for  the  exprcfTion  is  the  very  fame 

of  the  di"  concerning  one  God,  and  one  mediator  -,  and  there- 

t'u"e  ^^'    ^'*^^^  ^^  ^^"^^  apoftle  when  he  fays, ''  there  is  one  God," 

pruned  in  certainly   means   that  there   is  but  one  God  •,  it  is 

the  year     equally  Certain,   that  when  he  fays,  "  there  is  one 

^  "  mediator  between  God  and  men,"  he  means,  there 

is  but  one  mediator,  viz.  Christ    Jesus.     He   is 

the  only  mediator  between  God  and  men. 

In  the  handling  of  this  argument,  I  lliall  proceed 
in  this  method. 

1 .  I  fliall  endeavour  to  fhew,  that  God  hath  ap- 
pointed but  one  mediator,  or  advocate,  or  intercefibr 
in  heaven  for  us  ;  in  whofe  name,  and  by  whofe 
mediation  and  interceffion,  we  are  to  offer  up  our 
prayers  and  fervices  to  God. 

2.  That  this  is  mofl'  agreeable  to  one  main  end 
and  defign  of  the  chriftian  religion,  and  of  our  Sa- 
viour's cominfj:  into  the  world. 

3.  That  it  is  likewife  evident  from  the  nature  and 
rcafon  of  the  thing  itfelf,  that  ''  there  is  but  one 
''  mediator"  and  interceffor  in  heaven  for  us,  to 
offer  up  our  prayers  to  God  ♦,  and  that  there  can  be 
no  more.     And  then 

4.  And  lafcly,  I  fnall  endeavour  to  fhew,  how 
contrary  to  the  dodrine  of  the  chriilian  religion,  con- 
cernins;  "  one  mediator  and  interceffor  in  heaven  for 
*'  us,"  the  dodlrine  and  pradice  of  the  church  of 
Rome  in  this  matter  is,  in  their  invocation  of  angels, 
and  the  bleffed  virgin,  and  the  faints,  and  making 
ufe  of  their  mediation  and  interceffion  with  God  for 
finners  j  as  likewife  how  contrary  it  is  to  the  dodrine 

and 


mediator  between  God  and  7fftn, 


\ 


1 105 


and  pradice  of  the  primitive  chriflian  church  :  and  sNs  R  M, 
then  I  fhall  anfwer  their  feveral  pretences  for  this  doc-  ' 

trine  and  pra6lice  ;  and  fhew  that  this  pradlice  is  not 
only  needlefs,  but  ufelefs  and  unprofitable  ;  and  not 
only  fo,  but  very  dangerous  and  impious. 

Firft,  I  fhall  endeavour  to  fhew,  that  God  hath 
appointed  but  one  mediator,  or  advocate,  or  inter- 
ceflbr  in  heaven  for  us,  in  whofe  name,  and  by  whofe 
intercefiion  we  are  to  offer  up  all  our  prayers  and 
fervices  to  God. 

Befides  that  it  is  exprefly  'faid  here  in  the  text, 
"  there  is  but  one  mediator  between  God  and  men, 
"  the  man  Christ  Jesus,"  and  that  the  fcripture 
no  where  mentions  any  other ;  I  fay,  befides  this,  we 
are  conflantly  dire6ted  to  offer  up  cur  prayers  and 
thankfgivings,  and  to  perform  all  a6ls  of  worfliip  in 
his  name,  and  no  other ;  and  with  a  promife,  that 
the  prayers  and  fervices,  which  we  offer  in  his  name, 
will  be  gracioufly  anfwered  and  accepted  :  John  xiv. 
13,  14.  '^  Whatfoeverye  fhall  afk  in  my  name,  that 
*'  will  I  do  ;  that  the  Father  may  be  glorified  in  the 
"  Son.  If  ye  fhall  afk  any  thing  in  my  name,  I 
*'  will  do  it."  And  chap.  xvi.  23,  24.  "  And  in 
"  that  day  ye  fhall  afl<:  me  nothing  •,  verily,  verily, 
"  I  fay  unto  you,  whatfoever  ye  fhall  aflc  the  Father 
*'  in  my  name,  he  will  give  it  you.  Hitherto  have 
**  ye  afked  nothing  in  my  name  j  aflc  and  ye  fhall 
*'  receive,  that  your  joy  may  be  full."  In  that 
day,  that  is,  when  I  have  left  the  world,  and  am 
gone  to  my  Father,  as  he  explains  it  at  the  28th 
verfe,  "  ye  fhall  ?Sk  me  nothing  •,  but  whatfoever 
*'  ye  fhall  afk  the  Father  in  m.y  name,  he  will  give 
"  it  you."  That  is,  you  fhall  not  need  to  addrefs 
your  prayers  to  me,  but  to  my  Father  in  my  name. 
And  ver.  26,  27.  "  At  that  day  ye  fhall  afk  in  my 


name;" 


iio6^  Christ  Jesus,  the  only 

S  E  R  y.  «  name  ;"  that  is,  from  the  tkne  that  I  am  afcended 

LXXi      . 

into  heaven,  ye  fhall  put  up  all  your  prayers  and  re- 

quclls  to  God  in  my  name ;  "  and  I  fay  not  unto 
*'  you,  that  I  will  pray  the  Father  for  you  ;  for  the 
"  Father  himfelf  loveth  you  ;"  that  is,  I  need  not  tell 
you  (though  I  Ihall  certainly  do  it)  that  I  will  inter- 
cede with  the  Father  for  you  ;  for  he  of  himfelf  is 
kindly  difpofed  and  affeded  towards  you,  for  my 
fake  •,  ''  the  Father  himfelf  loveth  you,  becaufe  yc 
*'  have  loved  me." 

St.  Paul  likewife  commands  Chriftians  to  perform 
all  acts  of  religious  worlhip  in  the  name  of  Christ  : 
Col.  iii.  1 6,  17.  "  Singing  with  grace  in  your  hearts 
"  to  the  Lord,  and  whatfoever  ye  do  in  word  and 
*'  deed,  do  all  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
*'  giving  thanks  to  God  and  the  Father  by  him." 
And  this  precept  of  addreffing  all  our  prayers  or 
thankfgivings  to  God,  by  Jesus  Christ,  as  the  on- 
ly mediator  between  God  and  us,  is  the  more  re- 
markable, becaufe  it  is  given  in  oppofition  to  the 
worfhipping  of  God  by  any  other  mediators  and  in- 
/  terceffors  in  heaven  for  us  ;  and  to  that  fuperftition 
•  which  had  begun  fo  early  to  prevail  among  fome 
Chriftians  at  ColofTe  and  Laodicea,  of  worfhipping 
God  by  the  mediation  and  intercefTion  of  angels, 
|againft  v/hich  he  had  cautioned  in  the  former  chap- 
iter, ver.  18,  19.  "  Let  no  man  beguile  you  of  your 
*'  reward  in  a  voluntary  humility,  and  worfhipping 
"  of  angels,  not  holding  the  head."  Intimating, 
that  for  Chriftians  to  addrefs  themfelves  to  God,  by 
any  other  mediator,  but  Jesus  Christ  only,  was  a 
defedion  from  Christ  "  the  head,"  and  "  high 
*'  prieft  of  our  profeflion."  And  that  this  is  the 
apoftle's  meaning,  Theodoret  alTures  us,  in  his  com- 
ment upon  this  place,  where  he  tells  us,  that  fome 
3  who 


mediator  between  God  and  men.  1107 

who  maintained  an  obfervance  of  the  law,  together  ^  ^^^^• 
with  the  gofpel,  afTerted  alfo,  that  angels  were  to  be  1 
worfhipped  y  faying,  ^'  that  the  law  was  given  by ' 
"  them."  And  this  ciiftom,  he  tells  us,  remained 
a  long  time  in  Phrygia  and  Pifidia,  and  that  uponi 
this  account  it  was,  that  the  fynod  of  Laodicea  in  , 
Phrygia  (about  the  middle  of  the  fourth  century )  for-  , 
bad  Chriflians  by  a  law,  to  pray  to  angels.  And 
yet  more  exprefly  in  his  comment  upon  thofe  words, . 
chap.  iii.  17.  "  Whatfoeverye  do  in  word  or  deed, 
"  do  all  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  giving 
"  thanks  to  God  and  the  Father  by  him."  For  be- 
"  caufe  (fays  he)  they"  (meaning  thofe  of  whom 
St.  Paul  warns  the  CololTians  to  beware)  "  becaufe 
"  they  did  command  m.en  to  worfhip  angels,  he  en- 
"  joins  the  contrary  ;  that  they  lliould  adorn  both' 
"  their  vvords  and  adions  with  the  memory  (or 
''  mention)  of  the  name  of  Christ  their  Lord  : 
"  and  fend  ye  up  (faith  he)  thankfgiving  to  God 
**  and  the  Father  by  him,  and  not  by  the  angels." 
And  then  he  makes  mention  of  the  canon  of  the  fy- 
nod of  Laodicea,  "  which  (fays  he)  inpurfuance  of 
"  this  rule,  and  being  deltrous  to  cure  that  old  dif- 
''  eafe,  made  it  a  law,  that  none  (hould  pray  unto 
"  angels,  nor  forfake  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 
It  feems  then  that  fome  reiicks  of  that  impious 
cuftom,  of  praying  to  angels,  which  Theodoret  here 
calls,  "that  old  difeafe,"  had  continued  from  Si. 
Paul's  time,  to  the  council  of  Laodicea,  which  was 
the  occaiion  of  that  fevere  canon  then  made  about 
that  matter  •,  the  very  words  whereof  I  will  fet  dov/n, 
becaufe  they  are  remarkable  •,  viz.  ^'  that  Chriftians 
"  ought  not  to  forfake  the  church  of  God,  and  go 
*^  away  from  it,  and  to  invocate  angels,  and  to  make 
"  conventicles,  all  which  are  forbidden.  If  any  there- 

*'  fore 


LXXI. 


1108        '  Christ  Jesus,  the  mly 

S  E  R  M.  «  fore  be  found  giving  himfelf  to  this  fccret  idola- 
"  try,  \^t  him  be  anathema  ;  becaufe  he  hath  for- 
"  fakenour  Lord  Jesus  Christ  the  Son  of  God, 
*^  and  is  gone  over  to  idolatry."  What  fh all  be 
faid  to  them,  who  do  not  only  fecretly,  and  in  their 
private  devotions,  but  in  the  publick  alTembhes  of 
Chriftians,  and  in  the  moil  pubhck  offices  of  their 
churcJi,  invocate  angels,  and  pray  to  them  ?  So  that 
it  was  praying  to  angels  (or  making  ufe  of  them  as 
mediators  and  intercelfors  with  God  for  us)  which 
^l,  Paul  here  reproves  fo  feverely  in  the  CololTians, 
as  a  defedion  from  Christ  and  the  chrillian  reli- 
gion. 

And  indeed,  confidering  how  frequently  the  fcrip- 
ture  Ipeaks  of  Christ,  as  ''  our  only  way  to  God, 
"  and  by  whom  alone  we  have  accefs  to  the  throne  of 
*'  grace,"  we  cannot  doubt,  but  that  God  hath 
conftituted  him  our  only  mediator  and  interceffor, 
by  whom  we  are  to  addrefs  all  our  requeils  to  God, 
John  xiv.  6.  Jesus  there  faith  unto  Thomas,  "  I 
"  am  the  way,  the  truth  and  the  life  \  no  mancom- 
"  eth  to  the  Father  but  by  me."  "  I  am  the  way, 
'^  the  truth,  and  the  hfe,"  that  is,  the  true  and  liv- 
ing way  to  the  Father  (which  the  apoflle  calls "  a  new 
*'  and  living  way,"  Heb.  x.  19,  20.  "  Having  there- 
"  fore  boldnefs  to  enter  into  the  holiefl  by  the  blood 
"  of  Jesus,  by  a  new  and  living  way  which  he  hath 
*'  confecrated  for  us.")  "  No  man  com  eth  to  the 
"  Father  but  by  me ;"  that  is,  we  can  have  no  ac- 
cefs to  God  by  prayer,  or  by  any  other  afe  of  reli- 
gious worfhip,  but  by  him.  So  St.  Paul  tells  us, 
Eph.  ii.  1 8.  ''^  For  through  him  (fpeaking  of  Christ) 
"  we  both  have  an  accefs  by  one  fpirit  unto  the  Fa- 
*'  ther."  We  both,  that  is,  both  Jews  and  Gen- 
tiles.    Under  the  law  the  Jews  had  accefs  to  God  , 

by 


7nediafor  between  God  and  men,  1 1 09 

by  their  high  prieft,  who  interceded  with  God,  and  S  ^  R  M. 
offered  up  prayers  in  behalf  of  the  people.  The 
Gentiles,  they  addreffed  themfelves  to  God  by  innu- 
merable mediators,  by  angels,  and  the  fouls  of  their 
departed  heroes,  wlich  were  the  pagan  faints.  In- 
{lead  of  all  thefe,  God  hath  appointed  one  mediator 
and  interceffor  in  heaven  for  us,  "Jesus  the  Son  of 
"  God,  and  "  by  him  all  mankind,"  both  Jews  and 
Gentiles,  "  have  accefsby  one  ipirit  unto  the  Father.'* 

And  we  have  no  need  of  any  other,  as  the  apoftle 
to  the  Hebrews  reafons,  chap.  vii.  24,  25.  "  But 
"  this  perfon  (fpeaking  of  Christ)  becaufe  heconti- 
"  nueth  for  ever,  hath  an  unchangeable  [)riefthood, 
"  aTTct^Qiuro]/^  a  prieflhood  which  doth  not  pafs 
"  from  one  to  another,"  as  the  priellhood  under  the 
law  did,  when  upon  the  death  of  one  high  prieft,  an- 
other fucceeded  in  his  place ;  but  our  high  prieft  un- 
der the  gofpel,  "  fince  he  abides  for  ever,  is  able 
"  to  fave  to  the  uttermoft  all  thofe  that  come  to  God 
*'  by  him,  feeing  he  ever  hveth  to  make  interceffion 
"  for  us."  So  that  Jesus  Christ  is  an  all-fuffi- 
cient  mediator,  and  able  to  carry  on  and  accomplilh 
the  work  of  our  falvation  from  firft  to  laft :  and  as 
we  do  not  find,  that  God  hath  appointed  any  other ; 
fo  v/e  are  fure,  that  there  needs  no  other,  "  fince  he 
"  is  able  to  fave  to  the  uttermoft  all  thofe  that  come 
"'  to  God  by  himi,  and  that  he  lives  for  ever  to  make 
*'  interceffion  for  us." 

Secondly,  I  proceed  now  in  the  fecond  place,  to 
fiiew,  that  this  dodrine  or  principle  of  "  one  media- 
'^  tor  between  God  and  man,"  is  moft  agreeable  to 
one  main  end  and  defignof  the  chriftian  religion,  and 
of  our  Saviour's  coming  into  the  world,  which 
was  "  to  deftroy  idolatry  out  of  the  world  •,*'  which 
St.  John  calls  *^  the  works  of  die  devil,"  i  John 

Vol.  V.  9  M  iii.  8. 


mo  Christ  Jesus,  the  only 

S  ER  M.  iii,  g,  <c  for  this  purpofe  the  Son  of  God  wa^  mant- 
LXXI  r     r 

"■  fefted,  that  he  might  dedroy,  'Im  Xv(ryi,  that  he 

"  might  dillblve  or  dcmohfh  the  works  of  the  devil ;" 
by  which  St.  John  does  more  efpecially  mean  the 
idolatrous  worfliip  of  the  heathen,  which  confifted 
in  the  multitude  of  their  gods  and  the  bloody  and 
barbarous  rites  and  facrifices,  whereby  they  worfhip- 
ped  them ;  and  likewife  in  the  multitude  of  their  me- 
diators between  the  gods  and  men,  who  were  alfo 
efteemed  by  them  an  inferior  fort  of  deities.  Both 
thefe  kinds  of  idolatry  had  flrangely  prevailed,  and 
over- run  the  world,  before  the  appearance  of  our 
Lord  and  Saviour,  who  came  on  purpofe  to  de- 
liver mankind  from  the  horrible  fuperilition  and  fla- 
very  of  the  worfliip  of  falfe-gods,  to  pull  down  this 
kingdom  of  the  devil,  and  to  demolilh  that  flibrick 
which  he  hath  been  fo  lono-  a  rearing;,  and  to  beat 
him  out  of  thole  fcrong  holds,  which  he  thought  had 
been  impregnable. 

God  indeed  gave  fome  check  to  tliefe,  many  ages 

^  before,  and  not  long  after  their  firfl  appearance,  by 

I  the  Jewifh  religion,  which  was  on  purpofe  introdu- 

ced,  and  confirmed,  and  eftabhUied  by  fo  many  and 

fuch  mighty  miracles  to  preferve  and  keep  alive  in 

the  world  the  primitive  tradition  and  belief  "  of  the 

*'  one  true  God  ;"  and  likewife  to  be  (as  it  were) 

fome  fhadow  and  rude  draught  of  that  more  perfect 

difpenfation  of  the  chriil-ian  religion  which  by  '*'  one 

*'  lacrifice  once  offered,"  and  by  "  one  mediator 

*'  between  God   and  men,"  was  to  put  an  end  to 

the  infinite  fuperftitions  of  the  heathen  worfliip,  and 

all  the  bloody  and  barbarous  rites  of  it,  and  likewife 

to  the  idolatry  they  were  guilty  of,  in  the  worfhip  of 

'  their  ir;ferior  deities,  whom  they  looked  upon  as  a 

\  middle  fort  of  powers  between  the  gods  and  men, 

and 


Mediator  between  God  and  men.  1 1 1 1 

and  therefore  addreffed  themfelves  to  them,  as  "^^"  .^rxxT* 
diators  between  the  fuperior  and  heavenly  gods,  and 
men  here  on  earth.  This  was  plainly  one  of  the  great 
defigns  of  the  chi-iftian  religion  \  and  therefore  it  con- 
cerns Chriftians  to  underftand  it,  and  to  be  very  care- 
ful, that  they  do  not  futfer  themfelves  to  be  deluded 
by  any  fpecious  pretences  whatfoever,  to  bring  thefe 
things  back  again  into  the  chriftian  religion,  for  the 
ruin  and  extirpation  whereof,  it  was  purpofely  de- 
figned  and  intended. 

And  this  feems  plainly  to  be  the  meaning  of  that 
caution,  wherewith  ^x..  John  concludes  his  catholick 
or  general  epiif  le,  namely,  that  Chriftians  fhould  be 
very  careful,  that  they  were  not  carried  back  again 
into  the  heathen  idolatry,  by  the  confident.pretences  of 
the  Gnoftick  hereticks  to  higher  degrees  of  knowledge 
and  illumination,  than  other  Chriftians  had :  that  is, 
by  their  pretending  to  be  "  the  infallible  church,  and 
*'  the  only  true  and  genuine  Chriftians."  For  it  is, 
againft  this  fedl,  that  this  epiftle  is  plainly  defigned, 
which  St.  John  thus  concludes,  chap.  v.  from  ver. 
^i8.  to  the  end  •,  "  we  know  that  whofoever  is  born 
*'  of  God  finneth  not  •,"  meaning  that  he  doth  not 
commit  the  "  fin  unto  death,"  which  he  had  fpoken 
of  juft  before,  viz.  apoftafy  from  chriftianity  to  the 
heathen  idolatry,  or  that  which  was  very  like  it) 
*'  whofoever  is  born  of  God  doth  not  commit  this 
"  fin,  but  he  that  is  begotten  of  God,  keepeth  him- 
"  fe4f,  and  that  wicked  one  toucheth  him  not ;"  that 
is,  he  preferveth  himfelf  from  the  contagion  of  ido- 
latry into  which  the  devil  was  fo  bufy  to  feduce  man- 
kind. "  And  we  know  that  we  are  of  God  •/'  that 
is,  do  belong  to  the  true  God,  and  are  worfnippers 
of  him  :  "  and  the  whole  world  lycth  in  wickednefs, 
"  h  Tta  7ro\7}pc^  KitTciiy  is  in  the  power,  or  under  the 

9  M  2  ''  domi- 


Christ  Jesus,  the  only 

"  dominion  of  that  wicked  one  ;"  that  Is,  the  great- 
eft  part  of  mankind  was  funk  into  idolatry,  and  the 
worfhip  of  the  devil.    "  And  we  know  that  the  Son 
"  of  God  is  come,  and  hath  given  us  an  underftand- 
''  ing,  that  we  may  know  him  that  is  true."     We 
know,  that  is,  we  Chriftians  are  better  taught  by  the 
chriftian  religion,  to  acknowledge  and  worfhip  the  only 
true  God  :  "  and  we  are  in  him  that  is  true,  in"  or 
;  "  by  his  Son  Jesus  Christ  ;"  that  is,  we  worfhip 
!  the  only  true  God,  by  his  Son  Jesus  Christ.  And 
1  then  he  concludes,  '•^  little  children  keep  yourfelves 
'*  from  idols  j"  intimating  hereby,   that  the  wor- 
iliipping  of  any  other,  befides  this  only  true  God, 
and  by  any  other  mediator  than  Jesus  Christ,  is 
idolatry. 
j^      There  were  indeed  two  very  ancient  and  common 
\  notions,  both  amongft  Jews  and  Gentiles,  of  the  o- 
\  riginal  whereof  it  is  hard  to  give  any  certain  account ; 
only  this  is  certain,  that  they  did  prevail  very  early, 
and  did  very  generally  pofTefs  mankind  -,    and  they 
were  thefe  ;  firft,  that  God  was  not  to  be  appeafed 
towards  finners,  merely  upon  their  repentance,  without 
the  death  and  fuffering  of  fome  other  in  their  ftead  5 
and  that  God  v/ould  accept  of  this  vicarious  punifh- 
ment  and  fuffering,  inftcad  of  the  death  of  the  finner 
himfelf.     And  this  feems  to  have  given  the  original 
to  the  facrifices  of  living  creatures,  to  appeafe  the 
wrath  of  God  towards  finners,  which  in  procefs  of 
time,  as  the  worfliip  of  falfe  gods  prevailed  in  the 
world,  did  proceed  to  that  degree  of  fuperftition  and 
barbarous  inhumanity,  that  by  the  inftigation  of  the 
devil,  men  offered  up  the  blood  of  their  children, 
and  facrificed  their  fons  and  daughters  to  their  idols 
and  falfe  gods.     Secondly,  another  common  notion^ 
which  had  likewife  poffefled  mankind,  w^s,  that  God 
3  was 


LXXI, 


mediator  befwee?i  God  and  men.  1 1 1 3 

was  not  to  be  immediately  approached  by  finful  men,  S  E^^^M. 
Jbut  that  their  prayers  were  to  be  offered  up  to  the 
deity,  by  certain  mediators  and  interceflbrs,  that 
were  to  procure  for  them  the  favour  of  the  gods,  and 
the  gracious  anfwer  and  acceptance  of  their  prayers. 
And  this  was  the  original  of  that  other  fort  of  hea- 
then idolatry,  which  confifted  in  the  worfhip  of  the 
demons  and  heroes,  that  is,  of  angels  and  fouls  de- 
parted, viz.  of  fuch  eminent  perfons,  as  had  been 
great  benefadors  to  mankind,  and  for  their  worthy 
deeds  upon  earth  were  canonized  and  tranflated  into 
the  number  of  the  inferior  gods.  By  thefe,  as  the 
chief  courtiers  and  favourites  of  heaven,  they  addref- 
fed  their  prayers  and  fupplications  to  the  fuperior 
gods.  ^  ^  ^ 

Now  with  thefe  notions  which  had  generally  pof- 
felTed  mankind  (how  imperfedt  foever)  God  was 
pleafed  to  comply  fo  far,  as  in  the  frame  of  the  Jew- 
ifh  religion  (which  was  defigned  for  a  type  of  the 
more  perfed  inftitution  of  the  chriftian  religion,  and 
a  preparation  for  it)  I  fay,  God  was  pleafed  to  com- 
ply fo  far  with  thefe  notions,  as  to  appoint  facrifices 
to  be  flain  and  offered  up  for  the  finner  •,  and  likewife 
"  an  high  prieft,  that  once  a  year  fhould  enter  into 
"  the  holy  of  holies,  Vv^ith  the  blood  of  facrifices'* 
that  were  offered  up  for  the  people  to  make  expia- 
tion for  them,  and  in  virtue  of  that  blood,  "  fhould 
"  intercede  for  the  people,"  as  the  apoflle  to  the 
Hebrews  does  declare  at  large.  And  when  "  God 
"  fent  his  Son  in  the  fulnefs  of  time,"  he  was  pleafed 
likewife,  in  the  difpenfation  of  the  gofpel,  (that  per- 
fed  inftitution  which  was  never  to  be  altered)  to  have 
fo  much  regard  to  thefe  common  notions,  and  ap- 
prehenfions  of  mankind,  as  to  provide  for  the  fup- 
ply  of  thofe  two  great  wants,  which  they  feemed  al- 
ways 


1 1 14  Christ  Jesus,  the  only 

SE  RM.v  -ways  to  have  laboured  under,  and  concerning  which 
they  were  at  fo  great  a  lofs,  viz.  an  effedual  expia- 
tory facrifice  for  fins  upon  earth,  and  a  powerful  me- 
diator and  intercelTor  with  God  in  heaven  :  and  both 
thefe  by  the  fame  perfon,  "  Jesus  Christ,  who 
"  appeared  in  the  end  of  the  world,  to  take  away 
*^  lin  by  the  facrifice  of  himfelf  •,"  and  in  the  merit 
and  vertue  of  that  facrifice,  "  appearing  in  heaven 
*'  in  the  prefence  of  God  for  us,"  is  become  a  per- 
petual advocate,  and  a  moil  powerful  interceilbr  with 
God  in  heaven  for  us.  So  that  inftead  of  the  end- 
lefs  facrifices  of  the  Jewifh  religion,  which  were  in- 
effe6tual  to  the  real  expiation  of  fin,  and  only  types 
and  fhadows  of  the  true  expiatory  facrifice  -,  and  in- 
ftead of  the  bloody  and  inhuman  facrifices  of  the  hea- 
then idolatry ;  the  Son  of  God  hath  "  by  one  facri- 
*'''  fice  for  fin  once  offered,  perfeded  for  ever  them 
*'  that  are  fandlified,  and  obtained  eternal  redempti- 
*'  on  for  us."  And  inftead  of  the  mediation  of  an- 
gels, and  the  fouls  of  their  departed  heroes,  which 
the  heathen  made  ufe  of  to  offer  up  their  prayers  to 
the  gods  ;  we  have  "  one  mediator  between  God 
*'  and  men,"  appointed  by  God  himfelf,  "  Jesus 
*'  the  Son  of  God,"  who  in  our  nature  is  afcended 
into  heaven,  "  to  appear  in  the  prefence  of  God  for 
"  us."  And  who  fo  fit  to  be  our  patron  and  advo- 
cate, as  he  who  was  our  facrifice  and  propitiation  P 

Thus  the  method  of  our  redemption,  as  it  was  by 
the  wifdom  of  God  admirably  fuited  to  the  common 
apprehenfions  of  mankind,  concerning  the  necelTity 
of  a  facrifice  to  make  expiation  of  fin,  and  of  a  me- 
diator to  intercede  with  God  for  finners  ♦,  fo  was  it 
likewife  excellently  fitted,  not  only  to  put  an  end  to 
the  Jewifh  facrifices,  but  likewife  to  abolifh  the  bar- 
barous facrifices  and  rites  of  the  heathen  idolatry,  and 

to 


mediator  between  God  and  men. 


1115 


to  cafhier  that  infinite  number  of  mediators  and  in-  S  E  R  M. 

T  VVT 

terceffors,  by  whom  they  addreiTed  their  prayers  to 
the  deity ;  and  inflead  of  all  this,  to  introduce  a  more 
reafonable  and  fpiritual  worfhip,  more  agreeable  to 
the  nature  and  perfections  of  God,  and  the  reafon 
of  mankind  ;  which  was  one  of  the  main  and  princi> 
pal  defigns  of  the  chriftian  religion  :  and  therefore  to 
bring  in  any  other  mediators,  to  intercede  in  heaven 
for  us  (whether  angels  or  faints)  and  by  them  to  offer 
up  our  prayers  to  God,  is  diredly  contrary  to  the 
defign  of  the  chriftian  religion. 

Thirdly,  it  is  likewife  evident  from  the  nature  and 
reafon  of  the  thing  itfelf,  that  "  there  is  but  one  me-  ' 
"  diator"  and  interceflbr  in  heaven,  who  offers  up 
our  prayers  to  God,  and  that  there  can  be  no  more. 
Becaufe  under  the  gofpel  there  being  but  one  high 
prieft,  and  but  one  facrifice  once  offered  for  fm,  and 
interceffion  for  finners  being  founded  in  the  merit  and 
virtue  of  the  facrifice,  by  which  expiation  for  fin  is 
made,  there  can  be  no  other  mediator  of  interceffi- 
on, but  he  who  hath  made  expiation  of  fin,  by  a  fa- 
crifice offered  to  God  for  that  purpofe  ;  and  this  Je- 
sus Christ  only  hath  done.  He  is  both  our  high 
prieft,  and  our  facrifice ;  and  therefore  he  only,  in  the 
merit  and  virtue  of  that  facrifice,  which  he  offered 
upon  earth,  can  intercede  in  heaven  for  us,  and  of- 
fer up  our  prayers  to  God.  Others  may  pray  to 
God  for  us  \  as  our  brethren  upon  earth  do,  and 
perhaps  the  angels  and  faints  in  heaven  *,  but  none  of 
thefe  can  offer  up  our  prayers  to  God,  and  procure 
the  acceptance  of  them  •,  for  that  can  only  be  done 
in  virtue  of  a  facrifice  firft  offered,  and  by  him  that 
offered  it ;  this  being  the  peculiar  office  and  qualifi- 
cation of  a  mediator  or  interceffor,  properly  fo^  called. 

It  is  the  plain  defign  of  the  author  of  the  epiftle  to 

the 


1 1 16  Christ  Jesus,  the  only 

SE  R  M.  the  Hebrews,  to  prove  that  Christ  is  our  only  me- 
diator in  heaven,  in  virtue  of  that  facrifice  for  fin, 
which  he  offered  upon  earth ;  and  that  he  alone  "  ap-' 
*'  pears  in  the  prefence  of  God  for  us,"  to  prefent 
our  requefts  to  him,  and  obtain  a  gracious  anfwer  to 
them  ;  and  he  Ihews  at  large,  how  this  wiis  particu- 
larly typified  by  the  Jewifh  high  prieft,  who  upon 
the  great  day  of  expiation,  after  the  facrifice  was  (lain 
without,  "  entered  alone  into  the  holy  of  holies, 
*'  with  the  blood  of  the  facrifices,"  in  virtue  where- 
of he  "  made  intercefTion  for  the  people."  Anfwer- 
ably  to  this,  "  Jesus  the  high  prieft  of  our  profef- 
*'  fion,  offered  himfelf  a  facrifice"  for  the  fins  of 
men,  and  in  virtue  of  that  facrifice  ''  is  entered  into 
*'  the  high  place  not  made  with  hands,  that  is,  inta 
*'  heaven  itfelf,  there  to  appear  in  the  prefence  of 
*'  God  for  us,  where  he  lives  for  ever  to  make  jnter- 
*'  ceffion  for  us,"  in  virtue  of  that  "  eternal  redemp- 
*'  tion,  which  he  hath  obtained  for  us,"  by  the  price 
of  his  blood,  as  the  apoftle  declares  in^  feveral  chap- 
ters of  that  epiftle.  So  that  this  interceffion  being 
founded  in  the  merit  of  a  facrifice,  which  he  alone  of- 
fered, he  is  of  neceffity,  "  the  only  mediator  between 
*^  God  and  men." 

And  for  this  reafon  it  is,  that  the  mediation  and 
interceffion  of  Christ,  is  fo  frequently  in  fcripture 
mentioned  together  with  the  expiation  which  he  made 
for  the  fms  of  men,  or,  (which  is  the  fame,)  with 
the  price  which  he  paid  for  the  redemption  of  man- 
kind ;  becaufe  the  one  is  founded  in  the  other,  and 
depends  upon  it.  So  we  find,  i  John  ii.  1,2.  "If 
*'  any  man  fin,  we  have  an  advocate  with  the  Father, 
"  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous,  and  he  is  the  pro- 
**  pitiation  for  our  fins  ;  and  not  for  ours  only,  but 
*'  alfo  for  the  fins  of  the  whole  world.'*    And  here 

likewifc 


mediator  between  God  and  men,  my 

likewife  in  the  text,  "  there  is  one  mediator  between  S  E  R  M, 

*'  God  and  men,  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  who  gave 

*'  himfelf  a  ranfom  for  all ;"  therefore  "  the  only  me- 

^^  diator  between  God  and  men  ;"  becaufe  ''  he  only 

"  gave  himfelf  a  ranfom  for  all"  men.  The  efficacy 

and  pre  valency  of  his  mediation,  being  founded  in 

the  merit  and  virtue  of  the  ranfom  of  his  blood. 

And  the  force  of  thefe  texts,  and  the  reafoning 
from  them,  is  not  to  be  avoided  and  turned  off,  by 
dillinguifhing  between  a  mediator  of  redemption  and 
of  interceffion,  and  by  faying,  that  it  is  true,  that 
Christ  is  the  only  mediator  of  redemption,  but 
there  may  be  many  mediators  of  interceffion  :  for 
if  the  force  of  his  being  advocate  or  interceffi^r  be 
founded  in  the  virtue  of  his  ranfom  and  propitiation 
(as  I  have  plainly  ffiewn,  to  the  convi6lion  of  any 
that  are  not  flrongly  prejudiced,  and  that  will  read 
and  confider  what  the  fcripture  fays  in  this  matter 
without  prepoifeffiion,)  then  it  is  plain,  that  none  can 
be  a  proper  mediator  of  interceffiion,  but  he  that  paid 
the  price  of  our  redemption :  fo  that  the  mediator 
of  our  redemption,  and  our  mediator  of  interceffion, 
muft  of  neceffity  be  one  and  the  fame  perfon ;  and 
none  can  appear  in  the  quality  of  "  our  advocate  with ' 
*'  the  Father,"  but  he  only  who  is  "  the  propitiation 
"  for  the  fins  of  the  whole  world." 

I  ffiould  now  have  proceeded  to 
-The  fourth  thing  I  propofed  in  the  handling  of 
this  argument,  namely,  to  ffiew  how  contrary  to  this 
dodtrine  of  the  chriftian  religion,  concerning  "  one 
"  only  mediator  and  intercelTor  in  heaven  for  us,"  the 
doflrine  and  practice  of  the  church  of  Rome  is  in  this 
matter ;  namely,  in  their  invocation  of  angels,  and 
the  bleffed  virgin,  and  the  faints,  and  flying  to  their 
help  and  making  ufe  of  their  mediation  and  intercef- 

VoL.  V,  9  N  fion 

5- 


1 1x8  Christ  Jesus,  the  only 

Hon  with  God  for  finners:  as  iikewife  how  contrary 
all  this  is  to  the  dodcrine  and  pra6lice  of  the  chriftian 
church,  for  feveral  of  the  firft  ages  of  it.  And  then 
I  iliould  have  anfwered  their  chief  pretences  and  ex- 
cufes  for  thefe  things,  and  Ihewed  that  this  pra6lice 
of  theirs  is  not  only  needlefs  (being  no  where  com- 
inanded  by  God)  but  ufelefs  alfo,  and  unprofitable  ; 
and  not  only  fo,  but  very  dangerous  and  impious, 
being  contrary  to  the  chriftian  religion,  and  highly 
derogating  from  the  virtue  and  merit  of  Christ's 
facrifice,  and  from  the  honour  of  "  the  only  media- 
*'  tor  between  God  and  men."  But  of  this  another 
time. 


SERMON     LXXII. 

Christ  Jesus,  the  only  mediator  be- 
tween God  and  men. 


I  T I M.  II.  5,  6. 

Tor  there  is  one  God,  md  one  mediator  between  God 
and  men,  the  moM  Christ  Jesus  ^  who  gave  him- 
felf  a  ranjom  for  all. 


S  E  R  M.  y  ]s;[  ^^(^  words  are  four  proportions ;  three  ex- 

^^^...^^.^  X  prefTed,  and  the  fourth  implied. 

The  I.  That  there  is  one  God. 

fecond  jj    'jpi^^j.  ^i^gj.^  -g  Qj^g  mediator  between  God  and 

fermon  on 

this  text,    men  j  Christ  Jesus. 

IIL  "  That 


mediator  between  QtiTi  and  men,  1119 

III.  That  he  s-ave  himfelf  a  ranfom  for  dl.  S  E  R  MJ 

IV.  That  the  mediation  or  intercefTion  of  Je- 
sus Christ,  is  founded  in  his  redemption  of  man- 
kind :  that  becaufe  "  he  gave  himfelf  a  ranfom  for 
''  all  men,"  therefore  he,  and  he  only,  is  qualifi* 
cd  to  intercede  for  all  men,  in  virtue  of  that  facrifice 
which  he  offered  for  the  falvation  of  all  mankind. 

The  fecond  of  thefe  I  fpake  to  the  laft  time,  and 
endeavoured  to  iliew, 

1.  That  God  hath  appointed  but  one  mediator^ 
or  advocate,  or  intercefTor  in  heaven  for  us  •,  b^  whofe 
mediation  we  are  to  offer  up  all  our  prayers  and  fer- 
vices  to  God. 

2.  That  this  do6lrine  of  one  mediator  is  moft  a- 
greeable  to  one  main  end  and  defign  of  the  chriftian 
religion,  and  of  our  Saviour's  coming  into  the 
world,  which  was,  to  deftroy  idolatry. 

3.  That  from  the  nature  and  reafon  of  the  thing 
(viz.  becaufe  interceffion  for  fmners  is  founded  in  the 
merit  of  that  facrifice,  by  which  expiation  of  fm  is 
made)  there  can  be  no  other  mediator  of  intercefTion, 
but  he  who  hath  made  expiation  for  fin,  by  a  facri- 
fice offered  to  God  for  that  purpofe  ;  and  this  Jesus 
Christ  only  hath  done.  Thus  far  I  have  gone :  I 
•proceed  now  to 

The  fourth  thing  which  I  propofed  in  the  handling 
of  this  argument,  namely,  to  fhew  how  contrary 
to  this  do6lrine  of  the  chriflian  religion,  concern- 
ing one  only  mediator  and  interceffor  in  heaven  for 
us,  the  dodtrine  and  the  practice  of  the  church  of 
Rome  is  in  this  matter  •,  namely,  in  their  invoca- 
tion of  angels,  and  the  blelTed  virgin,  and  the  faints 
and  flying  to  their  help,  and  making  ufe  of  their  me- 
diation and  interceffion  with  God  for  finners^ 

9  N  2  And 


1 1 20  Jesus  Christ,  the  only 

S  E  R  M.  And  that  I  may  proceed  more  diftindlly  in  this 
argument,  I  fliall  handle  it  under  thefe  particular 
heads. 

Firfl,  I  fhall  endeavour  to  (hew,  that  the  dodrine 
and  pradice  of  the  church  of  Rome  in  this  matter, 
is  contrary  to  the  dodtrine  of  the  chriftian  religion, 
cpncerning  one  only  mediator  and  interceflbr  in 
heaven  for  us. 

Secondly,  that  it  is  contrary  to  the  dodlrine  and 
pra6lice  of  the  chriftian  church,  for  feveral  of  the 
'fifft  ages  of  it. 

Thirdly,  I  fhall  endeavour  to  anfwer  their  chief 
pretences  and  excufes  for  this  do6trine  and  pradice. 

Fourthly,  to  fhew  that  this  dodlrine  and  practice 
of  theirs  is  not  only  needlefs,  being  no  where  com- 
manded by  God,  but  ufelefe  alfo,  and  unprofitable. 

Fifthly,  and  not  only  fo,  but  very  dangerous  and 
impious  j  becaufe  contrary  to  the  chriftian  religion, 
and  greatly  derogating  from  the  virtue  and  merit  of 
Christ's  facrifice,  and  from  the  honour  of  "  the 
"  only  mediator  between  God  and  men." 

Firft,  I  fhall  endeavour  to  fhew,  that  the  dodrine 
and  pradice  of  the  church  of  Rome  in  this  matter, 
is  contrary  to  the  dodrine  of  the  chriftian  religion 
concerning  one  only  mediator  and  intercefTor  in 
heaven  for  us  ;  namely  in  their  invocation  of  angels, 
and  the  blelTed  virgin,  and  the  faints,  and  flying  to 
their  help,  and  making  ufe  of  their  mediation  and  in- 
tercefTion  with  God  for  finners. 

That  Jesus  Christ  is  our  only  mediator  and 
intercefTor  with  God  in  heaven,  by  whom  we  have 
accefs  to  God  in  any  adlion  of  religious  worfhip, 
and  that  all  our  prayers  and  fervices  are  to  be  offered 
up  to  God  only  by  him,  and  in  his  name  and  me- 
diation, and  no  other,  I  have  plainly  fhewed  from 

1  fS^ip- 


mediator  between  God  and  men.  1 1 2 1 

fcrlpture,  and  proved  it  by  an  invincible  argument,  S  E  R  M. 
taken  likewife  from  fcripture  -,  namely,  becaufe  the 
efficacy  and  prevalency  of  his  mediation  and  inter- 
cefiion  is  founded  in  the  virtue  and  merit  of  his  fa- 
crifice  ;  and  that  he  is  therefore  "  the  only  mediator 
''  between  God  and  men,"  becaufe  "  he  only  gave 
*'  himfelf  a  ranfom  for  all  ;"  he  is  therefore  "  our 
''  only  advocate  with  the  Father,"  becaufe  "  he  on- 
^'  ly  is  the  propitiation  for  our  fins,  and  for  the  fins 
*'  ofthe  whole  world." 

I  have  fhewed  likewife,  that  the  fcripture  excludes  i 
angels  from  being  our  mediators  with  God,  from 
the  main  fcope  and  defign  of  the  epiflle  to  the  Co- 
loflians  ;  and  much  more  are  the  faints  departed  ex- 
cluded from  this  office,  being  inferior  to  the  angels, 
not  only  in  the  dignity  and  excellency  of  their  beings, 
but  very  probably  in  the  degree  of  their  knowledge. 

In  ihort,  prayer  is  a  proper  adl  of  religious  wor- 
Ihip,  and  therefore  peculiar  to  God  alone  ;  and  we 
are  commanded  "  to  worfhip  the  Lord  our  God, 
*'  and  to  ferve  him  only :"  and  no  where  in  fcrip- 
ture are  we  diredled  to  addrefs  our  prayers  and  fup- 
plications  and  thankfgivings  to  any  but  God  alone, 
and  only  in  the  name  and  mediation  of  Jesus 
Christ.  Our  bleffed  Saviour  himfelf  hath  taught 
us,  to  put  up  all  our  prayers  to  God  our  heavenly 
Father,  Luke  xi.  2.  "  when  you  pray,  fay.  Our 
'^  Father  which  art  in  heaven."  Which  plainly 
Ihews,  to  whom  all  our  prayers  are  to  be  addrefs' d  ; 
and  unlefs  we  can  call  an  angel,  or  the  bleffed  virgin, 
or  a  faint,  our  father,  we  can  pray  to  none  of  them. 
And  elfewhere  he  as  plainly  direds  us,  by  whom  we 
are  to  apply  our  felves  to  God,  and  in  whofe  name 
and  mediation  we  are  to  put  up  all  our  requefts  to 
him,  John  xiv.  6,  "  I  am  the  way,  and  the  truth, 

*^and 


1 122  Jesus  Christ,  the  only 

S  E  R  M.  «'  and  the  life  ;  no  man  cometh  unto  the  Father,  but 
LXXII.   ,,  ^y  ^^^  „  ^^^^  ^^^^  .J.  f^3iiQ^5^  ^gj.^  13,1^.  "  And 

*'  whatfoever  ye  fliall  afk  in  my  name,  that  will  I  do  ; 
"  that  the  Father  may  be  glorified  in  the  Son.  If 
"  ye  ihall  afk  any  thing  in  my  name,  I  will  do  it.** 
Nothing  is  clearer  in  the  whole  bible,  than  "  one 
*'  mediator  between  God  and  men,  Christ  Jesus,'* 
and  that  he  is  our  only  advocate  and  intercelTor  with 
God  in  heaven  for  us. 

Secondly,  I  fhall  endeavour  to  lliew,  that  the  doc- 
trine and  pradice  of  the  church  of  Rome,  in  this  mat- 
ter, is  contrary  to  that  of  the  chriftian  church,  for  fe- 
veral  of  the  firfl  ages  of  it. 

As  for  the  ages  of  the-  apoftles,  it  hath  been  alrea- 
dy proved  out  of  their  writings.      That  it  was  not 
pradlifed  in  the  three  firfl  ages,  we  have  the  acknow- 
ledgment of  cardinal  Perron,   and  others  of  their 
learned  writers  \  and  they  give  a  very  remarkable  rea- 
fon  for  it  -,  namely,  becaufe  the  worfhip  and  invoca- 
tion of  faints  and  angels,  and  addrefling  our  prayers 
to  God  by  them,  might  have  feemed  to  have  given 
countenance  to  the  heathen  idolatry.     From*  whence 
I  cannot  forbear,  by  the  way,  to  make  thefe  two 
obfervations.     i.  That  the  invocation  of  faints  and 
,  angels,  and  the  blefied  virgin,  and  addrefling  our- 
;  felves  to  God  by  their  mediation,  was  not  in  thofc 
I  primitive  ages  efteemed  a  duty  of  the  chriftian  reli- 
gion •,  becaufe,  if  it  had,  it  could  not  have  been  omit- 
ted  for  fear  of  the  fcandal  confequent  upon  it :  and 
i  if  it  was  not  a  duty  then,  by  what  authority  or  law, 
can  it  be  made  fo  fince?     2.  That  this  pradice  is 
\   very  liable  to  the  fufpicion  of  idolatry  ;  and  furely 
\  every  Chriftian  cannot  but  think  it  fit,  that  the  church 
of  Christ  ftiould,  like  a  chafte  fpoufe,  not  only  be 
free  from  the  crime,  but  from  all  fufpicion  of  ido- 
latry. An4 


mediator  hetween  God  and  men.  1123" 

And  for  the  next  ages  after  the  apoftles^  nothing  S  E  R  M. 
is  plainer,  than  that  both  their  dodlrine  and  practice 
were  contrary  to  the  do6l:rine  and  pradice  of  the 
prefent  church  of  Rome  in  this  matter.  The  mofl 
ancient  fathers  of  the  chriftian  church  do  conftantly 
define  prayer,  to  be  "  an  addrefs  to  God  j"  and 
therefore  it  cannot  be  made  to  any  but  God  only  : 
and  after  the  rife  of  Arianifm,  they  argued  for  the 
divinity  of  Christ,  againft  the  Arians,  from  our 
praying  to  him  ♦,  which  argument  were  of  no  force, 
if  prayers  might  be  made  to  any  but  God  ^  and  this 
was  in  the  beginning  of  the  fourth  age. 

And  we  no  where  find  any  mention  of  thofe  di- 
ftin6lions,  of  gods  by  nature,  and  gods  by  partici- 
pation (as  Bellarmin  calls  the  angels  and  faints)  or  of 
a  fupreme  and  inferior  religious  worfhip  ;  or  of  a 
mediator  of  redemption,  and  a  mediator  of  intercef- 
fion  -,  which  are  fo  commonly  made  ufe  by  the  church 
of  Rome  in  this  controverfy. 

And  which  is  as  confiderable  as  any  of  the  reft, 
the  ancient  fathers  were  generally  of  opinion,  that  the 
faints  were  not  admitted  to  the  beatific  vifion,  till 
after  the  day  of  judgment ;  and  this  is  acknowledg- 
ed by  the  moft  learned  of  the  church  of  Rome.  Buc 
this  very  opinion  takes  away  the  foundation  of  pray- 
ing to  faints  ;  becaufe  the  church  of  Rome  grounds 
it  upon  their  reigning  with  Christ  in  heaven,  and 
upon  the  light  and  knowledge  which  is  communi- 
cated to  them  in  the  beatific  vifion  ;  and  if  fo,  then 
they  who  believed  the  faints  not  yet  to  be  admitted 
to  this  vifion,  could  have  no  reafon  or  ground  to  pray 
to  them. 

And  laftly,  the  ancient  church  prayed  for  faints  \ 
departed,  and  for  the  blefied  virgin  herfelf ;  and  \ 
therefore  could  not  pray  to  them,  as  interceffors  for 

thsm 


1 1 24  Jesus  Christ,  the  only 

S  E  R  M.  them  in  heaven,  for  whom  they  themfelves  interced- 
ed upon  earth.  And  therefore  the  church  of  Rome, 
in  compliance  with  the  change  which  they  have  made 
in  their  do£lrine,  have  changed  the  miffal  in  that 
point,  and  inflead  of  praying  for  St.  Leo  (one  of 
tiieir  popes)  as  they  were  wont  to  do  in  their  ancient 
miffal,  in  this  form,  Grant,  O  Lord,  that  this  ob- 
lation may  be  profitable  to  the  foul  of  thy  fervant 
Leo  \  the  colled:  is  now  changed  in  the  prefent  Ro- 
man milTal  into  this  form,  Grant,  O  Lord,  that  by 
the  intercelTion  of  bleifed  Leo,  this  offering  may  be 
profitable  to  us.  And  (as  the  glofs  upon  the  canon 
law  obferves)  this  change  was  made  in  their  miffal 
upon  very  good  reafon  \  becaufe  anciently  they  pray- 
ed for  Leo,  but  now  they  prayed  to  him  ;  which  is 
an  ingenuous  acknowledgment,  that  both  the  doc- 
trine and  practice  of  their  church  are  plainly  changed, 
,  from  what  they  anciently  were  in  this  matter. 

What  the  dodrines  and  pra6tices  of  their  church  of 
Rome  are  in  this  matter,  all  the  world  fees,  and  they 
themfelves  are  fo  afhamed  of  them,  that  of  late  all 
their  endeavours  have  been,  to  reprefent  them  other- 
wife  than  in  truth  they  are,  and  to  obtrude  upon  us 
a  new  popery,  which  they  think  themfelves  better 
able  to  defend  than  the  old  \  which  yet  they  have  not 
fliewn,  that  the)^  are  fo  well  able  to  do  ;  and  there- 
fore nov/,  inftead'  of  defending  the  true  dodrines  and 
pradices  of  their  own  church,  they  would  fain  mince 
and  difguife  them,  and  change  them  into  fomething 
that  comes  nearer  to  the  proteflant  dodtrine  in  thofe 
points  :  as  if  they  had  no  way  to  defend  their  own 
doelrines,  but  by  feeming  to  defert  them,  and  by 
bringing  them  as  near  to  ours  as  pofTibly  they  can. 

But  take  them,  as  they  have  mollified  them  and 
par'd  them,  to  render  tl^m  more  plaufible  and  tena- 
ble^ 


mediator  between  God  and  men.  1 1  ^  5 

ble;  that  which  ftill  remains  of  them,  I  mean  "  ^^^^lxxti^' 
*'  folemn  invocation  of  f  :ints  and  angels,  as  media-  v,.,.^.^^^^ 
"  tors  and  intercelTors  with  God  in  heaven  for  us," 
is  plainly  contrary  both  to  the  dodrine  and  pradice 
of  the  primitive  ages  of  chriflianity. 

As  for  the  age  of  the  apoflles,  I  have  already 
fnev/n  it ;  and  the  matter  is  as  clear  for  feveral  of 
the  next  following  ages,  as  I  Ihall  briefly  fhew,  from 
a  few  very  plain  teftimonies. 

In  the  next  age  to  the  apoflles,  we  have  an  epiftle 
of  one  of  the  feven  churches,  (I  mean  the  church  of 
Smyrna)  in  which,  in  vindication  of  themfelves  from 
that  calumny  which  was  raifed  againfl  them  by  the 
Jews,  among  the  heathen,  "  that  if  they  permitted 
"  the  Chriftians  to  have  the  body  of  the  martyred 
''  Polycarp,  they  would  leave  Christ  to  w  or  (hip 
"  Polycarp  /'  I  fay,  in  vindication  of  themfelves 
from  this  calumny,  they  declare  themfelves  thus, 
"  Not  knowing  (fay  they)  that  we  can  neither  leave 
"  Christ,  who  fuffered  for  the  falvation  of  the  ^^e^*^ 
^^3[jQrld_Qf  thofe  that  are  favcd,  nor  worfhip  any 
"  other  ;"  or,  (as  it  is  in  the  old  Latin  tranfiation) 
"  nor  offer  up  the  fupplication  of  prayer  to  any 
"  other  perfon  ;  for  as  for  Jesus  Christ,  we  adore 
"  him,  as  being  the  Son  of  God  •,  but  as  for  the 
"  martyrs,  we  love  them,  as  the  difciples  and  imi- 
"  tatorsofthe  Lord."  So  that  they  plainly  ex- 
clude the  faints  from  any  fort  of  rehgious  worfhip, 
of  which  prayer  or  invocation  was  always  elleemed 
a  very  confiderable  part. 

Iren^us  likewife   tells   us,    (lib.  2.)    that  "  the 
"  church  doth  nothing"   (Ipeaking  of  the  miracles  ■:. 
which  were  wrought)  "  by  the  invocation  of  angels, 
"  nor  by  inchantment,  nor  by  any  other  wicked  ; 
*'  arts  ',  but  by  prayers  to  the  Lord  who  made  all 

Vol.  V.  9  O  ''  things, 

5- 


\yrj: 


1226  Christ  Jesus,  the  only 

S  ERM.  «  things,  and  by  calling  on  the  name  of  our  Lord 
._,_  J^  "  Jesus  Christ."  Here  all  invocation  of  angek, 
and  by  the  fame  or  greater  reafon,  of  the  faints,  is 
excluded.  And  Clemens  Alexandrinus  delivers  it  as 
the  dodrine  of  the  church-,  that  "  fince  there  is  but 
*'  one  good  God,  therefore  both  we  and  the  angels 
"  pray  to  him,  both  for  the  giving,  and  the  conti- 
*'  nuance  of  good  things. 

In  the  next  age,  Origen  is  fo  full  and  exprefs  in 
this  matter,  that  it  is  not  poffible  for  any  proteftant 
to  fpeak  more  pofitively  and  clearly,  lib.  8.  cont. 
Celfum,  where  he  does  on  fet  purpofe  declare  and 
vindicate  the  chriftian  do6trine  and  practice  in  this 
matter  ♦,  "  We  worfhip  (fays  he)  the  one  only  God, 
"  and  his  one  only  Son,  and  Word,  and  image,  with 
*'  our  utmofl  fupplications  and  honours,  bringing 
''  our  prayers  to  the  God  of  all  things,  through  his 
"  only  begotten  Son:"  and  afterwards,  "  away, 
*'  (fays  he)  with  Celfus  his  council,  that  fays,  we 
"  mufl  pray  to  demons  (or  angels)  for  we  muft  pray 
"  only  to  God  who  is  above  all  j  we  muft  pray  ta 
" .  the  only  begotten  and  firft-born  of  every  creature, 
*'  and  we  muft  befeech  him  to  offer  up  our  prayers 
"  which  we  make  to  him,  to  his  God,  and  our  Go  d  :" 
and  again  (fpeaking  of  angels)  "  as  for  the  favour 
"  of  others  (if  that  be  to  be  regarded)  we  know, 
"  that  thoufands  of  thoufands  ftand  before  him,  and 
"  ten  thoufand  times  ten  thoufand  miniftcr  unto 
'^  him  ;  thefe  are  our  brethren  and  friends,  who  when 
*'  they  fee  us  imitating  their  piety  towards  God, 
*'  work  together  to  the  falvation  of  thofe  who  call 
*'  upon  God,  and  pray  as  they  ought  to  do,"  that 
is,  to  God  only  ;  and  (1.  5.)  where  Celfus  urges  him 
with  this,  that  the  fcriptures  call  angels  gods,  he  tells 
him,  *'  that  the  fcriptures  do  not  call  the  angels  gods, 

'*  with 


Mediator  between  God  and  men.  1127 

*'  v/ith  any  defign  to  require  us  to  worfhip  and  adore  ^^^^  J^* 
*'  them  iaileaJ  of  C30D,  who  are  minillring  fpirits,  ^__  ^^ 
*'  and  bring  meflages,  and  blelilngs  down  to  us  ircm 
*'  God  •,  tor  (fays  he)  all  fupplicationy,  and  prayer, 
"  and  interceiTion,  and  giving  of  thanks,  muil  be 
"  fent  up  to  God,  who  is  above  all,  by  the  high 
"  prieft,  who  is  above  all  angels,  and  is  the  living 
*'  Word  and  God/'  And  though  angels  be  only 
here  mentioned,  yet  by  the  fame  reafon,  all  other 
creatures  are  excluded,  from  being  the  objeds  of  our 
religious  w^orlliip  and  invocation,  or,  mediators  of 
interceflion  with  God  for  us ;  becaufe  all  fupplica- 
tion  and  prayer,  and  interceiTion,  and  thankfgiving, 
mufb  be  fent  up  to  God  by  our  high  pried:,  who  13 
the  hving  Word  and  God.  "  Let  us  then  alfo  (as 
"  he  goes  on)  make  fupphcation  to  the  Word  him- 
"  felf,  and  interceiTion,  and  giving  of  thanks  and 
*'  prayer :  but  to  invocate  angels  is  not  reafonable  ; 
"  fince  we  do  not  comprehend  the  knowledge  of 
"  them,  which  is  above  us  •,  and  if  we  could  com- 
"  prehend  the  knowledge  of  them,  which  is  won- 
"  derful  and  fecret,  this  very  knowledge  which  de- 
"  clares  to  us  their  nature  and  office,  would  not  al- 
"  low  us  to  prefume  to  pray  to  any  other,  but  to 
*'  the  God  who  is  Lord  over  all,  and  abundantly 
"  fufficient  for  all,  by  our  Saviour  the  Son  of  God." 
Where  he  gives  two  plain  reafons,  why  we  ought  to 
pray  only  to  God,  and  to  offer  up  our  prayers  only 
by  the  mediation  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of 
God  and  our  Saviour:  firfl,  becaufe  he  only  is 
Lord  over  all,  and  therefore  the  worffiip  of  prayer  is 
to  be  given  to  him  only.  And  then,  fecondly,  be- 
caufe we  have  no  need  of  any  other  patron  and  be- 
nefadtor,  or  of  any  other  mediator  and  advocate, 
"  he  is  abundantly  fufficient  for  all,  by  our  Savi- 
^'  GUR  the  Son  of  God."  9^2  In 


LXXII. 


1128  Christ  Jesus,  the  only 

S  E  R  M.       jj^  j.]^g  {^xnt  age  Novatian,  in  his  book  concern- 
ing the  Trinity,  makes  ufe  of  this  argument,   to 
prove  the  divinity  of  Christ  ^  becaufe  he  hears  our 
prayers,  when  we  call   upon  him.     "  If  Christ, 
"  (fays  he)  be  only  a  man,  how  can  he  be  prefent 
"  every   where  to  thofe  that  call  upon  him  ?  fince 
"  this  is  not  the  nature  of  man,  but  of  God,  to  be 
*'  able  to  be  prefent  every  where  ?     If  Christ  be 
j  *'  only  a  man,  why  do  we  in  our  prayers  call  upon 
J  *'  him  as  mediator  •,  fince  prayer  to  a  man  is  deemed 
I  *'  ineffectual  to  help  or  five  us  ?  if  Christ  be  only 
t"  man,  why   do  we  put  our  hope  in  him  j   fince 
1  **  hope  in  man  is  accurfed  in  fcripture  ?" 

In  the  IVth  century,  the  apoftolical  conilitutions, 
^nder  the  name  of  Clemens  Romanus  (but  undoubt- 
edly written  in  that  age)  give  us  a  pregnant  negative 
;)  teftimony  in  this  matter  •,  for  though  a  great  many 
\  of  the  publick  prayers  are  there  fet  down  at  large, 
tyet  they  are  all  eiireded  to  Gou  alone,  and  not  the 
ieaft  intimation  there  of  any  prayer  made  to  the  an- 
gels or  faints,  or  even  to  the  virgin  Mary  •,  nor  of 
their  intercefifion  or  aid  j  vdiich  now  make  fo  great 
a  part  of  the  publick  devotions  of  the  church  of 
Rome. 

Athanafius,  in  his  fourth  oration  againft  the  Ari- 
ans,  proves  the  unity  of  the  Father  and  the  Son,  from 
J  Thef.  iii.  11.  "Now  God  himfelf,  and  our  Lord 
*'  Jesus  Christ,  dire(5l  our  way  unto  you."  From 
whence  he  argues  thus,  ^'  One  would  not  pray  to 
.  "  receive  any  thing  from  the  Father  and  the  angels, 
"  or  from  any  other  creature  •,  nor  would  one  fay, 
*'  God  and  the  angels  give  thee  this ;  but  one  would 
"  pray  to  receive  any  tiling  from  the  Father  and  the 
"  Son,  becaufe  of  their  unity  and  uniform  gift-,  for 
^'  all  things  that  are  given  by  the  Father,  arc  given 

"  by 


LXXII. 


mediator  between  God  and  men,  1 129 

"  by  the  Son,  and  there  is  nothing  which  the  Father  S  E  R  M. 
"  doth  not  work  by  the  Son  i"  and  then  conckides, 
"  that  it  doth  not  belong  to  any,  but  to  God  alone, 
"  to  blefs  and  erant  deliverances."  This  I  take  to 
be  a  very  remarkable  teftimony  againfh  the  church  of 
Rome,  who  in  their  publick  offices  join  the  blelTed 
virgin  with  God,  and  our  Saviour,  in  the  fame 
breath,  and  fometimes  put  her  before  her  Son ;  let 
Mary  and  her  Son  blefs  us  ;  as  it  is  in  the  ofiice  of 
the  bleffed  virgin  -,  in  dire6l  contradidion  to  what  I 
juil  now  cited  out  of  Athanafius  :  and  nothing  fo 
common  in  their  mouths,  as  Jefu  Mcirla^  Jefus  and 
Mary  ;  nothing  more  frequent  in  their  mofc  eminent 
writers,  than  to  join  them  together  in  their  doxolo- 
giesand  thankfgivings,  "  Glory  be  to  God,  and  the 
"  bleffed  virgin,  and  to  Jesus  Christ,"  fays  Gre- 
gory de  Valencia.  And  Bellarminhimfelf  concludes 
his  dilputations  concerning  the  worfhip  of  faints  ;  in 
thefe  words,  "  Praife  be  to  God,  and  to  the  bleffed 
''  virgin  mother  Mary  •,  likewife  to  Jesus  Christ, 
"  the  eternal  Son  of  the  eternal  Father,  be  praife  and 
"  glory."  And  in  the  very  Roman  miifal  itfelf, 
they  make  confelTion  of  their  fms  ''to  God  Almigh- 
"  ty,  and  the  bleifed  virgin  Mary,  to  St,  Michael 
"  the  archangel,  and  to  all  the  faints."  And  in 
their  abfolution,  they  join  together  "  the  pafTion  of 
"  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  merits  of  the 
"  bleffed  virgin,  and  of  all  the  faints,  for  the  remif^ 
''  fion  of  fms."  And  is  not  this  the  very  thing 
which  Athanafius  doth  feverely  condemn  ? 

I  have  mentioned  before  the  council  of  Laodicea, 
which  about  the  middle  of  this  century  condemns 
the  worfliip  of  angels,  and  praying  to  them,  as  down- 
right idolatry:  and  towards  the  end  of  this  fourth 
3ge,  and  in  the  beginning  of  the  fifth,  when  it  is 
2  pretended 


ii^o  Christ  Jesus,  the  only 

SE  RM..  pretended  that  praying  to  faints  did  begin  (though 
'  it  was  rather  by  way  or  apoftrophe  and  rhetorical  ad- 
drefs,  than  of  formal  invocation)  there  are  exprcfs 
teflimonies  againfi  h  of  the  mod  eminent  fathers  of 
that  time.  I  will  in'tance  but  in  three,  Epiphanius, 
St.  Chryfoftom,  and  St.  Au^^uftine. 

Epiphanius,  in  his  confutation  of  the  hertfy  of  the 
J  Collyridians  f  which  he  calls  tlie  herefy  of  the  women, 
I  becaufe  they  firft  began  the  woriliip  of  the  virgin 
;'  Mary)  declares  mofh  exprefly  againtl  the  worfhip  of 
any  creature  whatfoever  ;  "  for  neither  (fays  he)  is 
*'  Elias  to  be  v/orfliipped,  though  he  is  reckoned  a- 
*'  mong  the  living,"  (meaning  that  he  was  taken  up 
Mito  heaven,  body  and  foul)  "  nor  John,  nor  any  other 
''  of  the  faints  :"  and  as  for  the  virgin  Mary,  he  par- 
ticularly adds,  "  that  if  God  will  not  have  us  to 
*'  worfliip  the  angels,  how  much  more  would  he  not 
*'  have  us  to  woriliip  her  that  was  born  of  Anna  ?" 
And  concludes,  "  kx.  Mary  be  had  in  honour  j  but 
_''  let  the  Lord  be  worfliipped. 

St.  Chryfoftom,  in  a  long  difcourfe,  perfuades  men 
to  addrefs  their  prayers  immediately  to  God,  and 
not  as  we  addrefs  ourfelves  to  great  men  by  their  of- 
ficers and  favourites  •,  and  tells  us  "  that  there  is  no 
"  need  of  fuch  interceflors  with  God,  who  is  not  fo 
*'  ready  to  grant  our  petitions,  when  we  entreat  him 
.*'  by  others,  as  when  we  pray  to  him  ourfelves." 

Laftly,  St.  Auguftine,  "  becaufe  the  fcripture  pro- 
"  nounces  him  accurfed,  that  putteth  his  trull:  in 
•'  man  •,"  from  thence  he  argues,  that  "  therefore 
*'  we  ought  not  to  afk  of  any  other,  but  of  our 
**•  Lord  God,  either  the  grace  to  do  well,  or  the 
.^'  reward  of  it."  The  contrary  to  which  I  am  furc 
is  done  in  fcveral  of  t\\(^  publick  prayers  ufed  in  the 
church  of  Rome,     ilrxd,  \.  22.  de  civ.  Dei,  he  cx- 

prelly 


mediator  between  God  and  men.  ll 3  i 

prefly  tells  us,  that  "  the  names  of  the  martyrs  were  SE  R  M. 
"  recited  in  their  prayers  at  the  altar :  but  they  were 
"  not  invocated  by  the  pried  who  did  celebrate  di- 
^'  vine  fervice."  And  in  the  third  council  of  Car- 
thage (which  was  in  St.  Auguftine's  time)  *'  it  is 
"  enjoined  (can.  33.)  that  all  prayers  that  were 
"  made  at  the  altar,  fhould  be  dire<51:ed  to  the  Father. ' ' 
Which  how  it  is  obferved  in  the  church  of  Rome, 
we  all  know. 

To  conclude  this  matter,  it  cannot  be  made  ap- 
pear, that  there  were  any  prayers  to  faints  in  the  pub- 
lick  offices  of  the  church,  till  towards  the  end  of  the 
eighth  century.  For  in  the  year  754.  the  invoca- 
tion of  faints  was  condemned  by  a  council  of  338 
bifhops  at  Conflantinople,  as  is  acknowledged  by  the 
fecond  council  of  Nice,  which  iirft  eftablifhed  this 
fuperflition,  in  the  year  787,  and  this  very  council 
was  condemned  {zYtw  years  after,  in  a  council  at 
Frankfort,  and  declared  void,  and  to  be  no  otherwife 
efteemed  of,  than  the  council  of  Ariminum. 

Thus  you  fee,  when  this  do&ine  and  pradlice,  fo 
contrary  to  the  do6lrine  and  pra6lice  of  a  great  many 
of  the  firft  ages  of  the  chriilian  church,  was  firft  efta- 
blifhed, namely,  at  the  fame  time  with  the  worfhip 
of  images,  and  when  the  firft  foundation  of  tranfub- 
,  ftantiation  was  laid  -,  which  as  they  began  at  the  fame 
time,  fo  they  are  very  fit  to  go  together. 

I  fliould  now  have  proceeded  to  the  next  thing 
which  I  propofed,  namely,  to  anfwer  the  chief  pre- 
tences which  are  made  for  this  dodrine  and  practice. 
But  of  that  in  the  following  difcourfe. 


SER- 


1132  Christ  Jesus,  the  only 

SERMON     LXXIII. 

Christ  Jesus,  the  only  mediator  be- 
tween God  and  men. 


I  TIM.  II.  5,  6. 

For  there  is  one  God,  and  one  mediator  between  God 
and  me  n^  the  man  Christ  Jesus;  who  gave  him^ 
felf  a  ranforn  for  all. 

LX)an'  X-^  ^^  ^^^  former  difcourfes  upon  this  text,  I 
*— v-*^  JL  have  treated  on   the  fecond  proportion  I  laid 
The  third  down  from  the  v/ords  ;  viz.  "  that  there  is  but  one 
ihiTtext!"  "  mediator  between  God  and  men,  the  man  Christ 
"  Jesus."  In  treating  of  this  proportion,  I  lliewed, 
Firft,  that  it  is  agreeable  to  fcripture. 
Secondly,  that  it  is  agreeable  to  one  great  end 
anddefign  of  the  chriilian  religion,  and  of  our  Sa- 
viour's coming  into  the  world,  which  was  to  de- 
flroy  idolatry  out  of  it. 

Thirdly,  that  from  the  nature  and  reafon  of  the 
thing,  there  can  be  but  one  m.ediator  or  inter- 
cefTor  in  heaven  with  God  for  finners ;  and  that  he 
can  be  no  other  than  Jesus  Christ. 

Fourthly,  I  fhewed  how  contrary  to  this  dodrine, 
the  dodlrine  and  praftice  of  the  church  of  Rome  is, 
in  their  invocation  of  angels,  and  the  blelTed  virgin, 
and  the  faints,  and  making  ufe  of  their  mediation 
.and  interceflion  with  God  for  finners. 

This  I  endeavoured  to  do,  by  iliewing,  ift,  How 
contrary  this  is  to  the  dodrine  of  the  fcriptures. 

2dly> 


mediator  between  God  and me?2,  ^  ^33 

2dly,  How  contrary  to  the  do6lrine  and  praclice  of  ^  ^  ^  ^• 
the  church,  for  feveral  of  the  firft  ages  of  it.     And 
thus  far  I  have  gone. 

I  proceed  now  in  the  3d  place,  to  anfwer  the  chief 
pretences  and  excufes  which  are  made  by  thofe  of 
the  church  of  Rome,  for  this  doflrine  and  praclice. 

As,  I.  That  they  only  fay,  that  it  is  lawful  to 
pray  to  angels  and  faints  ;  but  do  not  enjoin  and  re- 
quire it.     To  this  I  anfwer  two  things. 

( I . )  In  faying  that  it  is  lawful  to  pray  to  faints 
and  angels  (if  they  went  no  farther)  they  fay,  that 
which  they  can  never  make  good  ;  becaufe  prayer  is 
an  a6l:  of  religious  worfhip,  and  peculiar  and  proper 
to  God  only,  and  therefore  cannot  be  given  to  any 
creature,  angel,  or  faint.  This  I  have  proved  from 
fcripture,  where  our  Saviour  commands  us,  "  when 
*'  we  pray,  to  fay,  Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven  i" 
that  is,  to  dired  and  addrefs  our  prayers  to  God  on- 
ly. And  St.  Paul  likewife  forbids  the  worfhipping 
angels  by  invocating  of  them,  and  making  ufe  of 
them  as  mediators  between  God  and  us,  in  his  epif- 
tle  to  the  CololTians  •,  which  Theodoret  expredy  in- 
terprets concerning  the  invocation  of  angels,  and 
applying  our  felves  to  them,  as  mediators  and  inter- 
cefibrs  with  God  in  heaven  for  us.  And  the  coun- 
cil of  Laodicea  declares  this  pradice  to  be  idolatry. 
Befides  that  the  ancient  fathers  of  the  chriilian  church, 
for  above  three  hundred  years,  never  fpake  of  pray- 
ing to  any,  but  God  only  ;  and  do  exprefly  condemn 
the  invocation  of  angels,  much  more  of  the  faints, 
who  are  inferior  to  them  -,  and  therefore  they  always 
define  prayer  to  be  an  addrefs  to  God,  a  converiing 
and  difcourfing  with  God  j  which  would  be  a  falfe 
definition  of  prayer,  if  it  were  lawful  to  pray  to  any 
but  to  God  only.     All  which  confidered,  one  may 

Vol.  V.  9  P  juftly 

5- 


1 134  Christ  Jesus,  the  only 

juftly  wonder  at  the  confidence  of  fom 
would  have  it  taken  for  granted,  withou 
that  the  invocation  of  faints  and  angels  is  lawful. 


S  R  R  M.  iuftly  wonder  at  the  confidence  of  fome  men,  who 
would  have  it  taken  for  granted,  without  any  proof, 


^     (2.)  If  it  were  true,  that  it  is  lawful  to  pray  to  an- 
il gels  and  faints  -,  it  is  not  true,  that  the  church  of  Rome 
Idoes  only  declare  it  to  be  lawful,  but  does  not  require 
and  enjoin  it  •,  as  fome  of  their  late  writers  pretend. 
With  what  face  can  this  be  faid,  when  there  are 
fo  many  prayers  to  angels  and  faints,  and  tfoecially 
to  the  blefTed  virgin,  in  the  publick  offices  of  their 
cliurch,  in  which  all  are  fuppofjd  to  join,  as  much 
as  in  the  prayers  which  are  put  up  to  God  by  the 
pried  ?  'lis  true  indeed,  the  people  underiland  nei- 
ther ;  but  they  are  prefent  at  both,  and  join  in  both 
alike  ;  that  is,  as  much  as  men  can  be  faid  to  join  in 
.    that  which  they  do  not  underfband ;  as  that  church 
I   fuppofeth  people  may  do,  and  receive  great  cdifica- 
I   tion  alfo,  by  joining  with   the  pried,  in    a  fervice 
r  which  they  do  not  underdand.     But  how  they  can 
'    be  edified  by  what  they  do  not  underdand,  I  mud 
conftfs  niyfelf  as  little  able  to  underdand,  as  they  do 
their  prayers.     But  whether  they  underdand  them, 
or  not,  'tis  certain  that  if  the  people  have  any  part  in 
the  publick  prayers  of  the  church,  they  are  bound 
to  pray  to  angels  and  faints. 

And  if  the  creed  of  pope  Pius  IV.  framed  by  vir- 
tue of  an  order  of  the  council  of  Trent,  be  of  any 
authority  with  them  •,  one  of  the  articles  of  it  is,  that 
I  do  firmly  hold,  that  the  faints,  which  reign  toge- 
;(!  ther  with  Christ,  are  to  be  wordiipped  and  invo- 
cated,  and  that  they  do  off'er  up  prayers  to  God 
for  us.     And  this  creed  all  the  governors  of  cathe- 
drals and  fuperior  churches,  and  all  who  hold  any 
dignity,  or  benefice  with  cure  of  fouls  from  them, 
,  are  bound  folemnly  to  make  profcfTion  of,  and  fwear 
^'  to. 


mediator  between  God  and  men.  i  ^  3  J 

to,  and  carefully  to  caufe  it  to  be  held  and  taught^  .^  ^'  ^  ^> 
and  preached  by  all  that  are  under  their  charge  ;  fo 
that  they  are  to  teach  the  people,  that  the  fldnts 
which  reign  together  with  C  h  r  i  s  t,  are  to  be 
worfhipped  and  prayed  to.  And  therefore  un- 
lefs  people  are  not  bound  to  do  that,  which  they  are 
to  be  taught  it  is  their  duty  to  do,  they  are  by  virtue 
of  this  article,  required  to  v/orfhip  and  pray  to  faints. 
And  if  the  publick  office  of  their  church  be  the  pub- 
lick  worfhip  ;  and  pope  Pius  his  creed,  the  publick 
faith  of  the  Romifh  church,  no  man  can  be  either 
of  the  faith,  or  in  the  communion  of  that  church, 
who  does  not  only  hold  it  lawful,  but  his  duty,  to 
worfhip  the  faints  in  heaven,  and  to  pray  to  them, 
and  accordingly  does  join  in  the  worfhip  of  them, 
and  prayers  to  them,  as  much  as  in  any  other  part  ^ 
of  divine  fervice. 

2.  Another  pretence  for  this  dodlrine  and  praflice, 
is,  that  the  faints  in  heaven  do  pray  for  us ;  and 
what  is  this  but  to  be  mediators  and  intercefTors  with 
God  for  us  ?  And  if  fo,  why  may  we  not  pray  to 
them,  to  intercede  with  God  for  us  ?  To  this  I  an- 
fwer  four  things. 

(i.)  We  do  not  deny  that  the  faints  in  heaven 
pray  for  us  that  are  here  upon  earth,  becaufe  they 
may  do  fo  for  any  thing  we  know  \  but  that  they  do 
fo,  is  more  than  can  be  proved,  either  by  clear  teili- 
mony  of  fcripturc,  or  by  any  convincing  argument 
from  reafon,  and  therefore  no  do6lrine  or  pradice 
can  be  fafely  grounded  upon  it. 

(2.)  Though  it  were  certain,  that  the  faints  in 
heaven  do  pray  for  us  •,  yet  they  are  not  mediators 
and  intercelTors  properly  fo  called :  for  all  interceffion 
ftridly  and  properly  fo  called,  is  in  virtue  of  a  facri- 
fice  offered  by  him  that  intercedes  \  and  therefore  he 

9  P  2  only 


1 136  Jesus  Christ,  the  o?ily 

S  E  R  M.  only  by  wliom  expiation  of  fin  is  niade  upon  earth, 
can  be  properly  an  intercelTor  with  God  in  heaven ; 
but  this,  no  angel  or  faint  hath  done,  nor  can  do. 

And  (as  I  have  fliewed  in  fome  of  the  former  dif- 
courfcs)  it  is  the  plain  fcope  of  a  great  part  of  the 
epiflle  to  the  Flebrews  to  prove  this  very  thing,  that 
under  the  gofpel  "  we  have  an  high  priefl  that  lives 
"  for  ever,  and  appears  in  the  prefence  of  God  for 
''  us,"  in  the  virtue  of  "  that  blood  which  he  fhed, 
"  and  that  facrifice  which  he  offered  upon  the  crofs 
"  for  the  expiation  of  fin :"  and  that  ''  by  this  high 
"  priefl  only  we  have  accefs  with  freedom  and  con- 
"  fidence  to  the  throne  of  grace,"  and  by  him  do 
offer  up  all  our  prayers  and  thankfgivings,  and  all  other 
afts  of  religious  worfliipto  God  :  and  this  the  apo- 
llle  fhews  was  typified  in  an  imperfecl  manner,  by 
the  Jewifh  high  priefl  under  the  law,  who  was  but 
one,  and  none  but "  he  only  could  enter  into  the  holy 
*'  of  holies,  with  the  blood  of  the  facrifices,  that 
"  were  (lain  and  burnt  without,  by  which  blood  he 
*'  made  an  atonement,  and  interceded  for  the  peo- 
"  pie  i"  and  though  every  priefl  might  pray  for  the 
people,  and  the  people  for  one  another,  which  is  a 
kind  of  interceffion  ;  yet  that  peculiar  kind  of  inter- 
ceffion,  which  was  performed  by  the  high  prieft,  in 
the  holy  of  holies,  in  virtue  of  the  facrifice  that  was 
flain  without,  could  not  be  made,  but  by  the  high 
priefl  only.  By  all  which  was  typified  our  high  priefl 
under  the  gofpel  "  who  only  hath  made  expiation  of 
"  fin,  by  the  facrifice  of  himfelf,  and  is  entered  into 
"  heaven,  to  appear  in  die  prefence  of  God  for  us, 
*-'  where  he  lives  for  ever,  to  make  interceffion  for 
'*  us,"  in  virtue  of  tliat  blood  which  was  fhed  for 
the  expiation  of  fin,  and  which  can  only  be  prefented 
to  GoDj  by  him  tliat  fhed  it.  And  this  is  properly 
I  inter- 


mediator  beHveen  God  and  men,  1^37 

intercefTion,  like  that  of  the  hieh  prieft  under  the  law  S  E  R  M. 

lYYrrr 
for  the  people  of  Ifrael ;  and  this  kind  of  intercefTion     '  '  **  • 

can  be  made  by  none  in  heaven  for  us,  but  only  by 

"  the  high  prieft  of  our  profefTion,  Jesus  the  Son 

*'  of  God,"  and  by  none  elfe  can  we  offer  up  our 

prayers  and  fervices  to  God,    and  confequently  we 

cannot  addrefs  ourfelves  to  any  other,  angels  or  faints, 

as  mediators  with  God  for  us. 

(3.)  SLfppofmg  it  certain,  that  the  faints  do  pray 
for  us ;  yet  we  may  not  addrefs  folemn  prayer  to 
them  to  pray  for  us,  becaufe  prayer  and  folemn  invo- 
cation is  a  part  of  that  rdigious  v/orfhip  which  is  pe- 
culiar to  God. 

(4. )  Suppofing  it  not  only  certain  that  the  faints 
in  heaven  do  pray  for  us,  but  likewife  that  they  might 
be  proper  mediators  and  interceffors  with  God  for 
lis  ;  yet  we  ought  not  to  pray  to  them,  becaufe  they 
cannot  hear  us,  as  I  fhall  have  occafion  to  fhew  fully 
by  and  by. 

3.  Another  of  their  pretences  or  excufes  for  this 
pradice,  is,  that  praying  to  faints  to  pray  for  us,  is 
no  more  than  what  we  do  to  good  men  upon  earth, 
when  we  defire  them  to  pray  for  us.  So  the  late  ex- 
pounder of  the  catholick  faith,  namely  the  bifhop  of 
Meaux,  tells  us,  that  they  pray  to  the  faints  in 
heaven,  in  the  fame  order  of  brotherly  fociety,  with 
which  we  entreat  our  brethren  upon  earth  to  pray 
for  us. 

But  that  this  is  not  a  true  reprefentation  either  of 
their  do6lrine  or  practice  in  this  matter,  will  appear 
by  thefe  following  confiderations. 

( I.)  That  they  pray  to  the  angels  and  faints  in  hea- 
ven, with  the  fame  folemn  circumftances  of  religious 
worfhip,  that  they  pray  to  God  himfelf  in  the  fame 
place  and  in  the  fame  humble  poftu;-e,  and  in  the  fame 

religious 


LXXIII. 


1 138  Jesus  Christ,  the  only 

S  E  R  M.  religious  offices  and  fervices,  in  which  they  pray  to 
God  ;  which  furely  is  never  done  by  any  to  their  bre- 
thren upon  earth.   . 

(2.)  That  in  their  prayers  and  thankfgivings,  they 
join  the  angels  and  the  bleffed  virgin  and  the  faints 
together  with  God  and  Christ,  as  if  (to  ufe  their 
own  phrafe)  it  were  in  the  fame  order  of  brotherly 
fociety,  and  as  if  they  were  all  equally  the  objedls  of 
our  invocation  and  praife  ;  of  which  in  my  laft  dif- 
courfe,  I  gave  feveral  plain  inftances  ;  but  this  alfo  is 
never  done  to  our  brethren  upon  earth. 

(3.)  That  in  the  creed  of  pope  Pius  IV.  it  is  ex- 
preQy  faid,  that  the  faints  which  reign  together 
with  Christ,  are  to  be  worfhipped  and  invocated  ; 
but  this  furely  they  will  not  allow  to  be  done 
to  our  brethren  upon  earth.  And  the  council 
of  Trent  does  expreHy  ground  the  worfhip  and  in- 
vocation of  faints,  upontheir  reigning  with  Christ 
in  heaven ;  and  therefore  this  worfhip  and  invocation 
of  faints  muft  necelTarily  be  fomething  more,  than 
according  to  the  fame  order  of  brotherly  fociety, 
with  v/hich  we  entreat  our  brethren  upon  earth  to 
pray  for  us  :  otherwife  the  reafon  given  by  the 
council  of  their  reigning  with  Christ  in  heaven, 
would  be  frivolous  j  if  the  fame  thing  may  be  done 
to  our  brethren  upon  earth. 

(4. )  In  the  publick  offices  of  their  church,  they 
do  not  only  pray  to  the  faints  to  pray  for  them,  but 
they  dircd  their  prayers  and  thankfgivings  immedi- 
ately to  them,  for  all  thofe  bleffings  and  benefits 
which  they  afk  of  God,  and  thank  him  for.  Of 
which  innumerable  examples  might  be  given  out  of 
their  publick  offices  ;  particularly  in  the  office  of  the 
bleffed  virgin,  they  pray  to  the  angels  thus  ;  deliver 
us  we  b::feech  you  by  your  command  from  all  our 
jGns^  And 


mediator  between  God  and  men,  1^39 

And  the  words  of  the  decree  of  the  council  of  Trent,  S  E  R  M. 
\ad  eorum  orationes^  opera,  auxiliumque  confugere,  to 
flee  to  their  prayers,  aid,  and  help]  unlefs  we  will 
make  them  a  meer  tautology,  mull  of  necefilty  fig- 
nify  fomething  more  than  begging  of  them  to  pray 
for  us.  And  indeed  thofe  words  of  their  aid  and 
help,  feem  to  be  added  on  purpofe  to  give  counte- 
nance to  thofe  dire6l  prayers  which  are  made  to  the 
faints,  for  all  fpiritual  and  temporal  blelTings,  and 
which  flill  remain  without  any  change  in  their  pub- 
lick  offices  ;  and  unlefs  we  will  underftand  them,  con- 
trary to  the  plain  and  obvious  fenfe  of  thofe  prayers, 
they  mufl  fignify  fomething  more  than  praying  to 
the  faints  to  pray  for  us. 

It  is  true  indeed,  that  the  catechifm  which  was 
framed  by  order  of  the  council  of  Trent,  for  the  ex- 
plaining of  their  dodrines,  makes  the  difference  be- 
tween their  prayers  to  God,  and  to  the  faints,  to  lye 
in  this,  that  we  fay  to  God,  have  mercy  on  us,  or 
hear  our  prayers  ;  but  to  the  faints,  pray  for  us. 
But  I  have  fhewn  before,  that  this  is  not  the  conftant 
form  of  praying  to  faints,  but  that  frequently  they 
make  dired:  addrefles  to  them  for  their  help  and  aid. 
And  this  the  compilers  of  the  catechifm  were  fenfible 
of,  and  therefore  they  add,  although  it  be  lawful 
in  another  manner  to  afk  of  the  faints  themfelves, 
that  they  would  have  mercy  on  us ;  becaufe  they 
are  very  merciful.  And  is  not  God  fo  too  ?  And 
then  where  is  the  difference  between  their  prayers  to 
God,  and  to  the  faints  ?  If  it  neither  lye  in  the  mat- 
ter of  them,  nor  in  the  form,  nor  in  the  reafon  of 
them  ;  if  we  pray  to  them  for  the  fame  thing,  and 
in  the  fame  form,  have  mercy  on  us,  and  our  pray- 
ers to  them  be  grounded  upon  the  fame  reafon,  that 

our 


1 140  Jesus  CatusT,  the  only 

SKRM.  our  prayers  to  God  are,  namely,  becaufe  they  arc 
mercifuJ ;  where  then  is  the  difference  between  them  ? 

4.  I  will  mention  but  one  pretence  itiore,  which 
is,  that  by  praying  to  the  faints  in  heaven,  they  do 
not  make  them  gods  ;  and  therefore  there  can  be  no 
fulpicion  or  danger  of  idolatry  in  the  cafe. 

To  this  I  Ihall  anfwer  two  things  ; 

(i,)  That  praying  to  them  in  all  places,  and  at 
all  times,  and  for  all  forts  of  blcffings,  does  fuppofe 
them  to  have  the  incommunicable  perfections  of  the 
divine  nature  imparted  to  them,  or  inherent  in  them, 
namely  his  omnipotence,  andomnifcience,  and  im- 
menfe  prefence  •,  and  to  whatever  being  we  afcribe 
thefe  perfedions,  in  fo  doing  we  rhake  it  God  \  for 
prayer  to  God  is  no  otherwife  an  acknowledgment 
of  his  omnipotence,  omnifcience,  and  immenfe  pre- 
fence, than  as  we  do  in  all  places,  and  at  all  times, 
pray  to  him  for  all  things  ;  and  fo-they  do  to  the 
\  faints,  and  that  not  only  with  vocal  but  with  mental 
\  prayer,  which  the  council  of  Trent  allows,  and  in  fo 
doing,  neceflarily  fuppofeth  them  to  know  our  hearts, 
diredly  contrary  to  the  reafon  which  Solomon  gives, 
why  we  fhould  put  up  all  our  prayers  and  fupplications 
to  God,  (i  Kings  viii.  39.)  "  for  thou,  even  thou, 
"  only  knoweil  the  hearts  of  all  the  children  of  m.en." 

(2.)  Bellarmine  is  fo  fenfible  of  the  dint  of  this  ar- 
gument, that  he  is  forced  to  acknowledge  the  faints 
which  reign  with  Christ  in  heaven  to  be  gods 
by  participation,  (that  is,  a  fort  of  inferior  gods, 
as  the  heathen  fuppofed  th^ir  mediators  to  be)  and 
that  therefore  we  may  fly  to  their  aid  and  help,  as 
well  as  to  their  intercefTion  and  prayers.  And  is 
this  alfo  to  pray  to  the  faints  iii  heaven,  in  the  fame 
order  of  brotherly  fociety,  with  which  we  entreat 
our  brethren  upon  earth  to  pray  for  us  .'^     This  me- 

thinks 


77iediator  betwcm  God  and  men,  1 1 4 1 

thinks  is  great  familiarity,  to  treat  gods  by  partici-  ^  E  R  M. 
pation,  juft  in  the  fame  manner  as  we  do  our  brethren 
upon  earth.  Certainly  either  Bellarmine  hath  raifed 
the  faints  in  heaven  too  high,  v/hen  he  makes  them 
gods  by  participation  \  or  the  biiliop  of  Meaux  hath 
funk  them  too  low,  when  he  thinks  they  are  to  be 
treated  and  addreffed  to,  in  the  fame  rank  of  bro- 
therly fociety,  with  mortal  men  here  upon  earth. 

One  cannot  but  think  the  decree  of  the  council  of 
Trent  to  be  very  cbfcure  and  ambiguous,  when  it 
can  admit  of  two  of  fo  very  diiFerent  explications.  If 
the  infallible  judge  of  controverfies  can  fpeak  no  plain- 
er ;  I  think  we  had  even  beft  (lick  to  the  bible,  and 
hear  what  God  fays  in  his  word,  and  endeavour  to 
underlland  it  as  well  as  we  can. 

I  proceed  now  to  the  fourth  thing  which  I  pro- 
pofed,  namely,  to  fhew  that  this  pra6lice  of  theirs, 
of  addreiTmg  ourfelves  to  angels  and  faints,  and  mak- 
ing ufe  of  their  mediation,  to  offer  up  our  prayers 
and  thankfgivings  to  God  is  not  only  needlefs,  being 
no  v/here  commanded  by  God  ;  but  ufelcfs  alfo,  and 
unprofitable. 

They  are  fo  far  from  pretending,  that  it  is  com-  ' 
manded  by  God,  that  feveral  of  their  later  writers 
would  fain  make  us  believe  that  it  is  not  enjoined  by 
their  councils  •,  but  only  declared  to  be  lawful,  or  at 
moil,  but  recommended  as  profitable.  Nor  is  there 
any  example  of  praying  to  faints,  either  in  the  old 
or  new  teftament :  not  in  the  old,  (as  they  of  the 
church  of  Rome  confefs)  becaufe  the  faints  were  not 
then  admitted  into  heaven  ;  nor  in  the  new,  for  fear 
of  fcandaiizing  the  Jews,  and  of  making  the  Gen- 
tiles think  they  propofed  new  gods,  and  new  medi- 
ators to  them  inftead  of  the  old  ,  which  are  the  rea- 
fons  given  by  their  own  writers. 

Vol.  V,  9  0^  And 

5- 


1742  Christ  Jesus,  the  only 

S  E  R  M.       ^(^  it  is  needlefs  likewife  ;  becaufe  the  mediation 
of  Jesus  Christ  alone  is  fufficient  for  us,  and  more 
than  the  interceflion  of  millions  of  faints  and  angels. 
"  He"  alone  "  is  able  to  fave  to  the  utmoft  all  thofe 
"  that  come  to  God  by  him,'*  as  the  apoftle  to  the 
Hebrews  fpeaks.     Hath  not  he  made  a  clear  and  full 
promife  to  us,  that  "  whatever  we  afk  in  his  name, 
*'  fhall  be  granted  us  ?"  And  have  we  any  reafon 
to  doubt,  either  of  his  inclination  and  good  will,  or 
of  his  power  and  interefi;  to  do  us  good  ?  What  need 
then  is  there  to  fue  for  the  favour,  or  to  take  in  the 
afTiflance  of  any  other,  even  of  thofe  who  are  thought 
to  be  mod  powerRil,  and  the  chief  minifters  and  fa- 
vourites in  that  heavenly  court  ?  After  fuch  an  affu- 
rance  that  my  bufinefs  will  be  effedually  done  there, 
by  that  great   advocate  with   the   Father,    Jesus 
Christ  the  righteous  \  why  fhould  I  apply  myfelf 
to  St.  Peter,  though  he  be  faid  to  keep  the  keys  of 
heaven  •,  or  to  Michael  the  arch-angel,  though  he  be 
the  chief  of  the  miniilring  fpirits  ;  or  to  the  blefled 
virgin  herfelf,  notwithftanding  thofe  glorious  titles  of 
the  queen  of  heaven,  and  the  mother  of  mercy,  which 
they  of  the  church  of  Rome  are  pleafed  to  beftow 
upon  her,  and  without  her  confent,  and,  as  may  rea- 
fonably  be  prefumed,  againll  her  will  ? 

I  will  put  a  cafe,  which  may  help  to  render  this 
matter  a  lintle  more  plain  and  fenfible  to  us,  fo  as 
every  man  may  be  able  to  judge  of  it.  Suppofe  a 
king  fliould  conflitute  his  fon,  the  great  mafter  of 
requefts  i  with  this  exprefs  declaration  and  afTurance, 
that  all  petitions  that  were  addreffed  to  him  by  his 
fon,  fliould  be  gracioudy  received  and  anfwered  ;  in 
this  cafe,  though  every  man  might  ufe  his  own  dif- 
cretion,  at  his  own  peril,  and  take  what  courfe  he 
pleafed,  yet  I  fhould  moft  certainly  prefer  all  my  pe- 
titions 


mediator  ietiveen  God  and  men,  1^3 

titions  to  the  king,  in  the  way  which  he  had  fo  plain-  ^  E  R  ^I- 
ly  direcled,  and  fhould  trouble  never  a  courtier  of  *'  ' 
them  all  \nth  my  bulinefs  \  for  fear  the  king  iliould 
think,  that  I  did  either  diflruil  his  royal  word,  or 
defpife  his  fon,  by  my  Ibliciting  the  aid  and  help  of 
ever}'  little  courtier,  after  I  had  put  my  petition  into 
the  hands  of  this  great  mailer  of  requefts. 

And  now  I  will  not  dillrufl  any  of  your  underftand- 
ings  fo  far  as  to  make  the  application.  I  will  only 
add,  that  it  is  an  eternal  rule  of  truth,  and  which 
never  fails  in  any  cafe,  fruftra  fit  per  pluri^  qu:d fieri 
^Gtefi  per  pauciora^  "  it  is  in  vain  to  attempt  that  by 
"  more  ways  and  means,  which  may  as  well  and  as 
"  cffec'hially  be  done  by  one  j"  becaufe  this  would 
be  perfect  lofs  of  time  and  pains  :  and  therefore  they 
who  would  fend  us  i(^  far  about,  as  to  trouble  all  the 
laints  and  angels  in  heaven  with  our  petitions,  when 
they  cannot  deny  but  that  our  great  mediator  is  alone 
fufficient ;  do  feem  to  be  to  fend  us  upon  a  very 
fleevelefs  errand  •,  fo  that  if  with  all  their  fkill  in  fenc-  . 
ing,  they  could  defend  this  practice  from  being  un- 
lawful, yet  this  one  thing  is  a  fufficient  objedlion  in 
reafon  againft  it,  that  it  is  perfedJy  needlefs. 

Or  if  we  could  imagine  any  need  of  this  ;  all  ad- 
drefles  to  them  muft  be  vain  and  unprofitable,  if  they 
do  not  know  our  wants,  and  hear  our  prayers  that 
are  put  up  to  them  ;  which  St.  Auftin  thought  they 
do  not  know  and  hear,  fiatcndum  ejl  (faith  he  L.  De 
cur  a  pro  mcr:uis)  nefare  qiiidcra  rr.crtuos^  quid  hie  agatur  \ 
"  it  muft  be  acknowledged  that  the  dead  are  igno- 
*'  rant  of  what  is  done  here."  This  was  his  opi- 
nion ;  but  we  are  certain  that  they  cannot  know  our 
wants,  nor  hear  our  prayers  at  all  times  and  in  all 
places ;  unlefs  they  can  either  be  prefent  every  where, 
which  no  finite  being  can  be ;  or  elleGoD  be  pleafed 

9  0^2  in 


Christ  Jesus,  the  only 

in  fome  fiipernatural  way  to  communicate  to  them 
the  knowledge  of  our  wants,  and  of  the  prayers 
which  we  put  up  to  them  \  which  we  can  never  know 
that  he  does,  unlefs  he  hath  communicated  to  us, 
that  he  is  pleafed  to  do  fo,  of  which  the  fcripture  no 
where  gives  us  the  lead  intimation. 

But  becaufe  they  pretend,  that  the  fcripture  gives 
us  fome  hints  of  this,  I  Ihall  briefly  examine  what 
they  fay  about  this  matter. 

I.  That  tlie  angels  know  our  condition  here  be- 
low, becaufe  they  are  faid  "  to  rejoice  at  the  conver- 
"  fion  of  a  fmner  ;"  and  therefore  the  faints  do  hke- 
wife  know  our  condition,  becaufe  "  they  fhall  be  Uke 
"  the  angels.'*  But  this  is  not  faid  of  them  till  after 
the  refurredion,  when  we  fhall  liave  no  occafion  to 
pray  to  them.  Belides,  that  it  may  well  enough  be 
fuppofed,  that  God  may  reveal  both  to  the  angels 
and  faints  in  heaven,  the  converfion  of  a  finner,  be- 
caufe it  may  contribute  to  the  increafe  of  their  joy 
and  happincfs:  but  will  it  hence  follow,  that  God 
reveals  to  them  all  other  circumftances  of  our  condi- 
tion, our  dangers  and  temptations  and  troubles,  our 
fms  and  our  falferings,  the  knowledge  whereof  would 
no  ways  contribute  to  the  increafe  of  their  happinefs  ? 
And  yet  in  order  to  their  interceffion  with  God  for 
us,  their  knowledge  of  thefe  things  would  be  moft 
beneficial  to  us. 

II.  Becaufe  the  rich  m.an  was  concerned  in  hell  for 
the  falvation  of  his  relations  on  earth,  they  argue  that 
it  is  much  more  probable,  that  the  faints  in  heaven 
are  concerned  for  us,  and  are  ready  to  pray  for  us, 
and  therefore  it  is  very  credible,  that  fome  way  or 
other,  tliey  have  the  knowledge  of  our  condition  and 
wants,  though  we  cannot  certainly  tell,  what  that 
pardcuiar  way  is. 

To 


mediator  between  God  and  men,  1 14^ 

To  which  I  anfwer,  S  E  R  M. 

.  LXXIII 

(i.)  That  it  is  a  known  rule  amongft  all  divines, 

that  no  certain  argument  can  be  drawn  from  the  cir- 
cumflances  of  a  parable,  but  only  from  the  main 
fcope  and  intention  of  it ;  nor  is  it  fo  hkely  that  the 
wicked  in  hell  Ihould  have  any  fhare  in  that,  which 
St.  Paul  tells  us,  is  the  great  virtue  of  the  faints  in 
heaven,  I  mean  charity  •,  and  if  they  have  it  not, 
then  no  argument  can  be  drawn  from  it.  Some  of 
their  commentators  think,  that  this  motion  of  the 
rich  man  to  Abraham,  concerning  his  brethren,  did 
not  proceed  from  charity  to  them,  but  to  himfelf ; 
left  his  torment  and  punifliment  fhould  be  increafed 
by  their  coming  to  hell,  by  the  means  of  the  ill  ex- 
ample which  he  had  given  them,  when  he  was  upon 
earth :  and  cardinal  Cajetan  thinks  that  he  was  con- 
cerned for  his  brethren  out  of  pride  and  ambition, 
and  becaufe  it  would  be  for  the  honour  of  his  family, 
to  have  fome  of  them  in  that  glory  (fo  far  above  any 
thing  in  this  world)  which  he  faw  Abraham  and  La- 
zarus poiTefs'd  of.  This  is  a  reafon,  which  I  confefs 
I  Ihould  not  have  thought  on  •,  and  yet  perhaps  it 
mJght  be  likely  enough  to  enter  into  the  mind  of  a 
cardinal.  And  I  cannot  but  obferve  by  the  v/ay,  that 
this  petition  or  requeft,  which  the  rich  man  in  hell 
made  to  Abraham,  is  the  only  inftance  we  meet  v/ith 
in  fcripture,  of  any  thing  like  a  prayer  that  was  put 
up  to  any  of  the  faints  in  heaven. 

Well !  but  fuppofe  that  the  rich  man  in  hell  had 
this  charity  for  his  brethren,  and  we  will  eafily  agree, 
that  the  faints  in  heaven  have  much  more  charity, 
not  only  for  their  kindred,  but  for  all  men  here  upon 
earth  ;  let  us  now  confider  the  particular  way  and 
manner  which  the  great  divines  of  the  church  of 
Rome  (I  mean  the  fchool-men,  who  cannot  be  con- 
3  tent 


11^6  Christ  Jesus,  the  only 

S  E  R  M.  tent  to  be  ignorant  of  any  thing)  do  afTign  of  the 

'  knowledge  which  the  faints  in  heaven  have  of  tlic 
condition  and  wants  of  men  here  below. 

They  tell  us  that  they  know  all  our  prayers  and 
wants  in  the  glafs  of  the  Deity,  or  Trinity  ;  which 
metaphor  of  the  glafs  of  the  Deity,  or  Trinity,  if  it 
have  any  meaning,  it  muft  be  this,  that  the  faints  in 
heaven  beholding  the  face  of  God  or  the  divine  ef- 
fence,  in  which  the  knowledge  of  all  things  is  con- 
tained, they  may  in  that  glafs  fee  all  things  that  God 
knows  :  but  then  they  fpoil  all  this  fine  fpeculation 
again,  by  telling  us,  that  this  glafs  does  not  necef- 
farily  reprefent  to  then^i  all  that  knowledge  which  is 
in  the  divine  mind  ;  but  that  it  is  a  kind  of  volun- 
tary glafs,  in  which  the  faints  are  only  permitted  to 
fee  fo  much  as  God  pleafeth  ;  but  how  much  that 
is,  they  cannot  tell  us.  Which  amounts  to  no  more 
than  this ;  that  the  faints  in  heaven  know  as  much 
of  our  condition  here  upon  earth,  as  God  is  pleafed 
to  reveal  to  them  :  and  if  this  be  all,  it  is  as  good  a 
reafon  why  we  fhould  pray  to  good  men  in  the  Eaft 
or  Weft-Indies,  to  pray  for  us  and  help  us,  becaufe 
they  alfoknow  as  much  of  ournecelTities  and  prayers, 
as  God  thinks  fit  to  reveal  to  them. 

But  if  the  faints  muft  have  a  revelation  from  God 
of  our  prayers,  before  that  they  know  that  we  pray 
to  them  ;  then  the  fhortcft  and  fureft  way  to  both, 
is  to  pray  to  God,  and  not  to  them  -;  or  however 
(as  Bellarmin  confeffeth)  it  were  very  fit  to  pray  to 
God,  before  every  prayer  we  make  to  the  faints, 
that  he  would  be  pleafed  to  reveal  that  prayer  to  them, 

;  thai:  upon  this  fignal  and  notice  given  them  by  God, 

|;  they  may  betake  themfelves  to  pray  to  God  for  us. 

?  But  unlefs  it  were  very  clear  from  fcripture,  that 
God  had  appointed  this  method,  it  is  in  reafon  fuch 

a  way 


mediator  between  God  and  m^n\  \  147 

a  way  about,  as  no  man  would  take  that  could  help  S  E  R  M. 
it :  and  it  feems  to  me  to  as  little  purpofe  :  for  why 
fhould  not  a  man  think  God  as  ready  to  grant  him 
all  his  other  requells,  without  the  mediation  and  in- 
terceflion  of  faints,  as  this  one  requeft  of  revealing 
our  prayers  and  wants  to  them  ?  And  if  this  way  be 
not  thought  fo  convenient,  I  know  but  one  more,    ' 
and  that  is,  to  pray  to  the  faints  to  go  to  God,  and 
beg  of  him,  tliat  he  would  be  pleafed  to  reveal  to 
them  our  fupplications  and  wants,  that  they  may 
know  what  to  pray  to  him  for  in  our  behalf  ^  which 
is  jufl  fuch  a  wife  courfe,  as  if  a  man  fhould  write  a 
letter  to  his  friend  that  cannot  read,  and  in  a  poft- 
fcript  defire  him,  that  as  foon  as  he  hath  received  it,  ^  ^ 
he  would  carry  it  to  one  that  can  read,  and  entreat  ii 
him  to  read  it  to  him.    So  that  which  way  foever  we  - 
put  the  cafe,  what  courfe  foever  we   take  in  this 
matter,  it  will  be  fo  far  from  feeming  reafonable, 
that  we  fhall  have  much  ado,  and  muft  handle  the 
bulinefs  very  tenderly,  to  hinder  it  from  appearing 
very  ridiculous. 

Thus  I  have  examined  their  chief  pretences  from 
fcripture,  for  the  countenancing  this  do6trine  and 
pradice,  and  have  fhewn  how  little,  or  rather  no- 
thing at  all  is  there  to  be  found  for  it ;  and  that  alone 
is  reafon  enough  againft  it,  though  there  were  nothing 
in  fcripture  againft  it,  that  there  is  nothing  in  fcrip- 
ture for  it :  but  I  have  already  produced  clear  proof 
out  of  the  new  teftament  againft  it.  And  becaufe 
they  think  the  leaft  ftiew  and  probability  from  fcrip- 
ture, a  good  argument  on  their  fide,  I  will  offer 
them  a  probable  argument  out  of  the  old  teftament, 
upon  which  though  I  will  lay  no  abfolute  ftrefs,  yet 
I  believe  it  would  puzzle  them,  upon  their  principles, 
to  give  a  clear  anfwer  to  it  j  and  it  is  from  2  Kings 

ii.  9*. 


■\ 


1 148  Christ  Jesus,  the  only 

SERM.  ii.  ^.  where  Elijah  juft  before  he  was  taken  up  into 
^HL  heaven,  fays  to  EliOia,  "  Aflc  what  I  Ihall  do  for 
"  thee  before  I  be  taken  away  from  thee  ;"  thereby 
intimating  (as  one  would  think)  that  then  was  the 
lail  opportunity  of  afking  any  thing  of  him  :  but  if 
Elijah  had  underftood  the  matter  right  (as  the  church 
of  Rome  does  now)  he  fhould  rather  have  directed 
him,  to  have  prayed  to  him  when  he  was  in  heaven, 
where  he  would  have  a  more  powerful  intereft,  and 
be  in  a  better  capacity  to  do  him  a  kindnefs.  For 
the  reafon  the  church  of  Rome  gives,  why  they  did 
not  pray  to  the  faints  under  the  old  teftament  (name- 
ly, becaufe  they  were  not  then  admitted  into  heaven) 
will  not  hold  in  the  cafe  of  Elijah,  who  was  taken 
up  into  heaven  body  and  foul,  and  confequently  in 
as  good  circumflances  to  be  prayed  to,  as  any  of  the 
faints  and  martyrs  that  have  gone  to  heaven  fince. 

I  fhould  now  have  proceeded,  in  the  fifth  and  laft 
place,  to  have  fhewn,  that  this  practice  is  not  only 
needlefs  and  ufelefs,  but  very  dangerous  and  impi- 
ous ;  becaufe  contrary  to  the  chriftian  religion,  and 
greatly  derogating  from  the  merit  and  virtue  of 
Christ's  facrifice,  and  from  the  honour  of  "  the 
"  only  mediator  between  God  and  men,  Christ 
"  Jesus."  And  indeed,  how  can  we  apply  our 
felves  to  any  other  mediators  and  interceiTors  with 
God  in  heaven  for  us,  without  a  grofs  and  apparent 
contempt  of  the  highpriefh  of  our  profefTion,  Jesus 
the  Son  of  God  ?  As  if  we  either  diftrufled  his 
kindnefs  and  affedtion,  or  his  power  and  intereft  in 
heaven,  to  obtain  at  God's  hand  all  thofe  bleflings 
which  we  ftand  in  need  of.  The  apoftle  to  the  He- 
brews tells  us  exprefly,  that  "  he  is  able  to  fave  to 
"  the  utmoft  all  thofe  that  come  to  God  by  him  •," 
that  is,  who  addrefs  their  prayers  and  fupplications 

to 


mediator  between  God  aitd men,  ^  ^49 

to  God  in  his  name  and  mediation.  But  if  we  will  ^^^^^ 
chufe  other  mediators  for  our  felves,  of  whom  we 
are  not  fure  that  they  can  either  hear  or  help  us,  we 
may  fall  fhort  of  that  falvation,  which  the  apofcle  tells 
us  we  are  fecure  of  by  the  mediation  of  Jesus 
Christ  ;  "for  he  is  able,"  &c. 

But  this  hath  been  fliewn  fo  abundantly  in  the  for- 
mer part  of  this  difcourfe,  and  is  fo  clearly  confe- 
quent  from  the  whole,  that  I  lliall  here  conclude  vcq 
difcourfe  upon  the  fecond  propofition  I  laid  down 
from  the  words  of  my  text,  viz.  that  there  is  but 
one  mediator  between  God  and  men,  the  man 
Christ  Jesus. 

As  to  the  third  propofition  contained  in  the  tt^^ 
viz.  that  this  one  mediator,  Jesus  Christ,  gave 
himfelf  a  ranfom  for  all,  I  have  treated  on  that  fub- 
fed  particularly,  on  another  ^  occafion.  *  A  Ser* 

And  as  to  the  fourth  and  lail  propofition,  viz.  cerning*"' 
that  the  mediation  or  interceiTion  of  Jesus  Christ  is  the  facri- 
founded  in  his  redemption  of  mankind  \  and  becaufe  ^'^  l^. 
he  gave  himfelf  a  ranfom  for  all,  therefore  he  and  on  of 
he  only  is  qualified  to  intercede  for  all  men,  in  virtue  Chrift.  ^ 
of  that  facrifice  which  he  offered  for  the  falvation  of  ^j^^     ^Z 
mankind,  I  judge  nothing  more  needful  to  be  added,  i693» 
to  what  has  fallen  in  concerning  that  fubjed,  in  my 
handling  the  fecond  propofition,  in  this  and  the  two 
former  fermons. 


Vol.  V.  5  R  S  E  Ri 


1150  The  general  and  effectual  publication 


Rreached 
on  afcen- 
fion  day. 


SERMON     LXXIV. 

The  general  and  effectual  publication  of 
the  gofpel  by  the  apoftles. 


MARK  XVI.  19,  20. 

So  then  after  the  Lord  had  fpoken  tin  to  them^  he  zvas 
received  up  into  heaven^  and  fat  on  the  right  hand  of 
God.      And  they  went  forth^   and  preached  every 

■  where y  the  Lor  d  working  with  them^  and  confirming 
the  word  with  figns  following, 

S  E  R  M.  T'  N  thefe  words  you  have  thefe  two  great  points 

LXXiV.  ^  J^  of  chriflian  dodrine. 

I.  Our  Saviour's  afcenfion  into  heaven,  and  ex- 
altation at  the  right  hand  of  God  •,  "  he  was  receiv- 
*'  ed  up  into  heaven,  and  fat  on  the  right  hand  of 
*'  God." 

n.  The  effed  or  confequence  of  his  afcenfion  and 
exaltation,  which  was  the  general  and  eSTeclual  pub- 
lication of  the  gofpel ;  "  they  went  forth,  and  preach- 
"  ed  every  where,  the  Lord  working  with  them, 
*'  and  confirming  the  word  with  figns  following." 
And  both  thefe  are  very  proper  for  this  day  •,  but  I 
fliall  at  this  time  handle  the  latter  point,  namely,  the 
effedl  or  confequence  of  our  Saviour's  afccnHon 
into  heaven,  and  exaltation  at  the  right  hand  of 
God  ;  "  they  went  forth,  and  preached  every  where, 
"  the  Lord  working  with  them,  and  confirming  the 
•^V  word  with  iignsf(>llowing," 

z  ^  And 


of  the  gofpel  by  the  apqflles.  1 1 5 1 

And  thefe  words  contain  two  things  in  them.        S  E  R  M. 

I.  The  general  pubhcation  of  the  gofpel,  by  the 
apofble  ;  "  they  went  forth  and  preached  every 
"  where." 

II.  The  reafon  of  the  great  efficacy  and  fuccefs  of 
it  *,  namely,  the  divine  and  miraculous  power,  which 
accompanied  the  preaching  of  it  ;  "  the  Lord 
"  wrought  with  them,  and  confirmed  the  word  with 
*'  figfis  following." 

I.  The  general  publication  of  the  gofpel  by  the 
apoftles  ;  "  they  went  forth,  and  preached  every 
"  where."  And  indeed  the  induflry  of  the  apoftles, 
and  the  other  difciples,  in  publifning  the  gofpel,  was 
almoft  incredible.  What  pains  did  they  take  ?  what 
hazards  did  they  run  ?  what  difficulties  and  difcou- 
ragements  did  they  contend  withal  in  this  work }  and 
yet  their  fuccefs  was  greater  than  their  induftry,  and 
beyond  all  human  expectation  :  as  will  appear,  if  we 
confider  thefe  five  things. 

1 .  The  vaft  fpreading  of  the  gofpel  in  fo  fliort  a 
fpace. 

2.  The  wonderful  power  and  efficacy  of  it,  upon 
the  lives  and  manners  of  men. 

3.  The  weaknefs  and  meannefs  of  the  inftruments 
that  were  employed  in  this  great  work. 

4.  The  powerful  oppofition  that  was  raifed  a- 
gainft  it. 

5.  The  great  difcouragements  to  the  embracing 
the  profeffion  of  it.  I  ftiall  fpeak  briefly  to  each  of 
thefe. 

I .  The  vaft  fpreading  of  the  gofpet  in  fo  Ihort  a 
fpace.  This  is  reprefented.  Rev.  xiv.  6.  by  "  an 
"  angel  flying  through  the  midft  of  heaven,  and 
"  preaching  the  everlafting  gofpel  to  every  nation, 
^'  and  kindred,  and  tongue,  and  people.''  No  foo-n- 
9  R  2  er 


T^he  general  and  effe5tiial  publication 

er  was  the  do6lrine  of  the  chriftian  religion  publilhed, 
and  made  known  to  the  world,  but  it  was  readily 
embraced  by  great  numbers,  aim  oft  in  all  places  where 
it  came.  And  indeed  fo  it  was  foretold,  in  the  pro- 
phecies of  the  old  teftament,  Gen.  xlix.  lo.  "  That 
"  when  Shiloh  (that  is  the  MefTias)  Ihould  com.e,  to 
^*  him  ihould  the  gathering  of  the  people  be  :"  and 
Ifa.  ii.  2.  "  That  in  the  laft  days  the  mountain  of 
*'  the  Lord's  houfe  Ihould  be  eftablifhed  in  the 
*'  top  of  the  mountains,  and  be  exalted  above  the 
"  hills,  and  that  all  nations  fhould  flow  unto  it." 
Ifa.  Ix.  8.  the  prophet  fpeaking  of  mens  ready  fub- 
mifTion  to  the  gofpel,  and  the  great  number  of  thofe 
that  fhould  com.e  in  upon  the  preaching  of  it,  they 
are  faid,  "  to  fly  as  a  cloud,  and  as  the  doves  to  the 
"  windows."    • 

So  quick  and  ftrange  a  progrefs.  did  this  new  doc- 
trine and  religion  make  in  the  world,  that  in  the 
fpace  of  about  30  years  after  our  Saviour's  death, 
it  was  not  only  diffufed  through  the  greateft  part  of 
tjie  Roman  empire,  but  had  reached  as  far  as  Par- 
thia  and  India.  In  which  we  fee  our  Saviour's 
predidion  fully  verified,  that  before  the  deftru6lion 
of  Jerufalem,  the  gofpel  fliould  be  preached  in  all 
the  world,  Matt.  xxiv.  14.  "  This  gofpel  of  the 
"  kingdom  iliall  be  preached  in  all  the  world,  for  a 
'*  witnefs  unto  all  nations,  and  then  fhall  the  end 
*'  come."  But  this  is  not  all:  men  were  not  only 
brought  in  to  the  profeflion  of  the  gofpel  j  but, 

2.  l\his  do6l:rine  had  hkev/ife  a  wonderfiil  power 
and  efficacy  upon  the  lives  and  manners  of  men. 
The  generality  of  thofe  that  entertained  the  gofpel, 
were  obedient  to  it  in  word  and  deed,  as  the  apoftle 
tells  us,  concerning  the  Gentiles  that  were,  converted 
to  chriflianity,  Rom.  xv.  18.     Upon  the  change  of 

their 


of  the  gcfpel  by  the  apo files.  1 1 53 

their  religion,  followed  alfo  the  change  of  their  man-  S  E  R  M. 

-  LXXIV 

ners,  and  of  their  former  courfe  of  life.     They  that 

took  upon  them  the  profelTion  of  chriftianity,  "did 
"  thenceforth  not  walk  as  other  Gentiles  did,  in  the 
*'  lufbs  of  the  flefli,  and  according  to  the  vicious  courfe 
*'  of  the  world  ;  but  did  put  off  concerning  their  for- 
*'  mer  converfation,  the  old  man,  which  was  corrupt, 
*'  accordins;  to  the  deceitful  lulls  -,  and  were  renewed  in 
"  the  ipirit  of  their  mind,  and  did  put  on  the  new  man, 
* '  which  after  God  was  created  in  righteoufnefs  and  true 
*'  holinefs."  So  fbrange  an  effedhad  the  gofpel  upon 
the  lives  of  the  generality  of  the  profeflbrs  of  it,  that 
I  remember  Tertullian,  in  his  apology  to  the  Roman 
emperor  and  fenate,  challengeth  them  to  inftance  in 
any  one,  that  bore  the  title  of  Chriftian,  that  was  con- 
demned as  a  thief,  or  a  murderer,  or  a  facrilegious 
perfon,  or  that  was  guilty  of  any  of  thofe  grofs  enor- 
mities, for  which  fo  many  pagans  were  every  day 
made  examples  of  publick  juilice,  and  punilh'd  and 
executed  among  them. 

And  this  certainly  was  a  very  admirable  and  happy 
effedl,  which  the  gofpel  had  upon  men,  to  work  fo 
great  and  fudden  a  change  in  the  lives  of  thofe  who 
entertained  this  dcdrine,  to  take  them,  quite  olf  from 
thofe  vicious  pradices,  which  they  had  been  brought 
up  in,  and  accuflomed  to  ;  to  change  their  fpirits, 
and  the  temper  of  their  minds  ;  and  of  lewd  and  dif- 
honeil,  to  make  them  fober  and  jull,  and  "  holy  in  all 
*'  manner  of  converfation  i"  of  proud  and  fierce,  con- 
tentious and  pafTionate,  malicious  and  revengeful  to 
make  them  humble  and  meek,  kind  and  tender- 
hearted, peaceable  and  charitable. 

And  that  the  primitive  Chriilians  were  generally 
good  men,  and  of  virtuous  lives,  is  credible,  becaufe 
their  religion  did  teach  and  oblige  them  to  be  fuch  ; 

which 


I'he  general  and  effediual  publication 

which  though  it  be  not  effedlual  now,  to  make  all 
the  profefTors  of  it  fuch,  as  it  requires  they  fhould 
be  ;  yet  it  was  a  very  forcible  argument  then,  in  the 
circLimflances  in  which  the  primitive  Chriflians  were : 
for  chriftianity  was  a  hated  and  perfecuted  profeflion  : 
no  man  could  then  have  any  inducement  to  embrace 
it,  unlefs  he  were  refolved  to  pra6life  it,  and  live  ac- 
cording to  the  rules  of  it  •,  for  it  offered  men  no  re- 
wards and  advantages  in  this  world ;  but  on  the  con- 
trary threatned  men  with  the  greatefc  temporal  incon- 
veniencies  and  fufferings,  and  it  promifed  no  happinefs 
to  men  in  the  other  world  upon  any  other  terms,  than 
of  "  denying  ungodlinefs  and  worldly  lulls,"  and  of 
*'  living  foberly,  righteouily,  and  godly  in  this  pre- 
"  fent  world." 

And  befides  this  confideration,  we  have  the  beil 
teftimony  in  the  world  of  their  unblameable  lives  ; 
viz.  the  teftimony  of  their  profefs'd  enemies,  who 
did  not  perfecute  them  for  any  perfonal  crimes,  which 
they  charged  particular  perfons  withal,  but  only  for 
their  religion,  acknowledging  them  otherwife  to  be 
very  innocent  and  good  people.  Particularly  Pliny, 
in  his  letter  to  Trajan  the  emperor  (who  had  given 
him  in  charge,  to  make  particular  enquiry  concern- 
ing the  Chriftians)  gives  this  honourable  report  of 
them.  That  there  was  no  fault  to  be  found  in  them, 
befides  their  obftinate  refufal  to  facrifice  to  the  gods  ^ 
that  at  their  religious  meetings  it  was  an  efiential  part 
of  their  worfliip  to  oblige  themfelves  by  a  folcmn 
facrament,  againft  murder,  and  theft,  and  adultery, 
and  all  manner  of  wickednefs  and  vice.  No  chrif- 
tian  hiftorian  could  have  given  a  better  charader  of 
them,  than  this  heathen  writer  does.     But, 

3.  The  fuccefs  of  the  gofpel  will  appear  yet  more 
ftrange,  if  we  confider  the  weaknefs  and  meanneft 

of 


of  the  gofpel  by  the  apojlles.  ^  ^  55 

of  the  inflruments  that  were  employed  in  this  great  S  E  R  M. 
work.  A  company  of  plain  and  ilhterate  men,  mofl 
of  them  deftitute  of  the  advantages  of  education, 
went  forth  upon  this  great  defign,  weak  and  unarm- 
ed, unafTiiled  by  any  worldly  intereft,  having  no  fe- 
cular  force  and  power  on  their  fide,  to  give  counte- 
nance and  authority  to  them  ;  and  this  not  only  at 
their  firfl  fetting  out,  but  they  remained  under  thefe 
difadvantages  for  three  ages  together. 

The  firft  publifhers  of  the  chriftian  religion  offered 
violence  to  no  man,  did  not  go  about  to  compel  any 
by  force  to  entertain  the  do6lrine  which  they  preach- 
ed, and  to  lift  themfelves  of  their  number  ;  they 
were  not  attended  with  legions  of  armed  men,  to 
difpofe  men  for  the  reception  of  their  dodrine,  by 
plunder  and  free-quarter,  by  violence  and  tortures  ; 
this  modern  method  of  converfion   was  not  then 
thought  of  •,  nor  did  they   go  about  to  tempt  and 
allure  men  to  their  way,  by  the  promiies  of  tempo- 
ral rewards,  and  by  the  hopes  of  riches  and  honours  ; 
nor  did  they  ufe  any  artificial  infmuations  of  wit  and 
eloquence,  to  gain  upon  the  minds  of  men,  and  fteal 
their  doctrines  into  them ;  but  delivered  themfelves 
v/ith  the  greateft  plainnefs  and  fimplicity  •,  and  v/ith- 
out  any  ftudied  ornaments  of  fpeech,  or  fine  arts  of 
perfuafion,  declared  plainly  to  them,  the  dodrine 
and  miracles,  the  life  and  death,  and  refurredlion  of 
Jpsus  Christ,  promifing  life  and  immortality  to 
them  that  did  believe  and  obey  his  dodtrine,  and 
threatning  eternal  woe  and  mifery  in  another  world, 
to  the  defpifers  of  it. 

And  yet  thefc  contemptible  inftruments,  motwith- 
ftanding  all  thefe  difadvantages,  did  their  work  ef- 
fedually,  and,  by  the  power  of  God  going  along  with 
them,  gained,  numbers  every  day  to  theif  religion, 

and 


LXXIV. 


J  I  r6  ^he  general  and  effediual publication 

SE  R  M.  and  in  a  fhort  fpace,  ''  drew  the  world  after  them." 
Nor  did  they  only  win  over  the  common  people, 
but  alfo  feveral  pcrfons  confiderable  for  their  digni- 
ty, and  eminent  for  their  learning,  who  afterwards 
became  zealous  aflertors  of  chriftianity,  and  were  not 
aihamed  to  be  inftruded  in  the  faving  knowledge  of 
the  gofpel,  by  fuch  mean  and  unlearned  perfons  as 
the  apoflleS  were  ;  for  they  faw  fomething  in  them 
more  divine,  and  which  carried  with  it  a  greater 
power  and  perfuafion,  than  human  learning  and  elo- 
quence. 

4.  We  will  confider  the  mighty  oppofition  that 
was  raifed  againft  the  gofpel.  At  its  firll  appear- 
ance it  could  not  be  otherwife,  but  that  it  muft  meet 
with  a  great  deal  of  difficulty  and  oppofition,  from 
the  lufts  and  vices  of  men,  which  it  did  fo  plainly 
and  fo  feverely  declare  againft,  and  likewife  from 
the  prejudices  of  men  that  had  been  brought  up  in  a 
contrary  religion  •,  no  prejudice  being  Jo  ftrong,  as 
that  which  is  founded  in  education  •,  and  of  all  the  pre- 
judices of  education,  none  fo  obftinate  and  fo  hard  to 
be  removed,  as  thofe  about  religion,  yea,  though 
they  be  never  fo  abfurd  and  unreafonable :  "  hatha  na- 
''  tion  changed  their  gods,  which  yet  are  no  gods  ?'* 
Men  are  very  hardly  brought  otf  from  the  religion 
which  they  have  been  brought  up  in,  how  little 
ground  and  reafon  foever  there  be  for  it  ;  the  being 
trained  up  in  it,  and  having  a  reverence  for  it  im- 
planted in  them  in  their  tender  years  fupplies  all  other 
defedts. 

Had  men  been  free  and  indifferent  in  religion, 
when  chriftianity  firft  appeared  in  the  world,  and  had 
they  not  had  their  minds  prepoffefs'd  with  other 
apprehenfions  of  God  and  religion,  and  been  inured 
to  rites  and  fuperftitions  of  a  quite  different  nature 

from 


of  the  go/pel  by  the  apojiles,  ^  ^  5  7 

from  the  chriftian  religion  ;  or  had  they  at  that  time  SERM. 
been  weary  of  the  fuperflitions  of  their  idolatrous  ,_^^_^ 
worfhip,  and  been  enquiring  after  a  better  way  of 
religion  ;  then  indeed  the  chriftian  religion  had  ap- 
peared with  great  advantage,  and  would  in  all  pro- 
bability have  been  entertained  with  a  readinefs  of 
mind  proportionable  to  the  reafonablenefs  of  it.  But 
this  was  not  the  cafe  :  when  the  dodrine  of  the  gof- 
pel  was  firft  publilhi'd  in  the  world,  the  whole  world, 
both  Jews  and  Gentiles,  were  violently  prejudiced 
againft  it,  and  fix'd  in  their  feveral  religions. 

The  Jews  indeed  in  former  times  had  been  very 
prone  to  relinquifh  the  worfhip  of  the  true  God,  and 
to  fall  into  the  heathen  idolatry  :  but  after  God  had 
punifh'd  them  feverely  for  that  fin,  by  a  long  cap- 
tivity, they  continued  ever  after,  very  ftri(5t  and  firm 
to  the  worfhip  of  the  true  God  •,  and  never  were 
they  more  tenacious  of  their  religion  and  law,  than  at 
that  very  time  when  our  Saviour  appeared  in  the 
world :  and  though  he  was  foretold  in  their  law,  and 
moft  particularly  defcribed,  in  the  authentic  books  of 
their  religion,  the  prophets  of  the  old  teftament  *, 
yet  by  reafon  of  certain  groundlefs  traditions,  which 
they  had  received  from  the  interpreters  of  their  law, 
that  their  Meffias  was  to  be  a  great  temporal  prince, 
they  conceived  an  invincible  prejudice  againft  our 
Saviour,  upon  account  of  the  mean  circumftances 
in  which  he  appeared  •,  and  upon  this  prejudice  they 
rejected  him,  and  put  him  to  death,  and  perfecuted 
his  followers  ;  and  though  their  religion  was  much 
nearer  to  the  Chriftian,  than  any  of  the  heathen  ido- 
latries •,  yet  upon  this  account,  of  our  Saviour's 
mean  appearance,  they  were  much  more  averfe  to 
the  entertainment  of  it,  than  the  grofleft  idolaters 
among  the  nations. 

Vol.  V.  98  Not 

5- 


1158  T'he  general  and  effectual  publication 

E^^J^-       Not  but  that  their  prejudice  alfo  was  very  great; 
the  common  people  being  llrongly  addided  to  the 
idolatry  and  fuperilitions  of  their  feveral  countries  ; 
and  the  wifer,  and  more  learned  (whom  they  call'd 
philofophers)  were  fo  puft  up,    with  a  conceit  of 
their  own  knowledge  and  eloquence,  that  they  de- 
fpifed  the  rudenefs  and  firnplicity  of  the  apoflles,  and 
look'd  upon  their  doclrine  of  a  crucified  Saviour, 
as  ridiculous,  and  the  llory  of  his  refurredion  from 
the  dead  as  abfurd  and  impolTible.     So  St.  Paul  tells 
us,  "  that  the  crofs  of  Christ  was  to  the  Jews  a 
^'  ftumbling-block,  and  to  the  Greeks  foolifhnefs.'* 
But  befides  the  oppofition  which  the  gofpei  met 
withal,  from  the  lufts  and  prejudices  of  men,  the 
powers  of  the  v/orld  did  likewife  flrongly  combine 
againfl  it.     Among  the  Jews,  the  chief  priefts  and 
rulers  did,  with  all  their  force  and  malice,  endeavour 
to  ftifle  it  in  the  birth,  and  to  fupprefs  it  in  it's  firft 
rife  ;  and  feveral  of  the  Roman  emperors,  who  where 
then  the  great  governors  of  the  world,  engaged  all 
their  authority,  and  their  whole  ftrength,  for  the  ex- 
tirpation of  it,  and  raifed  fuch  a  florm  of  perfecution 
againfl  it,  as  fwept  away  greater  numbers  of  man- 
kind, '  than  any  famine  or  plague  or  war  that  ever 
was  in  the  Roman  empire :  and  yet  this  religion  bore 
up  againfl:  all  this  oppofition,  and  made  it's  way 
through  all  the  refiilance,  that  the  lufts  and  preju- 
dices of  men,  armed  with  the  power  and  authority 
of  the  whole  world,  could  make  againfl  it.  And  this 
brings  me  to  the 

5.  And  lafl  confideration  I  mentioned,  the  great 
difcouragement  that  was  given  to  the  entrance  of  this 
religion. 

There  was  nothing  left  to  invite  and  engage  men 
to  it,  but  the  confideration  of  another  world  i  for 

all 


of  the  gofpel  by  the  apojiles.  ^^  ^9 

all  the  evils  of  this  world  threatned  every  one  that  S  E  R  M, 

LXXIV 
took    the    profefTion    of     chriilianity    upon    him. 

Whoever  was  known  to  be  a  Chriftian  was  liable 
to  reproach  and  ruin,  to  cruel  mockings  and  fcourg- 
ings,  to  banifhment,  or  imprifonment  and  confifca- 
tion  of  eflate  ;  but  thefe  were  flight  and  tolerable 
evils,  in  comparifon  of  others  that  Were  commonly 
infli6ted  upon  them ;  they  v/ere  condemned  to  the 
mines,  and  to  the  lions,  and  all  imaginable  cruelties 
were  exercifcd  upon  them  ;  the  moft  exquifite  tor- 
ments that  could  be  devifed,  and  death  in  all  it's  fear- 
ful fliapes  was  prefented  to  them,  to  deter  men  from 
embracing  this  religion,  and  to  tempt  them  to  quitT 
it :  and  yet  they  perfifled  in  the  profeffon  of  their 
religion,  and  for  the  fake  of  it,  did  not  only  "  take 
"  joyfully  the  fpoiling  of  their  goods,"  but  the  moil 
barbarous  ufage  of  their  perfons,  and  demeaned  them- 
felves  not  only  with  patience  and  courage,  but  in 
exultation  and  triumph,  under  thofe  tortures  which 
no  man  can  hear  or  read  of,  without  horror  :  and  they" 
did  not  only  bear  up  this  manfully,  for  one  brunt  i 
but  when  thefe  violent  perfecutions  were  renewed  and 
repeated  upon  them,  chriftianity  fupported  itfelf  un-^ 
der  all  thefe  daunting  difcouragements  for  almoft 
three  hundred  .years,  and  held  out,  till  the  very  ma^ 
lice  of  their  perfecutors  was  out  of  breath,  and  their- 
cruelty  had  tired  itfelf 

Nay  it  did  not  only  fupport  itfelf,  under  all  thefe 
oppofitions,  but  grew  and  profpered,  and  the  blood 
of  martyrs  became  the  feed  of  th€  church,  and  Chri-- 
flians  fprang  up  faller,  than  any  pet fecu tion  could 
mow  them  down  :  for  men  by  degrees  became  curi- 
ous to  enquire  into  the  caufe  of  fach  fufFerings,  and, 
the  reafon  of  fo  much  conftancy  and  patience  under 
them  J  and  upon  enquiry  were  fatisfied,  and  becam'e 

9  S  2  Chjriftia^^ 


1 6  o  ^he  geiieral  and  effe5iual  publicatmi 

R  M.  Chriilians  themfelves  •,  and  many  times  their  very 
perfccutors  were  ready  to  facrifice  their  Uves  the  next 
day,  for  that  very  caufe  for  which  but  the  day  be- 
fore they  had  put  others  to  death. 

And  it  cannot  here  be  reafonably  objeded,  that 
Chriilians  yielded  up  themfelves  to  all  thefe  fuffer- 
ings,  upon  the  fame  account  that  fome  brave  fpirits 
among  the  heathen  laid  down  their  lives  for  their 
country  ^  namely,  out  of  a  defire  of  fame,  and  to 
perpetuate  their  names  in  after- ages  •,  this,  I  fay,  can- 
not reafonably  be  faid  in  this  cafe  ;  becaufe  thefe  fuf- 
ferers  were   not  the  great  and  ambitious  fpirits,  the 
fiOwer  and  fele6l  part  of  mankind,  but  the  common 
people,  and  many  of  them  of  the  tenderer  fex  and 
age,  who  have  ufualiy  a  greater  fenfe  of  pain  than 
of  glory  j    and  yet  fo  w^re  they  animated  by  their 
religion,  and  tranfport^d  beyond  themfelves,  as  not 
only  to  fubmit,  but  miny  times  to  offer  themfelves 
to  thofe  fufferings,  bV  declaring  themfelves  to  be 
Chriilians,  when  no  nian  accufed  them,  and  when 
they  knew  tliey  fhould  die,  for  making  that  profef- 
fion  ;  fo  that  it  is  harder  to  juilify  their  forwardnefs 
to  fuffer,  than  the  fincerity  of  their  fufferings.     Be- 
fides,  that  nothing  could  be  more  foolifh,  and  un- 
reafonable,  than  for  men  to  hope  to  get  a  nam.e  by 
fuffering  in  a  croud,  and  to  be  particularly  remem- 
bred  to  poilerity,  when  they  died  in  fuch  multitudes, 
that  no  man  knew  the  names  of  the  greateft  part  of 
the  fufferers. 

You  fee  then  how  ilrongly  the  gofpel  prevailed, 
how  foon  this  new  religion  over- ran  the  world,  how 
Suddenly  it  fubdued  the  fpirits,  and  changed  the 
manners  of  men  \  and  by  what  mean  and  defpicablc 
inilaiments,  to  all  human  appearance,  this  great 
work  was  doncj  and  how  ia  defpite  of  all  oppofi- 

tion 


LXXIV. 


of  the  gofpel  by  the  apojlles.  1 1 6 1 

tion  and  difcouragemcnts,  it  was  carried  on.  Can  ^^^^3^??' 
any  one  of  the  falfe  religions  of  the  world  pretend  to 
have  been  propagated  and  eftabhih'd  in  fuch  a  man- 
ner, merely  by  their  own  force,  and  the  evidence 
and  power  of  truth  upon  the  minds  of  men  •,  and  to 
have  born  up  and  fuftained  themfelves  fo  long  under 
fuch  fierce  afifaults,  as  chriftianity  hath  done  ? 

As  for  the  religion  of  Mahomet,  it  is  famoufly 
known  to  have  been  planted  by  force  at  firft,  and  to 
have  been  maintained  in  the  world,  by  the  fame 
violent  means.  So  that  great  impoftor  openly  de- 
clares, that  he  came  not  to  plant  his  religion  by  mi- 
racles, but  by  the  fword. 

And  as  for  the  idolatries  of  the  heathen,  they  came 
in  upon  the  world  by  infenfible  degrees,  and  did  not 
oppofe  the  corruptions  of  men,  but  grew  out  of 
them ;  and  being  fuited  to  the  vicious  temper  and 
difpofition  of  mankind,  they  eafily  gained  upon  their 
ignorance  and  fuperftition,  by  cuftom  and  example. 
They  were  juft  fuch  a  corruption  of  natural  religion, 
in  fuch  times  of  darknefs  and  ignorance,  and  by  fuch 
infenfible  fbeps,  as  there  hath  been  fince,  of  the  chri- 
ftian  religion  in  fome  parts  of  the  world,  which  we 
all  know.  But  no  fooner  did  the  light  of  the  gofpel 
fhine  out  upon  the  world,  but  the  idolatry  and  fu- 
perfl:ition  of  the  heathen  fell  before  it,  like  "Dagon 
"  before  the  ark  of  God  i"  and  though  it  had  the 
power  of  the  world,  and  countenance  of  authority  on 
it's  fide,  yet  it  was  not  able  to  maintain  it's  groun<i  •, 
and  no  fooner  was  that  prop  taken  away,  which  was 
the  only  fupport  of  it,  but  it  prefently  funk  and  va- 
nifli'd  ;  it  was  not  driven  out  of  the  world  by  vio- 
lence and  perfecution,  but  upon  the  breaking  in  of 
fo  great  a  light,  it  filently  withdrew,  as  being  afham- 
ed  of  itfclf :  and  when  afterwards  the  emperor  Julian 

3  endea- 


1 1 6  2  ^Je  general  and  effectual  publication 

S  E  R  M.  endeavoured  to  retrieve  it,  by  his  wit  and  authority^ 
and  ufed  all  imaginable  arts  and  ftratagems,  to  fup- 
prefs  and  extinguifh  chriftianity,  he  was  able  to  effect 
neither  -,  for  the  chriftian  religion  kept  it's  ground, 
and  paganifm,  after  it  had  made  a  little  blaze,  died 
with  him. 

Now  to  what  caufe  fhall  we  afcribe  this  wonderful 
fuccefs,  and  prevalency  of  the  gofpel  in  the  world  ? 
There  can  but  thefe  two  be  imagined ;  the  excellency 
of  the  chriftian  religion,  and  the  power  and  prefence 
of  the  divine  Spirit  accompanying  it. 

1.  The  excellency  of  the  chriftiaa  religion,  which 
both  in  relped;  of  the  goodnefs  of  it's  precepts,  and 
the  alTurance  of  it's  rewards,  hath  plainly  the  advan- 
tage of  any  religion,  that  ever  yet  appeared  in  the 
world.  And  this  is  a  great  advantage  indeed  :  but 
by  this  alone  it  could  never  have  been  able  to  have 
broken  through  all  that  mighty  oppofition  and  re- 
fiftance,  which  was  made  againft  it  j  and  therefore 
tliat  it  might  be  able  to  encounter  this  with  fuccefs. 

2.  God  was  pleafed  to  accompany  the  firft  preach- 
ing of  it,  with  a  mighty  and  fenfible  prefence  and 
power  of  his  fpirit.     And  this  brings  me  to  the 

Second  part  of  the  text,  the  reafon  of  the  wonder- 
ful efficacy  and  fuccefs,  which  the  apoftles  had,  in  the 
preaching  of  the  gofpel ;  "  the  Lord  wrought  with 
*'  them,  and  confirmed  the  word  with  figns  folio w- 
"  ing."  Which  words  exprefs  to  us  that  miracu- 
lous power  of  the  Holy  Ghoft,  which  accompanied 
the  firft  preaching  of  the  gofpel ;  by  which  I  do  not 
intend  to  exclude  the  inward  operation  of  God's  ho- 
ly Spirit  upon  the  minds  of  men,  fecretly  moving  and 
iuclining  thofe  to  whom  the  gofpel  was  preached,  to 
embrace  and  entertain  it  •,  which  the  fcripture  elfe- 
where  fpeaks  frequently  of,  and   may  poflibly  be 

intended 


of  the  gofpel  by  the  apoftks,  ^^  163 

intended  in  the  firft  of  thefe  expreflions,  "  the  Lord  ^  E  R  M. 
''  working  with  them  •/'  and  the  latter  may  only  be 
meant  of  the  miraculous  gifts  of  the  Spirit,  with  re- 
gard to  which,  God  is  faid  to  "  confirm  the  word 
*'  with  figns  following,*'  or  accompanying  it.  But 
I  rather  think  they  are  both  intended  to  exprefs  the 
fame  thing,  and  that  the  latter  is  only  added  by  way 
of  explication  of  the  former,  to  ihew  more  particu- 
larly, how  the  Lord  wrought  with  them;  namely, 
by  giving  confirmation  to  their  do6lrine  by  thofe  mi- 
raculous gifts  and  powers  of  the  Spirit,  which  they 
were  endowed  withal  •,  "  the  Lord  working  with 
"  them,  and  confirming  the  word  with  figns  follow- 
*'  ing  ;"  that  is,  with  thofe  miracles,  which  accom- 
panied the  firft  preaching  of  the  gofpel.  For  thcle 
words  do  plainly  refer  to  the  promife  of  the  Spirit  at 
xht  17th  verfe  ;  "  and  thefe  figns  fhall  follow  them 
-*'  that  believe ;"  which  is  the  reafon  why  they  are 
here  called  figns  following  -,  that  is,  miracles  which 
accompanied  the  word  that  was  preached. 

And  that  this  is  the  full  meaning  of  this  text,  will 
appear  by  comparing  it  v/ith  one  or  two  more,  Rom. 
XV.  18,  19.  where  St.  Paul  fpeaking  of  "  the  things 
"  which  Christ  had  wrought  by  him,  to  make  the 
"  Gentiles  obedient  to  the  gofpel,  he  fays,  they  were 
''  done  through  mighty  figns  and  wonders,  by  the 
"  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God  ;"  which  is  the  fame 
with  that  which  is  faid  here  in  the  text,  of  '^  the 
"  Lord's  working  with  the  apoftles,  and  confirming 
'^  the  word  with  figns  following."  So  likewife, 
Heb.  ii.  3,  4.  the  apoftle  there  tells  us,  that  "  the 
"  gofpel  which  was  firft  fpoken  by  the  Lord,  was 
''  confirmed  by  them  that  heard  him,  God  alfo  bear- 
*'  ing  them  witnefs,  both  with  figns  and  wonders, 
"  and  with  divers  miracles  and  gifts  of  the  Holy 

"  Ghoft.'* 


LXXIV. 


1 1 64  T'/J^  general  and  eJ^eEliial publication 

SERM.  ««  Ghofl."  So  that  the  great  confirmation,  which 
is  faid  here  to  be  given  to  the  gofpel,  was  by  the  mi- 
raculous gifts  of  the  Spirit,  which  were  poured  forth 
upon  the  apoftles  and  primitive  Chriftians. 

In  fpeaking  of  which,  I  fliall  briefly  do  thefe  two 
things. 

I.  Give  an  account  of  the  nature  of  thefe  gifts,  and 
of  the  ufe  and  end  to  which  they  ferved :  and  then 
fhew  in  the 

II.  Place,  how  the  gofpel  was  confirmed  by  them. 
I.  For  the  nature  of  thefe  gifts,  and  the  ufe  and 

end  to  which  they  were  defigned. 

They  are  thofe  miraculous  powers  which  by  the 
defcent  of  the  HolyGhoft  upon  the  day  of  Pentecofl, 
the  apoftles  were  endowed  withal,  .  to  qualify  them 
to  publifli  the  gofpel  with  more  fpeed  and  fuccefs. 
Such  was  the  gift  of  fpeaking  divers  languages,  and 
die  gift  of  interpreting  things  fpoken  in  divers  lan- 
guages ;  (and  thefe  two  gifts  were  not  necelTarily  u- 
nited  in  the  fame  perfon,  for  the  apoftle  tells  us, 
thatfome  had  the  one,  andfome  the  other  •,)  the  gift 
of  prophecy  and  foretelling  things  to  come,  which 
was  always  a  fign  of  a  perfon  divinely  infpired  •,  the 
miraculous  powers  of  healing  difeafes,  of  raifing  the 
dead,  and  of  cafting  out  devils  ;  a  power  of  inflid:- 
ing  corporal  difeafes,  and  punifhments,  upon  fcan- 
dalous  and  obflinate  Chriftians,  who  would  not  fub- 
mit  to  the  apoftles  authority  and  government  •,  which 
is  in  fcripture  called  -,  "  a  delivering  up  to  Satan,  for 
"  the  deftru6lion,"  or  tormenting  "  of  the  body, 
*'  that  the  foul  may  be  faved ;"  nay,  in  fome  cafes, 
this  power  extended  to  the  inflifting  of  death  itfelf, 
as  in  the  cafe  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira. 

Not  that  all  thefe  miraculous  powers  were  given 
to  every  one  of  the  apoftles,  or  that  they  could  exer- 

cife 


of  the  go/pel  hy  the  apoftks,  i  i  6  j 

cife  them  at  all  times  •,  fome  were  beftowed  upon  one,  S  E  R  M. 
and  fomc  upon  another,  according  to  God's  good 
pleafure,  and  as  was  moil  expedient  for  the  uie  and 
benefit  of  the  church,  and  mofl  fubfervient  to  thofe 
ends  for  which  God  gave  them  \  only  we  find  that 
all  the  apoflles  had  the  gift  of  tongues  -,  and  that  the 
power  of  "  cafting  out  devii$,  in  the  name  of 
"  Christ,"  was  common  to  every  Chrillian,  and 
continued  in  the  church  for  a  long  time  after  the  o- 
ther  gifts  were  ceafed  ^  as  Tertul.  Arnob.  and  Mino 
Felix  do  teftify^  even  of  their  own  times. 

But  If.  I  ihall  bviefiy  fhew  how  the  gofpel  was 
confirmed  b}  thcfc  miraculous  gifts. 

Now  befides  the  particular  ufes  and  ends  of  thofe 
miraculous  gifts  (as  the  gift  of  tongues,  did  evident- 
ly ferve  for  the  more  fpeedy  planting  and  propagat- 
ing of  the  chriilian  religion  in  the  world  •,  and  the 
power  of  inflid:ing  corporal  punifliments,  in  a  mi- 
raculous manner,  upon  fcandalous  and  difobedient 
Chriflians,  did  maintain  the  power  and  authority  of 
the  apoflles,  and  was  inilead  of  an  ordinary  magi^ 
ftratical  power,  which  Chriitians  were  deflitute  of,^ 
whilil  the  Roman  empire  continued  heathen  ; )  I  fay, 
befides  the  particular  ends  and  ufes  of  all  thefe  m.ira- 
culous  gifts,  they  did  all  in  general,  as  they  were 
miracles,  ferve  for  the  confirmation  of  the  gofpeL 

The  apoflles  delivered  the  dodlrine  of  Christ^" 
and  were  witnefTes  of  his  refurredion  from  the  dead,; 
as  the  great  miracle,  whereby  his  dodrine  was  con- 
firmed 5  now  there  v/as  all  the  reafon  in  the  world  to 
believe  them,  to  whom  God  v/as  pleafed  to  give 
fuch  a  teflimony  from  heaven  :  for  who  could  make- 
any  doubt  of  the  truth  of  their  teftimony,  concern- 
ing the  refurredlion  of  Christ  who  were  enabled 
to  raife  "  others  from  the  dead/'  and  by  many  other 

Vol.  V.  9  T  wonderful 

6. 


1 1 6  6  The  general  and  effectual  publication 

Wx\\r'  ^^^^^'^'^^  things  which  they  did,  gave  fuch  clear  te- 
flimony,  that  "  God  was  with  them?*' 

Never  had  any  reUgion  fewer  worldly  advantages  to 
recommend  it,  and  fo  little  temporal  countenance  and 
afllflance  to  carry  it  on  \  but  what  it  wanted  from  men, 
it  had  from  God  ;  for  "  he  gave  witnefs  to  it  with  figns 
*'  and  wonders,  and  divers  miracles,  and  gifts  of  the 
''  holy  Ghoft."  God  feems  onpurpofe  to  have  ftript 
it  of  all  fecular  advantages,  that  the  chriftian  religion 
might  be  j^erfedly  free  from  all  fufpicion  of  worldly 
intereft  and  defign,  and  that  it  might  not  owe  it's 
eftablifhment  in  the  world,  to  the  wifdom  and  con- 
trivance of  men,  but  to  the  arm  and  power  of  God. 
The  inferences  I  fhall  at  prefent  make  from  this 
difcourfe  fhall"  be  thefe. 

I.  To  give  us  fatisfa6lion  of  the  truth  and  divinity 
of  the  dodlrine  of  the  chriftian  reUgion,  which  hath 
had  fo  eminent  a  confirmation  given  to  it  from  hea- 
ven, and  did  at  it's  firft  fetting  out  fo  ftrangely  pre- 
vail in  the  world,  againft  all  human  probabiUty ; ''  not 
"  by  might,  nor  by  power  \  but  by  the  Spirit  of  the 
"  Lord/' 

No  man  can  well  fuppofe  a  religion  in  circumftan- 
ces  of  greater  difadvantage,  and  upon  all  human  ac- 
counts, more  unlikely  to  fuftain  and  bear  up  itfelf, 
than  the  chriftian  religion  was.  The  firft  appearance 
of  it  was  fo  mean,  and  it's  beginnings  fo  fmall,  that 
no  man  but  would  have  thought  it  would  prefently 
have  come  to  nothing ;  and  no  other  account  can  be 
given  of  the  ftrange  fuccefs  and  prevalency  of  it,  but 
that  "  it  was  of  God,"  and  therefore  "  it  could  not 
"be  overthrown." 

II.  This  difcourfe  may  likewife  fatisfy  us  of  the 
reafon  why  this  miraculous  power,  which  accompa- 
nied the  gofpel  at  firft,  is  now  ceafed  y  becaufe  there 

is 


of  the  go/pel  by  the  apoflks.  1 1 67 

is  not  the  like  reafon  and  necefllty  for  it,    which  S  E  R  M 
there  was  at  firfl.  .  ^^^^ 

\t  was  highly  neccfTary  then,  to  introduce  the 
chriflian  religion  into  the  world,  and  to  be  a  fenlible 
evidence  to  men  of  the  divinity  of  that  new  doctrine, 
which  was  preached  to  them ,  but  now  that  the  gof- 
pel  is  generally  entertained,  there  is  not  the  fame  rea- 
fon, why  this  miraculous  power  fhould  flill  be  con- 
tinued. Acquiftto  fine^  cejjant  media  ed  finem^  when 
the  end  is  once  obtained,  the  means  ceafe  ;  and  the 
wife  God,  who  is  never  wanting  in  what  is  necelTary, 
does  not  ufe  to  be  lavifh  in  that  which  is  fuperfluous. 
Now  that  the  chriflian  religion  hath  got  firm  foot- 
ing in  the  world ;  God  leaves  it  to  be  propagated 
and  advanced  by  it's  own  rational  force  upon  the 
minds  of  men  :  now  that  the  prejudices  of  education 
in  a  contrary  religion  are  removed,  and  the  powers 
of  the  world  are  reconciled  to  chriflianity  ;  there  is 
no  need  of  fuch  violent  and  extraordinary  means  for 
the  continuance  of  it :  now  that  it  fbands  upon  equal 
advantages  with  other  religions  :  God  hath  left  it  to 
be  carried  on,  in  more  humane  and  ordinary  ways,  aiid 
fuch  as  are  more  level  and  accommodate  to  the  na- 
ture of  man. 

That  miracles  are  longlinceceafed,  is  acknowledg- 
ed by  the  fathers,  who  lived  an  age  or  two  after  tlie 
ceafing  of  them  •,  particularly  by  St.  Chryfbftom,  who 
gives  the  fame  reafon  for  it,  which  I  have  jull  now 
alTigned.  But  the  church  of  Rome  would  Hill  bear 
us  in  hand,  that  this  miraculous  power  does  ftili  con- 
tinue in  their  church,  and  according  to  Beliarmine, 
mufl  always  continue ;  becaufe  he  makes  it  an  infe- 
parable  property  and  mark  of  the  true  church. 

But  we  pretend  to  no  fuch  power,  nor  have  we 

any  reafon  fo  to  do  i  becaufe  all  the  dodrines  of  our 

9  T  2  i^hgionj^ 


LXXIV. 


T 1 6  8  ^he  general  and  effeBual  publication 

S  E  R  M.  religion,  are  the  ancient  do6lrines  of  chriftianity,  de- 
livered by  our  Saviour,  and  by  his  apofllcs  pub- 
lillied  to  the  world  ^  and  thefe  are  fufficiently  con- 
firmed already,  by  the  miracles  which  our  Saviour 
and  his  apoftles  wrought  in  the  primitive  times  of 
chriftianity.     But  the  church  of  Rome  hath  great  oc- 
cafion  and  need  of  new  miracles,  to  confirm  their 
new  dodrines  •,    and  therefore  as  tliey  have  reafon, 
they  ufually  apply  them  to  the  confirmation  of  their 
new  do6frines  •,  fome  to  confirm  purgatory,  and  to 
give  countenance  to  indulgences  ;  others  to  encou- 
rage the  worfhip  of  the  bleffed  virgin,  and  the  faints  ; 
others  to  confirm  that  v/hich  all  the  miracles  in  the 
world  are  not  fuincient  to  confirm,  I  mean  the  doc- 
trine of  tranfubftantiation  ;  which,  becaufe  it  over- 
throws the  certainty  of  fenfe,  is  in  the  nature  of  it 
pecuharly  incapable  of  being  confirmed  by  a  miracle. 
III.    And  laftly,    the  confideration  of  what  has 
been  faid  does  juftly  upbraid  us  that  this  religion, 
which  was  fo  powerful  at  firfb,  and  hath  fuch  cha- 
racters of  divinity  upon  it,  coming  down  to  us  con- 
firmed by  fo  many  miracles,  fhould  yet  have  fo  little 
effed  upon  moft  of  us  who  call  ourfelves  Chrillians. 

We  have  all  the  advantages  of  the  chriftian  reli- 
gion, having  been  educated  and  brought  up  in  it  •, 
and  yet  it  h^th  lefs  effed  upon  us,  than  it  had  upon 
thofe  whofc  minds  wTre  prejudiced,  and  whofe  man- 
ners were  depraved,  by  the  principles  of  a  falfe  reli- 
gion :  for  thofe  who  were  reduced  from  paganifm  to 
chriftianity,  did  on  the  fudden  become  better  men, 
^nd  were  more  holy  and  virtuous  in  their  lives ;  than 
the  greateft  part  of  us,  who  have  been  inflructed  and 
trained  up  all  our  hves  in  the  dodrine  of  chriftianity. 
The  true  reafon  of  v/hich  is,  that  many  of  us  are 
Chriftians,  upon  the  fame  account,  that  they  were  at 

firft 


of  the  gofpel  by  the  apojiles.  1 1 69 

firfl  heathens  •,  becaufe  it  was  the  reHo-ion  of  their  S  E  R  M. 
country,  and  they  were  born  and  bred  up  in  it :  but 
chriftianity  was  the  reUgion  of  their  choice,  and  there 
were  no  motives  to  perfuade  them  to  the  profeiTion 
of  that  rehgion,  but  what  were  as  powerful  to  obUge 
them  to  the  practice  of  it.  Let  us  alfo  be  Chriflians, 
not  only  by  cuftom.,  but  by  choice ;  and  then  we 
fball  live  according  to  our  religion. 

He  that  takes  up  a  religion,  for  any  other  reafon, 
than  to  obey  and  pradlife  it,  does  not  chufe  a  religion, 
but  only  counterfeits  the  choice  of  it.  We  have  be- 
yond comparifon  the  beft  and  moll  rcafonable  reh- 
gion in  the  world,  a  religion  that  hath  the  greateft 
evidenceof  it's  truth,  that  contains  the  beft  precepts, 
and  gives  men  the  greateft  afllirance  of  a  future  hap- 
pinefs,  and  dire6ls  them  to  the  fureft  way  of  attain- 
ing it :  now  the  better  our  rehgion  is,  the  worfe  are 
we,  if  we  be  not  made  good  by  it.  The  philofophy 
of  the  heathen,  made  fome  virtuous  :  and  there  were 
many  eminent  faints  under  the  imperfedion  of  the 
jewifti  inftitution.  What  degrees  then  of  holinefs 
and  virtue  may  be  expe(5Led  from  us,  upon  whom 
the  glorious  light  of  the  gofpel  ftiineth  fo  brightly  ? 

I  will  conclude  all,  with  the  words  of  the  apoftle, 
Heb.  ii.  i,  2,  3,  4.  "  Therefore  we  ought  to  give 
"  the  more  earneft  heed  to  the  things  which  we  have 
*'  heard,  left  at  any  time  we  ftiould  let  them  fiip. 
"  For  if  the  word  fpoken  by  angels  was  ftedfaft,  and 
"-  every  tranfgreftion  and  difobedience  received  a  juft 
"  recompence  of  reward :  how  ftiall  we  efcape  ;  if 
"  we  negle6l  fo  great  falvation,  which  at  the  firft 
"  began  to  be  fpoken  by  the  Lord,  and  was  con- 
"  firmed  unto  us  by  them  that  heard  him  ♦,  God  alfo 
"  bearing  them  witnefs,  both  with  figns  and  wonders, 
*'  and  with,  divers  miracles,  and  gifts  of  the  Holy 
^'  Ghoft,  according  to  his  own  will  ?''  SER- 


jiyo 


The  nature^  ?^^^>  ^^^ 


^::t:'  sermon   lxxv. 

fealt  of  St. 

The  nature,  office,  and  employment  of 
good  angels. 


SERM. 
LXXV. 


HEB.  I.  14. 

xire  they  not  all  mlniftring  fpirits  fan  forth  to  minifter 
for  them  who  jhall  be  heirs  of  falvation  ? 

Til  I  S  is  fpoken  of  good  angels,  whofe  ex- 
iilence,  as  well  as  that  of  evil  fpirits,  the 
fcriptures  both  of  the  old  and  new  teftament,  do 
every  where  take  for  granted,  no  lefs  than  they  do 
the  being  of  God,  and  the  immortality  of  the  foul. 
And  well  they  may,  fince  they  are  all  founded  upon 
the  general  confcnt  of  all  ages,  derived  down  to  us 
from  the  firil  fpring  and  original  of  mankind  ;  of 
which  general  confent  and  tradition,  it  is  one  of  the 
hardeft  things  in  the  world  to  aflign  any  good  rea- 
fon,  if  the  things  themfelves  were  not  true.  There- 
fore I  fhall  not  go  about  to  force  my  way  into  this 
argument  concerning  the  exiilence  of  fpirits,  and  be- 
ings diflincl  from  matter,  by  dint  of  difpute  (which 
perhaps  would  neither  be  fo  proper,  nor  fo  profita- 
ble for  this  alTcmbly)  but  fhall  take  the  thing  as  I 
find  it  received  by  a  general  confent  of  mankind.  And 
fo  the  books  of  divine  revelation  do  :  nor  was  there 
reafon  to  proceed  in  any  other  method,  than  to  fup- 
pofe  thefe  things,  and  take  them  for  granted,  as  ge- 
nerally aifented  to  by  mankind,  without  either  af- 
ferting  them  for  new  difcoveries,  or  attempting  to 

prove 


employment  of  good  angels.  1 1 7 1 

prove  what  was  fo  univerfally  believed.  The  fcrip-  S  E  R  M. 
turcs  indeed  have  more  particularly  declared  the  na- 
ture  of  thefe  fpirits,  as  alfo  their  order  and  employ- 
ment i  as  in  the  words  which  I  have  read  to  you, 
where  the  office  and  employment  of  good  angels  is 
more  particularly  difcovered ;  "  are  they  not  all" 
(fays  the  text)  "  miniftring  fpirits,  fent  forth  to  mi- 
"  nifter  for  them  who  fhall  be  heirs  of  falvation  ?" 

The  author  of  this  epiftle  to  the  Hebrews  having 
had  occafion,  in  comparing  the  two  difpenfations  of 
the  law  and  the  gofpel,  to  fpeak  of  the  angels,  by 
whofe  miniftry  the  law  was  given,  did  not  think  fit 
to  entertain  thofc  to  whom  he  v/rote,  with  any  nice 
and  curious  fpeculations  (for  fchool  divinity  was  not 
then  in  fafhion)  about  the  nature  and  order  of  an- 
gels ;  but  tells  us,  what  it  concerns  us  more  to  know, 
namely,  what  their  office  and  employment  is  in  re- 
gard to  us.  Concerning  their  nature,  he  only  tells 
us,  that  they  are  fpirits  ^  as  to  their  office  and  em- 
ployment, he  fays  in  general,  that  they  are  miniftring 
fpirits,  that  is,  that  they  ftand  before  God  to  attend 
upon  him,  ready  to  receive  his  commands,  and  to 
execute  his  pleafure  :  more  particularly,  that  they 
are  upon  occafion  appointed  and  fent  forth  by  God 
to  minifter  on  the  behalf,  and  to  do  good  offices  "  for 
"  them  that  fhall  be  heirs  of  falvation."  Which 
laft  words  are  a  defcription  of  pious  and  good  men, 
fuch  as  had  fmcerely  embraced  the  chriftian  religion, 
and  were  thereby  become  the  children  of  God,  and 
heirs  of  eternal  falvation.  So  that  thefe  words  are  a 
brief  fummary  of  the  doftrine  of  good  angels,  and 
of  what  the  fcripture  has  thought  fit  to  reveal  to  us 
concerning  them :  which  may  be  referred  to  thefe 
three  heads. 

Firft,  their  nature  ;  "  are  they  not  fpirits  ? 

3  Secondly, 


LXXV. 


11^2  ^he  nature y  office ^  and 

S  E  R  M.      Secondly,  their  general  office  and  employment  j 
"  are  they  not  miniftring  fpirits?" 

Thirdly,  their  fpecial  office  and  employment,  in 
regard  to  good  men,  "  they  are  fent  forth  to  mini- 
''  fler  for  them"  (that  is,  in  their  behalf,  and  for 
their  benefit)  "  who  Ihall  be  heirs  of  falvation." 

And  this  is  as  mxuch  as  is  neceffary  for  us  to  know 
concerning  them  ;  and  all  this  is  very  ^  agreeable  to 
the  general  apprehenfion  of  mankind  ;  but  thefcrip- 
ture  hath  very  much  cleared  and  confirmed  to  us,  that 
which  was  more  obfcure  and  lefs  certain  before.  I 
fliall  briefly  explain  and  illuflrate  thefe  three  heads, 
and  then  draw  fome  ufeful  inferences  from  the  whole. 

Firft,  for  their  nature  •,  they  are  fpirits.  This  is 
univerfally  agreed  by  all  that  acknowledge  fuch  an 
order  of  beings,  that  they  are  fpirits  :  but  whether 
they  are  pure  fpirits,  divefted  of  matter,  and  all 
kind  of  corporeal  vehicle  (as  the  philofophers  term 
it)  hath  been  a  great  controverfy,  but  I  think  of  no 
great  moment  and  confequence.  Not  only  the  an- 
cient philofophers,  but  fome  of  the  ancient  chriftian 
fathers,  did  believe  angels  to  be  clothed  with  fome 
kind  of  bodies,  confifting  of  the  purefl  and  fineft 
matter  -,  which  they  call  aetherial.  And  this  opinion 
feems  to  be  grounded  upon  a  pious  beUef,  that  it  is 
the  peculiar  excellency  and  prerogative  of  the  divine 
nature,  to  be  a  pure  and  fimple  fpirit,  wholly  fepa- 
rate  from  matter  :  but  the  more  current  opinion  of 
the  chriflian  church  (efpecially  of  latter  times)  hath 
been,  that  angels  are  mere  and  pure  fpirits,  without 
any  thing  that  is  material  and  corporeal  belonging  to 
them  \  but  yet  fo,  that  they  have  a  power  to  affume 
thin  and  airy  bodies,  and  can  when  they  pleafe  ap- 
pear in  human  Ihape,  as  they  are  frequently  in  fcrip- 
ture  faid  to  have  done.  And  this  feems  moll  agree- 
able 


employment  of  gooil  a'ngeh.  ^  ^ 73 

able  to  the  fcripture  account  of  them  ;  though  I  think  ^j  ySJ!^* 
it  is  no  neceiTary  article  of  faith,  either  to  believe  that 
they  are  clothed  with  fome  kind  of  bodies,  or  that 
they  ai*'e  wholly  divefted  of  matter. 

But  however  this  be,  they  are  defcribed  in  fcrip- 
ture to  be  endowed  with  great  excellencies  and  per- 
fections ;  they  are  faid  "  to  excel  in  flrength,"  PfaL 
ciii.  20.  and  in  knov/ledge  and  wifdom.  Hence  are 
thofc  expreffions  of  "  being  as  an  angel  of  God,  to 
"  difcerngood  and  bad,*'  2  Sam.  xiv.  17.  "Wife, 
"  according  to  the  wifdom  of  an  angel,"  ver.  20. 
To  be  of  great  adivity  and  fvviftnefs  in  their  mo- 
tions \  hence  it  is  that  they  are  reprefented  in  fcrip- 
ture, as  "full  of  wings  :"  and  to  excel  in  purity  and 
holinefs  ;  hence  is  that  title  given  them  in  fcripture, 
of  "  the  holy  angels."  This  is  the  fum  of  what  the 
fcripture  hath  in  feveral  places  delivered  to  us,  con- 
cerning the  nature  and  properties  of  good  angels  ; 
and  beyond  this,  all  our  knowledge  of  them  is  mere 
conjedure  and  uncertainty  •,  and  the  nice  fpeculations 
concerning  them,  idle  and  wanton  curiofities.  In- 
deed the  fcripture  gives  fufiicient  intimation  of  feve- 
ral ranks  and  orders  among  them,  by  calling  Michael 
an  archangel,  and  chief  prince,  and  by  diftinguifh- 
ing  them  by  the  names  of  "  principaHties,  and  pow- 
"  ers,  and  thrones,  and  dominions :"  but  what  the 
difference  of  thcfe  names  import,  though  fome  have 
attempted  to  explain,  yet  I  do  not  iind  that  they 
have  difcovered  any  thing  to  us,  beudes  their  own 
ignorance  and  arrogance,  in  pretending  to  be  "  wife 
"  above  what  is  written  ;  intruding  into  thofe  things 
"  which  they  have  not  feen,  being  vainly  puft  up 
"  in  their  fiellily  minds-,"  as  the  apoille  cenfures 
fome  in  his  time. 

Vol.  V.  9  U  Secondly, 

6. 


l^he  nature^  ?/^^^,  ^^d 

Secondly,  we  have  here  their  general  office  and 
employment  j  "they  are  miniftring  fpirits  ;"  they  are 
(as  I  may  fay)  domeftick  fervants,  and  conftant  at- 
tendants upon  that  great  and  glorious  king,  "  whofe 
*'  throne  is  in  the  lieavens,  and  whofe  kingdom 
*'  ruleth  over  all ;  they  fland  continually  before  him, 
*'  to  behold  his  face,"  expeding  his  commands, 
and  in  a  conftant  readinefs  to  do  his  will.  For  though 
the  omnipotence  of  God,  and  his  perfedl  power  of 
acting  be  fuch,  that  he  can  do  all  things  immediate- 
ly by  himfelf,  "  wliatcver  he  pleafeth  in  heaven  and 
"  in  earth ;"  can  govern  the  world,  and  fteer  the 
affairs  of  it,  and  turn  them  which  way  he  thinks  beft, 
by  the  leaft  nod  and  beck  of  his  will,  without  any 
inftruments  or  minifters  of  his  pleafure  ;  yet  his  wif- 
dom  and  goodnefs  has  thought  fit  to  honour  his 
creatures,  elpecially  this  higher  and  more  perfe6b 
rank  of  beings,  with  his  commands,  and  to  make 
them,  according  to  their  feveral  degrees  and  capaci- 
ties, the  prdinary  minifters  of  his  affairs,  in  the  rule 
and  government  of  this  inferior  world  ;  and  this 
not  for  his  own  eafe  (for  to  infinite  power  nothing 
can  be  difncult  or  troublefom)  but  for  their  happi- 
nefs  ;  and  he  therefore  employs  them  in  his  work 
and  fervice,  that  they  may  be  capable  of  his  favour 
and  rewards. 

And  that  the  angels  of  God  are  the  great  mini- 
Hers  of  his  providence  here  in  the  world,  hath  not 
only  been  the  conftant  tradition  of  all  ages  ;  but  is 
very  frequently  and  plainly  afferted  in  fcripture.  In 
the  old  teftament  we  often  read  that  God  employed 
his  angels  to  be  the  meffengers  of  his  will  and  plea- 
fure to  men :  and  to  carry  good  tidings  and  comfort- 
able news  to  them  upon  feveral  occafions  :  as  to 
Abraham,  tp  fgr^te]  tte  miraculous  birth  of  his  fon 

Ifaac  J 


LXXV. 


employment  of  good  migeh,  ^  ^75 

Ifaac  ;  and  afterwards  to  refcue  him  from  being  facri-  S_K  R  M. 
iiced  :  to  Jacob,  when  he  was  fo  afraid  of  his  bro- 
ther Efau  :  to  Manoah  and  his  wife,  to  foretel  the 
birth  of  Sampfon,  the  great  deliverer  of  Ifrael  from 
the  Philiflines :  and  upon  that  great  occafion  of  bring- 
ing the  people  of  Ifrael  out  of  Egypt,  and  condu6ling 
them  through  the  wildernefs,  he  fent  a  great  and 
mighty  angel  (called  "  the  angel  of  his  prefence*')  to 
go  before  them,  and  guide  them  in  their  way :  and 
the  apoftle  tells  us,  that  "  the  law  was  delivered  to 
"  them  upon  mount  Sinai  by  the  difpofition  of 
"  angels." 

On  the  other  hand,  God  frequently  made  them 
the  meffengers  of  his  wrath,  and  inftrunients  of  his 
vengeance.  Thus  he  fent  them  to  foretel,  and  to 
execute  that  terrible  deftru6lion  upon  Sodom  and 
Gomorrah.  And  he  fent  a  deftroying  angel  to  bran- 
difh  his  fword  in  a  vifible  manner  over  Jerufalem, 
and  to  fmite  them  with  the  peftilence,  for  David's 
fin  in  numbering  the  people.  And  by  the  miniftry 
of  an  angel  he  flew  in  the  camp  of  the  Affyrians  in 
one  night,  an  hundred  and  eighty  five  thouiand. 
And  Ads  xii.  23.  it  is  faid,  that  "  the  angel  of  the 
"  Lord  fmote  Herod,"  for  receiving  the  blafphe- 
mous  acclamations  of  the  people. 

Nay,  the  angels  fhall  be  the  inftmments  and  ex- 
ecutioners of  God's  vengeance  upon  the  wicked,  at 
the  judgment  of  the  great  day.  So  the  judge  him- 
felf  tells  us,  Matth.  xiii.  49,  50.  "  So  fliall  it  be  at 
''  the  end  of  the  world  •,  the  angels  fhall  come  forth 
''  and  fever  the  wicked  from  among  the  juft,  and 
*'  fhall  cafl  them  into  the  furnace  of  fire  ;  there  lliall 
''  be  wailing,  and  gnafhing  of  teeth. 

And  that  particular  angels  do  prefide  over  empires 
and  kingdoms,  and  fway  the  weighty  affairs  of  them ; 

9  U  2  and 


1 176  Tthe  nature^  ?^^^>  ^^^^ 

^T\^^*  ^"^  ^y  ^  iccret  and  invifible  hand  manage  and  bring 
about  great  changes  and  revokitlons,  both  Jews 
and  Chriftians  have  collefted  with  great  probability 
and  confent  from  Daniel  x.  where  there  is  men- 
tion made  of  the  prince  of  the  kingdom  of  Per- 
fia  withllanding  the  angel  that  was  fent  to  Daniel, 
and  of  Michael  a  chief  prince  afiifling  him.  And 
of  this  minifiry  of  angels,  in  the  government  of 
kingdoms,  Clem.ens  Alexandiinns  fpeaks,  as  of  a 
thing  out  of  all  controverfy.     I  proceed  to  the 

Third  thing,  which  I  principally  intended,  and 
feems  to  be  chiefly  defigned  in  the  text :  and  this 
is  the  fpecial  ofHce  and  employment  of  good  an- 
gels, in  regard  to  good  men  ;  and  for  this  the  apo- 
ftle  exprefly  tells  us,  that  "  they  are  fent  forth  to 
"  minifler  for  them"  (that  is,  in  their  behalf,  and 
for  their  benefit)  "  who  fhall  be  heirs  of  falvation." 
In  which  words  there  are  three  things  very  confidera- 
ble  for  our  inftrudiion  and  comfort. 

1.  Their  particular  cefignation  and  appointment 
for  this  employment,  exprefs'd  inthefe  words,  "  fent 
"  forth,"  ^Vc9!rAAc/^gvo;,  as  if  they  were  particular- 
ly commifiioned  and  appointed  by  God  for  this  very 
end.  God  himfclf  doth  fuperintcnd  all  affairs,  and 
by  his  particular  defignation  and  command,  the  an- 
gels do  fulfil  his  word,  and  execute  the  pleafure  of 
his  good  will  towards  us.  Hence  it  is  fo  frequently 
faid  in  fcripture,  that  God  fent  his  angel  to  fuch  or 
fuch  a  perfon,  for  fuch  or  fuch  purpofes. 

2.  You  have  here  the  general  end  of  their  employ- 
ment ;  for  good  men  ^  they  are  fent  forth  on  our 
behalf,  and  for  our  benefit  ^  to  take  care  of  us  and 
protect  us,  to  fuccour  and  comfort,  to  dirc6l  and 
afTiil,  to  rcfcuc  and  deliver  us. 

3.  Flere 


employment  of  good  angels.  '^'^77 

3.  Here  is  the  more  fpecial  end  of  their  employ-  S  E  R  M, 
ment  in  regard  to  good  men,  interned  in  thofe 
words,  "  for  them  who  fhall  be  heirs  of  falvation  ♦," 
hereby  iignifying,  that  the  angels  are  employed  about 
good  men,  with  regard  more  particularly  to  their 
eternal  happinefs,  and  for  the  conducing  and  fur- 
thering of  the  great  affair  of  their  everlailing  falva- 
tion. This  certainly  is  our  greateil  concernment ; 
and  therefore  they  have  a  more  particular  charge  and 
care  of  us  in  regard  to  this. 

It  v/as  a  common  opinion  among  the  Heathen, 
and  a  conftant  and  firmly  beheved  tradition  among 
the  Jews,  (the  Sadducees  only  excepted,  who  did 
not  believe  there  were  angels  or  fpirits)  that   every 
man  (at  leaft  every  good  man)  had  a  guardian  an- 
gel appointed  him  by  God,  to  take  a  fpecial  care  of 
him  and  his  concernments,  both  fpiritual  and  tem- 
poral ;  to  guard  him  fromi  dangers,  to  direct  and 
profper  him  in  his  way,  and  to  comfort  and  deliver 
him  in  his  afflidion  and  difbrefs.     And  therefore  we 
find  among  the  jewilh  prayers,  ufed  by  them  at  this 
day,  a  particular   prayer,  wherein  they   requeft  of 
God,  to  command  the  angels  who  have  the  care  of 
human  affairs,  to  help  and  affifl,  to  preferve  and 
deliver  them.     'But  efpecially  they  beheved  good 
angels,  in  their  attendance  upon  good  m^en,  to  be 
very  adive  and  dihgent  to  incline  them  to  good,  and 
to  encourage  them  therein,  by  holy  emotions  and 
fuggeftions,  by  fecret  comfort  and  affiftances,  and  by 
oppofing  evil  fpirits,  and  defending  us  againft  their 
affauks,  and   by  countermining  their  malicious  de- 
figns  and  attempts  upon  us.     And  accordingly  We 
find  that;,  the  beff  men  among  the  Jews  did  ftedfaftly 
believe,  if  not  the  particular  guardianfhip  of  angels, 
and  that  every  good  man  had  his  particular  angel  af- 

figned 


1 178  I'he  nature^  office ^  and 

^T  yxrv  ^^S"^^  ^^  ^^^  W  God,  to  take  the  particular  charge 
of  him  ;  yet  the  common  miniilry  of  good  angels, 
about  good  men  ;  and  their  more  efpecial  care  of 
particular  perfons,  upon  particular  and  great  occa- 
iions,  to  proted  them  from  temporal  evils,  and  to 
promote  and  profper  their  temporal  affliirs  and  con- 
cernments. 

Of  this  Abraham,  "  the  father  of  the  faithful,"  and 
"  the  friend  of  God,"  was  mofl  firmly  perfuaded  (at 
leaft  in  matters  of  great  moment  and  concernment 
to  us)  as  appears  by  his  difcourfe  with  his  fteward, 
when  he  was  fending  him  to  treat  of  a  match  for  his 
fon.  Gen.  xxiv.  40.  '^  The  Lord  (fays  he)  before 
"  whom  I  walk,  will  fend  his  angel  with  thee,  and 
"  profper  thyway."  And  David  the  '*man  after  God's 
*'  own  heart,"  does  more  than  once  declare  his  confi- 
dent belief  of  the  watchful  care  and  miniftry  of  an- 
gels about  good  men,  Pfal.  xxxiv.  and  7.  "  The 
"  angel  of  the  Lord  encampeth  about  them  that  fear 
''  him,  and  delivereth  them."  AndPf.  xci,  11,12. 
fpeaking  of  the  good  man,  whoputteth  his  tmil,  and 
confidence  in  God,  he  tells  him  for  his  comfort  and 
fecurity,  that  the  holy  angels  have  a  particular  charge 
of  him  to  preferve  him  from  all  the  mifchiefs  and 
dangers  to  which  he  is  expofed  j  *^  he  fnall  give  his 
'*  angels  charge  over  thee,  to  keep  thee  in  all  thy 
^'  ways  ;  they  fhall  bear  thee  up  in  their  hands,  left 
"  thou  dalli  thy  foot  againft  a  ftone." 

So  that  according  to  the  perfuafion  of  thofe  two 
excellent  perfons,  and  of  greateft  renown  for  piety 
in  all  the  old  teftament,  very  much  of  the  fafety  and 
the  fuccefs  of  good  men,  even  in  their  temporal 
concernments,  is  to  be  afcribed  to  the  vigilant  care 
and  protedion  of  good  angels.  And  though  this 
be  feldom  vifible  and  fenfible  to  us,  yet  we  have 

great 


employment  of  good  angels,  ^  ^79 

great  reafon,  upon  fo  great  teftimonies,  to  aflent  to  ^  E  R  -^. 

the  truth  of  it.     And  there  is  no  reafon  I  think  to  , * 

doubt,  but  that  God's  care  extends  now  to  Chri- 
flians,  as  well  as  it  did  to  the  Jews ;  and  that  the 
angels  have  as  much  kindnefs  for  us,  as  they  had  for 
the  Jews  •,  and  there  is  no  reafon  to  think,  that  the 
angels  are  now  either  dead  or  idle. 

Our  Saviour  tells  us,  that  they  cannot  die  ;  and 
our  reafon  tells  us  that  a  pure  fpirit  is  an  adlive  prin- 
ciple ;  and  the  fcripture  reprefents  angels  as  all  flame 
and  wings.  Evil  fpirits  are  believed  by  Chriilians 
to  be  as  active  now,  to  all  purpofes  of  harm  and 
mifchief,  as  ever :  and  why  fhould  any  man  imagine, 
that  good  fpirits  are  not  as  intent  and  bufy  to  do 
good  .^  The  apoftle  (I  am  fure)  tells  us  in  the  text, 
that  the  angels  in  common  (all  of  them)  do  employ 
their  fervice  about  us,  and  wait  to  do  good  offices  to 
us  ;  "  are  they  not  all  (fays  he)  miniilring  fpirits, 
^'  fent  forth  to  minifler  for  them  that  fhall  be  heirs 
''  offaJvationP'' 

And  our  Saviour,  Matt,  xviii.  lo.  feems  to  ap- 
prove and  confirm  the  tradition  of  the  Jews,  con- 
cerning particular  guardian  angels  belonging  to  every 
one  that  believed  in  him,  that  is,  to  every  Chriflian  ; 
"  Take  heed  (fays  he)  that  ye  defpife  not  one  of 
*'  thefe  little  ones  ;  for  I  fay  unto  you,  that  in  hea- 
*'  ven,  their  angels  always  behold  the  face  of  my 
"  Father  which  is  in  heaven."  And  this  feems  like- 
wife  to  have  been  a  received  opinion  among  the  firft 
Chriftians  ;  for  we  find,  Adls  xii.  15.  that  when  Pe- 
ter was  miraculoufly  releafed  out  of  prifon  by  an 
angel,  and  came  to  the  houfe  where  the  Chriftians 
were  afTembled  to  pray  for  him,  and  one  told  them, 
"  that  Peter  was  at  the  door,  they  faid  it  was  his 
l[  angel  j'*  thinking  that  he  himfelf  was  faft  in  pri- 
3  fon : 


LXXV. 


1180  'The  nature^  office ^  and 

S  E  R  M.  foil :  For  which  faying  there  could  be  no  reafon,  had 
there  not  been  a  current  opinion  among  them  of 
guardian  angels. 

And  becaufe  the  providence  of  God  is  more  pe- 
culiarly concerned,    in  condu6ling    men  to  eternal 
happinefs  \  it  is  very  credible,  that  God  fhould  more 
efpecially  ordain  the  miniftry  of  angels  about  good 
men,  for  the  furtherance  of  their  falvation.     And  fo 
the  apoitle  tells  us  in  the  text  \  "  are  they  not  all 
"  miniftring  fpirits,  fent  forth  to  minitler  for  them 
"  that  fliall  be  heirs  of  falvation  ?"     Nay,  our  Sa- 
viour, in  that  remarkable  place  I  mentioned  before. 
Matt,  xviii.  10.  feems  to  intimate,  that  angels  of  a 
higher  rank  and  quality  are  afTigned  guardians  and 
guides  to  thofe  that  beheved  on  him ;  "  but  I  fay 
"  unto  you,  that  in  heaven,  their  angels  do  always 
"  behold  the  face  of  my  Father,  which  is  in  heaven  :'* 
an  allufion  to  the  manner  of  earthly  kings,  upon 
whom  not  all  the  fervants,  but  the  chief  of  the  no- 
bihty  do  more  immediately  attend,  and  Hand  conti- 
nually in  their  prefence  ;  for  to  behold  the  face  of 
the  king,  and  to  ftand  in  his  prefence,  are  phrafes 
ufed  in  fcripture  to  fignify  immediate  attendance  up- 
on his  perfon.     So  that  by  this  manner  of  exprelTion 
our  Saviour  doth  mod  fignificantly  intimate,  in 
what  efteem  good  men  are  with  God,  whofe  care 
and  protedion  he  com.mits  to  the  chief  of  the  angels, 
to  thofe  who  are  neareft  to  him,  and  in  highefc  fa- 
vour and  honour  with  him  ;  as  if  he  had  faid,  their 
angels  are  not  of  the  ordinary  rank,  but  fuch  as  are 
admitted  to  a  more  immediate  attendance  upon  the 
great  king  and  governor  of  the  world. 

And  no  doubt  it  is  for  no  mean  end,  that  fuch 
high  and  glorious  fpirits  are  employed  about  us ;  it 
i§  chiefly  for  the  furtherance  of  our  laivation ;  for 

the 


employment  of  good  angels,  1 1 8 1 

the  purchafmg  whereof,  the  Son  of  God  hlmfelf  3  E  R  M. 
("  whom  all  the  angels  of  heaven  worfhip"  )came  down 
from  heaven,  and  appeared  and  fiiifered  in  our  nature, 
that  we  may  one  day  "  be  made  like  to  the  angels," 
and  dwell  where  they  are,  and  may  "  continually 
"  behold  the  face  of  our  father  which  is  in  heaven 
"  as  they  do."  And  in  order  to  this  end,  it  is  very 
probable,  that  good  angels  are  ready  to  do  good  of- 
fices, juft  contrary  to  thofe  of  evil  fpirits,  that  is, 
to  employ  their  befr  diligence  and  endeavour  for  the 
falvation  of  men  ^  and  that  they  are  very  fedulous  and 
officious  to  reitrain  and  pull  them  back  from  fm,  and 
to  excite  and  fohcit  them  to  that  which  is  good  ; 
and,  in  a  v/ord,  to  do  all  they  can  to  help  forward 
the  repentance  and  converfion  of  finners.  And  this 
may  reafonably  be  colle&d  from  that  paflage  of  our 
Saviour,  Luke  xv.  lO.  where  he  tells  us,  "  that 
*'  there  is  joy  in  the  prefence  of  the  angels  of  God, 
*'  over  one  fmner  that  repenteth/'  And  if  they  be 
fo  glad  of  the  repentance  of  a  finner  ^  we  may  eafily 
imagine  how  forward  they  are,  to  further  and  pro- 
mote fo  good  av/ork.  And  Vv^hen  finners  are  brought 
to  repentance  •,  we  have  no  reafon  to  doubt,  but  that 
the  angels  are  as  ready  to  affift  their  progrefs  in 
goodnefs. 

It  hath  been  a  general,  and  I  think  not  ill-ground- 
ed opinion,  both  of  the  Jews  and  Heathens,  that 
good  angels  are  more  efpeciaily  prefent  with  us,  and 
obfervant  of  us,  and  afliitant  to  us,  in  the  perfor- 
mance of  all  a6ls  of  religion  ;  that  they  are  particu- 
larly prefent  at  our  prayers ;  and  therefore  the  Jews 
fpeak  of  a  particular  angel  for  this  purpofe,  whom 
they  call  the  angel  of  prayer  ;  that  they  obferve  our 
vows,  and  our  breach  or  performance  of  them.  So 
Solomon  feems  to  intimate,  Ecclef  v.  4,  6.  "  When 

Vol.  V,  9  X  ''  thou 

6. 


1 1  8  2  T'he  nature,  office,  and 

S  E  R  M.  «'  thou  vowefb  a  vow  unto  God,  defer  not  to  pay 

LXXV  '  r   y 

"  it ;  for  he  hath  no  pleafure  in  fools  •,  pay  that 
"  which  thou  hail  vowed.  Suffer  not  thy  mouth 
"  to  caufe  thy  flcfh  to  fin  :"  that  is,  do  not  intangle 
thy  life  with  a  rafh  vow,  which  the  frailty  of  hu- 
man nature  may  make  thee  afterwards  to  break  •, 
"  neither  fay  thou  before  the  angel,  that  it  was  an 
"  error  ;  that  isj  do  not  in  the  prefence  of  the  angel 
who  attends  upon  thee,  and  obferves  thee,  betray 
thine  own  error  and  raflmefs.  This  I  take  to  be  the 
meaning  of  this  difficult  paifage,  "  let  not  thy  mouth 
''  caufe  thy  fiefh  to  fm  •,  neither  fay  thou  before  the 
''  angel,  that  it  was  an  error.'* 

But  the  angels  are  yet  more  particularly  prefent  in 
the  places  and  at  the  times  of  God's  publick  wor- 
fhip.  The  placing  of  the  cherubims  in  the  holy  of 
holies,  feems  to  fignify  the  prefence  of  the  angels  in 
our  mofl  religious  addrefles  to  God.  And  Plutarch 
fays,  that  the  angels  are  tjie  overfeers  of  divine  fef- 
vice.  And  therefore  we  ought  to  behave  ourfelves 
with  all  modefty,  reverence,  and  decency  in  the 
worfhip  of  God,  out  of  regard  to  the  angels,  who 
are  there  prefent,  and  obferve  our  carriage  and  be- 
haviour. And  to  this  the  apoille  plainly  hath  refpedl 
in  that  place,  which  by  interpreters  hath  been  thought 
fo  difficult,  I  Cor.  xi.  lo.  where  he  fays,  "  that, 
"  for  this  caufe,"  in  the  affembly  of  Chriftians  for 
the  w^orfliip  of  God,  "  the  woman  ought  to  have 
^^  avail  upon  her  head,"  in  token  of  fubje6lion  to 
her  hufband,  "  bccaufe  of  the  angels  •,"  that  is,  to 
be  decently  and  modeftly  attired  in  the  church,  be- 
caufe  of  the  prefence  of  the  holy  angels ;  before  whom 
we  fliould  compofe  our  felves  to  the  greateil  external 
gravity  and  reverence,  which  the  angels  behold  and 
obferve,  but  cannot  pen(gtrate  into  the  inward  devo- 
tion 


employment  of  good  mtgels.  1 1 8  '^ 

tion  of  our  mineis,  which  God   only  can  do ;  and  S  E  R  M. 
therefore  with  regard  to  him  who  fees  our  hearts,  we  * 

fhould  more  particularly  compofe  our  minds,  to  the 
greatefl  fincerity  and  ferioufnefs  in  our  devotion. 
Which  I  would  to  God  we  would  all  duly  confider, 
all  the  while  we  are  exercifed  in  the  worihip  of  God, 
^ho  chiefly  regards  our  hearts.  But  we  ought  like- 
wife  to  be  very  careful  of  our  external  behaviour,  with 
a  particular  regard  to  the  angels,  who  are  prcfent 
there,  to  fee  and  obferve  the  outward  decency  and 
reverence  of  our  carriage  and  deportment :  of  which 
we  are  very  careful  in  the  prefence  even  of  an  earthly 
prince  when  he  either  fpeaks  to  us,  or  we  make  any 
addrefs  to  him.  And  furely  much  more  ought  wc 
to  be  fo,  when  we  are  in  the  immediate  prefence  of 
God,  and  of  his  holy  angels,  every  one  of  whom  is 
a  much  greater  prince,  and  of  greater  power,  than 
any  of  the  princes  of  this  world.  But  how  little  is 
this  confidered,  (I  fpeak  to  our  fhame)  and  by  how 
few  among  us  ! 

And  as  angels  are  helpful  to  good  m.en,  in  work- 
ing out  their  falvation,  throughout  the  courfe  of  their 
Jives  i  fo  at  the  hour  of  death,  they  ftand  by  them, 
to  comfort  them  and  ailiil  them  in  that  needful  and 
difmal  time,  in  that  lail  and  great  con[]i(51:  of  frail 
mortality  with  death  and  the  powers  of  darknefs  ;  to 
receive  their  expiring  fpirits  into  their  charge,  and  to 
condudl  them  fafely  into  the  manfions  of  the  blefled. 
And  to  this  purpofe  alio  the  Jev/s  had  a  tradition  ; 
that  the  angels  wait  upon  good  men  at  their  death, 
to  convey  their  fouls  into  paradife  :  which  is  very 
much  countenanced  by  our  Saviour,  in  the  parable 
of  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus,  Luke  xvi.  22.  where 
it  is  faid,  "  that  when  Lazarus  died,  he  was  carried 
;^  by  the  angels  into  Abraham's  bofom." 

9X2  Nay, 


1 184  T'he  nature^  ^ff^ce^   and 

SE  R  M.       Nay,  that  the  angels  have  fome  charge  and  care  of 
^^^^_^^^  the  bodies  of  good  men  after  death,  may  not  impro- 
bably be  gathered  from  that  pafiage  in  St.  Jude,  ver. 
9.  where  Michael  the  archangel  is  faid  to  have  "  con- 
"  tended  with  the  devil,  about  the  body  of  Mofes." 
What  the  ground  of  this  controverfy  betwixt  them 
was,  may  be  moil  probably  explained,  by  a  paifage, 
Deut.  xxxiv.  6.  where  it  is  faid,  "  that  God  took 
"  particular  care  (probably  by  an  angel)  concern- 
"  ing  the  burying  of  Mofes  in  a  certain  valley  •,"  and 
it  is  added,  "  but  no  man  knoweth  of  his  fepulchre 
*^  unto  this  day."     The  devil  it  fcems  had  a  fiir 
profped:  of  laying  a  foundation  for  idolatry,  in  the 
worfhip  of  Mofes  after  his  death ;  if  he  could  have 
gotten  the  difpofal  of  his  body,  to  have  buried  it 
in  fome  known  and  publick  place.     And  no  doubt, 
it  would  have  gratified  him  not  a  little,  to  have  made 
him,  who  was  fo  declared  an  enemy  to  idolatry  all 
his  life,  an  occafion  of  it,  after  his  death.     But  this 
God  thought  fit  to  prevent,  in  pity  to  the  people  of 
Ifrael,  whom  he  faw  upon  all  occafions  fo  prone  to 
idolatry ;    and  for  that  reafon  committed  it  to  the 
charge  of  Michael  the  archangel,  to  bury  his  body  fe- 
cretly ;    and  this  was  the  thing  which  Michael  the 
archangel  contended  with  the  devil  about. 

But  before  I  pafs  from  this,  I  cannot  but  take  no- 
tice of  one  memorable  circumftance  in  this  conteft, 
mentioned  likewife  by  St.  Jude,  in  thefe  words,  "  yet 
"  Michael  the  archangel,  when  contending  with  the 
"  devil,  he  difputed  about  the  body  of  Mofes,  durft 
*'  not  bring  againfl  him  a  railing  accufation."  His 
duty  reflrained  him  from  it,  and  probably  his  difcre- 
tion  too  :  as  he  durft  not  oifend  God,  in  doing  a 
thing  fo  much  beneath  the  dignity  and  perfection  of 
his  nature  \  fo  he  could  not  but  think,  that  the  devil 

would 


employment  of  good  angels,  1 1 85 

would  have  been  too  hard  for  him  at  raiUng ;  a  thing  S  E  R  M. 
to  which  as  the  angels  have  no  difpofition,  fo  I  be- 
lieve that  they  have  no  talent,  no  faculty  at  it.  The. 
cool  confideration  whereof  fhould  make  all  men,  e- 
fpecially  thofe  who  call  themfelves  divines,  and  efpe- 
cially  in  controverfies  about  religion,  afhamed  and 
afraid  of  this  manner  of  difputing  ;  fince  "  Michael 
"  the  archangel,  even  when  he  difputed  v/ith  the  de- 
"  vil,  durft  not  bring  againfl  him  a  railing  accufa- 
"  fation." 

But  to  proceed.  This  we  are  fure  of,  that  the  an- 
gels fhall  be  the  great  miniflers  and  inftruments  of 
the  refurreftion  of  our  bodies,  and  the  reunion  of 
them  to  our  fouls.  For  fo  our  bleffed  Saviour  has 
told  us,  Matth.  xxiv.  30,  31.  That  "  when  the  Son 
"  of  man  fhall  come  in  the  clouds  of  heaven,  with 
"  power  and  great  glory  ;  he  lliall  fend  his  angels  to 
"  gather  the  ele6t,  from  the  four  winds,  from  one 
"  end  of  heaven  to  the  other." 

Thus  I  have  as  briefly  as  I  could,  and  fo  far  as 
the  fcripture  hath  gone  before  us,  to  give  us  light  in 
this  matter,  endeavoured  to  fhew  the  feveral  ways 
wherein  good  angels  do  nlinifter  in  behalf  of  them 
who  fhall  be  heirs  of  falvation.  All  that  now  re- 
mains, is  to  draw  fome  inferences  from  this  difcourfe, 
and  fo  I  fhall  conclude. 

Firll,  What  hath  been  faid  upon  this  argument, 
and  fo  abundantly  proved  from  fcripture,  may  ferve 
to  eftablifh  us  in  the  belief  of  the  truth,  and  to  awa- 
ken us  to  a  due  confideration  of  it.  That  the  angels 
are  invifible  to  us,  and  that  we  are  feldom  fcnfible  of 
their  prefence,  and  the  good  offices  they  do  us,  is 
no  fufficient  reafon  againfl  the  truth  and  reality  of  the 
thing  ;  if  by  other  arguments  we  are  convinced  of  it. 
For  by  the  fame  reafon  we  may  almoft  as  well  call 

in 


1 1 86  The  nature,  office,  and 

SE  R  M.  in  queftlon  the  exigence  of  God,    and  of  our  own 

^  _■ ^  fouls  \  neither  of  which  do  fall  under  the  notice  of 

^our  fenfes  ;  and  yet  by  other  arguments  we  are  fuffi- 
ciently  convinced  of  them  both.  So  in  this  cafe,  the 
general  confcnt  and  tradition  of  mankind,  concern- 
ing the  exiitence  of  angels,  and  their  miniftry  about 
us,  efpecially  being  confirmed  to  us,  by  clear  and  ex- 
prefs  tellimony  of  holy  fcripture,  ought  to  be  abun- 
dant evidence  to  us  ;  when  we  confider  that  fo  gene- 
ral a  confent  muft  have  a  proportionable  caufe  j  which 
can  be  no  other,  but  a  general  tradition  grounded  at 
firfi  upon  revelation,  and  derived  down  to  all  fuc- 
ceeding  ages,  from  the  firil  fpring  and  original  of 
mankind  ;  and  fince  confirmed  by  manifold  revela- 
tions of  God,  both  in  the  old  and  nev/  teilament. 

But  yet  I  am  fenfible,  that  all  this  is  no  convidion 
to  the  perverfe  and  contentious.  Men  will  not  be- 
lieve even  the  evidence  of  fenfe  itfelf,  when  they  are 
flirongly  prepoflefTed  and  prejudiced  to  the  contrary : 
for  do  we  not  fee  great  numbers  of  men,  even  fo 
many  as  have  the  face  to  call  themfelves  the  catholick 
church,  that  can  make  a  fhift,  when  they  have  a 
mind,  either  to  believe  or  diibelieve  things  contrary 
to  the  plaineft  evidence  of  their  fenfes }  All  that  I 
fhall  fay  farther  about  this  matter,  is,  that  this  doc- 
trine of  angels  is  not  a  peculiar  do6lrine  either  of  the 
jewifh  or  chriftian  religion,  but  the  general  do6lrine 
of  all  religions  that  ever  were  ;  and  therefore  cannot 
be  objeded  againft  by  any  but  the  Atheifts. 

And  yet  after  all,  I  know  nor  whence  it  comes  to 
pafs,  that  this  great  truth,  which  is  fo  comfortable 
to  mankind,  is  fo  very  little  confidered  by  us.  Per- 
haps the  corruption  of  fo  great  a  part  of  the  chriftian 
church,  in  the  point  of  the  worfliip  of  angels,  may 
have  ryn  us  fo  far  into  the  other  extreme,  as  fcarcely 

to 


employment  of  good  ajigels.  1187 

to  acknowledse  any  benefit  we  receive  by  theni*  But  S  E  R  M. 
furely  we  may  believe  they  do  us  good,  without  any  ^  '^   ' 
obligation  to  pray  to  them  ;  and  may  own  them  as 
the  minifters  of  God's  providence,  without  making 
them  the  objefts  of  our  worfhip. 

I  confefs  it  feems  to  me  a  very  odd  thing,  that 
the  power  of  the  devil,  and  his  influence  upon  men, 
and  the  particular  vigilancy  and  adivity  of  evil  fpirits 
to  tempt  us  to  fin,  fhould  be  fo  readily  owned,  and 
fo  fenfibly  talked  of  among  Chriflians  •,  and  yet  the 
aififtance  of  good  angels  fiiould  be  fo  little  taken  no- 
tice of,  and  confidered  by  us.  The  fcripture  fpeaks 
plainly  of  both,  and  the  reafons  for  believing  both 
are  equal  :  for  God  forbid  but  that  good  angels 
fhould  be  as  officious  and  forward  to  do  us  good,  as 
the  devil  and  his  angels  are  malicious  and  bufy  to  do 
us  mifchief.  And  indeed  it  would  be  very  hard  with 
mankind,  if  we  had  not  as  much  rcafon  to  hope  for 
the  alTiffance  and  protedion  of  good  fpirits,  as  we 
have  caufe  to  fear  the  malice  and  fury  of  th.t  bad. 
Good  angels  are  certainly  as  powerful,  and  have  as 
ftrong  a  propenfion  and  inclination  to  do  good,  as 
the  devil  has  to  do  harm  ;  and  the  number  of  good 
angels  is  probably  much  greater,  than  of  evil  fpirits. 
The  biggeft  nurfiber  that  are  ufed  in  fcripture,  are 
appHed  to  good  angels.  Dan.  vii.  10.  it  is  faid  of 
*'  the  angels  about  God's  throne,  that  thoufand 
"  thoufands  miniftred  urito  him,  and  ten  thoufand 
*'  times  ten  thoufand  flood  before  him."  And  Re- 
velations V.  1 1 .  "  the  number  of  them"  is  faid  to  be, 
*'  ten  thoufand  times  ten  thoufand,  and  thoufand  of 
"  thoufands."  And  the  apoflle  to  the  Hebrews, 
ch.  xii.  22.  calls  them,  "  an  innumerable  company 
*'  erf"  angels. "^ 

What 


LXXV. 


1 8  8  7'i)e  nature^  office,  and 

SE R  M.  What  then  lliould  be  the  reafon,  that  men  ihould 
be  fo  apt  to  own  the  fnares  and  temptations,  which 
the  devil  lays  before  us,  in  all  our  ways  •,  but  take  {o 
little  notice  of  the  attendance  and  good  offices,  done 
to  us  by  good  Spirits  ?  I  can  imagine  but  thefe  two 
reafons,  and  I  am  forry  I  can  find  no  better  ;  that 
we  are  more  mindful  of  injuries  than  of  benefits :  and 
are  glad  to  take  in  others  for  the  excufe  of  our  faults  •, 
but  are  loth  any  fhould  come  in  for  a  fliare  in  the 
good  that  is  done  by  us.  And  yet  methinks  it  fliould 
be  a  very  comfortable  confideration  to  us,  againfl  the 
enmity  and  cunning  of  the  devil  and  his  angels  ;  that 
the  holy  angels  of  God  are  as  intent  and  induflrious 
to  do  us  good,  and  to  help  forward  our  falvation,  as 
evil  fpirits  can  be  to  work  our  ruin  and  deftroy  us. 

Secondly,  We  fhould  with  great  thankfulnefs  ac- 
knowledge the  great  goodnefs  of  God  to  us,  who 
takes  fuch  care  of  us,  as  to  appoint  his  angels,  and 
to  give  them  particular  commilTion  and  charge  con- 
cerning us,  to  prote61;  and  aflifl  us  in  all  our  ways, 
and  efpecially  to  promote  the  great  concernment  of 
our  eternal  happinefs  :  and  that  not  only  fomc  parti- 
lar  and  inferior  fpirits  but  the  chief  miniilers  of  this 
great  king  of  the  world,  thofe  that  "  fland  in  his  pre- 
"  fence,  and  behold  his  face  -,"  and  not  a  few  of  thefe, 
but  the  whole  order  of  them  are  employed  about  us. 
So  the  apoflle  feems  to  fay,  by  the  queftion  which  he 
puts  in  the  text,  "  are  they  not  all  miniflring  fpirits, 
"  fent  forth  to  minifler  ?"  That  is,  all,  at  one  time 
or  other.  And  though  they  be  principally  appointed 
to  minifler  to  us  in  order  to  our  falvation ;  yet  we 
have  no  reafon  to  doubt  but  God  employs  them  ma- 
ny times  for  our  temporal  fafety,  and  makes  ufe  of 
them  more  efpecially  in  thofe  great  revolutions,  in 

3  which 


employment  of  good  angels.  1189 

which  his  caufe  and  religion  are  more  immediately  ^j^S^^* 
concerned. 

In  fuch  a  cafe,  it  is  not  at  all  incredible,  that  God 
fhould  give  his  angels  a  particular  charge,  concern- 
ing thofe  that  fight  his  battles  -,  to  pitch  about  their 
camps,  and  fecretly  to  aiTift  them  againil  their  ene- 
mies, and  to  ward  off,  and  put  by  many  dangerous 
blows  and  thruils,  which  are  made  at  them  ;  and 
wonderfully  to  preferve  them,  when  the  inftruments 
of  death  fly  about  them,  and  do  execution  on  every 
fide  of  them.  To  what  can  we  afcribe  fuch  and  fo 
many  remarkable  deliverances  of  a  perfon  upon  whom 
fo  much  depends  -,  but  either  to  the  immediate  hand 
of  God,  or  to  the  miniflry  of  angeU  ?  And  where 
God  is  provided  fo  abundantly,  with  fuch  powerful 
beings  and  miniflers  of  his  will  •,  though  they  may 
be  invifible  to  us,  yet  there  is  great  reafon  to  believe, 
that  he  very  feldom  works  without  them. 

And  now  what  an  ailonifhing  regard  is  this,  which 
the  great  God  is  pleafed  to  have  for  the  fons  of  men, 
that  he  ihould  make  the  whole  creation  ferviceable  to 
us  ;  not  only  the  vifible  creation,  for  the  fupport  of 
our  bodies,  and  the  diverfion  of  our  minds ;  but 
even  the  nobleft  of  all  his  creatures,  the  great  and 
glorious  inhabitants  of  the  invifible  world,  mightily 
furpalTing  us  mortal  men,  in  the  fimplicity  and  pu- 
rity of  their  nature,  in  the  quicknefs  and  largenefs 
of  their  underilandings,  and  in  their  power  and  vi- 
gour of  acting  ;  I  fay,  that  God  fhould  give  thefe 
excellent  and  glorious  beings  the  charge  over  us,  and 
fend  them  forth  to  minifler  to  us,  for  the  fafeguard 
of  our  perfons,  for  the  fuccefs  of  our  affairs,  and  for 
the  fecurity  and  furtherance  of  our  eternal  falvation  ! 
"  Lord,  what  is  man  that  thou  art"  thus  "  mind- 
*'  ful  of  him  i"  that  when  "  thou  madeft  him  low- 

VoL.  V.  9  Y  "  er 


1 1 90  The  nature^  ^ffi^^^-i  ^^^^i 

S  F.  R  M.  «<  er  than  the  angels,"  thou  fhouldeft  yet  "  make  the 
*    "  angels  to  minifter  unto  him!" 

Thirdly,  If  the  angels  have  the  particular  charge 
of  good  men,  we  lliould  take  heed  how  we  defpifc, 
or  be  any  way  injurious  to  them  :  for  how  defpicable 
foever  they  may  appear  to  us,  they  are  certainly  very 
dear  to  God  ;  fince  he  deems  them  fo  confiderable, 
as  to  employ  his  chief  mi niflers  about  them,  and  to 
commit  the  charge  of  them  to  thofe,  who  by  their  of- 
fice do  more  im.mediatcly  attend  upon  himfelf.  This  is 
our  Saviour's  own  argument.  Mat.  xviii.  lo.  "Take 
"  heed  that  ye  defpife  not  one  of  thefe  little  ones ; 
"  for  I  fay  unto  you,  their  angels  do  continually  be- 
"  hold 'the  face  of  your  father,  which  is  in  heaven." 
With  how  much  contempt  foever  we  may  look  upon 
a  poor  good  man ;  he  hath  friends  and  patrons  of  a 
higher  fort,  than  any  of  the  princes  of  this  world. 

Fourthly,  If  God  appointed  angels  to  be  mini- 
ftring  Spirits  in  our  behalf;  we  may  thence  very 
reafonably  conclude,  that  God  did  not  intend,  that 
we  fhouid  worfhip  them.  This  feems  to  be  a  clear 
confequence,  if  the  reafoning  of  the  angel  in  the  re- 
velation be  good  ;  where  he  forbids  St.  John  to  wor- 
fhip him  ;  "  becaufe  he  was  his  fellow- fer van t."  Yea 
the  confequence  feems  to  be  yet  flronger  from  the 
ttxt  -,  that  if  they  be  not  only  fellow-fervants  but 
do  in  fome  fort  miniiler  unto  us  ;  then  we  are  not  to 
worfhip  them. 

And  yet  this  pra-flice  is  openly  avowed  in  the 
church  of  Rome  ;  though  it  be  reproved  fo  very  fe- 
verely  by  the  apoflle,  as  an  apoflafy  from  chriflianity, 
Colof.  ii.  1 8,  19.  "  Let  no  man  (fays  he)  deceive 
^'  you,  in  a  voluntary  humility,  and  worfhipping  of 
*^  angels ;  not  holding  the  head  5"  as  if  it  were  a  re- 

"  nouncipg 


employment  of  good  angels.  iigi 

nounclng  of  Christ,  out  of  a  pretended  humility,  S  E  R  M. 
to  make  ufe  of  other  mediators  befides  him  to  the  :  _^* 
Father.  And  notwithflanding  alfo  that  the  angel  in 
the  revelation  does  fo  vehemently  forbid  it,  lea,  jn^ 
by  no  means,  upon  no  terms  to  do  it  •,  and  he  for- 
bids it  for  fuch  a  reafon,  as  makes  it  for  ever  unlaw- 
ful ;  namely,  that  we  ought  not  to  worlliip  thofe, 
who  ferve  and  worfhip  God  together  with  us  -,  "  do 
"  it  not,  fays  the  angel,  I  am  thy  fellow  fervant^ 
*'  worfhip  thou  God."  In  which  words,  he  plain- 
ly dire6ls  us  to  the  fole  and  proper  objed  of  our 
worfhip. 

Bellarmine  the  great  champion  of  the  popifh  caufe, 
never  ufed  more  grofs  and  apparent  fhufHing,  than 
in  anfwer  to  this  text.  He  fays  firft,  why  are  we 
reproved  for  doing  what  St.  John  did  ?  To  which 
the  anfwer  is  very  eafy ;  becaufe  St.  John  himfelf  v/as 
reproved  by  an  angel,  for  doing  what  he  did.  And 
now  that  his  queftion  is  anfwered,  one  might  me- 
thinks  afk  him  a  crofs  queftion  or  two.  Why  does  the 
church  of  Rome  prefume  to  do  that,  which  an  angel 
does  fo  expreHy  forbid  to  be  done  ^  Or  was  it  fit  for 
St.  John  to  woriliip  one,  who  (according  to  Bellar- 
mine) was  fo  ignorant  in  the  dodlrine  of  the  catholick 
church,  as  to  reprove  him  for  doing  his  duty  ?  As  is 
evident  from  his  fecond  crafty  anfwer  to  this  text. 
That  St.  John  did  well  to  give  due  worlliip  to  the 
angel :  and  yet  it  is  plain  from  this  text,  that  the 
angel  did  not  think  the  worihip  which  St.  John 
gave  him,  to  be  his  due. 

It  is  very  hard  to  imagine,  but  that  a  man  of  Bel- 
larmine's  underftanding,  did  intend  to  give  up  the 
caufe,  in  his  anfwers  to  this  text :  but  if  he  was  in 
earneft,  then  the  matter  is  brought  to  this  plain  and 

9X2  Ihorc 


LXXV. 


^he  nature^  ^ffic^y  ^^^ 

iliort  ifTue  ;    whether  it  be  fitter  for  us  to  believe  a 
cardinal  of  Rome,  or  an  angel  of  God  ? 

Laftly,  We  fhould  imitate  the  holy  angels,  by  en- 
deavouring to  ferve  God  as  they  do,  in  miniftring  to 
the  good  of  others.  Whilft  we  arc  in  the  body, 
in  this  ftate  of  infirmity  and  imperfe^lion ;  though 
we  cannot  ferve  God  with  the  fame  aftivity  and  vi- 
gour that  the  bleffed  angels  do,  yet  we  may  in  the 
fame  fincerity,  and  with  the  fame  true  pleafure  and 
delight. 

And  we  fliould  learn  alfo  of  them,  to  condefcend 
to  the  meaneft  fervices,  for  the  good  of  others.  If 
the  angels,  who  are  no  ways  allied  to  us,  do  fo  much 
excel  us,  in  the  dignity  and  perfedlion  of  their  na- 
ture, (for  though  David  fays,  that  "  God  made  man 
"  little  lower  than  the  angels  •,"  his  meaning  is,  that 
he  made  him  next  below  the  angels  in  the  rank  of 
beings ;  but  yet  very  diftant  from  them  in  perfedion) 
I  fay  if  thofe  glorious  creatures,  who  are  the  chief  of 
the  ways  and  works  of  God,  do  not  think  much  to 
humble  themfelves  to  be  minifters  on  our  behalf; 
iliall  we  be  fo  proud  as  to  think  much  to  Hoop  to 
the  lowed  offices,  to  ferve  one  another } 

You  fee,  my  brethren,  what  is  the  conftant  work 
and  employment  of  the  blelTed  fpirits  above ;  to  do 
good  to  men,  efpecially  in  order  to  their  eternal  hap- 
pinefs  ;  and  this  is  the  highell  degree  of  charity,  and 
charity  is  the  higheft  -perfedion  of  men  and  angels  : 
fo  that  to  employ  ourfelves,  with  all  our  minds,  and 
with  all  our  might,  to  help  forward  the  falvation  of 
others,  is  to  be  good  angels  (I  had  almoft  faid  to  be 
a  kind  of  gods)  to  men. 

I  hope  that  we  all  of  us  do  hope  one  day  to  be 

like  the  angels,  in  the  purity  and  perfedion  of  their 

I  nature. 


employment  of  good  angels.  ^93 

nature.     So  our  Saviour  has  told  us,  that  ''  at  the  ^  ^  ^^  ^• 

LXXV 
"  refurredion  we  fliall  be  Hke  the  angels :"  now  as 

they  are  the  patterns  of  our  hope  and  happinefs ;  fo  let 
us  make  them  the  examples  of  our  duty  and  obe- 
dience: according  as  our  Saviour  hath  taught  us 
to  pray,  "  that  God's  will  may  be  done  on  earth, 
^'  as  it  is  in  heaven  ;"  that  is,  that  we  may  ferve 
God,  and  do  his  will  here  on  earth,  (fo  far  as  the  in- 
firmity of  our  nature  and  of  our  prefent  ftate  will  ad- 
mit) with  the  fame  readinefs  and  diligence,  with  the 
fame  chearfulnefs  and  zeal,  that  the  holy  and  blefled 
angels  do  in  heaven.  And  let  us  afpire  continually 
in  our  minds,  after  that  blefTed  time,  when  we  fhall 
be  free  from  fin  and  forrow,  from  afRidtion  and  pain, 
from  difeafes  and  death ;  when  we  fhaJl  ferve  God 
without  diflradlion,  and  do  his  will  without  weari- 
nefs,  and  fhall  "  be  for  ever  with  the  Lord,  amidfl 
"  an  innumerable  company  of  angels,  and  the  fpi- 
**  rits  of  juft  men  made  perfed.'V 

Finally,  Let  us  blefs  God,  as  for  all  the  vifible  ef- 
fefts  of  his  merciful  providence  towards  us,  fo  hke- 
wife  for  the  invifible  aids  and  prote61:ion  of  his  holy 
angels ;  many  times  probably  vouchfafed  to  us,  when 
we  are  but  little  aware  of  it.  But  above  all,  let  us, 
blefs  him  for  his  Son,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
who  "  was  made  a  little  lower  than  the  angels,"  that 
is,  a  mortal  man  •,  "  that  by  the  fuffering  of  death'* 
for  our  fakes,  "  he  might  be  clothed  with  glory  and 
"  honour,  according  to  the  working  of  that  mighty 
*'  power  which  God  wrought  in  Christ,  when  he 
**  raifed  him  from  the  dead,  and  fet  him  at  his  own 
*'  right  hand  in  the  heavenly  places,  far  above  all 
*'  principalities  and  powers,  and  might,  and  domi- 
*'  nion,  and  every  name  that  is  named,  not  only  in 

"  this 


1 1 94  ^^-^^  reputation  of 

"  this  world,  but  alfo  in  that  which  is  to  come.  To 
*^  him  O  Father,  with  thee  and  the  Holy  Ghofl,  be 
*'  all  honour  and  glory,  dominion  and  power,  both 
''  now  and  forever.'*     Amen. 


^-"ed   SERMON     LXXVI, 

on  ot, 
Luke*s 


day. 


The  reputation  of  good  men,  after 
death. 


PSALM  CXII.  6. 

The  latter  part  of  the  verfe. 
ne  righteous  Jhall  he  in  everlafiing  remembrance, 

TX^VT^'  A  ^  ^^^  defire  and  hope  of  immortality,  which 
Xj^  is  implanted  in  human  nature,  is  fome  evi- 
dence of  the  thing  -,  fo  likewife  that  natural  defire 
which  is  in  men,  to  have  a  good  name  perpetuated, 
and  to  be  remembered,  and  mentioned  with  honour, 
when  they  are  dead  and  gone,  is  a  fign,  that  there 
is  in  human  nature  fome  prefage  of  a  hfe  after  death ; 
in  which  they  hope,  among  other  rewards  of  well- 
doing, to  meet  with  this  alfo,  to  be  well  fpokcn  of 
to  poilerity  :  and  though  probably  we  Ihould  not 
know  the  good  that  is  faid  of  us,  when  we  are  dead, 
yet  it  is  an  encouragement  to  virtue,  to  be  fecured  of 
it  before-hand  ;  and  to  find  by  experience,  that  they 
who  have  done  their  part  v^gU  in  this  life,   go  off 

with 


good  men ^  after  death,  ^^9? 

with  applaufe  •,  and  that  the  memory  of  their  good  S  E  R  M. 
adlions  is  preferved  and  tranfmitted  to  poflerity. 

And  among  the  many  advantages  of  piety  and 
virtue,  this  is  not  altogether  inconfiderable,  that  it 
reflecfhs  an  honour  upon  our  memory  after  death  \ 
which  is  a  thing  much  more  vahiable,  than  to  have 
our  bodies  preferved  from  putrefadlion :  for  that  I 
think  is  the  meaning  of  Solomon,  when  he  prefers  a 
good  name  before  precious  ointment.  Eccl.  vii.  i. 
"  A  good  name  is  better  ,than  precious  ointment.'* 
This  they  ufed  in  embalming  of  dead  bodies,  to  pre- 
ferve  them  from  noifomnefs  and  corruption :  but  a 
good  name  preferves  a  man's  memory,  and  makes 
it  grateful  to  poflerity ;  which  is  a  far  greater  bene- 
fit, than  that  of  a  precious  ointment  which  ferves  on- 
ly to  keep  a  dead  body  from  flench  and  rottennefs. 

I  fhall  briefly  explain  the  words,  and  then  confi- 
^der  the  matter  contained  in  them ;  "  the  righteous 
*'  fhall  be  in  everlafling  remembrance."  By  the 
righteous  is  probably  here  meant  the  good  mian  in 
general ;  for  though  juflice  and  righteoufnefs  are  in 
fcripture  frequently  ufed  for  that  particular  virtue, 
whereby  a  man  is  difpofed  to  render  to  every  man 
his  own ;  which  is  known  by  the  name  of  juflice  ; 
^tx.  it  is  lefs  frequently,  and  perhaps  in  this  place, 
ufed  in  a  larger  fenfe,  fo  as  to  comprehend  all  piety 
and  virtue.  For  fo  the  righteous  man  is  defcribed 
at  the  beginning  of  this  pfalm,  "  bleffed  is  the  man 
"  that  feareth  the  Lord,  that  delighteth  greatly  in 
"  his  commandments: '  'and  he  is  oppofed  to  the  wick- 
ed man,  ver.  lo.  "  the  wicked  fhall  fee  it,  and  be 
"  grieved;"  that  is,  he  fhall  be  troubled  to  fee  the 
profperity  of  the  righteous  ;  the  manifold  blefTings  of 
his  hfe,  and  the  good  name  he  fhall  leave  behind  him 
at  his  death  \  which  is  the  meaning  "  of  his  being  in 


"  ever- 


1 1^6  The  reputation  of 

S  E  R  M.  «  everlaftino;  remembrance  ;"  that  is,  lono;  after  he 

VXYVT  'o 

•  is  dead,  perhaps  for  many  ages,  he  fhall  be  well 
Ipoken  of,  and  his  name  mentioned  with  honour, 
and  liis  good  deeds  recorded  and  remembered  to  all 
pollcrity. 

So  that  the  fenfc  of  the  words  amounts  to  this, 
that  eminently  good  men,  do  commonly  leave  a  good 
name  behind  them,  and  tranfmit  a  grateful  memory 
of  themfelves  to  after-ages.  I  fay  commonly,  for 
fo  we  are  to  underftand  this  kind  of  fayings  ;  not 
that  they  are  ftri6lly,  and  univerfally  true,  without 
exception  ;  but  ufually,  and  for  the  mofl  part.  It  is 
poflible,  that  a  good  man  may  foon  be  forgotten,  by 
the  malice  of  men,  or  through  the  partiality  and  ini- 
quity of  the  age,  may  have  his  name  blemifhed  after 
death,  and  be  mif-reprefented  to  poilerity :  but  for 
the  moft  part  it  is  otherwife  ;  and  though  the  world 
be  very  wicked,  yet  it  feldom  deals  fo  hardly  and 
unjuflly  with  men  of  eminent  goodnefs  and  virtue, 
as  to  defraud  them  of  their  due  praife  and  commen- 
dation after  death.  It  very  frequently  happens  other- 
wife  to  good  men,  whilft  they  are  alive  ;  nay  they 
are  then  very  feldom  fo  juftly  treated,  as  to  be  gene- 
rally eileemed  and  well  fpoken  of,  and  to  be  allowed 
their  due  praife  and  reputation  :  but  after  death,  their 
good  name  is  generally  fecured  and  vindicated,  and 
poilerity  does  them  that  right,  which  perhaps  the 
age  wherein  they  lived  denied  to  them.  Therefore 
in  the  profecution  of  this  argument,  I  fhall  enquirs 
into  thefe  two  things. 

Firfl:,  whence  it  comes  to  pafs,  that  good  men  arc 
very  often  defrauded  of  their  juft  praife  and  reputa- 
tion, whilft  they  are  alive  .^     And, 

Secondly,  what  fecurity  they  have  of  a  good  name 
after  death  ? 

Firft, 


good  men^  after  death,  ^  1 97 

Firft,  whence  it  comes  to  pafs,  that  o;ood  men  S  E  R  M. 
are  fo  frequently  defrauded  of  their  jufl  praife  and 
reputation,  while  they  are  alive  ?  and  to  give  our- 
felves  full  fatisfadion  in  this  matter,  two  things  are 
fit  to  be  enquired  into. 

1 .  From  what  caufe  this  proceeds  ? 

2.  For  what  reafon  the  providence  of  God  doth 
often  permit  it  ? 

( I . )  From  what  caufe  it  proceeds,  that  good  men 
have  fo  often  the  hard  fate  to  be  ill  fpoken  of,  and  to 
be  feverely  cenfur'd,  and  to  have  their  worth  much 
detraded  from,  while  they  are  alive  ? 

And  this  proceeds  partly  from  good  men  them- 
felves ;  and  partly  from  others. 

I.  Good  men  themfelves,  are  many  times  the 
caufe  of  it.  For  the  beft  men  are  imperfed  -,  and 
prefent  and  vifible  imperfedtions  do  very  much  lelTcn 
and  abate  the  reputation  of  a  man's  goodnefs.  It 
cannot  be  otherwife,  but  that  the  luftre  of  a  great 
piety  and  virtue  Ihould  be  fomewhat  obfcured,  by 
that  mixture  of  human  frailty,  which  does  necelTari- 
ly  attend  this  ftate  of  imperfe6lion :  and  though  a 
man  by  great  care  and  confideration,  by  great  vigi- 
lancy  and  pains  with  himfelf,  be  arrived  to  that  de- 
gree and  pitch  of  goodnefs,  as  to  have  but  a  very 
few  vifible  failings,  and  thofe  fmall,  in  comparifon  ; 
yet  when  thefe  come  to  be  fcan'd  and  commented 
upon,  by  envy,  or  ill-will,  they  will  be  flrangely 
inflamed  and  magnified,  and  made  much  greater, 
and  more  than  in  truth  they  are.  But  there  are  few 
perfons  in  the  world,  of  that  excellent  goodnefs,  but 
befides  the  common  and  more  pardonable  frailties  of 
humanity,  they  do  now  and  then  difcover  fomething, 
^ which  might  perhaps  juftly  deferve  a  fevere  cenfure. 

Vol.  V.  9  Z  if 


1 9.8  Tthe  reputaton  of 

R  M.   if  fome  amends  were  not  made  for  it,  by  many  and 


great  virtues. 


Very  good  men  are  fubjed  to  confiderable  impru- 
dences, and  fuudcn  pafllons  -,  and  efpecially  to  an 
affe6led  feverity  and  morofenefs  of  carriage  ;  which 
is  very  difguilful,  and  apt  to  beget  didike.  And 
they  are  the  more  incident  to  thefe  kind  of  imper- 
fedlions  ;  becaufc  out  of  a  juii  hatred  of  the  vicious 
cuftoms  and  pra6tices  of  the  worki,  and  to  keep  out 
of  the  way  of  temptation,  they  think  it  fafeil  to  re- 
tire from  the  work!  as  much  as  they  can  •,  being 
loth  to  venture  themfelves,  more  than  needs,  in  fo 
infedlious  an  air.  By  this  means,  their  fpirits  are  apt 
to  be  a  httle  four,  and  they  mull  neceffarily  be  igno- 
rant of  many  points  of  civiUty,  and  good  humour  ; 
which  are  great  ornaments  of  virtue,  though  not  of 
the  eflence  of  it. 

Now  two  or  three  fauks  in  a  good  man,  if  an 
uncharitable  mian  have  but  the  handhng  and  manag- 
ing of  them,  may  eafily  cail  a  confiderable  blemifh 
upon  his  reputation  j  becaufe  the  better  the  man  is,  fo 
much  the  more  confpicuous  are  his  faults  ;  as  fpots 
are  fooneft  difcovered*  and  moil  taken  notice  of,  in 
a  pure  and  white  garment.  Befides  that,  in  mat- 
ters of  cenfure,  mankind  do  much  incline  to  the 
harder  fide  ;  and  but  very  few  perfons  are  fo  chari- 
table and  equal,  as  to  conllrue  things  to  the  befl 
fenfe,  and  to  confider  a  man  all  together  -,  and  fairly 
to  fct  the  good  that  is  in  him  againfl  his  faults  and 
imperfections.     But, 

2.  Though  good  men  many  times  contribute  too 
much  to  the  lefTening  of  their  own  reputation,  with 
thofe  among  whom  they  live  ;  yet  the  principal 
caufe  of  their  fuffering  in  this  kind  is  not  from 
themfelves,  but  others  j  and  that  upon  thefe  three 
accounts.  j.  From 


good  men ^  after  death.  ^^99 

i.  From  the  hatred  and  oppofition  of  bad  men  S  E  R  M. 
to  holinefs  and  virtue  ;  and  thefe  are  commonly  the 
greatefc  number,  and  make  the  loUdeft  cry.  They 
are  declared  enemies  to  goodnefs ;  and  then  how  can 
it  be  expeded,  they  fhould  have  any  great  kindnefs 
for  good  men  ?  They  want  virtue  themfeives  ;  and 
therefore  they  think  themfeives  upbraided  by  the 
good  qualities  of  others. 

This  enmity  of  v/icked  men  againd  the  righteous, 
and  the  true  reafon  of  it,  is  very  well  exprefs'd,  in 
txhe  v/ifdom  of  Solomon,  chap.  ii.  12.  "  Let  us  (fay 
they)  lye  in  wait  for  the  righteous  •,  becaufe  he  is 
not  for  our  turn,  and  is  clean  contrary  to  oiir  do- 
ings ;  he  upbraideth  us  with  our  offending  the 
law,  and  he  objefteth,  to  our  infamy,  the  fins  of 
our  youth  -,  he  was  made  to  reprove  our  thoughts, 
therefore  he  is  grievous  unto  us,  even  to  behold  ; 
for  his  life  is  not  like  other  men,  he  is  quite  of 
another  fafliion  •,  we  are  efleemed  of  him  as  re- 
probate filver,  he  abftaineth  from  our  v/ays,  as 
from  filthincfs.'''  This  is  that  which  filleth  the 
minds  of  wicked  men  with  malice  againil  the  righ- 
teous •,  and  malice  will  eafily  invent  ways  to  blail 
any  man's  reputation.  Good  men  do  fometimes,  as 
it  is  their  duty,  reprove  thofe  that  are  bad  •,  or  if 
they  do  it  not  in  word,  yet  they  upbraid  them  in 
their  adions,  and  contrary  courfe  of  life  •,  and  both 
thefe  are  grievous  and  provoking  to  tliem.  Not  but 
that  wicked  men  are  many  times  in  their  confciences 
convinced  of  the  real  goodnefs  of  thofe  whom  they 
fpeak  againil ;  but  th.ey  will  not  ov/n  it,  left  in  fo 
doing  they  fhould  condemn  themfeives. 

2.  Another  caufe  of  this  is  the  envy  of  thofe,  ivhd 

perhaps  have  fome  degree  of  goodnefs  themfeives. 

For  great  virtue  is  apt  to  raile  envy  in  thofe  who  fall 

9  Z  2  Ihort 


I200  ^h^  reputation  of 

ERM.  fhort  of  it  •,  and  this  makes  thofe  who  are  but  im- 
perfcdly  good,  to  detrad  from  the  eminent  worth 
of  others ;  becaufe  they  are  fenfible,  they  are  out- 
fliined  by  them,  and  that  it  occafions  a  difadvanta- 
geous  comparifon,  and  makes  their  defeds  taken  no- 
tice of.  ♦ 

They  can  endure  a  man  that  is  moderately  good, 
and  keeps  pace  with  his  neighbours :  but  if  he  en- 
deavour to  outflrip  them,  they  prefently  combine 
againfl  him,  and  take  all  opportunities  to  undermine 
his  reputation  ;  and  will  be  very  glad,  either  to  find 
a  blot  in  his  efcutcheon,  or  to  fix  one  there. 

3.  There  is  fomething  in  the  very  prefence  and 
nearnefs  of  goodnefs  and  virtue,  which  is  apt  to 
lefTen  it. 

In  matters  of  fenfe,  the  nearer  the  obje6t  is,  the 
bigger  it  appears  ;  and  the  farther  dillant  it  is  from 
us,  the  lefs  it  feem.s  to  be :  but  here  it  is  quite  other- 
wife  ^  men  are  not  fo  apt  to  value  prefent  worth, 
when  yet  they  will  reverence  it  mjghtily  at  a  diflance. 
I  know  not  whence  it  comes  to  pafs,  but  fo  we  cer- 
tainly find  it ;   that  men  are  more  fenfible  of  the 
goodhefs  and  excellency  of  any  thing,  under  the 
want  of  it,  than  while  they  enjoy  it;  and  do  ufually 
value  it  more  when  it  is  gone,  than  they  did  whilft 
it  was  prefent  with  them.    Whilfl  we  hve  with  good 
men,  and  converfe  with  them  every  day,  we  take 
but  little    notice  of  them  •,  but  no  fooner  are  they 
departed,  but  we  admire  them,  and  every  man's 
mouth  is  open  to  celebrate  their  good  qualities.  Per- 
haps familiarity,  and  acquaintance,  and  converfation 
does  infenfibly  beget  fomething  of  contempt  •,  but 
whatever  the  reafon  of  it  be,  we  find  the  thing  moft 
certainly  true  in  experience. 

(2.)  Let 


good  men^  after  death.  1 20 1 

(2.)  Let  us  confider  in  the  next  place,  for  what  ^^  E  R  M. 

•  LXXVI 

reafons  the  providence  of  God  permits  it  thus  to 

be  ?  I  fhall  mention  but  thefe  two. 

I.  To  keep  good  men  humble,  and,  as  the  ex- 
preflion  is  in  Job,  "  to  hide  pride  from  men." 

God's  providence,  in  the  difpofal  and  ordering  of 
things  in  this  world,  feems  rather  to  confult  our 
fafety,  than  our  fatisfadlion  j  and  the  fecurity  of  our 
virtue,  than  the  full  reward  of  it.  Now  if  good 
men  fhouid  always  meet  with  that  clear  efleem  and 
reputation,  which  their  goodnefs  deferves,  they  would 
be  in  great  danger  of  being  puftup  with  a  proud  con- 
ceit of  themfelves  -,  and  pride  is  enough  to  fupplant 
the  greateft  virtue  in  the  world  ;  fuch  a  dead  fly,  as 
this,  were  fufficient  to  fpoil  a  box  of  the  moil  pre- 
cious ointm.ent.  For  man  is  an  ambitious  creature, 
and  vain  above  aJl  things ;  fo  vain,  as  not  only  to 
be  covetous  of  praife,  but  even  patient  of  flattery  ; 
and  the  befl:  of  men  lye  too  open,  on  this  blind  fide 
of  human  nature;  and  therefore  God,  who  knows 
our  frame,  and  how  apt  dufl:  and  afl:ies  are  to  be 
proud,  hath  in  his  wife  and  merciful  providence  fo 
difpofed  things,  that  good  men  are  feldom  expofed 
to  the  full  force  of  fo  ftrong  a  temptation.  And  for 
this  reafbn,  he  lets  looie  envious  and  malicious 
tongues,  to  detra6l  from  good  men,  for  a  check  to 
the  vanity  of  human  naaire,  and  to  keep  their  virtue 
fafe,  under  the  prote<5tion  of  humility. 

And  this  is  the  way  Ukewife  to  fecure  the  reputa- 
tion which  they  have,  and  which  otherwife  would 
be  in  danger  of  being  loft :  for  he  that  is  once  proud 
of  the  efteem  he  hath  got,  takes  the  readieft  way  to 
fall  into  contempt ;  and  certainly  it  is  better  of  the 
two,  that  our  reputation  fhouid  fuffer  a  little  by  the 
malice  of  others:  than  be  ruin'd  by  our  own  pride 
and  vanity.  God 


1 2  o  2  The  reputation  of 

SERM.  God  does  not  envy  good  men  the  reputation  of 
'  their  goodnefs  and  virtue  %  but  he  knows  the  weak- 
nefs  of  human  nature,  and  "  will  not  fuffer  it  to  be 
"  tempted,  above  what  it  is  able."  When  good 
men  are  grown  up  to  perfe6lion,  and  able  to  bear  it, 
as  they  will  be  when  they  come  to  heaven,  their 
good  name  fhall  be  fully  vindicated,  and  they  fliall 
have  praife,  not  only  from  men,  but  from  angels, 
and  from  God  himfelf. 

2.  This  life  is  not  the  proper  feafon  of  reward,  but 
of  work  and  fervice. 

In  this  life,  God  is  pleafed  to  give  fome  prefent 
encouragement  to  piety  and  virtue,  but  referves  the 
main  of  our  recompence,  to  be  beftowed  upon  us  at 
the  end  of  our  work.  When  our  courfe  is  finifhed, 
then,  and  not  before,  we  muil  exped  our  crown  ; 
when  our  accounts  are  caft  up,  and  ftated,  and  it 
appears  what  improvement  we  have  made  of  our  ta- 
lents, then  will  come,  the  euge  hone  ferve^  "  well 
*'  done  good  and  faithful  fervant."  In  the  mean 
time,  good  men  muft  be  content  with  fuch  a  por- 
tion of  efleem,  as  an  envious  and  ill-natured  world 
will  afford  them. 

And  thus  I  have  done  with  the  firft  thing  I  pro- 
pofed  to  enquire  into ;  whence  it  comes  to  pafs^  that 
good  men  are  frequently  defrauded  of  their  due  praife 
and  reputation,  while  alive  ?  I  proceed  to  the 

Second  enquiry,  nam^ely,  what  fecurity  good  men 
have  of  a  good  name  after  death  ? 

And  the  true  account  of  this  is  to  be  given,  partly 
from  the  providence  of  God,  and  partly  from  the 
nature  of  the  thing. 

(i.)  From  the  providence  of  God  :  which  is  con- 
cerned herein,  upon  a  twofold  account. 

I.  Inrefped  of  the  equity  of  it. 

2.  In 


LXXVI. 


good  men ^  after  death.  1203 

2.  In  regard  of  the  example  of  it.  ^^^-vt??' 

1.  In  refpe6l  of  the  equity  of  it.  God,  who  will 
not  be  behind-hand  with  any  man,  concerns  himfelf, 
to  fecure  to  good  men  the  proper  reward  of  their 
piety  and  virtue.  Now  praife  is  one  of  the  moil  pro- 
per recompences  of  good  and  virtuous  adions  ;  this 
good  men  feldom  meet  with  in  this  life,  without  a 
great  deal  of  allay  and  abatement ;  and  therefore 
the  providence  of  God  hath  fo  ordered  things,  that 
it  ihould  come  in  the  properefl  feafon,  when  our 
work  is  done,  and  when  we  are  out  of  the  danger  of 
the  temptation  of  it. 

2.  In  regard  of  the  example  of  it.  It  is  a  great 
argument  to  virtue,  and  encouragement  to  men,  to 
ad;  their  part  well,  to  fee  good  men  applauded, 
when  they  go  off  the  flage.  Every  man  that  hath 
any  fpark  of  generofity  in  him,  is  defirous  of  fame  ; 
and  though  men  care  not  how  foon  it  comes,  yet 
they  will  be  glad  to  have  it  after  death,  rather  than 
not  at  all.  Piety  and  virtue  would  be  but  very  me- 
lancholy and  uncomfortable  things  •,  if  they  Ihould 
always  be  fo  unfortunate,  as  never  to  meet  with  due 
eileem  and  approbation  :  but  when  men  are  aiiured, 
that  they  Ihall  have  this  reward,  one  time  or  other, 
and  obferve  it  to  be  fo  in  experience  ;  this  is  a  great 
fpur  and  encouragement  to  do  virtuoufly :  and  a 
great  mind,  that  hath  a  juft  fenfe  of  reputation  and 
a  good  name,  will  be  content  to  lay  in  for  it  before- 
hand \  and  patiently  to  wait  the  time,  which  God 
knows  fitteft  for  the  bellowing  of  it. 

(2.)  The  other  part  of  the  account  of  this  truth, 
is  to  be  given  from  the  nature  of  the  thing  :  becaufe 
death  removes  and  takes  away  the  chief  obftacle  of 
a  good  man's  reputation.  For  then  his  defers  arc 
out  of  fight,  and  men  are  contented  that  his  imper- 
3  fedtions 


1204  ^^^  reputation  of 

SKRM.  feflions   fhould  be  buried  in   his  grave  with    him» 

L.XXVI 

•  Death  hath  put  him  out  of  the  reach  of  malice  and 
envy,  his  worth  and  excellency  does  now  no  longer 
ftand  in  other  mens  light  *,  his  great  virtues  are  at  a 
diftance,  and  not  fo  apt  to  be  brought  into  compa- 
rifon,  to  the  prejudice  and  difadvantage  of  the  liv- 
ing ;  mortiii  non  mordent  -,  the  example  of  the  dead 
is  not  fo  cutting  a  reproof  to  the  vice  of  the  living  •, 
the  good  man  is  removed  out  of  the  way,  and  his 
example,  how  bright  foever,  is  not  fo  fcorching  and 
troublefom  at  a  difliance  -,  and  therefore  men  are  ge- 
nerally contented,  to  give  him  his  due  charader. 

Befides,  that  there  is  a  certain  civiHty  in  human 
nature,  which  will  not  fuffer  men  to  wrong  the  dead, 
and  to  deny  them  the  juft  commendation  of  their 
worth.  Even  the  fcribes  and  pharifees  (as  bad  a  fort 
of  men  as  we  can  well  imagine)  though  they  were 
juft  like  their  fathers  in  perfecuting  and  flaying  the 
prophets,  while  they  were  alive  j  yet  had  they  a 
mighty  veneration  for  their  piety  and  virtue  after 
they  were  dead,  and  thought  no  honour  too  great 
to  be  done  to  them.  They  would  be  at  the  charge 
of  raifmg  monuments  to  the  memory  of  thofe  good 
men,  whom  their  fathers  had  flain  \  and  whom  they 
would  certainly  have  ufed  in  the  very  fame  manner, 
had  they  either  lived  in  the  days  of  thofe  prophets, 
or  thofe  prophets  had  lived  in  their  days,  as  our 
Saviour  plainly  told  them. 

All  that  now  remains  is,  to  draw  fome  inferences 
from  what  hath  been  faid,  by  way  of  application  ; 
and  they  fhall  be  thefe  three. 

1 .  To  vindicate  the  honour  and  refpedl  which  the 
chriftian  church,  for  many  ages,  hath  paid  to  the 
memory  of  the  firft  teachers  and  martyrs  of  our 
religion. 

2.  To 


good  men ^  after  death,  1205 

2 .  To  encourage  us  to  piety  and  goodnefs,  from  S  E  R  M 
this  confideration  \  that  ' '  the  righteous  fhall  be  in 
**  everlafting  remembrance.'* 

3.  Tliat  when  we  pretend  to  honour  the  memory 
of  good  men,  we  would  be  careful  to  imitate  their 
holinefs  and  virtue. 

I.  To  vindicate  the  honour,  which  the  chriflian 
church  hath  for  many  ages  done  to  the  firft  teachers 
and  martyrs  of  our  reUgion  ;  I  mean  more  efpecially 
to  the  holy  apoilles  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  ;  to 
whofe  honour,  the  chriflian  church  hath  thought  fit  to 
itx.  apart  folemn  times,  for  the  commemoration  of 
their  piety  and  Offering,  and  to  ftir  up  others  to  the 
imitation  of  them. 

This  certainly  can  with  no  good  colour,  either 
from  fcripture  or  reafon,  be  pretended  to  be  unlaw- 
ful ;  and  when  David  here  fays,  "  the  righteous 
*'  fliall  be  in  everlafling  remembrance  ;"  he  cannot 
certainly  be  thought  to  exclude  the  mofl  folemn  way 
of  commemorating  their  piety  and  virtue. 

I  do  not  pretend,  this  cuftom  can  be  derived  from 
the  very  firft  ages  of  chriftianity  \  but  furely  it  is  fuf- 
ficient,  for  the  lawfulnefs  of  it,-  that  it  is  no  where 
forbidden  ;  nay  it  is  r.ther  reqijired  here  in  the  text  ^ 
the  befl  v/ay  to  preferve  the  memory  of  good  men, 
being  thus  to  commemorate  them.  And  it  may  be 
of  great  ufe  to  us,  if  it  be  not  our  own  fault  •,  the 
fetting  before  our  eyes,  the  holy  lives  of  excellent 
men,  being  in  it's  own  nature  apt  to  excite  us  to  the 
imitation  of  them. 

Befides  that  I  could  tell  you,  that  though  this  can- 
not be  proved  fo  ancient,  as  fome  vainly  pretend  ; 
yet  it  is  of  great  antiquity  \n  tlie  Church,  and  did  be- 
gin in  fome  of  the  bell  age:,  of  chriftianity.  Memc- 
rice  MartjTum^  the  meetings  of  chriftians  at  the  tombs 

Vol.  V.  10  A  of 

6. 


i2o6  'J'he  reputation  of 

SE  R  M.   of  the  martyrs  was  pra6tifed  long  before  the  degenc- 

^_  _^,  racy  of  the  weftern  church ;  and  the  Chriftians  were 

wont  at  thofe  meetings,  folemnly  to  commemorate 

the  faith   and  conflancy  of  thofe  good  men,  and  to 

encourage  themfelves  from  their  examples. 

I  know  very  well,  that  this  did  in  time  degene- 
rate into  grofs  fuperftition,  which  afterward  gave 
colour  and  occafion  to  that  grofs  and  idolatrous  prac- 
tice in  the  church  of  Rome,  of  worfhipping  faints. 
But  this  abufe  is  no  fufHcient  reafon  for  us,  to  give 
over  the  celebrating  of  the  m.emory  of  fuch  holy 
men,  as  the  apoftles  and  martyrs  9f  Christ  were ; 
and  propounding  them  to  our  felves  for  our  patterns. 
We  may  flill  lawfully  give  them  their  due  honour  ; 
though  the  church  of  Rome  hath  fo  over- done  it,  as 
to  rob  God  of  his. 

2.  Let  this  confideration,  that  "  the  righteous 
*'  Ihall  be  in  everlailing  remembrance,"  be  an  en- 
couragement to  us,  to  piety  and  goodnefs.  This  to 
a  generous  nature,  that  is  fenfible  of  honour  and  re- 
putation, is  no  fmali  reward  and  encouragement. 
Before  thehappinefs  of  ]ieaven  was  clearly  revealed, 
and  *'  life  and  immortality  brought  to  light,  by  the 
"  gofpel,"  one  of  the  grcatcft  motives  to  worthy 
and  virtuous  deecis,  was  the  earnell  defire  which  men 
had  of  leaving  a  good  name  behind  them,  and  of 
perpetuating  the  tame  and  glory  of  their  adions  to 
atter-agcs.  Upon  this  ground,  chiefly,  many  of  the 
braveft  fpirits,  among  t]ie  heathen,  were  animated  to 
virtue,  and,  witii  the  hazard  of  their  lives,  to  do 
great  and  glorious  exploits  for  their  country. 

And  certainly,  it  is  an  argument  of  a  great  mind, 
to  be  moved  by  this  confideration  •,  and  a  fign  of  a 
low  and  bafe  fpirit,  to  ncgled  it.  He  that  hath  no 
rcg.ird  to  liis  lame,  is  loft  to  all  purpofcs  of  virtue 

and 


good  men ^  after  death,  1207 

c*  T*  n   TV  yT 

and  goodnefs  j  when  a  man  is  once  come  to  this,  not  j^^^yj ' 
to  care  what  others  fay  of  him,  the  next  ftep  is,  to 
have  no  care  what  himfelf  does,  ^wd  confcientia  eft 
apud  Deum^  id  fama  eft  apud  homines^  what  confci- 
ence  is  in  refpedl  of  God,  that  is  fame  in  refpe6t  of 
men.  Next  to  a  good  confcience,  a  clear  reputation 
ought  to  be  to  every  man  the  deareft  thing  in  th« 
world.  Men  have  generally  a  great  value  for  riches  ; 
and  yet  the  fcripture  pronounceth  him  the  happier 
man,  that  leaves  a  good  name,  than  him  that  leaves 
a  great  eilate  behind  him,  Prov.  xxii.  i.  ''  A  good 
*'  name  is  rather  to  be  chofen  than  great  riches.'* 

If  then  we  have  any  regard  to  a  good  name  ;  the 
beft  way  to  fecure  it  to  our  felves,  is  by  the  holy  and 
virtuous  actions  of  a  good  life.  Do  well,  and  thou 
flialt  be  well  fpoken  of ;  if  not  now,  yet  by  thofe 
who  fliall  come  after ;  the  fureft  way  to  glory,  and 
honour,  and  immortality,  is  by  a  patient  continuance 
in  well-doing.  God  hath  engaged  his  promife  to 
us  to  this  purpofe,  i  Sam.  ii.  30.  "  Them  that  ho- 
"  nour  me,  I  will  honour  ;  and  they  that  defpife 
"  me,  fhali  be  hghtly  efteemed."  "  The  name  of  the 
"  wicked  Ihall  rot,"  fays  Solomon,  Prov.  x.  7.  But 
God  doth  ufually  take  a  particular  care,  to  prefer^^e 
and  vindicate  their  memory,  who  are  careful  to 
"  keep  his  covenant,  and  remember  his  command- 
"  ments  to  do  them." 

3dly  and  lafdy,  whenever  we  pretend  to  do  ho- 
nour to  the  memory  of  good  men,  let  us  charge  our 
felves  with  a  ilrift  imitation  of  their  holinefs  and  vir- 
tue. The  greateft  honour  we  can  do  to  Gqd,  or 
good  men,  is  to  endeavour  to  be  like  tliem  \  to  ex- 
prefs  their  virtues,  and  reprefent  them 'to  the  world  in 
ourhves.  Upon  thefe  days,  we  fhould  propound 
to  our  felves  as  cik'  patterns,  all  thofe  holy  pnd  ex- 

10  A  2  cdlent 


1 20 8  ^he  reputation  of ^   &c. 

^v\m  ■  ^^^^^  pcrfons,  who  have  gone  before  us  ;  the  apof- 
ties  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour,  and  all  thofeblefied 
faints  and  martyrs,  "  who  were  faithful  to  the  death, 
"  and  have  received  a  crown  of  life  and  immortality." 

We  fhould  reprefent  to  ourfelvcs  the  piety  of  their 
actions,  and  the  patience  and  conftancy  of  their  fuf- 
fcrings,  that  w^e  may  imitate  their  virtues,  and  "  be 
*'  followers  of  them,  who  through  faith  and  patience, 
"  have  inherited  the  promifes  •,  and  feeing  we  are 
•^^  compaft  about  with  fuch  a  cloud  of  witnefifes," 
we  fhould  "  lay  afide  every  weight,  and  run  with 
*'  patience  the  race  that  is  fet  before  us." 

Let  us  imagine  all  thofe  great  examples  of  piety 
and  virtue,  {landing  about  us  in  a  throng,  and  fix- 
ing their  eyes  upon  us.  How  ought  we  to  demean 
ourfelves  in  fuch  a  prefence,  and  under  the  eye  of 
fuch  witnefifes  !  and  how  fhould  we  be  afliamed  to 
do  any  thing,  that  is  unworthy  of  fuch  excellent  pat- 
terns, and  blufh  to  look  upon  our  own  lives,  when 
we  remember  theirs !  Good  God  !  at  what  a  diftance 
do  the  greateft  part  of  thriftians  follow  thofe  exam- 
ples !  and  while  we  honour  them  with  our  lips,  how 
unlike  are  v/e  to  them  in  our  lives  ! 

Why  do  we  thus  reproach  our  felves  with  thefe 
glorious  patterns  ?  Let  us  either  refolve  to  imitate 
their  virtues,  or  to  make  no  mention  of  their  names  ; 
lor  while  we  celebrate  the  examples  of  faints  and 
holy  men,  and  yet  contradi6l  them  in  our  lives,  we 
either  mock  them,  or  upbraid  our  felves. 

Now  the  God  of  peace,  who  brought  again  from 
the  dsad  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  &:c. 

•    SER- 


€209 


Sermon   lxxvii.  l:fu' 

faints  day. 

The  duty   of  imitating   the   primitive 
teachers,  and  patterns  of  chriftianity. 


HEB.  XIII.  7. 

The  latter  part  of  the  verfe. 

fFbofe  faith  follow^  co-nfidering  the  end  of  their  con- 

verfation. 

The  whole  verfe  runs  thus. 
Remember  them  which  have  the  ride  over  yotiy  who  have 
fpoken  unto  you  the  word  of  God  -,  whofe  faith  foU 
loWy  corftdering  the  end  of  their  converfaticn. 

TH  E  great  fcope  and  defign  of  this  epiftle,  is  S  E  R  M: 
to  perfuade  the  Jews,  who  were  newly  con-  LXXVU. 
verted  to  chriftianity,  to  continue  ftedfaft  in  the 
profefTion  of  it,  notwithftanding  all  the  fufferings 
and  perfecutions  it  was  attended  withal  •,  and  to  en- 
courage them  hereto,  among  manyx»ther  arguments 
v/hich  the  apoftle  makes  ufe  of,  he  doth  feveral 
times  in  this  epiftle  propound  to  them  the  examples 
,^nnd  patterns  of  faints  and  holy  men,  that  were  gone 
before  them  •,  efpecially  thofe  of  their  own  nation, 
who  in  their  refpecSlive  ages  had  given  remarkable 
teftimony  of  their  faith  in  God,  and  conftant  adhe- 
rence to  the  truth,  chap.  vi.  11,  12.  "  And  we  de- 
"  fire,  that  every  one  of  you  do  fhew  the  fame  di- 
*'  ligence,    to  the  full  affurance  of  hope,  unto  the 

''  end: 


1 2  lo    T^be  duty  of  imitating  the  primitive  teachers^ 

E  R^M.   «  end :  that  ye  be  not   flothful ;  but  followers  of 
"  them,  who  through  faith  and  patience  inherit  the 
"  promifes.'*     And  chap.  xi.  he  gives  a  catalogue 
of  the  eminent  heroes  and  faints  of  the  old  teftament, 
who  by  faith  had  done  fuch  wonders,  and   given 
fuch  teftimony  of  their  patience  and  conftancy,  in 
doing  and  fuffering  the  will  of  God  ;  from  whence 
he  infers,  chap.  xii.  i .  that  we  ought  to  take  pattern 
and  heart  from  fuch  examples,  to  perfevere  in  our 
chriftian  courfe  ;  "  wherefore  feeing  we  alfo  are  com- 
''  pafifcd  about  with  fo  great  a  cloud  of"  martyrs,  or 
''  witnefTes,  let  us  lay  afide  every  weight,  and  the 
*'  fin  which  doth  fo  eafily  befet  us,  and  let  us  run 
''  with  patience  the  race  that  is  fet  before  us  j"  efpe- 
cially  fince  they  had  greater  examples  than  thele, 
nearer  to  them,  and  more  frelli  in  memory ;  the 
great  example  of  our  Lord,  the  founder  of  our  re- 
ligion \  and  of  the  firft  teachers  of  chriftianity,  the 
difciples  and  apoftles  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour, 
The  example  of  our  Lord  himfelf,  the  captain  and 
rewarder   of  our  faith,  ver,  2.  of  that  xiith  chap. 
"  Looking  unto  Jesus  the  author  and  finifher  of 
''  our  faith,  who,  for  the  joy  that  was  fet  before  him, 
'*  endured  the  crofs,  defpifing  the  fhame :"  ver.  3. 
"  For  confider  him  who  endured  fuch  contradi6lion 
"  of  finners  againit  himfelf,  left  ye  be  wearied,  and 
"  faint  in  your  minds."     This  indeed  is  the  great 
pattern  of  Chriftians,  and,  in   regard  of  the  great 
perfe6lion  of  it,  furpaffeth   all  other  patterns,  and 
feems  to  make  them  ufelefs  ^  as  having  in  it  the  per- 
fedtion   of  the  divinity,  not  in  it's   full  brightnefs, 
(which  would  be  apt  to  dazzle  rather  than  direct  us) 
but  allayed  and  fliadowed  with  the  infirmities  of  hu- 
man nature  •,  and  for  that  reafon,  more  a,ccomrriodate 
and  familiar  to   us,  than  the  divine  perfedlions  ab- 
ilradedly  confidered.  But 


LXXVII. 


(thd  fat  terns  of  chrijlianit)\  1 2 1  r 

But  yet  becaufe  our  blefied  Saviour  was  God  as  SE R  M. 
well  as  man,  and  clear  of  all  flain  of  fin,  (for  though 
he  was  clothed  with  the  infirmities,  yet  he  was  free 
from  the  corruption  of  human  nature)  therefore  the 
examples  of  mere  men,  liable  to  fin  as  we  are,  may 
in  many  refpefts  be  more  fuitable  and  accommodate, 
to  encourage  us  to  the  imitation  of  thofe  virtues, 
which  are  attainable  by  us,  in  this  ftate  of  imperfec- 
tion •,  for  which  reafon  the  apoftle  hath  thought  fit 
likewife  to  propofe  to  us,  the  highell  examples  of 
that  kind,  the  firft  teachers  of  our  religion  ;  for  of 
thefe  he  feems  to  fpeak  here  in  the  text,  namely  thofe 
apofiles,  or  apoflolical  men,  by  whom  they  had  been 
inllruded  in  the  faith  of  C  h  r  i  s  t  ,  but  who  were  now 
departed  this  hfe  ;  it  being  very  probable,  that  the 
apoftle  here  fpeaks  of  fuch  as  were  dead,  when  he 
fays,  "  remember  them,  which  have  had  the  rule  over 
"  you,"  (or.  thofe  that  have  been  your  guides)  "  who 
"  have  fpoken  to  you  the  word  of  God,  whofe  faith 
"  follow,  confidering  the  end  of  their  converfation." 

I  fay  this  is  very  probable,  becaufe  he  minds  them 
to  remember,  which  fuppofcth  them  to  be  abfent ; 
but  efpecially,  becaufe  he  minds  them,  to  confider 
the  end  of  their  converfation  ^  by  which  furely  he 
means  the  ble/Ted  ftate  of  thofe  good  men  after  death : 
which  is  elfev/here  called,  "  i\\t  end  of  our  faith,  e- 
''  ven  the  falvation  of  our  fouls,"  i  Pet.  i.  9.  So 
likewife,  Rom.  vi.  22.  this  isfaid  to  be  the  end  of  a 
holy  life  ;  "ye  have  your  fruit  unto  holinefs,  and  the 
''  end,  everlafting  life."  And  it  very  much  favours 
this  interpretation,  that  the  apoftle  afterwards  fpeaks 
of  the  living  guides,  and  governors  of  the  church, 
ver.  17.  "  Obey  them  which  have  the  rule  over  you, 
*^  and  fubmit  your  felves,  for  they  watch  for  your 
**  fouls.''  2 


LX.KVir. 


1 2 1 2     'fhe  duty  of  imitating  the  primitive  teachers^ 

S  E  R  M.  So  that  it  is  highly  probable,  that  the  apoftle  here 
fpeaks  of  fuch  guides,  and  governors  of  the  church, 
as  had  once  been  over  them,  but  were  now  departed 
this  hfe ;  and  therefore  he  might  with  more  freedom 
and  lefs  envy,  recommend  their  example  to  them, 
and  bid  them  call  to  mind  their  faith,  and  exemplary 
converfation  among  them,  and  propofe  it  for  a  pat- 
tern to  thcmfelves,  confidering  the  happy  end  of  it, 
viz.  the  blelTed  ftate  they  were  now  in,  and  the  glo- 
rious reward  they  were  made  partakers  of,  in  another 
life. 

In  the  words  thus  explained,  you  have, 

I.  A  duty  enjoined  ;  which  is,  to  propofe  to  our- 
felves,  for  our  imitation,  the  examples  of  good  men, 
that  have  gon©^  before  us  ',  efpecially  the  primitive 
patterns  of  chriftianity,  and  the  fail  teachers  of  our 
religion.  "  Remember  them  which  have  been  your 
*'  guides,  and  have  fpoken  to  you  the  word  of  God, 
*'  whofe  faith  follow." 

II.  The  motive  or  encouragement  to  it,  from  the 
confideration  of  the  reward  of  it  -,  confidering  the 
end  of  their  converfation. 

I.  The  duty  enjoined  ;  which  is,  to  propofe  to  our- 
felves,  for  our  imitation,  the  example  of  good  men, 
that  have  gone  before  us  \  efpecially  the  primitive 
patterns  of  chriftianity,  and  firfl  teachers  of  our  re- 
ligion. "  Remember  them  that  have  had  the  rule 
"  over  you,"  that  have  been  your  guides,  "  and  have 
*'  fpoken  to  you  the  word  of  God,  whofe  faith  fol- 
*'  low."  In  which  v/ords,  the  apoftie  bids  them  call 
to  mind  their  firfl  guides  and  initruclors  in  chriflia- 
nity,  whom  they  had  known,  and  heard,  and  con- 
verfed  with  in  this  world,  but  who  now  refted 
from  their  labours,  and  were  receiving  the  reward  of 
them  j  to  remember  the  do6lrines  they  had  heard  from 

them. 


and  patterns  of  chriftianity,  ^  2  1 3 

them,  and  the  virtues  they  had  feen  in  them  ;  and  to  ^^  P^  ^  ^1 
embrace  the  one,  and  imitate  the  other.  ^  ^_i  j 

Thus  we  cannot  remember  the  primitive  teachers, 
and  patterns  of  chriftianity,  the  apoflles  of  our  Lord 
and  Saviour  ;  becaufe  we  did  not  perfonally  know 
them,  and  converfe  with  them,  living  at  the  diftance 
of  many  ages  from  their  time  :  but  we  may  do  that 
which  is  equivalent,  and  a  kind  of  remembrance 
of  them  •,  we  may  commemorate  their  faith,  and  the 
virtue  and  holinefs  of  their  lives  \  and  what  we  hear 
and  read  of  them,  we  may  propofe  for  patterns  to 
ourfelves,  and  copy  them  out  in  our  lives  and  adlions  : 
and  this  is  our  duty,  and  the  fame  in  fubilance  with 
theirs,  who  had  the  happinefs  to  know,  and  con- 
verfe with  thofe  excellent  perfons,  to  hear  them  preach, 
and  to  fee  the  rules  and  precepts  of  that  holy  doc- 
trine, which  they  taught,  exempiilied  in  their  lives. 

In  the  handling  of  this  argument,  I  fnall  do  theie 
three  things. 

Firft,  Shew  why  amongil  all  the  examples  of  good 
men,  we  fhould  more  efpecially  propofe  to  our  imi- 
tation, the  primiuive  teachers,  and  patterns  of  our 
religion. 

Secondly,  Wherein  we  Hiould  imitate  them.  The 
apoftle  expreffeth  it  in  one  word,  in  their  faith  j 
"  whofe  faith  follow." 

Thirdly,  The  encouragement  to  this,  from  the 
confideration  of  the  happy  flate  they  are  in,  and  the 
glorious  reward  they  are  made  partakers  of;  "  con- 
"  fidering  the  end  of  their  converfation." 

Firil,  I  fhall  endeavour  to  fhew,  why  among  all 
the  examples  of  good  men,  we  fhould  more  efpeci- 
ally propofe  to  our  imitation,  the  primitive  teachers 
and  patterns  of  our  religion,  I  mean,  the  holy  apo- 
illes  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour,  '^  whofe  faith,"  we 

Vol.  V,  10  B  iliould 

6. 


12  14     ^b^  duty  of  imitating  the  primitive  teacher^, 

S  E  R  M.  fhould  endeavour  "  to  follow,"  and  to  imitate  the  ho- 
linefs  and  virtue  of  their  converfation.  For  thefe  cer- 
tainly come  nearcfl  to  that  moft  perfe6l,  and  excellent 
pattern  of  all  goodnefs,  our  blefled  Saviour,  and 
are  the  faireft  tranfcripts  of  that  unblemifhed  original. 
Hence  it  is  that  St.  Paul  fo  frequently  exhorts  Chri- 
llians  to  imitate  his  example,  and  the  examples  of 
the  other  apoftles ;  it  being  reafonable  to  prefume, 
that  they  came  neareft  to  the  pattern  of  our  Lord. 
I  Cor.  xi.  I.  "Be  ye  followers  of  me,  even  as  I  al- 
''  fo  am  of  Christ,"  Phil.  iii.  17.  "  Brethren,  be 
*'  followers  together  of  me,  and  mark  them  which 
*'  walk  fo,  as  ye  have  us  for  an  enfample.  For  our 
*'  converfation  is  in  heaven." 

And  this  is  reafonable,  that  the  firft  in  every  kind 
fhould  be  the  rule  and  pattern  of  the  reft,  and  of  all 
that  follow  after  ;  becaufe  it  is  likely  to  be  moft  per- 
fedt.  In  procefs  of  time,  the  beft  inftitutions  are  apt 
to  decline,  and  by  infenfible  degrees  to  fv/erve,  and 
depart  from  the  perfedion  of  their  firft  ftate  ;  and 
therefore  it  is  a  good  rule,  to  preferve  things  from 
corruption  and  degeneracy,  often  to  look  back  to  the 
firft  inftitution,  and  by  that  to  corred  thofe  imper- 
fedions  and  errors  which  will  almoft  unavoidably 
creep  in  with  time. 

If  we  would  prefen'^e  that  purity  of  faith  and  man- 
ners, which  our  religion  requires,  we  fhould  have 
frequent  recourfe  to  the  primitive  teachers  and  pat- 
terns of  chriftianity,  and  endeavour  to  bring  our  be- 
lief and  fives  to  as  near  a  conformity  with  theirs,  as 
is  poflible.  Who  fo  likely  to  deliver  the  faith  and 
dof trine  of  Christ  pure,  and  uncornipted,  as  the 
primitive  teachers  of  it,  who  received  it  from  our 
Lord  himfelf;  and  were  by  an  extraordinary  afli- 
ftance  of  the  holy  Spirit,  fecured  from  error  and  mi- 

ftakc 


and  patterns  of  chrijlianity. 

flake  in  the  delivery  of  it  ?  And  who  fo  likely  to 
bring  their  lives  and  converfations  to  an  exad:  con- 
formity with  this  holy  do6lrine,  as  they,  who  were 
fo  thoroughly  inftrudled  in  it  by  the  beft  mafter,  and 
fhewn  the  pradlice  of  it  in  the  moft  perfedl  example 
of  all  holinefs  and  virtue  ?  Great  reafon  there  is  there- 
fore, why  all  Chriflians  fliould  follow  their  faith, 
and  make  their  converfation  more  efpecially  the  pat- 
tern of  their  lives. 

The  want  of  a  due  regard  to  thefe  fountain^  of 
chriftian  do6lrine,  and  the  firil  and  beft  patterns  of 
chriftian  practice,  hath  been  the  great  caufe  of  that 
foul  degeneracy  of  the  Romifh  church,  both  in  the 
dodtrine  and  practice  of  chriftianity.  They  do  not 
follow  the  faith  of  the  apoftles,  the  firft  fathers  and 
teachers  of  chriftianity  \  but  of  the  fathers  of  the 
council  of  Lateran  and  Trent.  Thus  have  they  "  for- 
**  faken  the  fountain  of  living  waters,"  the  holy  fcrip- 
tures,  "  and  have  hewn  to  themfelves  broken  cifterns, 
"  that  will  hold  no  water  •,"  the  dodlrines  and  tra- 
ditions of  men.  Nay,  they  have  ftopt  up  this  "  foun- 
"  tain  of  living  waters"  from  the  people,  and  forbid 
them  to  come  to  it ;  and  forced  them  to  drink  of 
thofe  impure  and  puddled  ftreams,  which  they  let 
out  to  them  •,  and  inftead  of  the  lives  of  the  holy  a- 
poftles,  and  thofe  eminent  graces  and  virtues  which 
ihined  forth  in  them,  they  reprefent  to  them  the  pat- 
terns of  new  faints  \  fome  of  which  neither  they  nor 
their  fathers  knew,  and  indeed  never  were  in  being  ; 
as  St.  Almanach,  and  St.  Synoris,  and  feveral  others  ; 
many  of  them  fo  far  from  being  faints,  that  they  may 
be  reckoned  among  the  worft  of  men  •,  (for  inftancc, 
our  countrjrman  Thomas  a  Becket,  who  for  pride  and 
rebellion  may  almoft  vie  with  Lucifer  himfelf  •,  and 
yet  this  ill  man  and  worft  of  fubjeds,  was  canonized 

10  B  2  tQ 


1 2 1 6     T'he  duty  of  imitating  the  primitive  teachers^ 

TvSA^n  ^^  ^^^^  height,  as  for  two  hundred  years  together, 
'*  to  engrofs  the  worihip  of  thefe  wellern  parts  of  the 
world,  and  to  impoverifh  the  fhrines  of  all  other 
faints,  even  of  the  bleiTed  virgin  herfelf ;)  others,  fuch 
ideots,  or  hot-headed  fanaticlcs,  that  he  that  reads  their 
Jives,  would  take  them  to  be  fools  and  madmen,  ra- 
ther than  faints,  (as  Francis,  and  Dominick,  and  Ig- 
natius Loyola,  and  feveral  others  of  the  fame  ftamp  ;) 
and  many  the  very  heft  of  them,  fo  difguifed  by  their 
legends,  that  inflead  of  the  fubftantial  virtues  of  a 
good  life,  their  ftory  is  made  up  of  falfe  and  fantaili- 
cal  miracles,  and  ridiculous  freaks  of  fuperilition. 

All  which  confidered,  there  is  great  reafon,  why 
we  fhould  have  recourfe  to  the  primitive  patterns  of 
faith  and  holinefs,  "  and  be  followers  of  them,  who" 
we  are  fure  "  were  followers  of  Christ."  I  pro- 
ceed to  the 

Second  thing  I  propofed,  namely,  wherein  we  fhould 
imitate  thefe  patterns.  And  the  apoflie  exprefleth 
it  in  one  word,  in  their  faith,  "  whofe  faith  follow." 
And  the  woi'd  faith  is  frequently  in  the  new  teflament 
ufed  fo  largely,  as  to  comprehend  the  whole  condi- 
tion of  the  gofpel  \  a  firm  belief  of  the  dodrine  of  it, 
and  the  fruit  and  effcd  of  this  belief,  in  a  good  con- 
verfation.  And  that  faith  here  in  the  text,  takes  in 
a  holy  life,  is  evident  from  v/hat  follows,  "  whofe 
"  faith  fellow,  confidering  the  end  of  their  conver- 
*'  fation  ;"  from  whence  it  is  evident,  that  the  apo- 
flie fpeaks  of  fuch  a  faith,  as  fhews  forth  itfelf  in  a 
good  converfation. 

So  that  we  may  very  well  fuppofe  the  apoftle  here 
to  recomm.end  the  primitive  faith  to  our  imitation, 
in  thefe  four  refpecls. 

1 .  In  regard  of  the  fincerity  and  purity  of  it. 

2.  In  regard,  of  the  firmnefs  and  liability  of  it. 

3- Of 


and  patterns  ofchrijlianity.  1 2 1 7 

3,  Of  their  conflancy  and  perfeverance  in  it.  ^  ^'  ^  J^- 

4.  Of  the  efFicacy  and  fruitfulnefs  of  it,  in  a  good 
converfation.  All  thefe  may  be  colle6ted  from  the 
expreffions  and  circumftances  of  the  text. 

1.  We  are  to  imitate  thefe  primitive  patterns,  in 
the  fincerity  and  purity  of  their  faith  ;  I  mean,  that 
the  faith  which  we  profefs,  be  the  fincere  dodrine  of 
chriftianity,  and  the  pure  word  of  God,  free  from 
all  mixture  of  human  additions  and  inventions,  and 
not  made  up,  as  the  faith  of  the  Pharifees  was  a- 
mong  the  Jews,  and  theirs  of  the  church  of  Rome 
is  at  this  day,  of  the  word  of  God,  and  the  doctrines 
and  traditions  of  men  ;  not  like  the  creed  of  pope 
Pius  IV.  (which  is  now  the  flandard  of  the  Ro- 
man faith)  confiding  of  the  12  old  articles  of  the 
cliriftian  faith,  delivered  to  us  by  Christ  and  his 
apoftles,  and  as  many  new  ones,  coined  and  ftampt 
by  their  later  councils.  This  is  not  "  to  follow  the 
''  faith"  of  the  apoftles,  and  firft  patterns  of  chri- 
ftianity, "  the  faith  once  deUvered  to  the  faints,"  as 
St.  Jude  calls  it.  This  is  to  have  our  faith  ftand 
upon  the  authority  of  men,  and  not  on  the  word  of 
God  ;  whereas  we  are  "  to  follow  the  faith  of  the 
"  iirft  guides"  of  the  chriftian  church,  "  who  fpake 
"  unto  them  the  word  of  God,"  as  the  apoftle  ex- 
prefty  chargeth  here  in  the  text. 

2.  We  are  to  imitate  them,  in  the  ftability  and 
firmnefs  of  our  faith,  and  not  fufFer  ourfelves  to  be 
fhaken,  and  removed  from  it,  by  every  wind  of 
new  dodrine  ;  the  faith  of  Chp.ist  being  unchange- 
able, as  Christ  himfelf.  And  that  by  following 
the  faith  of  the  primitive  guides  and  teachers  of 
chriftianity,  the  apoftle  here  means,  that  we  ftiould 
''  be  ftedfaft  and  immovable"  in  it,  is  plain  from  what 
follows  immediately  after  the  text  v  "  whofe  faith 

3  ;'  follow. 


Lxxvir. 


1 2 1 8     7X^  duty  of  imitating  the  primitive  teachers^ 

^  E  R^^-  "  follow,  confidering  the  end  of  their  converfation. 
"  Jesus  Christ,  the  fame  yefterday,  and  to  day, 
"  and  for  ever.  Be  not  carried  about  with  divers 
"  and  flrange  dodrines  :  for  k  is  a  good  thing,  that 
*'  the  heart  be  eflablifhed  with  grace,"  that  is,  in 
the  dodlrine  of  the  gofpel,  which  is  frequently  called 
''the  grace  of  God." 

3.  We  are  to  imitate  them,  in  the  conftancy  and 
perfeverance  of  their  faith  \  and  that,  notwithftand- 
ing  all  the  difcountenance  and  oppofition,  the  pcrfe^- 
cation  and  fuffering  which  attend  the  profeffion  of 
this  faith  ;  which  the  apoftle  fufficiently  intimates  in 
this  epiftle,  to  have  been  the  condition  of  thofe  Chri- 
flians,  to  whom  he  wrote ;  and  therefore  he  pro- 
pofeth  fo  many  examples  to  them,  of  conflant  and 
patient  fuffering  for  God  and  his  truth  ;  and  it  is 
probable  enough,  that  the  apoftle  here  recommends 
the  example  of  thofe,  who  were  the  primitive  mar- 
tyrs, as  well  as  teachers  of  chriftianity.  He  had  be- 
fore propofed  to  them  the  living  examples  of  thofe, 
who  were  under  adual  perfecution  and  fufferings  for 
the  gofpel,  ver.  3.  "  remember  thofe  that  are  in 
*'  bonds,  and  thofe  that  fuffer  adverfity  •,"  and  here 
in  the  7th  verfe  he  feems  to  propofe  the  pattern  of 
thofe,  who  had  laid  down  their  lives  and  died  for  the 
faith  ;  "  remember  thofe  who  have  been  your  guides, 
*'  and  have  fpoken  to  you  the  word  of  God,  whofe 
•'  faith  follow,  confidering  the  end  of  their  conver- 
*'  fation,"  Tjji/  \yLZ(t(nv  ryjg  clvci<^^o(p>jg,  which  may  be 
rendered,  the  laft  ad  of  their  hves,  the  manner  of 
their  going  out  of  the  world,  perhaps  by  martyrdom  ; 
as  if  he  had  faid,  imitate  them  in  their  conftancy  and 
perfeverance  in  the  faith,  even  to  the  laft,  in  laying 
down  their  lives  for  it.  And  thus  we  ftiould  be  rea- 
dy to  do,  if  God  calls  us  to  it.  However,  it  is  cer- 
tain 


and  patterns  of  chrijlianity .  1 2 1 9 

tain  the  apoftle  meant  their  conftancy  and  perfeve-  S  E  R  ivi 
ranee  in  the  faith,  to  the  laft,  and  their  dying  in,  if  ^^_  _^, 
not  for  the  faith  of  Christ.     And  this  is  neceflary, 
if  we  expcdl  the  crown  of  hfe,  and  hope  for  the  fame 
happy  end,  which  they  had  ;  for  none  but  "  they 
*'  that  continue  to  the  end,  fhall  be  faved." 

4.  We  fhould  imitate  them,  in  the  efficacy  and 
fruitfulnefs  of  their  faith,  in  the  pradlice  and  virtues 
of  a  good  life.  "  Whofe  faith  follow,  confidering 
"  the  end  of  their  converfation,"  that  is,  their  per- 
feverance  in  a  holy  courfe  to  the  end.  And  thefe 
mufl  never  be  feparated ;  a  found  faith,  and  a  good 
life.  Without  this,  our  faith  is  barren  and  dead, 
as  St.  James  tells  us,  ch.  ii.  ver.  17.  Cur  know- 
ledge and  belief  of  the  chriftian  dodrine,  mull  mani- 
fefl  itfelf  in  a  good  converfation.  "  Who  is  a  wife 
"  man,"  (fays  the  fame  St.  James,  ch.  iii.  ver.  13.) 
"  who  is  a  wife  man,  and  endowed  with  knowledge 
"  amongft  you  ?  Let  him  fhew  out  of  a  good  conver- 
"  fation  his  works."  "  This  is  a  faithful  faying," 
laith  St.  Paul  to  Titus,  ch.  iii.  8.  "  and  thefe  things 
*'  I  will  that  thou  affirm  conflantly,  that  they  who 
*'  have  believed  in  God,  be  careful  to  maintain  good 
"  works." 

And  herein  the  apoftles  of  our  Lord  and  Savi- 
our were  eminent  examples.  They  lived  as  they 
taught,  and  pradbifed  the  dodrine  which  they  preach- 
ed. So  St.  Paul  ftridtly  chargeth  Timothy,  i  Tim. 
iv.  12.  "  Be  thou  an  example  of  the  believers,  in 
**  word,  in  converfation,  in  charity,  in  faith,  inpu- 
"  rity."  And  our  Saviour  tells  us,  that  hereby 
chiefly  falfe  prophets  and  teachers  might  be  known 
from  the  true  apoftles  of  Christ,  Matth.  vii.  20. 
"  By  their  fruits  ye  fhall  know  them."    And  indeed  S 

we  do  not  follow  the  faith  of  thofe  excellent  perfons, 

if 


LXXVTI. 


12  2  0     T*he  duty  of  imitating  the  primitive  teachers 

S  EJ^  M  if  we  do  not  "  abound  in  alJ  the  fruits  of  righteouf- 
nefs,  which,  by  Jesus  Christ,  are  to  the  praife 
and  glory  of  God."  I  come  now  to  the 
Third  and  laft  thing  I  propofed,  viz.  the  encou- 
ragement to  this,  from  the  confideration  of  the  hap- 
py ftate  of  thofe  perfons,  who  are  propofed  to  us 
for  patterns,  and  the  glorious  reward  which  they  are 
made  partakers  of  in  another  world.  Confidering 
the  end  of  their  converfation  t),v  e^tSar;-',  their 
egrefs  or  departure  out  of  this  life,  into  a  bleffcd 
and  glorious  ftate,  where  they  have  received  the 
crown  and  reward  of  their  faith  and  patience,  and 
pious  converfation  in  this  world ;  or  elfe  (which  com.es 
much  to  one,)  confidering  the  conclufion  of  their 
lives,  with  what  patience  and  comfort  they  left 
the  world,  and  with  what  joyful  aflurance  of  the  hap- 
py condition  they  were  going  to,  and  were  to  con- 
tinue in  for  ever. 

And  this  is  a  great  encouragement  to  conftancy 
and  perfeverance  in  faith  and  holinefs,  to  fee  with 
what  chearfulnefs  and  comfort  good  men  die,  and 
with  what  a  firm  and  fteady  perfuafion  of  the  happi- 
nefs  they  are  entring  upon.  For  who  would  not  be 
glad  to  leave  the  world,  in  that  calmnefs  and  ferenity 
of  mind,  and  comfortable  aflurance  of  a  bleffed  eter- 
nity ?  Bad  men  wifh  this,  and  are  ready  to  fay  with 
Balaam,  "  let  me  die  the  death  of  the  righteous, 
"  and  let  my  laft  end  be  like  his.'*  But  if  we  would 
have  the  comfort  of  fuch  a  death,  we  muft  live  fuch 
lives,  and  imitate  the  faith  and  good  converfation  of 
thofe  whom  we  defire  to  refemble  in  the  manner  of 
their  death,  and  to  go  into  the  fame  happy  ftate  that 
they  are  in  after  death.  If  we  do  not  make  their 
Jives  our  pattern  •,  we  muft  not  exped  to  be  conform-' 
able  to  them,  in  the  happy  manner  of  their  death. 

When 


and  pattern  of  chrijlianity.  itzt 

When  we  hear  of  the  death  of  an  eminent  good  man,  S  E  R  M* 

LXXVIIi 
we  do  not  doubt  but  he  is  happy  -,  and  are  confident, 

that  he  will  meet  with  the  reward  of  his  piety  and 
goodnefs  in  another  world.  If  we  believe  this  of 
him,  let  us  endeavour  to  be  like  him  •,  that  we  may 
attain  the  fame  happinefs,  which  we  believe  him  to 
be  pofTefTed  of,  and,  as  the  apoflle  exhorts,  chap.  vi. 
12.  ^'  let  us  not  be  flothful  -,  but  followers  of  them, 
*'  who  through  faith  and  patience  inherit  the  pro- 
*'  mifes."  Let  us  fliew  the  fame  diligence  that  they 
did  ',  that  we  may  have  the  fame  full  afllirance  of 
hope  unto  the  end,  which  they  had. 

The  inference  from  this  difcourfe,  which  I  havQ 
made  upon  this  argument,  is,  to  fhew  what  ufe  wq 
ought  to  make  of  thefe  excellent  examples,  which 
are  fet  before  us,  of  the  firll  founders  and  teachers  of 
our  religion,  and  what  is  the  proper  honour  and  re- 
iped:,  which  we  ought  to  pay  to  their  memory  :  nee 
invocation  and  adoration ;  but  a  zealous  imitation  of 
their  faith,  and  good  converfation.  The  greateft  ho- 
nour we  can  do  them,  the  mpil  acceptable  to  God, 
the  moft  gratcfjl  to  them,  and  the  mod  beneficial, 
to  ourfelves,  is  to  endeavour  to  be  like  them  :  not  t3 
make  any  images,  and  likenefs  of  them,  to  fall  dowi^ 
before  them,  and  worlhip  them  •,  but  to  torm  ths; 
image  of  their  faith  and  virtues  upon  our  hearts  and 
lives  :  not  to  pray  to  them-,  but  to  praife  God  for 
fuch  bright  and  glorious  examples,  and  to  endeavour 
with  all  our  might  to  im.itate  their  faith,  and  patience, 
and  piety,  and  humility,  and  meeknefs,  and  charity, 
and  all  thofe  other  virtues  which  \vere  fo  refplendent 
in  them.  And  this  is  to  remember  the  founders  of 
pur  religion  as  v/e  ought,  "  to  follow  their  faith/', 
and  "  to  confider  the  end  of  th^ir  corxverfation.'* 

Vol.  V,  10  C  Had 

7- 


12  2  2     T'he  duty  of  imitati?tg  the  primitive  teachers ^ 

Had  the  chriftian  religion  required,  or  intended  any 
fuch  thing,  as  of  latter  times  hath  been  pradifed  in 
the  world  ;  it  had  been  as  eafy  for  the  apoftle  to  have 
faid,  remember  them  that  have  been  your  guides, 
and  have  fpoken  to  you  the  word  of  God,  to  eredl 
images  to  them,  and  to  worlliip  them  with  due  ve- 
neration, and  to  pray  to  them  and  make  ufe  of 
their  intercelTion.  But  no  fuch  thing  is  faid,  or  the 
leaft  intimation  given  of  it,  either  in  this  text,  or 
any  other  in  the  whole  bible  •,  but  very  much  to  the 
contrary. 

Their  example  indeed  is  frequently  recommended 
to  us,  for  our  imitation  and  encouragement  \  and 
for  this  reafon,  the  providence  of  God  hath  taken 
particular  care,  that  the  memory  of  the  apoftles,  and 
fo  many  primitive  Chriftians  and  martyrs,  fliould  be 
tranfmitted  to  pofterity ;  that  Chriftians  in  all  fuc- 
ceeding  ages  might  propound  thefe  patterns  to  them- 
felves,  and  have  perpetually  before  their  eyes  the  pi- 
ety and  virtue  of  their  lives,  and  their  patient  and 
conftant  fufferings  for  the  truth  ;  that  when  God 
fhall  pleafc  to  call  us  to  the  like  trial,  "  we  may  not 
"  be  wearied  and  faint  in  our  minds ;  but  being  con>- 
**  pafled  about  with  fuch  a  cloud  of  witnefTes,"  hav- 
ing fo  many  examples  in  our  eye  of  thofe,  "  who 
"  through  faith  and  patience  inherit  the  promifes,'* 
and  do  now  as  it  were  look  down  from  their  happy 
ftate  upon  us  here  below,  who  are  combating  with 
manifold  temptations,  to  fee  how  we  behave  and  ac- 
quit ourfelves  in  our  chriftian  courfe,  we  may  take 
encouragement  to  ourfelves,  from  fuch  examples, 
and  fuch  fpedators,  to  "  run  with  patience  the  rac« 
*'  which  is  fet  before  us." 

I  know  indeed  that  other  ufe  than  this  hath  been, 
and  is  at  this  day  made  of  tke  memory  of  the  faints 

an^ 


and  patterns  of  chrijlianity.  1223 

and  martyrs  of  former  ages,  very  difhonourable  to  S  E  R  M. 
God,  and  very  grievous  to  them,  if  they  be  fenfible 
of  what  is  done  here  below  ;  I  mean  to  worfhip 
them,  and  to  pray  to  them,  and  (to  the  great  difpa- 
ragement  of  the  powerful  interceffion  of  ^'  our  great 
"  high  pried,  Jesus  the  Son  of  God")  to  make  them 
the  mediators  and  intercefTors  in  heaven  with  Gop 
for  us.  Of  this  the  fcripture  hath  no  where  given 
us  the  leail  intimation  ;  but  hath  exprefly  command- 
ed the  contrary,  "  to  worfliip  the  Lord  our  God, 
^'  and  him  only  to  ferve  •,  and  to  pray  to  him  alone, 
"  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  the  only 
"  mediator  betwixt  God  and  man."  Nor  are  there 
any  footfteps  of  any  fuch  pra6lice,  in  the  primitive 
church,  for  the  firft  three  hundred  years  -,  as  is  ac- 
knowledged by  our  mofl  learned  adverfaries  of  the 
church  of  Rome. 

The  fcripture  no  where  propounds  the  faints  to  us, 
for  obje6ls  of  our  worfhip  j  but  for  the  patterns  of 
our  lives.  This  is  the  greateil  refped:  and  venera- 
tion, that  we  can,  or  ought  to  pay  to  them  -,  and 
whatever  is  beyond  this,  is  a  voluntary  humility,  in- 
jurious to  God  and  our  bleifed  Saviour,  and  moil 
certainly  difpleafing  to  thofe,  whom  we  pretend  to 
honour  •,  if  they  know  how  men  play  the  fool  about 
them  here  below. 

Let  us  then  endeavour  to  be  like  them,  in  the 
holy  and  virtuous  adtions  of  their  lives,  in  their  con- 
ftant  patience  and  fuffering  for  the  truth;  if  God 
fhall  call  us  thereto.  And  we  may  be  like  them,  if 
we  do  but  fincerely  endeavour  it,  and  pray  to  God 
for  his  grace  and  affiftance  to  that  end.  For  thefe 
examples  were  not  left  for  our  admiration  only  •,  but 
for  our  imitation.  We  frequently  read  the  lives  of 
the  apoftles  and  firft  founders  of  our  religion  :  but  I 
10  C  2  know^ 


12  2  4     ^he  duty  of  imitating  the  primitive  teachers^ 

S  E  R  M.  know  not  how  it  comes  to  pafs,  we  choofe  rather 
LXXVII 

lazily  to  admire  them,  than  vigoroufly  to   follow 

them  ;  as  if  the  piety  of  the  firft  Chriflians  were  mi- 
raculous, and  not  at  all  intended  for  the  imitation  of 
fucceeding  ages  •,  as  if  hearen  and  earth,  God  and 
men,  and  all  things  were  alter' d,  fince  that  time  ; 
as  if  chriftianity  were  then  in  it's  youthful  age  and 
vigour,  but  is  fince  decayed,  and  grown  old,  and 
hath  quite  loft  it's  power  and  virtue.  And  indeed  the 
generality  of  Chriftians  live  at  fuch  a  faint  and  care- 
lefs  rate,  as  to  make  the  world  believe,  that  either 
all  the  ftories  of  the  primitive  Chriftians  are  fables  \ 
or  elfe,  that  the  force  of  chriftianity  is  ftrangcly 
abated,  and  that  the  holy  Spirit  of  God  hath  for- 
faken  the  earth,  and  is  retired  to  the  Father.  But 
truth  never  grows  old,  and  thofe  laws  of  goodnefs 
and  righteoufnefs,  which  are  contained  in  the  gofpel, 
are  ftill  as  reafonable,  and  apt  to  gain  upon  the  minds 
of  men,  as  ever.  God  is  the  fame  he  was,  and  our 
blefTed  Saviour  is  ftill  at  the  right  hand  of  God, 
interceding  powerfully  for  finners,  for  "  mercy  and 
*'  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need."  The  promifes 
and  threatnings  of  the  gofpel  are  ftill  as  true  and 
powerful  as  ever  •,  and  the  holy  Spirit  of  God  is  ftill 
in  the  world,  and  effedtually  works  in  them  that 
believe. 

Let  us  net  then  deceive  ourfelves  in  this  matter. 
The  primitive  Chriftians  were  "  men  like  ourfelves, 
*'  fubje(5i:  to  the  fame  paftions  that  we  are,  and  com- 
"  pafted  about  with  the  fame  infirmities  ;"  fo  that  al- 
though that  extraordinary  fpirit  and  power  of  mira- 
cles, which  God  endowed  them  withal,  for  the  firft 
planting  and  propagating  of  the  gofpel  in  the  world, 
be  now  ceafed  •,  yet  the  fandlifying  power  and  virtue 

of 


LXXVII. 


and  patterns  of  chrijiianity,  1 22 5 

of  God's  holy  Spirit,  does  ftill  accompany  the  go-  S^^R  M. 
ilpel,  and  is  ready  to  aflift  us  in  every  good  work. 

In  a  word,  we  have  all  that  is  neceflary  to  work 
the  fame  graces  and  virtues  in  us,  which  were  in 
them  ;  and  if  we  be  not  flothful,  and  wanting  to  our 
felves,  we  may  "  follow  their  faith,"  and  at  laft 
''  attain  the  end  of  it,  even  the  falvation  of  our 
''  fouls." 

Let  us  then,  from  an  idle  admiring  of  thofe  ex- 
cellent patterns,  proceed  to  a  vigorous  imitation  of 
them,  and  be  fo  far  from  being  difcouraged  by  the 
excellency  of  them,  as  to  make  even  that  matter 
and  ground  of  encouragement  to  ourfelves  ;  accord- 
ing to  that  of  Tertullian,  admonetur  omnis  atas  fieri 
pojje^  quod  aliquando  fa^mn  efi\  "  all  ages  to  the  end 
"  of  the  world  may  be  convinced,  that  what  hath 
*'  been  done,  is  polTible  to  be  done."  There  have  been 
fuch  holy  and  excellent  perfons  in  the  world ;  and 
therefore  it  is  pofTible  for  men  to  be  fuch. 

"  Let  us  not  then  be  flothful,  but  followers  of  them, 
''  who  through  faith  and  patience  inherit  the  pro- 
"  mifes.  Since  we  are  compalTed  about  with  fuch  a 
**  cloud  of  witneiTes  ;  let  us  lay  afide  every  weight, 
*'  and  the  fin  which  fo  ealily  befets  us,  and  let  us 
*'  run  with  patience  the  race  which  is  fet  before  us, 
"  looking  unto  Jesus  the  author  and  finifher  of  our 
**  faith,  who  for  the  joy  that  was  fet  before  him,  en- 
"  dured  the  crofs,  and  defpifed  the  Ihame,  and  is 
*^  now  fet  down  at  the  right  hand  of  God." 


SE»- 


1226       ^he  encouragement  to  fufer  for  Ch  r  i  s  t  3 

eached   SERMON      LXXVIII. 

The  encouragement  to  fuffer  for 
Christ  ;  and  the  danger  of  deny- 
ing him. 


2  TIM.  II.  II,  12. 

//  is  a  faithful  faying  \  for  if  we  be  dead  with  him^  we 
fhall  alfo  live  with  him :  if  we  fuffer^  we  jhall  alfo 
reign  with  him  :  if  we  deny  him^  he  alfo  will  deny  us. 

N  the  beginning  of  this  chapter,  '^t,  Paul  en- 
courageth  Timothy  to  continue  iledfafl:  in  the 
profelTion  of  the  gofpel,  notwithftanding  the  fuffer- 
ings  which  attended  it ;  ver.  i.  "  Thou  therefore 
"  my  fon,  be  ftrong  in  the  grace  which  is  in  Christ 
"  Jesus  ,"  and  ver.  3.  "  Thou  therefore  endure 
"  hardfiiip,  as  a  good  foldier  of  Jesus  Christ. '^ 
And  to  animate  him  in  his  refokition,  he  quotes  a 
faying,  which  it  feeps  was  well  known  and  firmly 
believed  among  Chrifcians  •,  a  faying  on  the  one  hand 
full  of  encouragement  to  thofe  who  with  patience  and 
conftancy  fuffered  for  their  religion ;  and  on  the  other 
hand,  full  of  terror  to  thofe  who  for  fear  of  fuffer- 
ing  denied  it. 

"  It  is  a  faithful  faying."  This  is  a  preface  ufed  by 
this  apoflle,  to  introduce  fome  remarkable  fentence, 
of  more  than  ordinary  weight  and  concernment  \ 
i  Tim.  i.  15.  "  This  is  a  faithful  faying,  and  wor- 
^'  thy  of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus  came 
3  "  ii^to 


and  the  danger  of  denying  him.  J  227 

'^  into  the  world  to  fave  finners  •,'*  and  chap.  iv.  8,  ^  ^'  ^  ^^- 

.  LXXVlIf. 

9.  "  Godlinefs  is  profitable  unto  all  things,  having 
"  a  promife  of  the  Ufe  that  now  is,  and  of  that  which 
"  is  to  come.  This  is  a  faithful  faying,  and  wor- 
*'  thy  of  all  acceptation."  Titus  iii.  8.  "  This  is 
"  a  faithful  faying,  and  thefe  things  I  will  that  thou 
"  affirm  conftantly,  that  they  which  have  believed 
^'  in  God,  might  be  careful  to  maintain  good  works." 
And  here  in  the  text,  the  fame  preface  is  ufed  to 
fignify  the  importance  of  the  faying  he  was  about  to 
mention  ;  "  it  is  a  faithful  faying  ;  if  we  be  dead 
''  with  him,  we  fhall  alfo  live  with  him  :  if  we  fuf- 
*'  fer,  we  fhall  alfo  reign  with  him  :  if  we  deny  him, 
''  he  alfo  v/ill  deny  us." 

The  firft  two  fentences  are  matter  of  encouragement 
to  thofe  who  fufFer  with  Christ,  and  for  him,  and 
are  the  very  fame  in  fenfe.  "  If  we  be  dead  with  him," 
that  is,  if  we  lay  down  our  lives  for  the  teftimony  of 
the  truth,  as  he  did,  "  we  ihall  alfo  live  with  him," 
that  is,  we  fhall  in  like  manner  be  made  partakers 
of  immortality,  as  he  is  :  "  if  we  fuffer"  or  endure 
as  he  did,  "  we  fhall  alfo  reign  with  him"  in  glory. 

The  other  fentence  is  m.atter  of  terror  to  thofe 
who  deny  him  and  his  truth.  "  If  we  deny  him, 
"  he  alfo  will  deny  us  •,"  to  which  is  fubioined  ano- 
ther faying  much  to  the  fame  fenfe  j  "  if  we  believe 
not,"  «  clTTicrSfMi',  if  we  be  unfaithful  •,  "  yet  he  re- 
"  maineth  faithful,  he  cannot  deny  himfelf ,"  that  is, 
he  will  be  as  good  as  his  word,  and  make  good  that 
folemn  threatning  which  he  hath  denounced  againfl 
thofe,  who  fnall  for  fear  of  fuffering  deny  him^  and 
his  truth. 

The  words  being  thus  explained,  I  fhall  begin 
v/ith  the  firft  part  of  this  remarkable  faying  ;  **  if  we 
"  be  dead  with  him,  we  fhall  alfo  live  with  him  :  if 


12  2  8      "The  encouragement  to  fuffer  for  Chr  i  s  t  ; 
S  E  R  M.  «  v^re  fuffer,  we  fhall  alfo  reisn  with  him."    This,  it 

LXXVIII*  . 

feems,  was  a  noted  faying  among  Chriftians  ;  and 
whether  they  had  it  by  tradition  of  our  Saviour^ 
or  whether  it  was  in  famihar  ufe  among  the  apoftles, 
as  a  very  proper  and  powerful  argument  to  keep 
Chriftians  ftedfaft  to  their  rehgion,  I  cannot  deter- 
mine. It  is  certain,  that  fayings  to  this  fenfe  are 
very  frequent,  efpecially  in  the  epiftles  of  St.  Paul, 
Rom.  vi.  5.  "  For  if  we  have  been  planted  together 
*'  in  the  likenefs  of  his  death  ;  we  fhall  be  alfo  in 
"  the  likenefs  of  his  refurredion."  And  verfe  8. 
'*  Now  if  we  be  dead  with  Christ  \  we  believe  that 
**  we  fhall  alfo  live  with  him."  2  Cor.  iv.  10. 
^'  Always  bearing  about  in  the  body,  the  dying  of 
'*  our  Lord  Jesus  j  that  the  life  alfo  of  Jesvus 
*^  might  be  raade  manifeft  in  our  body."  And  verfe 
18.  "  For  we  which  live,  are  always  delivered  unto 
''  death  for  Jesus  fake  \  that  the  life  alfo  of  Jesus 
"  might  be  made  manifeft  in  our  mortal  fiefli." 
And  Rom.  viii.  17.  "  If  fo  be  that  we  fuffer  with 
*'  him,  that  we  may  be  alfo  glorified  together."  Phil, 
iii.  10,  II.  "  That  I  may  know  him,  and  the  power 
*^  of  his  refurredlion,  and  the  fellowfhip  of  his  fuf- 
*'  ferings,  being  made  conformable  unto  his  death :  if 
'*  by  any  means  I  might  attain  unto  the  rcfurredbion 
"  of  th^  dead."  i  Pet.  iv.  12,  13.  ''  Beloved, 
*'  think  it  not  ftrange  concerning  the  fiery  trial, 
*'  which  is  to  try  you,  as  though  fome  ftrange  thing 
**  happened  unto  you  ;  but  rejoice,  inafmuch  as  ye 
^'  are  partakers  of  Christ's  fufferings  \  that  when 
•'  his  glory  fhall  be  revealed,  ye  may  be  glad  alfo 
^'  with  exceeding  joy." 

You  fee  that  the  fenfe  of  this  faying  was  in  fre- 
quent ufe  among  the  apoftles,  as  a  powerful  argu^ 
qieAt  to  encourage  Chriftians  to  conftancy  in  their 

religion. 


L  xxviri. 


a?2d  the  danger  of  deftying  him,  1 2  2  9 

reliP-ion,  notwithflandino;  the  dangers  and  fuffcrln^^s  ^  E  R  !vr. 
which  attended  it.     "  This  is  a  faithful  faying :  if 
"  we  be  dead  with  him,  we  fliall  alfo  live  with  him  : 
"  if  we  fuffer,  we  fhall  alfo  reign  with  him,'* 

And  the  force  of  this  argument  will  beft  appear  ; 
by  taking  into  confideration  thefe  two  things  -, 

I.  What  virtue  there  is  in  a  firm  belief  and  per- 
fuafion  of  a  bleffed  immortality  in  another  world,  to 
fupport  and  bear  up  mens  fpirirs  under  the  great  eft 
IkifFerings  for  righteoufnefs  fake  5  and  even  to  animate 
them,  if  God  fliall  call  them  to  it,  to  lay  down  their 
lives  for  their  religion. 

II.  How  it  may  be  made  out  to  be  reafonable,  for 
men  to  embrace  and  voluntarily  to  fubmit  to  prefent 
and  grievous  fufferings,  in  hopes  of  a  future  happi- 
nefs  and  reward  ;  concerning  which  we  have  not,  nor 
perhaps  are  capable  of  having,  the  fame  degree  of 
certainty  and  afTurance  which  we  have  of  the  evils  and 
fuffcrings  of  this  prefent  life. 

I.  What  virtue  there  is  in  a  firm  belief  and  per- 
fuafion  of  a  bleffed  immortality  in  another  world,  to 
fupport  and  bear  up  mens  fpirits,  under  the  greateft 
fufFerings  for  righteoufnefs  fake  :  and  even  to  ani- 
mate them,  if  God  fliall  call  them  to  it,  to  lay 
down  their  lives  for  their  religion. 

If  men  do  firmly  believe  that  they  fliall  change  this 
temporal  and  miferable  life  for  an  endlefs  fiate  of 
happinefs  and  glory,  and  that  they  lliall  meet  with 
a  reward  of  their  fufferings  infinitely  beyond  the  pro^ 
portion  of  them.,  both  in  the  weight  and  duration  of 
it ;  this  mufl:  needs  turn  the  fcales  on  that  fide,  on 
which  there  is  the  greateft  weight :  and  there  is  a 
fufficient  ground  for  a  firm  belief  of  this.  For  if 
any  thing  can  certainly  be  concluded  from  the  pro- 
vidence of  God,  this  may,   that  good  men  fliall 

Vol.  V.  10  D  be 


1230      TX^  encoiiragemejit  to  fuffer  for  Christ  ; 

SER  M.  be  happy  one  time  or  other:  and  becaufe  they  are 

vl— ^^^^  very  often  great  fufFerers  in  this  hfe  \  that  there  is 

another  ftate  remains  for  them  after  this  life,  wherein 

they  fhall  meet  with  a  full  reward  of  all  their  fuffer- 

ings  for  righteoufnefs  fike. 

But  befides  the  reafonablenefs  of  this,  from  the 
confideration  of  God's  providence,  we  have  now  a 
clear  and  exprefs  revelation  of  it  •,  "  life  and  im- 
"  mortality  being  brought  to  hght  by  the  gofpel." 
This  ^t,  John  tells  us  is  the  great  promifcof  the  go- 
fpel,  I  John  ii.  25.  "  This  is  the  promife  which  he 
*'  hath  promifed  us;  even  eternal  life."  And  this 
promife,  our  Saviour  nioft  exprefly  makes  to  thofe 
who  fuffer  for  him,  Matt.  v.  10,  11,  12.  ''  Blefied 
"  are  they  wiio  are  perfecuted  for  righteoufnefs 
"  fake  :  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Blef- 
*'  fed  are  ye,  when  men  lliall  revile  you,  and  perfe- 
"  cute  you,  and  fay  all  manner  of  evil  againfl  you 
*'  falfly  for  my  fake.  Rejoice,  and  be  exceeding 
*'  glad  :  for  great  is  your  reward  in  heaven."  Mark 
X.  29,  30.  "  Verily  I  Hiy  unto  you,  there  is  no  man  that 
"  hath  left  houfe,  or  brethren,  or  fillers,  or  father, 
*'  or  mother,  or  wife,  or  children,  or  lands,  for  my 
"  flike  and  the  gofpel's;  but  he  fliall  receive  an 
y  "  hundred -fold  now  in  this  time,  with  perfecutions," 
(that  is,  fo  far  as  a  ftate  of  perfecution  would  admit) 
"  and  in  the  world  to  come  eternal  hfe." 

And  if  fuch  a  pcrfuafion  be  firmly  fixed  in  our 
minds  ;  the  faith  of  another  world,  and  the  affured 
hope  of  eternal  life  and  happinefs,  mull  needs  have 
a  mighty  force  and  eflicacy  upon  the  minds  of  fober 
and  confiderate  men  •,  becaufe  there  is  no  proportion 
between  fuffering  for  a  little  while,  and  being  un- 
fpeakably  and  eternally  happy.  So  St.  Paul  tells  us 
he  calculated  the  matta,  Rom.  viii.  i8.  "  I  reckon 


a?7d  the  danger  of  denying  him,  i  2  3  i 

"  (fays  he)  that  the  fufFerings  of  this  prefent  time,  ^  ^'  ^  ^• 
''  are  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the  glory 
"  which  fhall  be  revealed  in  us."  The  vail  difpro- 
portion  between  the  fufferings  of  a  few  days,  and 
the  joys  and  glory  of  eternity,  when  it  is  once  firm- 
ly believed  by  us,  will  weigh  down  all  the  evils  and 
calamities  of  this  world,  and  give  us  courage  and 
conflancy  under  them.  For  why  lliould  we  faint ; 
if  we  believe,  that  "  our  light  afflidion,  which  is 
'^  but  for  a  moment,  will  work  for  us  a  far  more 
*'  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory?"  As  the 
fame  St.  Paul  alTures  us,  2  Cor.  iv.  17.  If  our 
minds  be  but  thoroughly  poflefs'd  with  the  hopes  of 
a  refurredlion  to  a  better  and  happier  life  ;  this  will 
make  death,  attended  even  with  extremity  of  ter- 
ror, to  be  tolerable  ;  as  we  read  of  fome,  in  that  long 
catalogue  of  faints  and  martyrs,  Heb.  xi.  35.  "  O- 
''  thers  were  tortured,  not  accepting  deliverance ; 
"  that  they  might  obtain  abetter  refurredion."  \t 
would  make  a  man  to  rejoice  in  the  ruin  and  diflb- 
lution  of  this  earthly  tabernacle,  to  be  affured,  that 
*'  when  it  is  diiTolved,  we  fhall  have  a  building  of 
^'  God,  a  houfe  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in 
*'  the  heavens,"  as  the  fame  apoflle  alTures  us, 
2  Cor.  v.  I .  Thus  you  fee  what  virtue  there  is  in  the 
firm  belief  and  perfuafion  of  a  better  life,  to  bear  up 
mens  fpirits  under  thofc  fufFerings  and  torments 
which  may  feem  unfupportable  to  human  nature. 

And  fo  indeed  they  would  be,  without  an  extra- 
ordinary grace  and  afiiilance  of  God  to  enable  them 
to  bear  thofe  fufFerings,  which  his  providence  per- 
mits them  to  be  exercifed  withal.  But  of  this  ex- 
traordinary grace,  we  are  affured,  not  only  from  the 
confideration  of  the  attributes  and  providence  of 
God  ;  but  Hkewife  from  the  exprefs  promifes  and 
declarations  of  his  word.  lo  D  2  The 


1 2  3  2      T^he  encouragement  to  fuffer  for  Ch  r i  s  t  ; 

SERM  The  attributes  of  God  and  his  providence  give 
us  good  ground  to  believe  that  he  who  loves  good- 
nefs  and  righteoufnefs,  and  hath  a  peculiar  favour 
and  regard  for  good  men,  will  never  fuffer  his  faithr 
fill  friends  and  fervants  to  be  brought  into  that  di- 
ftrefs  for  righteoufnefs  fake,  that  they  fhall  not  be 
able  to  endure  thofe  evils  and  afflidions  which  hefal 
them  upon  that  account  :  and  if  in  the  courfe  of  his 
providence,  any  thing  happen  to  them  that  is  above 
the  ordinary  conftancy  and  patience  of  human  na- 
ture to  bear,  that  in  fuch  a  cafe,  God  will  extraor- 
dinarily interpofe,  and  give  them  ftrength  and  pati- 
ence, fupport  and  comfort,  proportionable  to  the 
evils  and  fulferings  that  are  upon  them  ;  and  that  he 
will  either  lighten  their  burden,  or  add  to  their 
strength  ^  he  will  either  mitigate  their  pain,  or  in- 
^creafe  their  patience  ;  either  he  will  check  and  reftrain 
the  effed  of  natural  caufes,  as  in  the  cafe  of  the  three 
children,  that  were  in  the  fiery  furnace  ;  and  of  Da- 
niel, who  was  call:  into  the  den  of  lions ;  or  elfe, 
(which  comes  to  the  fame  ilTue)  if  he  will  fuffer 
caufes  to  have  their  natural  courfe,  he  will  afford  fu- 
pcrnatural  comforts  to  balance  the  fury  and  extre- 
mity of  them.  This  is  very  credible,  from  the  mere 
confideration  of  God's  goodnefs,  and  of  the  parti- 
cular care  and  favour  of  his  providence  towards 
go^:)d  men. 

But  befidcs  this,  we  have  the  exprefs  promife  and 
declaration  of  God's  word,  to  this  purpofe,  which 
puts  us  out  of  all  doubt  concerning  that  which  we 
had  good  reafon  to  hope  and  exped  before,  i  Cor. 
X.  13.  St.  Paul  there  tells  the  Chriflians  at  Corinth, 
that  though  they  had  met  with  fome  troubles,  yet 
they  had  not  been  tried  with  the  extremity  of  fuf- 
fei-ing ;  but  when  that  Hiould  happen,  they  had  no 

caufe 


and  the  danger  of  denying  him,  ^^33 

caufe  to  doubt,  but  God  would  enabJe  them  to  bear  S  E  R  M. 
it.  "  There  hath  no  temptation  taken  you,  but  fuch 
*'  as  is  common  to  man  ;"  that  is,  you  have  not  yet 
been  exercifed  v/ith  any  trial,  but  what  is  human ; 
what  the  ordinary  flrength  and  refolution  of  human 
nature  is  able  to  bear  :  but  in  cafe  it  iliould  come  to 
extreme  fuffering,  and  that  they  muft  either  comply 
with  the  heathen  idolatry,  or  endure  extremity  of 
torments  -,  they  had  the  promife  of  God's  help  to 
fupport  them  in  that  cafe,  "God  is  faithful,  fays  he, 
^'  who  will  not  fufter  you  to  be  tempted  above 
*•'  that  you  are  able  ;  but  will  with  the  tempta- 
*'  tion  alfo  make  a  way  to  efcape,  that  ye  may  be 
"  able  to  bear  it  ;'*  and  then  it  follows,  "  where- 
*'  fore  my  dearly  beloved,  flee  from  idolatry  ;"  that 
is,  let  no  fuffering  that  you  are  temipted  withal,  make 
you  guilty  of  this  fin.  And  i  Pet.  iv.  14.  the  pre- 
fence  of  God's  Spirit,  in  a  very  glorious  manner, 
for  our  fupport  and  comfort,  is  promifed  to  thofe 
who  fuffer  for  him.  "  If  ye  be  reproached  for  the 
•*'  name  of  Christ,  happy  are  ye  ;  for  the  Spirit  of 
•**  glory  and  of  God  refteth  upon  you." 

And  this  confideration  of  God's  flrength  to  fup- 
port us  under  fufferings,  makes  the  other,  of  the  re- 
ward of  them,  a  perfedt  and  complete  encourage- 
ment ;  which  it  could  not  be  without  it.  For  if, 
upon  the  whole  matter,  the  prefent  fufferings  of 
good  men  were  intolerable,  and  human  nature  were 
not  divinely  aflifted  to  bear  them  :  how  great  foever 
the  future  reward  promifed  to  them  Hiould  be  \  they 
that  lay  under  them  would  be  forced  to  confult  their 
own  prefent  eafe  and  deliverance.     I  proceed  to  the 

II.  Thing  I  propofed  to  confider,  namely,  how  it 
may  be  made  out  to  be  reafonable  to  embrace  and 
voluntarily  to  fubmit  to  prefent  and  grievous  fuffer- 
ings. 


12  34      ^^^^  encouragement  to  fnffer  for  Ch  r  i  s  T  ^ 

^  ^  V  if'  *^^^^'  ^^  hopes  of  future  happinefs  and  reward  ;  con- 
cerning which  we  have  not,  nor  perhaps  are  capable 
of  having,  the  fame  degree  of  certainty  and  affurance, 
which  v/e  have  of  the  evils  and  fufferings  of  this 
prefent  life. 

Now  granting  that  we  have  not  the  fame  degree 
of  certainty  concerning  our  future  happinefs,  that 
we  have  of  our  prefent  fufferings  which  we  feel,  or 
fee  juft  ready  to  come  upon  us ;  yet  prudence  mak- 
ing it  necelTary  for  men  to  run  this  hazard,  does  juf- 
tify  the  reafonablenefs  of  it.  This  I  take  to  be  a 
known  and  ruled  cafe  in  the  common  affairs  of  life, 
and  in  matters  of  temporal  concernment ;  and  men 
act  upon  this  principle  every  day.  The  hufbandman 
parts  with  his  corn,  and  calls  it  into  the  earth,  in 
confidence  that  it  will  fpring  up  again,  and  at  the 
time  of  harvefl  bring  him  in  a  confiderable  return 
and  advantage.  He  parts  with  a  certainty,  in  hope 
only  of  a  great  future  benefit :  and  though  he  have 
no  demonilration,  for  the  infallible  fuccefs  of  his  la- 
bour and  hazard  ;  yet  he  adts  very  reafonably  :  be- 
caufe  if  he  does  not  take  this  courfe,  he  runs  a  great- 
er and  more  certain  hazard,  of  perifhing  by  famine 
at  laft,  when  his  prefent  (lock  is  fpent.  The  cafe 
of  the  merchant  is  the  fame,  who  parts  with  a  pre- 
fent eftate,  in  hopes  of  a  future  improvement  •,  which 
yet  is  not  fo  certain,  as  what  he  parts  withal. 

And  if  this  be  reafonable  in  thefe  cafes  ;  then  the 
hazard  which  men  run,  upon  much  greater  affurance 
than  either  the  hufbandman  or  the  merchant  hath, 
is  much  more  reafonable.  When  we  part  with  this 
life  in  hopes  of  one  infinitely  better ;  that  is,  "in  fure 
*"'  and  certain  hope  of  a  refurredion  to  eternal  life :" 
and  when  we  fubmit  to  prefent  fufferings,  to  avoid 
an  eternity  of  inifery,  w'hich  is  much  more  to  be 

dreaded 


and  the  danger  of  denying  him,  1235 

dreaded  than  temporal  want,  this  is  reafonable  ;  be-  Lxxvm  * 
caufe  here  is  a  much  greater  advantage  in  view,  and 
a  more  prefTing  necefiity  in  the  cafe  ♦,  nothing  being 
fo  defirable  to  one  that  muft  live  for  ever,  as  to  be 
happy  for  ever  -,  and  nothing  to  be  avoided  by  him 
with  fo  m.uch  care,  as  everlafling  mifery  and  ruin. 
And  for  our  fccurity  of  obtaining  the  one,  and  efcap- 
ing  the  other,  v/e  has^e  "  the  promife  of  God,  who 
"  cannot  lie  ;"  which  is  all  the  certainty  and  fecu- 
rity  that  things  future  and  invifible  are  capable  of. 

Nay,  I  will  go  lower.  If  God  had  made  no  ex- 
prefs  promife  and  declaration  of  a  future  happinefs 
and  reward,  to  thofe  that  ferve  him  and  fuffer  for 
him  :  yet  if  any  man  out  of  a  fincere  love  to  God, 
and  awful  regard  to  his  laws,  endure  trouble  and  af- 
flidion,  if  there  be  a  God  and  providence  this  is  af- 
furance  enough  to  us,  that  our  fervices  and  fufferings 
fhall  one  time  or  other  be  confidered  and  rewarded. 
For  as  fure  as  any  man  is,  that  there  is  a  God,  and 
that  his  providence  regards  the  a6lions  of  men  ;  fo 
fure  are  we,  that  no  man  fliall  finally  be  a  lofer  by 
any  thing  that  he  doth  or  fuffers  for  him. 

So  that  the  matter  is  now  brought  to  this  plain 
iiHie,  that  if  it  be  reafonable  to  believe  there  is  a 
God,  and  that  his  providence  regards  and  confiders 
the  adions  of  men  \  it  is  alfo  reafonable  to  endure 
prefent  fufferings,  in  hope  of  a  future  reward  j  and 
there  is  certainly  enough  in  this  cafe,  to  govern  and 
determine  a  prudent  man,  that  is  in  any  good  mea- 
fure  perfuaded  of  another  life  after  this,  and  hath 
any  tolerable  confideration  of,  and  regard  to  his  eter- 
nal intereft. 

Indeed,  if  v/e  were  fure,  that  there  were  no  life 
after  this  •,  if  we  had  no  expe6tation  of  a  happinefs 
or  mifery  beyond  this  world  -,  the  wifeft  thing  that 

any 


1236       The  encouragement  to  J'uffer  for  Ck  r  i  s  T ; 

S  E  R  M.  any  man  could  do,  would  be  to  enjoy  as  much  of 
the  prefent  contentments  and  fatisfa6lions  of  this 
world,  as  he  could  fairly  come  at.  For  *'  if  there 
''  be  no  refurreftion  to  another  life  •,"  the  apoftle 
allows  the  reafoning  of  the  epicure  to  be  very  good, 
"  let  us  eat  and  drink,  for  to  morrow  we  die."  But 
on  the  other  hand,  if  it  be  true  that  we  are  defigned 
for  immortality,  and  that  another  Hate  remains  for 
us  after  this  hfe,  wherein  we  fhall  be  unfpeakably 
happy,  or  intolerably  and  eternally  miferable,  accord- 
ing as  we  have  behaved  ourfelves  in  this  world  •,  it 
is  then  evidently  reafonable,  that  men  fhould  take 
the  greateft  care  of  the  longefl  duration,  and  be  con- 
tent to  bear,  and  difpenfe  with  fome  prefent  trouble 
and  inconvenience,  for  a  felicity  that  will  have  n(» 
end  \  and  be  willing  to  labour  and  take  pains,  and 
deny  our  prefent  eafe  and  comfort  for  a  little  while^ 
that  we  may  be  happy  for  ever.  This  is  reckoned 
prudence  in  the  account  of  this  world,  for  a  man  to 
part  with  a  prefent  pofTeiTion  and  eiijoyment,  for  a 
much  greater  advantage  in  reverfion  :  but  furely  the 
difproportion  between  time  and  eternity  is  fo  vaft, 
that  did  men  but  firmly  believe  that  they  fhall  live 
for  ever,  nothing  in  this  world  could  reafonably  be 
thought  too  good  to  part  withal,  or  too  grievous 
to  fuffer,  for  the  obtaining  of  a  blefled  immortality. 
In  the  virtue  of  this  belief  and  pcrfuafion,  the  pri- 
mitive Chrifbians  were  fortified,  againll  all  that  the 
malice  and  cruelty  of  the  world  could  do  againft 
them  ;  and  they  thought  they  made  a  very  wife  bar- 
gain, if  "  through  many  tribulations  they  might" 
at  laft  ''  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God  ^"  becaufe 
they  believed,  that  the  joys  of  heaven  would  abun- 
dantly recompenfe  all  their  forrows  and  fufferings 
upon  earth.  And  fo  confident  were  they  of  this, 
2  that 


and  the  danger  of  denying  him.  ^237 

that  they  looked  upon  it  as  a  fpecial  favour  and  re-  ^  ^-  ^^' 
gard  of  God  to  them,  to  call  them  to  futfer  for  his 
name.  So  St.  Paul  fpeaks  of  it,  Phil.  i.  29.  "  Un- 
*■'  to  you  it  is  given,  on  the  behalf  of  Christ,  not 
"  only  to  believe  on  him,  but  alfo  to  fufter  for  his 
"  fake."  Yea,  they  accounted  them  happy,  who 
upon  this  account  were  miferable  in  this  world.  So 
St.  James  expredy  pronounceth  them,  Jam.  i.  12. 
"  BlefTed  is  the  man  that  endureth  temptation  ;'* 
(meaning  the  temptation  of  perfecution  and  fuffer- 
ing)  ''  for  when  he  is  tried,  he  fhall  receive  the 
"  crown  of  life,  v/hich  the  Lord  hath  pro mifed  to 
"  them  that  love  him."  And  this  confideration 
v/as  that  which  kept  up  their  fpirits,  from  finking 
under  the  weig-ht  of  their  o;reatefl;  fufferin2;s.  So  St. 
Paul  tells  us,  2  Cor.  iv.  14,  16.  "  Knowing  that 
"  he  which  raifed  up  the  Lord  Jesus,  fhall  raife 
"  up  us  alfo  by  Jesus.  For  which  caufe  we  faint 
"  not  •,  but  though  our  outward  man  perifli,  yet 
"  Che  inward  man  is  renev/ed  day  by  day."  The 
fufferings  of  their  bodies  did  but  help  to  raife  and 
fortify  their  fpirits  :  nay,  fo  far  were  they  from  faint- 
ing under  thofe  afflidions,  that  they  rejoiced  and 
gloried  in  them.  So  the  fame  apoftle  tells  us,  Rom. 
V.  2,  3.  that  in  the  midd  of  their  fufferings,  "  they 
"  rejoiced  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God  \  and  that 
"  they  gloried  in  tribulations,"  as  being  the  v/ay  to 
be  made  partakers  of  that  glory :  and  Fleb.  x.  34. 
that  "  they  took  joyfully  the  fpoiling  of  their  goods  j 
"  knowing  in  themfelves,  that  they  had  in  heaven  a 
^'  better  and  an  enduring  fubflance."  And  for  this 
reafon,  St.  Jam.es,  chap.  i.  2.  exhorts  Chriftians  "to 
account  it  all  joy^  when  they  fall  into  divers 
temptations-,"  (that  is,  various  kinds  offuffer- 
VoL.  V.  10  E  .  ings) 

7- 


<c 


1238       "The  encouragement  to  fuffer  for  Ch  r  i  s  t  ; 

E  R  M.   in^s)  becaufe  of  the  manifold  advantaofes  which  from 
thence  would  redound  to  them. 

Now  what  was  it  that  infpired  them  to  all  this 
courage  and  chearfulnefs,  but  the  belief  of  a  mighty- 
reward,  far  beyond  the  proportion  of  all  their  futfer- 
ings,  and  a  firm  perfuafion  that  they  fhould  be  vail 
gainers  by  them  at  the  lafb  ?  This  confideration  St. 
Paul  urgeth  with  great  force,  2  Cor.  iv.  1 7,  1 8 .  "  Our 
"  light  afBidlion,  which  is  but  for  a  moment,  work- 
"  eth  for  us  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight 
"  of  glory  :  whilfb  we  look  not  at  the  things  which 
"  are  feen ;  but  at  the  things  which  are  not  feen  : 
*'  for  the  things  which  are  feen,  are  temporal ;  but 
"  the  things  which  are  not  feen,  are  eternal."  If 
we  would  compare  things  juftly,  and  attentively  re- 
gard and  confider  the  invifible  glories  of  another 
world,  as  well  as  the  things  which  are  feen-,  we 
fhould  eafily  perceive,  that  he  who  fuffers  for  God 
and  religion,  does  not  renounce  happinefs  ;  but  puts 
it  out  to  intereft,  upon  terms  of  the  greateft  advan- 
tage. 

I  fhall  now  Ipeak  briefly  to  the 

Second  part  of  this  remarkable  liiying  in  the  text ; 
*'  if  we  deny  him,  he  alfo  will  deny  us  :"  to  which 
is  fubjoined  in  the  words  following,  "  if  we  believe 
"  not ;  « cy.Tri^^^iv,  if  we  deal  unfaithfully  with  him  •, 
"  yet  he  abideth  faithful,  he  cannot  deny  himfclf  •," 
that  is,  he  will  be  conllant  to  his  word,  and  make 
good  that  folemn  threatning  which  he  hath  denoun- 
ced againfl  thofe,  who  for  fear  of  fufTering  fhall  de- 
ny him  and  his  truth  before  men,  Mat.  x.  33.  "Who- 
"  foever  (faith  our  Lord  there)  Ihail  deny  me 
"  before  men,  him  will  I  alfo  deny  before  my  Fa- 
*'  therwhich  is  in  heaven."  Markviii.  38.  "  Who- 
•'  foever  therefore  fhall  be  afhamed  of  me,   and  of 

"  my 


and  the  danger  of  denying  him.  1239 

*'  my  words,  in  this  adulterous  and  finful  veneration,  S  E  K  M. 

LXXVIII. 

"  of  him  alfo  fliall  the  Son  of  man  be  afhamed,  when 
"  he  Cometh  in  the  glory  of  his  Father,  "with  the 
"  holy  angels,"  This  is  a  terrible  threatning,  "  to 
"  be  difowned  by  Christ  at  the  day  of  judgment, 
"  in  the  prefence  of  God  and  his  holy  angels  /'  and 
this  threatning  will  certainly  be  made  good  ^  and 
though  we  may  renounce  him,  "  and  break  our 
"  faith  with  him  ;  yet  he  remains  faithful,"  who 
hath  threatned,  and  '*^  cannot  deny  himfelf." 

This  is  matter  of  great  terror,  and  ferioudy  to  be 
thought  upon  by  thofe  who  are  tempted  to  deny 
Christ  and  his  truth,  either  by  the  hope  of  world- 
ly advantage,  or  the  fear  of  temporal  fufFerings. 
What  worldly  advantage  can  we  propofe  to  ourfelves, 
by  quitting  our  religion,  which  can  be  thought  an 
equal  price,  for  the  lofs  of  our  immortal  fouls,  and 
of  the  happinefs  of  all  eternity  ?  Suppofe  the  whole 
world  were  offered  us  in  confideration  \  yet  "  what 
"  is  a  man  profited  ;  if  he  fliould  gain  the  whole 
*'  world,  and  lofe  his  own  foul  ?  or  what  fhall  a 
''  man  give  in  exchange  for  his  foul  ?"  As  our  Sa- 
viour reafons.  Mat.  xvi.  26. 

And  on  the  other  hand,  if  the  fear  of  temporal 
fuffering  be  fuch  a  terror  to  men,  as  to  fhake  their 
confbancy  in  religion,  and  to  tempt  them  to  renounce 
it ;  the  fear  of  eternal  torments  ought  to  be  much 
more  powerful,  to  keep  them  ftedfaft  to  their  religion, 
and  to  deter  them  from  the  denial  of  it.  If  fear  will 
move  us  ;  then  in  all  reafon,  that  which  is  moft  ter- 
rible ought  to  prevail  moft  with  us,  and  the  great- 
eft  danger  ftiould  be  moft  dreaded  by  us,  according 
to  our  Saviour's  moft  friendly  and  reafonable  ad- 
vice, Lukexii.  4,  5.  "I  fay  unto  you,  my  friends, 
**  be  not  afraid  of  them  that  kill  the  body,  and  after 
10  E  2  *'  that 


r  2  4  o       ^^^  encouragement  to  fuffer  for  Christ; 

K  R  M.  cc  ^}-^^^  Yidy^  no  more  that  they  can  do.  But  I  v/ill 
"  forewarn  you  whom  you  fliall  fear.  Fear  him, 
"  who  after  he  hath  killed,  hath  power  to  caft  into 
"  hell;  yea,  I  fay  unto  you,  fear  him."  If  there 
can  be  no  doubt,  which  of  them  is  moil  to  be  dread- 
ed ',  there  can  be  no  doubt  what  we  are  to  do,  in 
cafe  of  fuch  a  temptation. 

I  fhall  now  draw  fome  inferences  from  this  difcourfe 
by  way  of  application. 

Firft,  If  "  this  be  a  faitliRil  faying,  that  if  we  be 
''  dead  with  Christ,  we  Hiall  alfo  live  with  him -, 
"  if  we  fuffer,  we  Hiall  alfo  reign  with  him  •,  but  if 
*'  we  deny  him,  he  will  alfo  deny  us  •,"  the  belief 
of  it  ought  to  have  a  mighty  influence  upon  us,  to 
make  us  ftedfail  and  unmoveable  in  the  profeffion 
and  pradice  of  our  holy  religion.  This  inference  the 
apoille  makes  from  the  do6lrinc  of  a  bieiled  refur- 
rediion,  i  Cor.  xv.  58.  "  therefore,  my  beloved  bre- 
"  thren,  be  ye  ftedfaftj  unmoveable,  always  abound- 
*'  ing  in  the  work  of  the  Lord  •,  forafmuch  as 
*^  ye  know,  that  your  labour  is  not  in  vain  in  the 
*'  Lord."  If  any  thing  will  fix  men  in  the  profef- 
fion of  their  religion,  and  miake  them  ferious  in  the 
pradice  of  it ;  the  belief  of  a  glorious  refurredion, 
and  of  the  reward  which  God  will  then  giv^e  to  his 
faithful  fervants,  muft  needs  have  a  very  powerful  in- 
fluence upon  them  to  this  purpofe.  Upon  the  fame 
ground  the  apoille  to  the  Hebrev/s  exhorts  them  '^  to 
"  hold  fad  the  profeffion  of  their  f^th,  without  wa- 
*'  vering;  becaufe  he  is  faithful  that  hath  promifed.'' 
If  we  be  conftant  in  the  profeffion  and  pra6^ice  of  our 
holy  religion  •,  God  will  be  faithful  to  the  promife 
which  he  hath  made  of  eternal  hfe,  ''  to  thofe  who 
*^  by  patient  continuance  in  well-doing,  feekforglo- 
'^^  ry  and  honour  and  immortality." 

If 


and  the  danger  of  de?iying  him,  1 24 1 

If  under  the  dark  and  imperfe6l  difpenfation  of  ^  ^  ^  ^^ 
the  law,  good  men  fliewed  fo  much  courage  and  con- 
ilancy  for  God  and  rehgion,  as  we  read  in  that  long 
catalogue  of  heroes,  Heb.  xi.  How  much  more 
lliould  Chriftians,  v/hofe  faith  is  fupported  much  more 
ftrongly  than  theirs  was,  by  a  much  clearer  evidence 
of  another  Ufe,  and  a  bleffed  im.mortality,  than  they 
had  *,  by  more  exprefs  promifes  of  divine  comfort 
and  alTiftance  under  fufferings,  than  were  made  to 
them  •,  and  by  the  moft  divine  and  encouraging  ex- 
ample, of  the  greateft  patience  under  the  greateft  fuf- 
ferings, that  the  world  ever  had,  in  the  death  and 
paiTion  of  the  Son  of  God,  "  who  for  the  joy  that 
^'  was  {^t  before  him,  endured  the  crofs,  and  de- 
^'  fpifed  the  fname,  and  is  fet  down  at  the  right  hand 
*'  of  the  throne  of  God  !"  When  we  confider  this 
glorious  example  of  fuffering,  and  the  glorious  re- 
ward of  it  *,  how  can  we  "  be  weary  and  faint  in  our 
*^  m.inds  1"  If  the  faints  and  apoftles  of  the  old  te- 
(lam.ent  did  fuch  great  things,  by  virtue  of  a  faith, 
which  relied  chiefly  upon  the  attributes  and  provi- 
cience  of  God  ;  what  fhould  not  we  do,  who  have 
the  fecurity  of  God's  exprefs  promife  for  our  com- 
fort and  encouragement !  We  certainly  have  much 
greater  reafon  to  take  up  our  crofs  more  chearfully, 
and  to  bear  it  more  patiently,  than  they  did. 

Secondly,  We  fliould  always  be  prepared  in  the  re- 
folutions  of  our  minds,  to  fuffer  for  the  teilimony  of 
God's  truth  and  a  good  confcience,  if  it  fhould  pleafe 
God  at  any  time  to  call  us  to  it.  This  our  Saviour 
hath  made  a  necelTary  condition  of  his  rehgion,  and 
a  qualification  of  a  true  difciple.  "  If  any  man  will 
^'  be  my  difciple  \  let  him  take  up  his  crofs  and  fol- 
''  low  me."  So  that  we  are  to  reckon  upon  it,  and 
to  prepare  for  it,  "chat  if  it  comes,  we  may  not  be 

furprized. 


1242       T'he  encouragement  to  fuffer  for  Christ; 

S  E  R  M.  furprized,  "  as  if  Tome  flrange  thing  had  happened 
"  to  us  ;"  and  may  not  be  unrefolved  what  to  do 
in  fuch  a  cafe.  And  God  knows  when  we  may  be 
called  to  it :  however  it  is  wife,  to  forecaft  it  in  our 
minds,  and  to  be  always  in  a  preparation  and  readi- 
nefs  to  entertain  the  worfl  that  may  happen  ;  that  if 
it  come,  we  m.ay  "  be  able  to  (land  out  in  an  evil  day," 
and  if  it  docs  not  come,  God  v/ill  accept  the  refolu- 
tion  of  our  minds,  and  reward  it  according  to  the 
fincerity  of  it :  he  that  knows  what  we  would  have 
done,  will  confider  it,  as  if  we  had  done  it. 

Thirdly,  The  lefs  we  are  called  to  fuffer  for  God, 
the  more  we  fhould  think  ourfelves  obliged  to  do  for 
him  ;  the  lefs  God  is  pleafed  to  exercife  our  patience, 
we  fhould  abound  fo  much  the  more  in  the  active 
virtues  of  a  good  life  •,  and  our  obedience  to  God 
fhould  be  fo  much  the  more  chearful,  and  we  more 
''  fruitful  in  every  good  work."  If  there  be  no  need 
of  fealing  the  truth  with  our  blood ;  v/e  fhould  be 
fure  to  adorn  and  recommend  it  by  our  lives. 

Fourthly  and  laftly,  if  the  hopes  of  immortality 
will  bear  men  up  under  the  extremity  of  fuffering 
and  torments,  and  give  men  courage  and  refolution 
againft  all  the  terrors  of  the  world  ;  they  ought  much 
more  to  make  us  vi6lorious  over  the  temptations  and 
allurements  of  it.  For  certainly  it  is  in  reafon  much 
eafier  to  forego  pleafure,  than  to  endure  pain  to 
refufe  or  lay  down  a  good  place,  for  the  teflimo- 
ny  of  a  good  confcience,  than  to  lay  down  our 
lives  upon  that  account.  And  in  vain  does  any  man 
pretend  that  he  will  be  a  martyr,  for  his  religion  j 
when  he  will  not  rule  an  appetite,  nor  reflrain  a  lufb, 
nor  fubdue  a  paffion,  nor  crofs  his  covetoufnefs  and 
ambition,  for  the  fake  of  it,  "  and  in  hope  of  that 
•'  etcrnaj  life,  which  God,  that  caimot  lie,  hathpro- 
2  "  m.ifed/' 


and  the  danger  of  denying  him.  1 243 

"  mifed."  He  that  refufeth  to  do  the  lefs,  is  not  like 
to  do  the  greater.  It  is  very  improbable,  that  a  man 
will  die  for  his  religion,  when  he  cannot  be  perfuaded 
to  live  according  to  it.  So  that  by  this  we  may  try 
the  lincerityof  our  refolution  concerning  martyrdom. 
For  what  profefTion  foe^er  men  make,  he  that  will 
not  deny  himfelf  the  pleafures  of  fin,  and  the  advan- 
tages of  this  world,  for  Christ  ;  when  it  comes  to 
the  pufh,  will  never  have  the  heart  "  to  take  up  his 
''  crofs,  and  follow  him."  He  that  cannot  take  up 
a  refolution  to  live  a  faint,  hath  a  demonflration  with- 
in himfelf,  that  he  is  never  like  to  die  a  martyr. 


SERMON     LXXIX. 

The  bleflfednefs  of  good  men,  after 
death. 


REV.    XIV.  13. 

And  I  heard  a  voice  from  heaven^  faying  unto  me^  Write ^ 
Bleffdd  are  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord,  from 
henceforth  :  Tea^  faith  the  Spirit^  that  they  ma^j  reft 
from  their  labours  ;  and  their  works  do  follow  them. 


Preached 
on  All- 
faints  day 


I 


Will  not  trouble  you  with  any  nice  difpute  a-  S  E  R  M, 
bout  the  author  of  this  book  of  the  Revelation, 


or  the  authority  of  it  ^  though  both  thefe  were  fome- 

times  controverted  -,    becaufe  it  is  now  many  ages 

fince  this  book  was  received  into  the  cannon  of  the 

t  fqriptures. 


12  44  'The  bleffednefs  of 

SERM.  fcrlptures,  as  of  divine  authority,  and  as  written  b}" 
St.  John.  Nor  fhall  I  at  this  time  enquire  into  the 
particular  meaning  of  the  feveral  vifions  and  predic- 
tions contained  in  it.  It  is  confeiTedly,  in  feveral  parts 
of  it,  a  very  obfcure  book  ;  and  there  needs  no  other 
argument  to  fatisfy  us  that  '4§k  fo,  than  that  fo  ma- 
ny learned  and  inquifitive  perfons,  have  given  fuch 
different  interpretations  of  feveral  remarkable  paffages 
in  it  i  as  particularly  concerning  "  the  flaying  of  the 
"  two  witnefies,  and  the  number  of  the  beait." 

The  words  which  I  have  read  to  you,  though 
there  be  fome  diHiculty  about  the  interpretation  of 
fome  particular  expreffions  in  them  ;  yet  in  the  ge- 
neral fenfe  and  intendment  of  them,  they  are  veiy 
plain,  being  a  folemn  declaration  of  the  bleffed  ftate 
of  good  men  after  this  life. 

And  that  we  may  take  the  more  notice  of  them, 
they  are  brought  in  with  a  great  deal  of  folemn  pre- 
paration and  addrefs,  as  it  were  on  purpofe  to  be- 
fpeak  our  attention  to  them :  "  I  heard  a  voice  from 
"  heaven,  faying  unto  me,  Write,  BieiTed  are  the 
*'  dead  which  die'  in  the  Lord,  from  henceforth." 
And  for  the  greater  confirmation  of  them,  the  fpe- 
cial  teftimony  of  the  Spirit  is  added  to  "  tlie  voice 
^'  from  heaven,"  declaring  the  reafon  why  they 
*'  that  die  in  the  Lord,"  are  pronounced  to  be  in 
fo  happy  a  condition  :  "  Yea,  faith  the  Spirit,  that 
*'  they  may  reft  from  their  labours  •,  and  their  works- 
*'  do  follow  them." 

In  the  handling  of  thcfe  words,  I  fliall  firfl  en- 
quire into  the  particular  {zx\\t  and  meaning  of  them. 

Secondly,  Prcfecute  the  general  intendment  of 
them,  which  I  told  you  is  to  declare  to  us,  the  bleffed 
ftate  of  thofe  that  die  in  the  Lord,  (that  is)  of 
faints  and  good  men,  after  they  are  departed  this 
life.    .  Firll, 


men^  after  death,  ^^24^ 

Firft,  I  fhall  enquire  into  the  particular  {tn{'^  and  S  E  R  M. 
meaning  of  the  words.     To  the  clearing  of  which,  ^_,-_-^ 
nothing  will  conduce  more,  than  to  confider  the  oc- 
calion  of  them,  which  was  briefly  this.     \n  the  vi- 
iions  of  this  and  the  foregoing  chapter,  is  reprefented 
to  St.  John,  the  gr^  ftraits  that  the  Chriftians,  the 
true  worHiippers  of  the  true  God,  fliould  be  reduc- 
ed to.     On  the  one  hand,  they  are  threatned  with 
death  ;  or  if  they  be  fuffered  to  live,  they  are  inter- 
didled  all  commerce  with  human  fociety,  chap.  xiii. 
15.  "  And  he  had  power  to  caufe,  that  as  many  as 
''  would  not  woriLip  the  image  of  the  beaft,  fhould 
"  be  killed  :"  and  verfe  17.     "  that  no  man  may 
"  buy  or  fell,  fave  he  that  had  the  mark  of  the  beafl.'* 
And  on  the  other  hand,  they  that  do  worfhip  the 
beaft   are  threatned   with  damnation,  chap.  xiv.  9, 
io.    "  If  any  man  do  worfliip  the  beaft,  the  fam® 
•"^  fliall  drink  of  the  wine  of  the  wrath  of  God,  and 
"  fliall  be  tormented  with  fire  and  brimftone."     So 
that  whenever  this  fhould  happen,  it  would  be  a  time 
of  great  trial  to  the  fincere  Chriftians,  being  threat- 
ned with  extreme  perfecution  on  the  one  hand,  and 
eternal  damnation  on  the  other  •,  and  therefore  it  is 
added  in  the  12th  verfe,  "  here  is  the  patience  of 
"  the  faints  :  here  are  they  that  keep  the  command- 
*'  ments  of  God,  and  the  faith  of  Jesus."     This  is 
reprefented  in  St.  John's  vilions,  as  the  laft  and  ex- 
tremeft  perfecution  of  the  true  worihippers  of  God, 
and  which  ftiould  precede  tlie  final  downfal  of  Baby- 
Ion.  And  when  this  fhould  happen,  then  he  tells  us, 
the  patience  of  the  faints  vv^ouki  be  tried  to  purpofe, 
and  then  it  would  be  feen,  who  are  faithful  to  God, 
and  conftant  to  his  truth  ;  and  upon  this  immediate- 
ly follows  the  voice  from  heaven  in  the  text;  ''  and 
*'  I  heard  a  voice  from  heaven,   faying  unto  me. 
Vol.  V.  10  F  Write, 

7- 


1246  ^ke  blejfednefs  of 

E^^  M.  «  Write,  Bleffed  are  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord, 
"  from  henceforth  :  Yea,  faith  the  Spirit,  that  they 
"  may  reft  from  their  labours  -,  and  their  works  do 
**  follow  them.'* 

The  main  difficulty  of  the  words,  depends  upon 
the  word  ocTxrct^Ti^  from  hencefdrrh  *,  which  interpre- 
tei's  do  variouily  refer  to  feveral  parts  of  the  text. 
Some  by  changing  the  accent,  and  reading  it,  ctTrct^- 
Ti,  would  change  the  fignification  of  the  word  into 
omninb  ;  omninb  heati  funt^  they  are  altogether  blefled, 
very  happy,  who  die  in  the  Lord.  But  this  is  alto- 
gether deftitute  of  the  countenance  and  warrant  of 
any  ancient  copy.  We  will  then  fuppofe  that  the 
word  is  a.7rcL^Ti^  and  to  be  rendered  as  we  tranflate 
it,  from  henceforth,  from  this  time.  All  the  diffi- 
culty is,  to  what  part  of  the  text  we  are  to  refer  it. 
Some  refer  it  to  the  word  bleifed  •,  "  blefted  from 
"  henceforth  are  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord  :'* 
As  if  from  this  time,  and  not  before,  the  fouls  of 
good  men  were,  immediately  after  death,  admitted 
into  heaven  -,  which,  many  of  the  ancient  fatliers 
thought,  the  fouls  of  good  men  who  died  before  the 
coming  of  Christ,  were  not.  But  then  this  blef- 
fednefs  ought  to  have  been  dated,  not  from  the  time 
of  St.  John's  vifion,  but  of  Christ's  afcenfion  ;  ac- 
cording to  that  of  St.  Ambrofe,  in  the  hymn  called 
Te  Deum  ;  "  when  thou  hadft  overcome  the  fliarp- 
"  nefs  of  death,  thou  didft  open  the  kingdom  of 
"  heaven  to  all  believers."" 

Others  refer  it  to  dying  in  the  Lord  •,  "  bleffed 
*'  are  the  dead,  that  from  henceforth  die  in  the 
*'  Lord."  But  this  hath  no  peculiar  emphafis  in 
it ;  becaufe  they  were  *'  blclTed,  that  died  in  the 
"  Lord,"  before  that  time. 

Others 


good  men^    after  death.  1247 

Others  refer  it  to  the  words  following,  concern-  S  E  R  M. 
ing  the  teftimony  of  the  Spirit ;  "  Yea,  from  hence-  ^^^^'^• 
"  forth,  faith  the  Spirit."  all  thefe  varieties  agree  in 
this  fenfe  in  general  •,  that  fome  fpecial  bleffednefs  is^ 
promifed  and  declared  to  thofe  who  fliouid  die  after 
that  time  :  but  wha^  th^t  is  in  particular,  is  not  eafy 
to  make  out. 

But  the  moll  plain  and  fimple  interpretation,  and 
that  which  feems  to  be  moft  fuitable  to  the  occafion 
of  thefe  words,  is  this  ;  that  the  word  cIttckoti^  from 
henceforth,  is  to  be  referred  to  the  whole  fentence, 
thus  ;  '*  from  henceforth,  bleffed  are  the  dead  which 
"  die  in  the  Lord  j"  as  if  St.  John  had  faid,  con- 
fidering  the  extremity  and  cruel  circumflances  of  this 
laft  and  fevere  perfecution,  we  may  from  that  time 
forward  reckon  thofe,  who  are  already  dead,  (fup- 
pofing  that  they  died  in  the  Lord)  to  be  very  hap- 
py ;  in  that  they  did  not  live  to  fee  and  fuffer  thofe 
things,  which  will  then  befal  the  faithful  fervants  of 
God,  when  "  the  devil  fhall  come,  having  great 
*'  wrath,  becaufe  he  knoweth  he  hath  but  a  fhorc 
''  time."  Much  in  the  fame  fenfe  as  Solomon,  when 
he  confidered  the  oppreffions  that  were  done  under 
the  fun,  fays,  Eccl.  iv.  2.  that  "  he  praifed  the  dead, 
"  which  were  already  dead,  more  than  the  living, 
"  which  were  yet  alive  ;"  that  is,  confidering  the 
oppreffions,  which  were  fo  frequent  in  the  world,  he 
reckoned  thofe  happier  that  were  out  of  it,  than  thofe. 
who  flill  lived  in  it. 

And  as  this  is  very  agreeable  to  the  fcope  of  wliac 
goes  before,  fo  it  fuits  very  well  with  what  follows 
after,  as  the  reafon,  why  thofe  perfons  are  declared 
to  be  fo  happy  j  "  Yea,  faith  the  Spirit,  that  they 
"  may  reil  from  their  labours  :  and  their  works 
[[  do  follow  them  j"  that  is,  that  tliey  may  be  at 

1QF2  aa 


T243  The  blejjednefs  of 

I  y YT Y  ^"  ^^'^  ^^  ^^^'^^  troubles  and  fuffcrings  ;  and  may  not 
be  tried  beyond  their  flrength  and  patience,  under 
that  terrible  perfecurion  which  will  reign  at  that  time ; 
and  likewife  that  they  may  receive  the  reward  of  all 
the  good  they  have  done,  and  the  evils  they  have 
fuffered  in  this  world  •,  in  the  very  fame  fenfe,  that 
the  righteous  are  faid  to  be  taken  away  from  the  evil 
to  come,  Efai.  Ivii.  1,2.  "  The  righteous  is  taken 
*'  away  from  the  evil  to  come,  he  fnall  enter  into 
*'  peace :  they  fhall  reft  in  their  beds,  each  one  walk- 
*'  ing  in  his  uprightnefs  -,"  that  is,  enjoying  the  com- 
fort  of  his  integrity  and  fincerity  towards  God. 

And  now  the  main  difficulty  being  over,  we  fhall 
need  to  trouble  ourfelves  the  lefs  about  the  other  ex- 
preflions  in  the  text :  yet  there  are  two  which  I  fhall 
a  little  explain  to  you. 

I.  What  is  here  meant  by  "  dying  in  the  Lord.'* 
And  this  fort  of  phrafef,  in  the  Lord,  in  Christ, 
and  in  the  name  of  Christ,  is  ufed  in  fcripture  very 
varioufly.  In  general  it  fignifies,  the  doing  or  fuf- 
fering  any  thing,  with  relarion  to  Christ,  and  up- 
on his  account ;  and  fo  "  to  die  in  the  Lord,"  doth 
mofl  frequently  fignify,  to  die  in  the  faith  of  Christ, 
and  the  profeffion  of  the  chriftian  religion.  Some- 
times it  fignifies  to  die  for  his  caufe,  and  to  bear  te- 
ftimony  to  his  truth,  which  is  therefore  called  mar- 
tyrdom, as  St.  Paul  is  faid  to  be  ^ia-fiio;  h  zv^^c^)^ 
Eph.  iv.  I.  '*  A  prifoner  in  the  Lord  ;"  that  is, 
for  his  caufe.  So  likewife,  St.  Peter  ;  "  If  ye  be  re- 
*'  proached  h  cvojuctri  X^i9^\  in  the  name  of  Ckri  st  ; 
"  happy  are  ye  :"  and  it  is  probable,  that  the  ex- 
prefilon,'  i  Cor.  xv.  18.  "  Then  they  alfo  which  are 
"  fallen  adecp  in  Christ  •,"  is  to  be  underilood,  of 
thofe  that  died  for  his  caufe  ;  becaufe  it  follows  im- 
mediately, "  if  in  this  life  only  we  have  hope  in 

"  Christ, 


good  men y  after  death.  1249 

"  Christ,    we  are  of  all   men  moft  miferable ;"  SERM. 

•  LXXIX 

that   is,  confidering  how   much  Chriftians  fufFered 

for  him  in  this  life,  they  were  in  a  moft  miferable 
condition,  if  there  were  nothing  to  be  expeded  be- 
yond it ',  but  efpecially,  if  we  confider  the  parallel 
phrafe,  i  ThefT.  iv.  14.  "  So  them  alfo  that  deep 
"  in  Jesus,"  Sici  t^ 'l'/^o-5,  for  Jesus  fake;  that  is, 
them  that  have  fuffered  martyrdom  for  him,  ''  will 
"  God  bring  with  him."  And  in  thisfenfe,  many 
underftand  the  phrafe  in  the  text,  as  fpoken  of  mar- 
tyrs ;  "  blefled  are  the  dead,  which  die  in  the 
"  Lord  ;"  that  is,  for  his  caufe.  And  though  I 
think  the  phrafe  miay  well  enough  be  underftood 
more  generally,  yet  I  fhall  not  reject  this  fenfe: 
becaufe  it  is  not  unfuitable  to  the  fcope  and  occafion 
of  the  words.  For  confidering  that  laft  and  extremie 
perfecution  which  he  had  defcribed ;  it  was  not  al- 
together improper  to  pronounce  thofe  happy,  that 
had  fuffered  martyrdom  already,  and  were  taken 
away  from  thofe  dreadful  calamities,  which  in  thefe 
laft  days  of  antichrift  v/ere  to  fall  upon  the  faithful 
fervants  of  Ch  r  i  s  t  . 

The  other  exprefiion  is  the  laft  in  the  text,  "  and 
"  their  works  do  follow  them."  So  we  render  the 
v/ord  ctVioA^S-^,  which  yet  does  moft  properly  fig- 
nify  to  accompany,  or  go  along  with  one ;  and  fo 
indeed  the  expreffion  will  rather  be  more  emphatical, 
"  they  reft  from  their  labours,  and  their  works  ac- 
*'  company  them."  But  whether  the  word  be  ren- 
dered, to  follow,  or,  to  accompany,  the  difference 
is  not  very  material. 

Thus  you  fee  what  the  particular  fenfe  and  mean- 
ing of  the  words  probably  is,  to  declare  the  happy 
eftate  of  thofe  faints  or  martyrs,  who  were  already 
dead,  in  and  for  the  faith  of  ChrisTj  and  Ihould 

*^  not 


1250  T'he  blejjediiefs  of 

S  E  R  M.  not  live  to  fee  thofe  cruel  and  fearful  fufferings,  which 
fhould  afterwards  come  upon  the  Chrifliians.  But 
then  this  is  groun_!ed  upon  that  general  truth,  that 
"  they  are  happy  that  die  in  the  Lord."  And  this 
is  that  which  I  intend  now  to  profecute,  abftradling 
from  the  particular  occafion,  upon  which  thefe  words 
were  ipoken  ;  which  brings  me  to  the 

Second  thing  I  propounded,  and  chiefly  defigned 
to  handle  upon  the  occafion  of  this  day  ;  namely, 
the  happy  eflate  of  good  men  after  they  have  de- 
parted out  of  this  life.  And  in  fpcaking  to  this, 
I  Ihall  confine  myfelf  to  two  particulars,  which  the 
text  mentions,  as  the  reafons  and  grounds,  why 
"  they  that  die  in  the  Lord,"  are  declared  to  be  in 
fo  bleffed  a  condition  ;  "  Yea,  faith  the  Spirit,  tiiat 
'^  they  may  reft  from  their  labours  ;  and  their  works 
*^  do  follow  them." 

1.  Good  men,  when  they  are  departed  this  life, 
are  freed  from  all  the  labours  and  pains  they  were 
exercifed  with  in  this  world  :  "  that  they  may  reft 
",  from  their  labours." 

2.  They  reap  the  comfort  and  reward  of  all  the 
good  which  they  have  done  in  this  world :  "  and 
*'  their  works  do  follow  them,"  or  rather,  go  along 
with  them.,  to  receive  the  reward  which  God  hath 
promifed  to  "  them,  who  by  patient  continuance  in 
''  well-doing,  feek  for  glory,  and  honour,  and  im- 
*'  mortahty." 

I.  Thofe  "  who  die  in  the  Lord,"  are  freed 
from  the  evils  and  miferies  of  this  life.  And  this  is 
fo  great  a  felicity,  diat  fome  (and  thofe  who  think 
themfelves  no  fmall  philofophers)  have  placed  the  chief 
happinefs  of  man  in  freedom  from  pain  and  trouble. 
But  though  happinefs  do  not  confift  in  tliis  alone ; 
yet  it  cannot  be  denied  to  be  a  great  part  of  it :  for 
2  though 


good  men ^  after  death,  1251 

though  fome  have  been  fo  phantaflically  obllinate,  S  E  R  M. 
as,  againll  the  reafon  and  common  fenfe  of  mankind, 
to  maintain  this  paradox,  that  a  wife  man  may  be 
as  happy  upon  the  rack,  or  in  PhaJaris  his  bull,  as 
in  the  greateft  eafe  and  freedom  from  pain  that  can 
be  imagined  -,  yet  nature  cries  fhamc  of  this  hypo- 
crify  ;  and  there  are  none  of  thofe  wife  men  they 
fpeak  of,  WTre  ever  fuch  fools  as  to  try  the  experi- 
ment, and  to  lliew  by  their  a6lions,  that  it  was  in- 
different to  them,  whether  they  laid  themfelves  down 
upon  their  beds  every  night,  or  were  ftretch'd  upon 
a  rack  -,  which  yet  ought  to  have  been  indifferent  to 
them,  had  they  believed  themfelves,  and  really 
efteemed  that,  which  others  account  pain,  to  be  as 
happy  a  condition,  as  that  which  is  commonly  call-  . 
ed  eafe. 

But  we  need  not  trouble  ourfelves  to  confute  fb 
flupid  a  principle,  which  is  confuted  by  nature,  and 
by  every  man's  fenfe  and  experience.  I  think  w^e 
may  take  it  for  granted,  that  freedom  from  mifery 
is  a  very  confiderable  part  of  happinefs  •,  otherwife 
heaven  and  hell,  if  we  confider  only  the  torment  of 
it,  would  be  all  one.  But  certainly  it  is  no  fmall  en- 
dearment of  religion,  to  the  common  fenfe  of  man- 
kind, that  it  promifeth  to  us  in  the  next  life,  a  free-r 
dom  from  all  the  evils  and  troubles  of  this.  And 
by  this  the  'happinefs  of  heaven  is  frequently  de- 
fcribed  to  us  in  fcripture,  Efai.  Ivii.  2.  fpeaking  of 
the  righteous  man  •,  "he  Ihall  enter  into  peace  :  they 
*'  fhall  refl  in  their  beds,"  2  Thef  i.  7.  where  the 
apoftle  fpeaking  of  the  reward  of  thofe,  who  fliould 
fuffer  perfecution  for  religion.  "  It  is  a  righteous 
"  thing  with  God,  (fays  he)  to  recompenfe  to  you, 
*'  who  are  troubled,  reft  with  us,  when  the  Lord 
*'  Jesus  Ihall  be  revealed  from  heaven  with  his 

_"  mighty 


i>>>j: 


1252  ^he  blejfednefs  of 

SERM.  "  mighty  angels."  And  the  apoftle  to  the  He- 
brews frequently  defcribes  the  happinefs  of  Chri- 
ftians  by  "  entering  into  reft."  And  Rev.  xxi.  4. 
the  ftate  of  the  new  Jerufalem  is  fet  forth  to  us,  by 
deliverance  from  thofe  troubles  and  forrows,  which 
men  are  fubjed  to  in  this  world  -,  "  and  God  fliall 
"  wipe  away  all  tears  from  their  eyes  •,  and  there 
"  fliall  be  no  more  death,  neither  forrow,  nor  cry- 
''  ing,  neither  fhall  there  be  any  more  pain  :  for  the 
"  former  things  are  paft  away." 

Thus  it  is  with  us  in  this-  world,  we  are  liable  to 
forrow  and  pain  and  death  :  but  when  we  are  once 
got  to  heaven,  none  of  thefe  things  fhall  approach 
us.  "  The  former  things  are  pafs'd  away,"  that 
is,  the  evils  we  formerly  endured,  are  paft  and  over, 
and  fhall  never  return  to  afflid  us  any  more. 

And  is  not  this  a  great  comfort,  when  we  are  la- 
bouring under  the  evils  of  this  life,  and  conflidling 
forely  with  the  miferies  of  it  •,  that  we  Hiall  one  day 
be  paft  all  thefe,  and  find  a  fafe  refuge  and  retreat 
from  all  thefe  ftorms  and  tempefts :  when  we  are 
loaded  with  afflidlions,  and  even  tired  with  the  bur- 
den of  them,  and  ready  to  faint  and  fink  under  it ;. 
to  think  that  "  there  remains  a  reft  for  us,  into 
*'  which  we  ftiall  ftiortly  enter  ?"  How  can  it  choofe 
but  be  a  mighty  confolation  to  us,  whilft  we  are  in 
this  "  vale  of  tears  and  troubles,"  to  be  aiTured  that 
the  time  is  coming,  when  "God  ftiall  wipe  away 
"  all  tears  from  our  eyes,  and  there  ftiall  be  no  more 
*'  forrow  nor  crying  V 

There  are  none  of  us,  but  are  obnoxious  to  any 
of  the  evils  of  this  life  •,  we  feel  fome  of  them,  and 
we  fear  more :  our  outward  condition,  it  may  be,  is 
uncomfortable,  we  are  poor  and  perfecuted  \  we  are 
deftitute  of  friends,  or  have  many  enemies  \  we  are 

defpoiled 


good  men^  after  death,  ^^53 

dcfpoiled  of  many  of  thofe  comforts  and  enjoyments  ^^^  R  M. 
which  we  once  had  :  our  bodies  perhaps  are  in  pain,- 
6r  our  fpirits  troubled  \  or  though  we  have  no  real 
caufe  of  outward  trouble,  yet  our  fouls  are  ill  lodged, 
in  the  dark  dungeon  of  a  body  -,  over-powered  v/ith 
a  melancholy  humour,  which  keeps  out  all  light  and 
comfort  from  our  minds. 

And  is  it  no  reviving  to  us,  to  think  of  that  happy 
hour,  when  we  fhall  find  a  remedy  and  redrefs  of 
all  thefe  evils  at  once  ?  Of  that  bleffed  place,  where 
we  fhall  take  fandluary,  from  all  thofe  afflidiiions  and 
troubles  which  purfued  us  in  this  world  ?  Where  for- 
row,  and  mifery,  and  death  are  perfed  ftrangers,  and 
into  which  nothing  that  can  render  men  in  the  leaft: 
unhappy^  can  ever  enter  ?  Where  our  fouls  fhall  be  ' 
in  perfect  reft  and  contentment,  and  our  bodies  af- 
ter a  while  fhall  be  reftored  and  reunited  to  our  fouls  ; 
not  to  cloud  and  clog  them  as  they  do  here,  but  fo 
happily  changed,  and  refined  to  fuch  a  perfedlion, 
that  they  fhall  be  fo  far  from  giving  any  difturbance 
to  our  minds,  that  they  fhall  mightily  add  to  their 
pleafure  and  happinefs  ? 

And  when  we  are  once  landed  in  thofe  bleiTed  re- 
gions, what  a  comfort  will  it  be  to  us,  to  ftand  on 
the  fhore,  and  look  back  upon  thofe  rough  and  dan- 
gerous feas,  which  we  have  efeaped  ?  How  pleafant 
to  confider  the  manifold  evils  and  calamities  which 
we  are  fresd  from,  and  for  ever  fecured  againft  ?  To 
remember  our  paft  labours  and  fufferings,  and  to 
be  able  to  defy  all  thofe  temptations,  which  were 
wont  to  alfault  us  in  this  world,  with  fo  much  vio- 
knee,  and  with  too  much  fuccefs  ?         * 

And  this  is  the  condition  of  the  bleffed  fpirits  a- 
Ibove.     They  find  a  perfect  ccfTation  of  all  afRidions 

Vol.  V.  10  G  and 


The  blejfednefs  of 

and  troubles,  "  they  reft  from  their  labours."  But 
this  is  not  all :  for, 

2.  They  are  not  only  freed  from  all  the  evils  and 
fufferings  they  were  cxercifed  withal  in  this  world  ; 
but  they  fhall  receive  a  plentiful  reward  of  all  the 
good  they  have  done  in  it  ^  "  their  works  do  ac- 
"  company  them."  When  pious  fouls  go  out  of 
this  world,  they  do  not  only  leave  all  the  evils  of 
the  world  behind  them ;  but  they  carry  along  with 
them  all  the  good  they  have  done,  to  reap  there  the 
comfort  and  reward  of  it.  Juft  as,  on  the  other 
hand,  wicked  men,  when  they  die,  leave  all  the 
good  things  of  this  world,  all  the  pleafures  and  en- 
joyments behind  them  ;  but  the  guilt  and  remorfe  of 
their  wicked  lives  accompany  them,  and  ftick  clofe 
to  them,  to  torment  them  there,  and  that  there  they 
may  be  tormented  for  them. 

Thus  the  fcriptures  reprefent  to  us  the  different 
condition  of  good  and  bad  men,  Efai.  iii.  lo,  ii. 
^'  Say  ye  to  the  righteous,  that  it  fhall  be  well  with 
''  him  :  for  they  fhall  eat  the  fruit  of  their  doings. 
"  Wo  unto  the  wicked,  it  fliall  be  ill  with  him  :  for 
"  the  reward  of  his  hands  fhall  be  given  him.'* 
Which  is  many  times  true  in  this  world  •,  but  how- 
ever that  happen,  will  moft  certainly  and  remarka- 
bly be  made  good  in  the  other.  And  this  is  moft 
emphatically  exprefs'd  to  us,  in  the  parable  of  the 
rich  man  and  Lazarus,  Luke  xvi.  25.  where  the 
rich  man  petitions  Abraham  for  fome  eafe,  and  Abra- 
ham returns  him  this  anfwer  ;  "  Son,  remember  that 
*'  thou  in  thy  hfe-time  receivedft  thy  good  things, 
"  and  likewife  Lazarus  evil  things  :  but  now  he  is 
"  comforted,  and  thou  art  tormented."  What  a 
change  was  here !  How  comfortable  to  the  one,  and 

how 


good  tnen^  after  death,  ^255 

how^difmal  to  the  other  !  Lazarus  found  reft  from  ^  E  R  '^-^ 
all  his  labours  and  fufFerings,  and  his  piety  and  pa- 
tience accompanied  him  into  the  other  world,  and 
conveyed  him  into  Abraham's  bofom.  Whereas  the 
rich  man  was  parted  from  all  his  good  things,  and  the 
guilt  of  his  fins  v/ent  along  with  him.,  and  lodged 
him  in  the  place  of  torment. 

But  my  text  confines  me  to  the  bright  fide  of  this 
profpecl ;  x}i\^  confideration  of  that  glorious  recom- 
pence  which  good  men  fhall  receive,  for  the  good 
works  which  they  have  done  in  this  world.  Indeed 
x!i\t  text  doth  not  expredy  fay,  that  their  works  fhall 
be  rewarded,  but  that  "  they  fliall  go  along  with 
*'  them,"  and  that  they  arc  bieffed  upon  this  ac- 
count •,  and  this  implies  that  they  lliall  receive  a  fure 
rev/ard.  For  as  the  apoftle  reafons,  "  Goo  is  not 
"  unrighteous  to  forget  our  work  and  labour  of 
*'  love.  Verily  there  is  a  reward  for  the  righteous," 
as  fure  as  ''  there  is  a  God  that  judgeth  in  the  earth." 

But  how  orreat  and  glorious  that  fhail  be,  I  am  not 
in  any  meafure  able  to  declare  to  you.  It  may  fuffice, 
that  the  fcripture  hath  allured  us  in  general,  that 
God  rsthe  rewarder  of  good  men,  and  that  he  v/ill 
m.ake  them  happy,  not  according  to  what  can  now 
enter  into  our  narrow  thoughts,  but  "  according  to 
'^  the  exceeding  greatnefs  of  his  power"  and  good- 
nefs.  If  we  are  to  receive  our  reward  from  God, 
we  need  not  doubt,  but  it  v/ill  be  very  large,  and 
fuch  as  is  ever/  vv  ay  worthy  of  him  to  bellow.  For 
lie  is  a  great  king,  and  of  great  goodnefs  -,  and  we 
may  fafely  refer  ourfelves  to  him,  in  confidence  that 
he  will  confider  us,  not  according  to  the  meannefs 
of  our  fervice,  b^t  according  to  the  vaftnefs  of  his 
trealiires,  and  the  infinite  bounty  of  liis  mind.     If 

10  G  2  li& 


27j^  blejfednefs  of 

he  hath  promifed  to  make  us  happy,  though  he  hath 
not  particularly  declared  to  us,  wherein  this  happi- 
nefs  ihali  confift  •,  yet  we  may  truft  him  that  made 
us,  to  find  out  ways  to  make  us  happy ;  and  may 
believe,  that  he  who  made  us  without  our  know- 
ledge or  defire,  is  able  to  make  us  happy  beyond 
them  both. 

Only  for  the  greater  encouragement  of  our  holinefs 
and  obedience,  though  he  hath  promifed  to  reward 
every  good  man,  far  beyond  the  proportion  of  any 
good  he  hath  or  can  do  •,  yet  he  hath  declared,  that 
thefe  rewards  (hall  be  proportionably  greater  or  lefs, 
according  to  the  degree  of  every  man's  piety  and 
virtue.     So  our  Saviour  tells  us,  that  "  they  who 
^'  are  perfecuted  for  righteoufnefs  fake,  great  fhall  be 
*'  their  reward  in  heaven,"  Matt.  v.  12.      That 
there  will  be  a  difference  between   the  reward  of  a 
righteous    man,    and  a  prophet ;    that   is,    of  one 
who  is  more  publickly  and  eminently  ufeful  for  the 
falvation  of  others.      And  among  thofe   who  are 
teachers  of  others,  they  that  are  more  induftrious, 
and  confequently  more  likely  to  be  fuccefsful  in  this 
work,  fhall  have  a  more  glorious  reward ;  as  we  are 
told  by  the  angel,  Dan.  xii.  3.  "  And  they  that  are 
''^  wife,*'  (or  as  it  is  in  the  margin  rendered,  "   they 
*'  that  be  teachers)  fhall  fhine  as  the  brightnefs  of 
*'  the  firrnament,  and  they  that  turn  many  to  righ- 
"  teoufn^fs,  as  the  flars  for  ever  and  ever."     So 
hkewjfe  we  find  in  the  parable  of  the  talents,  that 
he  that  improved  his  talent  to  ten,  was  made  ruler 
over  ten  cipes.     And  St.  Paul,   2  Cor.  ix.  6.   fpeak- 
ing  of  the  degrees  of  mens  charity  and  liberality  to- 
wards the  poor,  fays  exprefly,  "  he  that  foweth  fpa-. 
*'  ringly,  fliall  reap  fparingly  \  but  he  that  foweth 

"  boun- 


good  men ^  after  death,  ^257 

*^  bountifully,  fhall  reap  bountifully,"   which  ^Y  lxx^I^* 

proportion  of  reafon  may  be  extended  to  the  exercife 

of  all  other  graces  and  virtues,   i  Cor.  xv.  41,  42. 

The  apoftle  there  reprefents  the  different  degrees  of 

glory,  which  good  men  fliall  be  invefled  with  at  the 

refurredlion,  by  the  different  glory  and  fplendor  of 

the  heavenly  luminaries.     ^^  There  is  one  glory  of 

"  the  fun,  another  of  the  moon,  and  another  glory 

'•'  of  the  ilars  ;  for  one  flar  diifereth  from  another 

"  ftar  in  glory  :    fo  alfo  is  the  refurredion  of  the 

^'  dead."     So  that  the  more  any  man  fuffers  for 

God,  and  the  more  patiently  he  fuffers,  the  more 

holily  and  virtuoufly,  the  more  charitably  and  ufe- 

fuUy  he  lives  in  this  world  ;  the  more  good  works 

will  accompany  him  into  the  next,  and  the  greater 

and  more  glorious  reward  he  may  hope  to  receive 

there  -,  which  as  the  apoftle  reafons  (in  the  conclu- 

fion  of  that  chapter,  concerning  the  dodrine  of  the 

refurrection)  ought  to  be  a  mighty  encouragement 

to  every  one  of  us,  not  only  to  be  '^  ftedfaft  and  un- 

''  moveable"  (that  is,  fixed  and  refolute  in  thepro- 

fefiion  and  pradice  of  our  religion)  but  "  abound- 

■"  ing  likewife  in  the  work  of  the  Lord  •,  forailnuch 

*'  as  we  know,  that  our  labour  is  not  in  vain  in  the 

"  Lord." 

Every  degree  of  diligence  and  induftry,  in  the 
work  and  fervice  of  God,  will  moft  certainly  one 
day  turn  to  a  happy  account.  "  Having  therefore 
''  fuch  promifes,  dearly  beloved,  let  us  cleanfe  our 
''  felves  from  all  filthinefs  of  flefh  and  fpirit,  perfed- 
"  ing  holinefs  in  the  fear  of  God."  The  more  per- 
fedly  holy  we  are  here  on  earth  -,  the  more  perfed- 
ly  happy  we  fhail  be  in  heaven,  and  continue  fo  to 
all  eternity, 

I  have 


LXXIX. 


1258  The  blejfednefi  of 

S  ER^^'  I  have  now  done  with  the  two  reafons,  which  are 
here  given  in  the  text,  of  the  happinefs  that  good 
men,  fuch  as  "  die  in  the  Lord,"  Ihall  be  made 
partakers  of  in  another  life  -,  becaufe  "  they  reft  from 
"  their  labours,  and  their  works  accompany  them  ;" 
they  are  freed  from  all  the  evils  which  they  fufFered, 
and  fhall  receive  the  reward  of  all  the  good  they  have 
done  in  this  life. 

I  fliould  now  have  proceeded  to  make  fome  infe- 
rences from  this  difcourfe  •,  but  thofe  I  will  referve 
for  another  difcourfe  on  this  fubjed. 

All  that  I  fhall  add  at  prefent,  as  the  application 
of  what  I  have  already  faid,  is,  that  this  Ihould  ftir 
us  up  to  a  careful  and  zealous  imitation  of  thofe 
bleffed  perfons  defcribed  in  the  text,  "  who  are  dead 
''  in  the  Lord,  and  are  at  reft  from  their  labours, 
"  and  whofe  works  do  accompany  them."  Let  us 
imitate  them,  in  their  faith  and  patience,  in  their 
piety  and  good  works,  and  in  their  conftancy  to 
God,  and  his  truth,  which  was  dearer  to  them  than 
their  lives. 

Thus  their  virtues  and  fufferings  are  defcribed  in 
the  vifions  of  this  book,  chap.  xiii.  10.  "  Here  is 
"  the  patience  and  the  faith  of  the  faints;"  and 
chap.  xiv.  12.  "  Here  is  the  patience  of  the  faints  : 
"  here  are  they  that  keep  the  commandments  of 
"  God,  and  the  faith  of  Jesus  -,"  and  chap.  xii.  1 1 . 
"  And  they  overcame  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  and 
"  by  the  word  of  their  teftimony  ^  and  they  loved 
**  not  their  lives  unto  the  death. 

In  this  way,  and  by  thefe  fteps,  all  the  flints  and 

martyrs  of  all  ages,  have  afcended  up  to  heaven,  and 

attained  to  that  bleffed  ftate,  which  they  are  now 

pofTeffed  of,  after  all  the  evils  which  they  iuffered 

2  .in 


good  men ^  after  death,  ^^59 

in  this  world.  "  They  are  now  at  reft  from  their  S  E  R  M. 
"  labours,"  and  all  the  good  works  which  they 
have  done,  "  are  gone  along  with  them,'*  and  they 
arc  now,  and  ihall  for  ever  be,  receiving  the  com- 
fort and  reward  of  them.  And  if  we  tread  in  their 
fteps,  by  a  zealous  imitation  of  the  piety  and  holi- 
nefs  of  their  lives,  and  of  the  conilancy  and  patience 
of  their  fufferings  •,  we  ihall  one  day  be  tranflated 
into  their  blelTed  fociety,  and  made  partakers  with 
them  of  the  fame  glorious  reward.  If  we  "  have 
"  our  fruit  unto  holinefs  ;"  our  end  ihall  be  "  ever- 
"  lafting  life."  If  we  "  be  faithful  unto  death ; 
"  fhall  receive  a  crown  of  life." 

Let  us  then,  as  the  apoille  to  the  Hebrews  ex- 
horts, chap.  vi.  II,  12.  ''  Every  one  of  us  ihew 
*'  the  fame  diligence,  to  the  full  aiTurance  of  hope^ 
"  unto  the  end :  and  let  us  not  be  flothful ;  but  fol- 
''  lowers  of  them,  who  through  faith  and  patience 
''  inherit  the  promifes." 

"  Now  the  God  of  peace,  who  brought  again 
"  from  the  dead  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the 
"  great  ihepherd  of  the  iheep,  through  the  blood 
"  of  the  everlafting  covenant,  make  you  perfedl  in 
*'  every  good  word  and  work,  working  in  you  that. 
"  which  is  well-pleafing  in  his  fight," 


SER- 


i26o  l^he  blejfednefs  of 

SERMON     LXX:?C. 

The  bleffednefs  of  good  men,  after 
death. 


REV.   XIV.  13. 

Anil  I  heard  a  voice  from  heaven^  faying  unto  me^  Write ^ 
Bleffed  are  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lo  r  d  ,  from 
henceforth  :  Tea^  faith  the  Spirit^  that  they  ma^^  reft 
from  their  labours  \  and  their  works  do  follow  them, 

S  E  R  M.  X  N  my  explication  of  thcfe  words  I  told  you,  that 

•^^^^'  I  JL  ^h^y  ^^^5  i^  ^^  general  fenfe   and  meaning  of 

The         them,  a  folemn  declaration  of  the  bleffed  eflate  of 

fecond       good  men  after  this  life  ;  but  delivered  upon  a  fpe- 

tSs\°xt°"  ^^^  occafion,  as  is  fignified  by  that  expreffion,  "  from 

"  henceforth  i"  that  is,  from  the  time  of  that  vifion,' 

in  which  was  reprefented  to  St.  John,  the  laft  and 

extremeft  perfecution   of  the    faithful  fcrvants    of 

Christ,  and  which  fhould  precede  the  fatal  down- 

fal  of  Babylon ;  from  that  time,  "  blelfed  are  the 

*'  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord  •,"  that  is,  confider- 

ing  the  extremity,  and  the  cruel  circumftances  of 

this  laft  and  fevereft  perfecution,  we  may,  from  that 

time  forward,"  reckon  thole  who  are  already  dead 

(fuppofing  that  they  "  died  in  the  Lord")  to  be' 

very  happy  •,  in  that  they  do  not  live  to  fee  and  fuf- 

fer  thofe  grievous  things,  which  then  will  befal  the 

faithful  fervants  of  God. 

In  m.y  former  difcourfe,  I  confidered  the  words' 
according  to  the  general  intention  of  them,  abftrad- 

ing 


good  men,  after  death,  i  2  6 1 

ing  irom  the  particular  occafion,  upon  which  they  S  E  R  M. 
were  fpoken,  endeavouring  to  fet  forth  the  happy  eflate 
of  good  men  after  this  hfe,  from  the  two  reafons 
and  grounds  mentioned  in  the  text,  namely,  becaufe 
'^  they  reft  from  their  labours,"  and  becaufe  "  their 
"  works  do  follow,"  or  accompany  and  go  along 
with  "  them;"  which  two  particulars  conftitute  the 
happinefs  of  the  future  flate. 

That  which  farther  remains,  and  to  which  I  now 
proceed,  is  to  make  fom.e  inferences  from  what  I 
have  faid  upon  this  fubjedl.  And  in  doing  this,  I 
fhall  have  an  eye  on  thefpecial  occafion  of  the  words, 
as  well  as  on  their  general  intention^  And  the  in- 
ferences Ihall  be  thefe  following  :  -^ 

Firfl,  If  thofe  that  "  die  in  the  Lord"  are  "  at 
"  reft  from  their  labours"  and  pains  j  then  the  text 
concludes  directly  againft  the  feigned  purgatory  of 
the  church  of  Rome,  which  fuppofeth  a  great  num-' 
ber  of  thofe  that  ''  die  in  the  Lord,"  and  have 
"  obtained  eternal  redemption"  by  him  from  hell^ 
not  to  pals  immediately  into  happinefs  -,  but  to  be 
dctain'd  in  the  fuburbs  of  hell,  in  great  pain  and  tor^ 
m.ent,  till  their  fouls  be  purged,  and  the  debt  of  tem- 
porary puniflimenr,  to  which  they  are  liable,  be  fome  -^ 
way  or  other  paid  off  and  difcharged. 

Secondly,  Here  is  a  mighty  encouragement  td 
piety  and  virtue,  to  confider,  that  all  the  good  we  do 
in  this  world  will  accompany  us  into  the  other. 

Thirdly,  It  is  a  great  encouragement  to  patience 
under  the  fufferings  and  perfecutions  which  attend 
good  men  in  this  world  -,  that  how  heavy  and  grie-^ 
vous  foever  they  are  at  prefent^  they  will  end  with  this 
life,  and  we  fhall  then  "  reft  from  all  our  labours." 
Fourthly,  The  conftderation  of  the  extreme  fuf- 
ferings of  Chriftians  in  the  laft  times,  and  which  per-- 
VoL.  V.  lo  H  haps 

7' 


1262  The  bklJednefs  of 

S  K  R  M.  haps  are  not  far  from  us,  Ihould  render  us  very  in- 
different to  life,  and  all  the  enjoyments  of  it,  lb  as 
even  to  efteem  it  a  particular  grace  and  favour  of 
God,  to  be  "  taken  away  from  the  evil  to  come," 
and  by  death  to  prevent  (if  he  fees  it  good)  thofe  ex- 
tremities of  fufferings,  which  feem  to  be  haftening 
upon  the  world. 

I.  If  thofe  "  that  die  in  the  Lord  are  at  reft  from 
**  all  their  labours"  and  pains;  then  this  text  con- 
cludes diredly  againft  the  feigned  purgatory  of  the 
church  of  Rome,  which  fuppofeth  a  great  number, 
yea  the  far  greateft  part  of  thofe  "  that  die  in  the 
**  Lord,"  and  have  "  obtained  eternal  redemp- 
*'  tion"  by  him  from  hell,  not  to  pafs  imm.ediately 
into  happinefs,  but  to  be  detained  fomewhere  (they 
are  not  certain  where,  but  moft  probably  in  the  fub- 
urbs  of  hell)  in  great  pain  and  torment,  equal  in 
degree  to  that  of  hell,  and  differing  only  in  duration  \ 
I  fay,  to  be  detained  there,  till  their  fouls  be  purg- 
ed from  the  defilements  they  have  contra6led  in  this 
world,  and  the  debt  of  temporary  punifhments,  to 
which  they  are  liable,  be  fome  way  or  other  paid  off 
^nd  difcharged. 

They  fuppofe  indeed  fome  very  few  holy  men  to 
be  fo  perfedl:  at  their  departure  out  of  this  life,  that 
they  do  immediately,  and  v/ithout  any  ftop,  pafs 
into  heaven,  becaufe  they  need  no  purgation  •,  and 
thofe  likewife  who  fuffer  martyrdom,  becaufe  they 
difcharge  their  debt  of  temporary  punifhments  here  : 
but  the  generality  of  Chriftians  "  who  die  in  the 
*'  Lord,"  they  fuppofe  fo  imperfed:,,  as  to  ftand 
in  need  of  being  purged  by  fire,  and  accordingly  that 
they  arc  detained  a  longer  or  fhorter  time,  as  their 
debt  of  temporary  punilhments  is  greater  or  lefs. 

3  And 


LXXX. 


good  men^    after  death.  1263 

And  indeed  they  have  a  very  confiderable  and  fub-  ^S^E  R  M. 
ftantial  reafon,  to  exempt  as  few  as  pofiibly  they  can 
from  going  to  purgatory  ;  becaufe  the  more  they  put 
in  fear  of  going  thither,  the  market  of  indulgencies 
rifeth  the  hither,  and  the  profit  thence  accruing  to 
the  pope's  coffers  ;  and  the  more  and  greater  legacies 
will  be  left  to  the  priefts,  to  hire  their  faying  of  maf- 
fes,  for  the  delivery  of  fouls  out  of  the  place  of  tor- 
ments :  for  though  the  prayers  of  friends  and  rela- 
tions will  contribute  fomething  to  this ;  yet  nothing 
does  the  bufmefs  fo  effedually,  as  the  maifes  and 
prayers  of  priefts  to  tha,t  end. 

But  how  is  it  then  that  St.  John  fays,  that  thofe 
"  that  die  in  the  Lord  are  happy,'*  becaufe  "  they 
"  reft  from  their  labours  ;"  if  fo  be,  the  far  great- 
eft  part  of  thofe  "  who  die  in  the  Lord,"  are  fo 
far  from  "  refting  from  their  labours,'*  that  they 
enter  into  far  greater  pains  and  torments,  than  ever 
they  endured  in  this  world  ?  And  therefore  Bellar- 
mine,  that  their  do6trine  of  purgatory  may  receive 
no  prejudice  from  this  text,  would  have  "  from 
"  henceforth,"  in  the  text,  to  be  dated  from  the 
day  of  judgment  •,  when  he  fuppofeth  the  pains  of 
purgatory  will  be  at  an  end.  But  why,  ''  from  hence- 
"  forth,"  fliould  take  date  from  the  day  of  judg- 
ment, he  can  give  no  reafon,  but  only  to  fave 
purgatory  from  being  condemned  by  this  text.  For 
St.  John  plainly  fpeaks  of  the  happinefs  of  thofe 
that  fliould  die  after  that  time,  (whatever  it  be) 
which  he  there  defcribes  ;  but  that  time  cannot  be 
the  day  of  judgment,  becaufe  none  ll^all  die  after 
that  time.  Juft  thus  Eftius  (one  of  their  moft  learn- 
ed commentators)  deals  with  another  text,  which  by 
the  generality  of  their  writers  is  urged  as  a  plain 
proof  of  purgatory  ^  "  he  fhall  be  faved,  yet  fo  as 
10  H  2  "by 


^he  bkjjednefs  of 

^^  by  fire:*'  upon  which  he  fays,  it  is  fufiicient  that 
there  is  nothing  in  this  text  againfl  purgatory.  Suf- 
ficient, for  what  ?  not  to  prove  purgatory,  as  they 
generally  pretend  from  this  text  •,  but  to  fave  it  harm- 
lefs  from  it ;  as  if  we  had  pretended  that  this  text 
makes  againfl  it. 

But  there  are  others  that  make  againft  it  with  a 
witnefs.  Not  only  the  perpetual  filence  of  fcripture 
about  it,  when  there  are  fo  many  fair  occafions  of 
fpeaking  of  it ;  as  in  the  parable  of  the  rich  man  and 
Lazarus,  where  the  future  ftate  is  fo  particularly  de- 
fcribed,  and  yet  no  mention  made,  nor  the  leaft  in^ 
timation  given  of  this  third  ftate :  but  befides  the  fi- 
lence of  fcripture  about  it,  there  are  feveral  paffages 
utterly  inconfillent  with  it  •,  as  namely,  St.  Paul's 
difcourfe  in  the  beginning  of  the  fifth  chapter  of  the 
fecond  epiftle  to  the  Corinthians,  where  he  plainly 
declares  the  afllirance  he  had,  that  all  fincere  Chri- 
flians,  fo  foon  as  they  quit  the  body,  do  pafs  into 
happinefs :  "  For  we  know,  (fays  he)  that  if  our 
"  earthly  houfe  of  this  tabernacle  were  diffolved  j 
*'  we  have  a  building  of  God,  a  houfe  not  made 
*'  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens."  The  plain 
meaning  of  which  is,  that  fo  foon  as  we  quit  the  one, 
we  fliall  pafs  into  the  other.  And  this  confideration, 
he  tells  us,  made  Chriftians  weary  of  this  world,  and 
willing  to  die  ^  vcr.  2.  "  For  in  this  wc  groan  car- 
*'  nellly,  defiring  to  be  clothed  upon  with  our  houfe, 
*'  which  is  from  heaven  -,"  and  vcr.  4.  "  For  we 
*'  that  are  in  this  tabernacle  do  groan,  being  bur- 

^' *'  dencd."  But  had  Chriftians  believed,  that  the 
greateft  part  of  them,  when  they  left  the  body,  were 
to  go  into  purgatory,  to  be  terribly  tormented  there  ; 
they  would  not  have  been  in  fuch  hafte  to  die  ^  but 

^^  would  have  protraded  the  tim.e  as  long  as  they  could, 

and 


good  men y  after  death »  1265 

and  have  contentedly  born  the  burden  of  tfals  earthly  S  E  R  M, 

tabernacle,  rather  than  to  quit  it,  for  a  condition  a 

thoufand  times  more  intolerable.     But  St.  Paul  ex- 

prefly  fays,  that  Chriftians  knew  the  contrary,  and 

that  as  foon  as  ever  they  went  out  of  the  body,  they 

fhould  be  happy,  and  with  the  Lord  ♦,  and  that 

this  gave  them  courage  againft  the  fears  of  death  ; 

ver.  6.  "  Therefore  we  are  always  confident,  S-a^- 

'^  '^^vj^g  Sv   tatccvJct^,  bono   igitur  animo  fumus ; 

*^  Therefore  we  are  always  of  good  courage,  know- 

"  ing  that  whilfl  we  are  at  homp  in  the  body,  wc 

"  are  abfent  from  the  Lord."     And  ver.  8.  "  We 

"  are  of  good  courage,  I  fay,  and  willing  rather  to 

"  be   abfent   from  the  body,  and  prefent  with  the 

"  Lord."     The  plain  fenfe  of  which  is,  that  Chri- 

llians  were  willing  rather  to  die  than  to  liv^  ;  becaufe 

they  knew,  that  fo  foon  as  they  left  the  body,  and 

departed  this  life,  they  fhould  "  be  prefent  with  the 

"  Lord."    But  now  if  the  do6lrine  of  purgatory  be 

true,  this  whole  reafoning  of  ^x.,  Paul  proceeds  upon 

a  grofs  miftake  •,  and  therefore  I  am  certain  it  is  not 

true  :  and  fo  does  the  voice  from  heaven  here  in  the 

text ;  "  BlefTed  are  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord, 

"  that  they  may  reft  from  their  labours :"  for  there 

is  no  reafon  to  reftrain  this  general  exprelTion,  "  that 

"  die  in  the  Lord,"  only  to  the  martyrs  ;  for  though 

they  are  certainly  included,  and  perhaps  primarily 

intended  in  it ;  yet  this  phrafe  comprehends  all  thofe 

"  who  die  in  the  faith  of  Christ,"  and  is  mod 

frequently  fo  ufed  in  the  new  tellament. 

But  let  this  fuffice  to  have  been  fpoken  of  this  mat-^ 
ter  •,  elpecially  fince  bifhop  Fifher,  and  feveral  of  their 
own  learned  writers,  do  fo  frankly  acknowledge,  that 
their  do6lrine  of  purgatory  hath  no  fufficient  ground 
in  fcripturc.     Other  reafons  I  grant  they  have  for  it, 

which;;. 


1266  The  blejjednefi  of 

^^^^^  which  make  them  very  loth  to  quit  it ;  it  is  a  very 
profitable  dodrine,  and  therefore  they  have  taken 
care  to  have  it  more  abundantly  confirmed,  by  appa- 
ritions of  fouls  from  the  dead,  than  any  other  doc- 
trine whatfoever.  In  fhort,  how  little  foevcr  they 
can  fay  for  it ;  it  is  in  vain  to  go  about  to  perfuade 
them  to  part  with  it.  Demetrius  the  filver  fmith  ar- 
gued as  well  as  he  could  for  his  goddefs  Diana,  from 
the  univerfal  confent  of  the  world  in  the  worfliip  of 
her;  "  the  great  goddefs  Diana,  whom  all  Afia  and 
*'  the  world  worfhipeth."  But  liis  trufty  argument 
to  his  workmen  was,  "  Sirs,  ye  know  that  by  this 
*'  craft  we  have  our  wealth,  and  this  our  craft  is  in 
''  danger  to  be  fet  at  nought." 

II.  Here  is  a  mighty  encouragement  to  piety  and 
virtue,  to  confider  that  all  the  good  we  do  in  this 
world  will  accompany  us  into  the  other.  "  BleflTed 
''  are  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord  ♦,  for  their 
*'  works  accompany  them." 

When  we  come  to  die,  we  can  call  nothing  Our 
own  but  the  good  works  which  by  the  grace  of  God 
we  have  been  enabled  to  do  in  this  life.  Thefe  will 
ftick  by  us,  and  bear  us  company  into  the  other 
world,  when  we  fhall  be  flript  of  all  o*ther  things, 
and  forced  to  part  from  them,  whether  we  will  or 
no.  Our  riches  and  our  honours,  our  fenfual  plea- 
fures  and  delights,  will  all  take  their  leave  of  us,  when 
we  leave  this  world  •,  nay,  many  times  they  do  not 
accompany  us  fo  far  as  the  grave,  but  leave  us  very 
:  unkindly  and  unfeafonably,  when  we  have  the  great- 
efl  need  and  ufe  of  them. 
y  There  is  one  way  indeed,  whereby  we  may  fe- 
cure  our  riches,  and  make  fure  friends  to  ourfelves 
of  them  ;  by  laying  them  out  in  charity.  By  this 
means  we  may  fend  them  before  us,  and  confign 

them 


good  men,  after  death.  1267 

them  over  to  another  world,  to  make  way  for  our  S  E  R  M. 

LXXX 
reception  there.     So  our  Lord  alTures  us,  Luke  xii. 

-^Q^.  that  "  by  giving  alms  we  provide  ourfelves  bags 

"  which  wax  not  old,  a  treafure  in  the  heavens  which 

"  faileth  not ;"  and  Luke  xvi.  9.  that  by  this  way 

we  may  "  make  to  ourfelves  friends  of  the  mammon 

''  of  unrighteoufnefs ;  that  when  we  fail,  they  may 

"  receive  us   into   everlailing   habitations."      The 

mammon  of  unrighteoufnefs,  what  is  that  ?  It  is  what 

the   fcripture   elfewhere  calls  deceitful  riches  ;    be- 

caufe  in  other  ways,    in  which  men  commonly  lay 

them  out,  they  turn  to  no  certain  account,  but  one 

way  or  other  do  deceive  and  fruftrate  our  expedla- 

tion :  by  difpofing  of  them  in  charity,  to  the  relief 

of  the  poor  and  perfecuted,  we  make  fure  friends  of 

them,  and  confign  the  effeds  of  them  to  our  certain,,^- 

benefit  and  advantage  in  another  world. 

And  as  charity,  fo  likev^^ife  all  other  graces  and 
virtues  are  that  good  part  which  cannot  be  taken  away 
from  us.  All  the  good  adlions  that  we  do  in  this 
life,  will  go  with  us  to  the  grave,  and  bear  us  com- 
pany into  the  other  world,  and  will  Hand  by  us, 
when  we  come  to  appear  before  our  judge,  and  through 
the  merits  of  our  bleffed  Saviour  will  procure  for 
us,  at  the  hands  of  a  gracious  and  merciful  God,  a 
moft  ample  and  eternal  rev/ard. 

And  what  an  encouragement  is  this  to  holinefs  and 
viraie,  to  confider  that  it  will  be  all  our  own  another 
day,  and  turn  to  our  unfpeakable  advantage  at  our 
great  account !  To  be  alTured,  that  whoever  ferves 
God  faithfully,  lays  up  fo  much  treafure  forhimfelf, 
which  he  may  take  along  with  him  into  the  other 
world  J  and  does  provide  for  himfelf  lading  comforts 
and  faithful  companions,  which  v/ill  never  leave  him 
nor  forfake  him ;  a  happinefs  large  as  his  defires,  and 
durable  and  immortal  as  his  foul !  Let 


LXXX. 


1268  T'he  blej/cdnefs  of 

S^E  R  M.  Ler  us  then  do  all  the  good  that  poiTibiy  we  c:in^ 
whilft  we  have  opportunity  :  let  us  ferve  God  indu- 
ftrioufly,  and  with  all  our  might,  knowing  that  no 
good  adion  that  we  do  fhall  be  loft  and  fall  to  the 
ground,  that  no  grace  and  virtue  that  w^  pradife  in 
this  life,  nor  any  degree  of  them,  iliall  lofe  their  re- 
ward. If  we  faithfully  improve  the  talents,  which 
are  committed  to  us,  to  our  mailer's  advantage  •, 
when  he  comes  to  call  us  to  an  account,  and  finds 
that  we  have  done  fo,  wc  fhall  not  fail  to  receive 
both  his  approbation  and  reward.  And  what  a  com- 
fort will  it  be  to  any  one  of  us,  to  hear  thofe  blelied 
words  from  the  mouth  of  our  Lord  ;  '^  Well  done 
"  thou  good  and  faithful  fervant,  thou  haft  been 
"  faithful  in  a  little,  I  will  make  thee  ruler  over 
"  much;  enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord  !'* 
We  fhall  not  need  to  plead  our  fervices  to  him,  and 
put  him  in  mind  of  them :  our  judge  himfelf  will  ce- 
lebrate our  good  deeds  upon  the  theatre  of  the  world, 
and  commemorate  them  to  our  advantage  •,  and  in- 
terpret every  good  office  we  have  done,  to  any  of 
his  poor  and  affii6ted  members,  as  if  it  had  been  a 
kindnefs  immediately  done  to  himfelf.  So  our  Lord 
reprefents  the  proceedings  of  the  great  Judge  and 
King  of  the  world,  in  the  great  day  of  recompence. 
Matt.  XXV.  34.  "  Then  fhall  the  King  fay  unto  them 
"  on  his  right  hand.  Come,  ye  blefled  of  my  Father, 
*'  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the 
*'  foundation  of  the  world.  For  I  was  an  hungred, 
"  and  ye  gave  me  meat :  I  was  thirfly,  and  ye  gave 
"  me  drink  :  I  was  a  flranger,  and  ye  took  me  in : 
*'  naked,  and  ye  clothed  me  :  I  was  fick,  and  ye  vi- 
*'  fited  me  :  I  was  in  prifon,  and  ye  came  unto  mc. 
^'  Then  fhall  the  righteous  anfwer  him,  faying, 
^  Lord,  when  faw  we  thee"  in  any  of  thefe  circum- 

ftances  i 


.     good  men ^  after  death.  1269 

«  ftances  •,  hungry,  or  thirfly,  or  a  ftranger,  or  nak-  ^^^^' 
"  ed,  or  Tick,  and  inprifon,  and  miniftred  unto  thee?  ^^^.^..^^.^ 
"  And  the  king  fliall  anfwer  and  fay  unto  them,  ve- 
''  rily  I  fay  unto  you,  inafmuch  as  ye  have  done  it 
"  unto  one  of  the  leaft  of  thefe  my  brethren,  ye  have 
*'  done  it  unto  me."  Who  would  not  be  ambitious 
and  glad  tb  ferve  fuch  a  prince,  who  will  fo  benign- 
ly interpret,  and  fo  bountifully  reward  the  leaft  fer- 
vice  we  do  to  him  ! 

III.  The  confideration  of  this  fhould  likewife  be  a 
great  argument  and  fupport  to  our  patience,  under 
all  thofe  evils,  and  fufferings,  and  perfecutions,  which 
many  times  attend  good  men  in  this  world.  They 
are  for  the  prefent  perhaps  very  heavy  and  grievous : 
but  there  is  a  time  fhortly  coming,  when  we  fhall  be 
at  eafe,  and  perfedtly  freed  from  them  \  when  we 
fhall  find  reft  from  our  labours  and  fufferings  \  when 
we  fhall  enter  into  peace,  and  reft  in  our  beds,  every 
one  walking  in  his  uprightnefs  ;  that  is,  reaping  the 
comfort,  and  enjoying  the  reward  of  his  fincerity  to- 
wards God,  and  conftant  fuffering  for  his  caufe  and 
truth.  And  therefore  it  was  well  faid  of  a  good  man,  U  "^^^T^ 
blefTed  be  God  that  we  are  to  die  ;  becaufe  to  good'" 
men,  that  is  a  certain  remedy  of  all  the  evils  of  this 
life,  and  will  unqueftionably  put  an  end  to  them  7 
The  grave  is  a  place  of  reft,  and  difcharge  from  all 
trouble,  as  Job  elegantly  defcribes  it,  chap.  iii.  1 7, 
18,  19.  "  There  the  wicked  ceafe  from  troubling: 
"  there  the  weary  be  at  reft.  There  the  prifoners 
"  reft  together,  they  hear  not  the  voice  of  the  op- 
"  prefTor.  The  fmall  and  the  great  are  there,  and 
**  the  fervant  is  free  from  his  mafter.'* 

So  foon  as  we  enter  into  the  other  world,  we  are 
fecure  againft  the  purfuit  and  danger  of  all  thofe  evils 
which  afHided  us  in  this  world  •,  and  nothing  will  re- 

VoL.  V,  10 1  mairi 

7- 


1270  ^hd  blejfednefs  of 

S  E  R  M.  T^2im  but  the  joyful  remembrance  of  our  fufferings, 
^^  ')  and  the  plentiful  reward  of  our  conftancy  and  patience 
under  them.  And  the  more  our  tribulations  and  per- 
fecutions  have  abounded,  the  greater  will  our  com- 
fort and  happinefs  then  be,  '^  which  (faith  St.  Paul) 
*'  is  a  manifeft  token,"  a  clear  dcmonftration,  *'  of 
*'  the  righteous  judgment  of  God,  that  ye  may  be 
*'  accounted  worthy  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  for 
'^  which  ye  alfo  fuffer  \  feeing  it  is  a  righteous  thing 
''  with  God,  to  recompence  to  you  who  are  troubled, 
"  reft  v/ith  us,  when  the  Lord  Jesus  fhall  be  re- 
^'  vealed  from  heaven  with  his  mighty  angels," 
2  ThefT.  i.  5,  6,  7. 

IV.  The  confideration  of  the  extreme  fufFerings, 
which  are  to  fall  upon  the  faithful  fervants  of  Ch  r  i  st 
.j  in  the  laft  rimes,  and  which  feem  now  to  be  begun, 
in  the  world,  fhould  make  us  very  contented  to  leave 
this  world,  and  glad  of  any  fair  opportunity  and  ex- 
cufe,  to  take  our  leave  of  it,  and  to  be  out  of  the 
reach  and  danger  of  thofe  violent  and  more  than  hu- 
man temptations,  with  which  our  faith  and  conftancy 
may  be  aftailed :  nay,  to  efteem  it  a  particular  grace 
and  favour  of  God  to  us,  to  be  taken  away  from  the 
evil  to  come,  and  to  prevent  (if  God  fees  it  good) 
thofe  extremities  of  fuffering  which  are  coming  up- 
on the  world. 

Thefe  feem  now  to  be  begun  in  fome  part  of  it ;, 
they  in  our  neighbour  nation  have  a  bitter  cup  put  in- 
to their  hands  ;  a  cup  of  aftoniftiment  to  all  thofe 
that  hear  of  it.  Whether  this  be  that  laft  and  ex- 
treme perfecution  fpoken  of  here  by  St.  John,  I  fhall 
not  pretend  pofitively  to  determine.  It  is  plainly  di- 
flinguifhed  in  the  vifions,  from  that  under  the  firft 
beaft,  defcribed  Rev.  xiii.  from  verfe  the  firft,  to 
^  verfe  II.     And  chap,  xvij,  Uiere  is  a  defcription  of 

.  ^^^^^*^  dtvu  I  c<rvxtr>^vvr  ^fc>  tfvt  e txy^v Vr  wi^rrL >'  the 


K£. 


good  men y  after  death.  ttjt 

"  the  bead:  upon  which  the  woman  fitteth,  On  whofe  S  E  R  M. 
"  forehead  is  a  name  written,  flt^pffccp,  25aBpIon 
*'  tfje  (l5rcat :"  and  this  beaft  is  there  faid  to  have 
feven  heads  and  ten  horns,  which  are  thus  explained 
by  St.  John,  chap.  xvii.  9,  10.  "  And  here  is  the 
"  mind  which  hath  wiidom  ;  the  feven  heads  are  fe- 
*'  ven  mountains  upon  which  the  woman  fitteth  •,  and 
"  there  are  feven  kings,"  that  is,  (as  is  generally  a- 
greed  by  interpreters)  a  fuccefTion  of  feven  govern- 
ments :  and  verfe  12,  13,  14.  "  And  the  ten  horns 
"  which  thou  fawefc  are  ten  kings,  which  have  re- 
*'  ceived  no  kingdoms  as  yet ;  but  receive  pov/er  as 
"  kings  one  hour  with  the  beaft.  Thefe  have  one 
"  mind,  and  fhall  give  their  power  and  ftrength  un- 
"  to  the  beaft  ;  and  ftiall  make  war  with  the  lamb.'' 
And  verfe  18.  "  And  the  woman  which  thou  faw- 
*'  eft,  is  that  great  city  which  reigneth  over  the  kings 
"  of  the  earth." 

So  that  this  beaft  is  plainly  the  Roman  empire ; 
and  the  woman  that  fitteth  upon  her,  is  the  great  city 
ftanding  upon  feven  mountains,  which  reigneth  over 
the  kings  of  the  earth  ;  which  can  be  no  other  than 
Rome,  as  is  agreed  by  interpreters  on  all  fides.  Bel- 
larmine  (1.  2.  c.  2.  de  Rom.  Pontif )  confelfeth  that 
St.  John  in  the  Revelations  every  where  calleth  Rome, 
Babylon,  as  TertuUian  (faith  he)  hath  noted,  and  as 
is  plain  from  chap.  xvii.  where  Babylon  is  faid  to  be 
feated  on  feven  mountains,  and  to  have  dominion 
over  the  kings  of  the  earth  :  there  being  no  other 
city  than  Rome,  which  in  the  time  of  St.  John  had 
dominion  over  the  kings  of  the  earth-,  and  that 
Rome  was  built  upon  feven  hills  is  famous.  Thus 
much  Bellarmine  acknowledgeth,  conftrained  by  the 
force  of  truth',  and  for  another  fmall  reafon  ;  name- 
ly, becaufe  St.  Peter  writes  his  f^rft  epiftle  from  Ba- 

I  o  I  2  by  Ion, 


1272  ■■  ^he  bkjfednefs  of 

S  ^^^-1  bylon,  by  which  if  Rome  be  not  meant,  they  have 
no  proof  from  fcripture,    that  St.  Peter  was  ever 
{ there. 

Indeed  they  of  the  church  of  Rome  would  have  it 
to  be  only  Rome  pagan.  But  that  cannot  be  •,  be- 
caufe  this  bead,  after  his  laft  head  was  wounded  to 
death,  and  his  deadly  wound  was  healed,  had  power 
given  him  to  continue  two  and  forty  months,  or  (as 
it  is  ellewhere  exprefled,)  1260  days  j  that  is,  in  the 
prophetick  ftile,  fo  many  years  •,  and  likewife  becaufe 
it  was  not  to  begin  till  the  ten  kingdoms,  into  which 
the  Roman  empire  upon  it's  diflblution  was  divided, 
were  fet  up  •,  which  was  not  till  after  the  weftern  em- 
pire was  overthrown  and  deftroyed  by  the  Goths  and 
Vandals.  And  laftly^  becaufe  this  is  that  Rome  or 
Babylon,  which  fhould  finally  be  dellroyed,  and  caft 
as  a  milllone  into  the  bottom  of  the  fea,  never  to  rife 
again ;  which  is  yet  to  come.  And  of  this  beaft  it 
is  faid,  that  he  fhould  "  make  war  with  the  faints, 
*"'  and  overcome  them."  chap.  xiii.  ver.  7.  that  is, 
that  he  fhould  raife  a  long  and  great  perfecution  a- 
gainft  them,  which  fhould  try  their  faith  and  patience ; 
ver,  10.  "  Here  is  the  patience,  and  the  faith  of  the 
"  faints/*  The  beaft  then  with  ten  horns,  muft  be 
Rome,  governing  the  ttn  kingdoms,  into  which  the 
Roman  empire  was  broken  ;  and  this  can  be  nothing 
elfe  but  Rome  papal,  to  which  the  ten  kings  are  faid 
to  give  their  power,  and  to  which  they  were  in  a  moft 
fervile  manner  fubjed  for  feveral  ages,  as  is  plain 
from  hiftory. 

And  to  confirm  this,  it  is  very  obfervable,  that  the 
ancient  fathers  generally  agree,  that  "  that  which 
"  hindered  the  revealing  of  the  wicked  one,"  (fpoken 
of  by  St,  Paul,  2  ThefT.  ii.  7,  8.)  was  the  Roman 
empire  \  and  that  being  removed,  the  man  of  fin  or 

antichrift 


good  men,  after  death,  ^273 

antlchrift  was  to  fucceed  in  it's  room.     I  fhall  pro-  S  E  R  M. 

LXXX 
duce  a  few  teflimonies  to  this  purpofe,  but  very  re- 
markable ones.  Tertullian  expounding  what  St. 
Paul  means,  by  him  that  with-holdeth  or  letteth, 
hath  thefe  words,  Qjji^-,  nifi  Romamsftattis,  &c?  Who 
is  that,  but  the  Roman  flate,  which  being  broken  in- 
to ten  kings,  fhall  bring  on  antichrift?  And  then 
"  thewirk.a  one  fhall  be  revealed.*'  And  in  his 
apology  he  gives  this  reafbn,  why  the  Chiiilians 
fhould  pray  for  the  Roman  emperors,  and  the  whole 
ftate  of  the  empire ;  becaufe  the  greatefl  mifchief 
hanging  over  the  world,  is  hindered  by  the  continu- 
ance of  it.  St.  Chryfofliom  fpeaking  of  that  which 
hinders  the  revelation  of  the  man  of  fin  •,  this  (fays 
he)  can  be  no  other,  than  the  Roman  empire :  for  as 
long  as  that  flands,  he  dares  not  fhew  himfelf  •,  but 
upon  the  vacancy  or  ceafing  of  that,  he  fhall  afTume 
to  himfelf  both  the  power  of  God  and  man.  St. 
Auftin,  in  his  book  de  Civil.  Dei^  no  man  (fays  he) 
doubts,  but  that  the  fucceffor  to  the  Roman  empe- 
ror in  Rome  fhall  be  the  man  of  fin ;  and  we  know 
who  hath  fucceeded  him. 

But  now  after  this,  another  beaft  is  reprefented 
coming  out  of  the  earth;  not  fucceeding  in  the 
place  of  the  firfl  beafl,  but  appearing  during  his 
continuance,  ver.  12.  and  he  hath  thefe  remarkabk 
charadlers,  by  which  he  may  be  known. 

I .  He  is  faid  to  have  but  two  horns  ;  by  which, 
according  to  the  interpretation  of  the  ten  horns, 
fignifying  the  ten  kingdoms,  into  which  the  Roman 
empire  after  it's  diffolution  fhould  be  divided,  we 
are  in  all  reafon  to  underiland  two  of  thefe  kingdoms, 
of  which  this  beafl,  whoever  he  be,  Ihall  be  pot 
fefTed. 

2.  He 


1 274  ^^^  blejjednefs  of 

SERM.  2.  He  is  faid  to  be  like  a  lamb,  but  to  fpeak 
like  a  dragon  ♦,  that  is,  to  pretend  and  make  a 
fhew  of  great  lenity  and  mildnefs,  in  his  proceedings ; 
but  that  really  he  fhall  be  very  cruel.  It  fhall  be  pre- 
tended, that  he  does  all  without  violence,  and  without 
arms  •,  but  he  fhall  fpeak  as  a  dragon,  that  is,  in 
truth  fliall  exercife  great  force  and  cruelty  •,  either  al- 
luding to  the  cruelty  of  the  dragon,  literally  fo  call- 
ed ;  or  perhaps  prophetically  pointing  at  a  particular 
fort  of  armed  foldiers,  called  by  that  name  of  dragons, 
or,  as  we  according  to  the  French  pronunciation  call 
them,  dragoons. 

3.  He  fhall  arife  during  the  continuance  of  the 
firft  bead,  and  engage  in  his  caufe  j  but  the  firft 
beaft  fhall  only  fland  by  and  look  on,  ver.  12. 
''  and  he  exercifeth  all  the  power  of  the  firft  beaft, 
*'  before  him,  and  caufe th  the  earth  and  them  that 
*'  dwell  therein,  to  worfhip  the  beaft,  whofe  deadly 
"  wound  was  healed;"  plainly  declaring  that  this 
perfecution  fhould   not  immediately  arife  from  the 

]  firft  beaft,  which  is  faid  to  come  out  of  the  fea, 
which  in  this  prophecy  denotes  the  ft  ate  ecclefiaftical ; 
but  from  the  fecond  beaft,  which  comes  out  of 
the  earth,  and  denotes  the  temporal  power.  But 
yet  all  this  ought  to  be  aded  in  the  fight  of  the 
firft  beaft,  and  in  his  behalf,  to  compel  men  to  wor- 
fhip him. 

4.  That  he  fhall  be  remarkable  for  caufing  fire  to 
come  down  from  heaven  to  earth,  in  a  v/onderful 
manner,  to  the  great  terror  and  amazement  of  men  j 
ver.  13.  "  And  he  doth  great  v/onders ;  fo  that  he 
"  maketh  fire  to  come  down  from  heaven  on  the 
•'  earth  in  the  fight  of  men." 

5.  That  he  would  intcrdid  all  thofe,  v/ho  would 
not  worlhip  the  beaft,  all  commerce  with  human  fo- 

cietyj 


good  men ^  after  death.  ^^7S 

ciety,  the  exercife  of  civil  trades  and  profefTions  ;  ver.  ^f^^' 
ly.    "  And  he  caufeth,  that  no  man  might  buy  or 
"  Mly  fave  he  that  had  the  mark  of  the  bead." 

6.  And  laftly  (which  feems  to  be  the  moft  peculiar 
and  characlcriftical  note  of  all  the  reft,)  that  his  num- 
ber fhould  be  666^  that  is,  (as  moll  of  the  ancients 
underftand  it,)  that  the  numeral  letters  of  a  certain 
word  or  name,  fhould,  being  computed,  amount  to 
that  number.  And  it  is  exprelly  fiid  to  be  "  the  num- 
"  ber  of  a  man."  ver.  i8.  "  Let  him  that  hath  un-* 
"  derftanding  count  the  number  of  the  beaft  ;  for  it 
^*  is  the  number  of  a  man.'*  And  in  the  verfe  before, 
it  is  faid  to  be  "  the  number  of  his  name." 

Now  to  whom  all  thefe  characters  do  agree,  and 
efpccially  the  laft,  concerning  the  "  number  of  his 
"  name,"  I  Ihall  not  prefume  to  conjecture;  much 
lefs  pofitively  to  determine,  whether  he  be  now  in 
being  ;  becaufe  it  is  faid  to  require  a  particular  wif- 
dom  and  underftanding  to  find  it  out.  "  Here  is  wif- 
"  dom ;  let  him  that  hath  underftanding  count  the 
"  number  of  the  beaft."  However  the  event,  when 
the  thing  is  fully  accompliftied,  will  clearly  difcover 
it.  Thus  much  is  certain,  that  this  extreme  perfecu- 
tion,  whenever  it  ftiall  be,  will  forerun  the  final  de- 
ftrudion  of  Babylon,  which  will  not  then  be  far  off. 
And  concerning  this  it  is  that  St.  John  fpeaks,  chap, 
xiv.  12.  when  he  fays,  "  Here  is  the  patience  of  the 
"  faints,  here  are  they  that  keep  the  commandments 
"  of  God,  and  the  faith  of  Jesus."  And  then  h»^ 
immediately  adds,  as  it  is  in  the  text,  "  and  I  heard 
^'  a  voice  from  heaven,  faying  unto  me.  Write, 
"  BlefTed  are  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord,  from 
"  henceforth :  Yea,  faith  the  Spirit,  that  they  may 
"  reft  from  their  labours  •,  and  their  works  do  ac- 
*'  company  them."  Thus  jnuch  may  fuffice  to  have 
be^n  ipoken  on  this  text,  S  E  R- 


1 276     ^^  vanity  and  wickednefs  of  honouring  dead 

'::tl'    SERMON    LXXXI. 

faints  day.' 

The  vanity  and  wickednefs  of  honour- 
ing dead  faints,  and  per fecu ting  the 
living. 


L  U  K  E  XL  49,  50,  5 1 . 

therefore  alfo  faid  the  wifdom  of  God,  I  will  fend  them 
frophets  and  apofiles,  and  fome  of  them  they  fhalljla'j 
and  perfecute :  that  the  blood  of  all  the  prophets^ 
which  was  fhed  from  the  foundation  of  the  worlds  may'^ 
be  required  of  this  generation  \  from  the  blood  of  Ahely 
tmto  the  blood  of  Zacharias^  which  perifhed  between 
the  altar  and  the  temple  :  verily  I  fay  unto  you^  it 
fhall  be  required  of  this  generation, 

^  Yxxf  '  I  ^HE  latter  part  of  this  chapter  is  a  very  Iliarp, 
JL  ^^^  j^^-^  inve6live,  made  by  our  Saviour 
againft  the  hypocrify  of  the  fcribes  and  pharifees,  of 
which  he  gives  many  inflances  -,  and  this  among  the 
reft  for  one,  that  they  pretended  a  great  honour  and 
refped  for  the  righteous  men,  and  prophets  of  for- 
mer ages,  whom  their  fathers  had  perfecuted  and 
flain ;  but  yet  were  of  the  fame  fpirit  and  tem- 
per, and  as  ready  to  perfecute  good  men,  as  their 
fathers  were.  They  raifed  indeed  ftately  monuments 
to  the  memory  of  thofe  faints  and  martyrs,  and  a- 
domed  them  with  great  art  and  coft,  and  it  is  likely 
made  a  great  fhew  of  efteem  and  veneration  for  them : 
but  all  this  while  they  were  of  the  fame  difpofition 

with 


faints^    and  perfecuthtg  the  living,  ^277 

with  their  fathers,  and  bare  the  fame  implacable  ha-  ^  ^  R  IVI. 

tred  and  malice  againft  the  prophets  and  righteous  , 1^^.^ 

men  who  then  lived  among  them,  (yea  againd  that 
great  prophet,  whom  God  had  fent  into  the  world, 
Jesus  the  Son  of  God,)  which  their  fathers  did  a- 
gainfl  the  good  men  of  their  times.     And  though 
they  difclaimed  the  wickednefs  and  cruelty  of  their 
fathers,  with  never  fo  much  zeal  and  vehemency ; 
yet  for  all  that,  they  were  ready  to  do  the  fame  things. 
Now  this  was  fo  grofs  and  odious  a  piece  of  hypo- 
crify  in  them,    that  our  Saviour  doth  with  great 
reafon  denounce  fo  fevere  a  woe  againft  them  :  "  ¥/oe 
"  unto  you  ;  for  ye  build  the  fepulchres  of  the  pro- 
"  phets,  and  your  fathers  killed  them.     Truly  ye 
"  bear  witnefs,    that  ye  allow   the  deeds  of  your 
*'  fathers  ^  for  they  indeed  killed  them,  and  ye  build 
"  their  fepulchres."     And  then  it  follows  ;  "there- 
*'  fore  alfo  faid  the  wifdom  of  God,  I  will  fend  them 
'^  prophets  and  apoftles,  and  fome  of  them  they  fnall 
"  flay  and  perfecute  :  that  the  blood  of  all  the  pro- 
*'  phets,  which  was  fhed  from  the  foundation  of  the 
''  world,  may  be  required  of  this  generation  ;  from 
''  the  blood  of  Abel,  to  the  blood  of  Zacharias, 
"  which  perifhed  between  the  altar  and  the  temple." 
There  are  confiderable  difficulties  in  both  thefe  paf- 
fages.     As  to  the  former,  "  Wo  unto  you  ;  for  ye 
"  build  the  fepulchres  of  the  prophets,  and  your  fa- 
"  thers  killed  them.     Truly  ye  bear  witnefs,  that 
"  ye  allow  the  deeds  of  your  fathers  ;  for  they  in- 
"  deed  killed  them,  and  ye  build  their  fepulchres." 
The  force  of  this  reafoning  is  at  firft  fight  not  eafy  to 
be  difcerned  ;  and  therefore  expofitors  have  gone  fe- 
veral  ways  to  explain  it. 

Some  comparing  this  with  the  parallel  places  in  St. 
Matthew's  gofpel  (chap,  xxiii.  29.)  will  not  have  our 
Vol.  V.  10  K  Saviour 

8. 


1278     l^he  vanity  and  wickednefs  of  honouring  dead 

S  R  R  M  Saviour  to  mean,  that  by  building  the  fepulchres 
of  the  prophets  they  exprelTed  their  approbation  of 
their  fathers  kilhng  them.  They  did  indeed  teftify 
by  their  ufage  of  theVighseous  men  that  lived  amongft 
themfcives,  that  they  were  of  the  very  fame  temper 
and  fpirit,  which  their  fathers  had  been  of ;  and  that 
they  would  have  done  juil  as  their  fathers  did,  if 
they  had  been  in  the  fame  circumftances  with  their 
fathers  ^  fo  that  they  were  witnefTes  to  themfelves  (as 
it  is  in  St.  Matthew)  "  that  they  were  children  of 
*'  them  which  killed  the  prophets-,"  they  owned  them- 
fcives their  children  by  dcfcent,  and  their  adlions  wit- 
neffed  that  they  were  their  children  alfo  inrcfemblance  j 
nay,  (as  it  is  there  farther  intimated)  they  feemed  re- 
folved  "  to  fill  up  the  meafure  of  their  fathers  :"  though 
all  this  v/hile  they  pretended  not  to  approve  their  fathers 
behaviour  ;  and  therefore  whilft  they  were  "  build- 
"  ing  the  tombs  of  the  prophets,  and  garnifhing  the 
''  fepulchres  of  the  righteous,  they  faid,  if  we  had 
"  been  in  the  days  of  our  fathers,  we  would  not  have 
*'  been  partakers  with  them  in  the  blood  of  the  pro- 
*'  phets."  And  the  interpreters  that  go  this  way  do 
accordingly  render  thefe  words  of  St.  Luke  -,  not  as 
they  are  in  our  tranflation,  "  ye  bear  witnefs  that  ye 
*'  allow  the  deeds  of  your  fathers  :"  but,  ye  bear 
witnefs,  and  ye  allow  (or,  are  well  pleafed  with)  the 
deeds  of  your  fathers ;  that  is,  ye  own  that  they 
were  your  fathers,  who  did  thefe  things  ;  and  though 
ye  do  not  in  words  allow  what  they  did,  yet  your 
inward  tempers  and  difpofitions  (whether  you  know 
it  or  no)  are  the  very  fame  with  theirs,  which  you 
too  plainly  teftify  by  your  adlions  ;  fo  that  when 
*'  you  build  the  fepulchres  of  the  prophets,"  you  on- 
ly expofe  the  deceitfulnefs  and  hypocrify  of  your 
hearts,  your  pretences  and  your  adlions  dire6lly  con- 
3  tradiding 


LXXXI. 


faints^  and  perfecuttJtg  the  living.  ^279 

tradi6ling  each  other.     Thus  fome  expofitors  give  ^  ^  ^  ^^• 
the  fenfe  of  this  paflage. 

But  others  think  that  our  Saviour  intended  fome- 
what  more,  in  St.  Luke,  namely  to  retort  upon 
them  the  honour  which  they  feemed  to  do  to  the 
prophets,  in  building  their  fepulchres,  as  an  ar- 
gument that  they  rejoiced  in  their  death;  feeing 
they  were  fo  well  content  to  be  at  the  charge  of  a 
monument  for  them  ;  like  Herod  v/ho,  when  he  had 
murdered  Ariftobulus,  made  a  magnificent  funeral 
for  him ;  or  as  the  Roman  hiilorians  fay  of  Cara- 
calla,  though  he  hated  all  good  men,  whilil  they 
were  alive,  yet  he  would  pretend  to  honour  them, 
when  they  were  dead.  This  fome  think  our  Savi- 
our intended  in  thefe  words,  "  truly  ye  bear  wit- 
*'  nefs,  that  ye  allow  the  deeds  of  your  fathers  :  for 
"  they  indeed  killed  them,  and  ye  build  their  fepui- 
"  chres  ;"  as  if  he  had  faid,  hereby  ye  teftify,  that 
ye  allow  and  like  very  well  what  your  fathers  did  to 
the  prophets.  According  to  which  latter  expofition, 
there  feems  to  be  more  force  and  greater  fharpnels 
in  our  Saviour's  reproof;  as  not  only  charging 
them  with  the  ill  ufage  of  the  righteous  men  of  their 
own  times ;  but  moreover  making  them,  by  their 
building  the  tombs,  and  garnilliing  the  fepulchres 
of  the  ancient  prophets,  to  become  as  it  were  accef- 
fories  to  the  murder  of  them. 

But  leaving  this  digrelTion,  I  now  proceed  to  that 
which  I  primarily  intended,  namely,  firfl,  to  explain 
the  following  words,  which  I  have  chofen  as  my 
prefent  fubjed,  and  then  to  make  fome  obfervations 
upon  them. 

"  Therefore  alfo  faid  the  wifdom  of  God,  I  will 

"  fend  them   prophets   and  apoftles,  and  fome  of 

^'  them  they  fhall  (lay  and  perfecute ;  that  the  blood 

10  K  2  ''of 


1280    I'he  vanity  and  wickednefs  of  honouring  dead 

S  E  R  M  "  of  all  the  prophets  which  was  fhed  from  the  foun- 
^  ^'  \  "  daiion  of  the  world,  may  be  required  of  this  ge- 
"  neration ;  from  the  blood  of  Abel,  to  the  blood 
"  of  Zacharias,  which  perifhed  between  the  altar  and 
"  the  temple  :  verily,  I  fay  unto  you,  it  fliall  be  re- 
"  quiredof  this  generation.'* 

There  are  three  confiderable  difficulties  in^  the 
words,  which  I  fhall  endeavour  to  explain  to  you. 

I.  What  is  here  meant  by  ''  the  wifdom  of  God." 

II.  Who  this  Zacharias  was,  here  mentioned  by 
our  Saviour  ;  ^'  from  the  blood  of  Abel,  unto  the 
"  blood  of  Zacharias,  who  perillied  between  the  al- 
"  tar  and  the  temple." 

III.  In  what  fenfc,  and  with  what  reafon  and  juf- 
tice  it  is  here  threatned,  "  that  the  blood  of  all  the  _ 
"  prophets  and  righteous  men,  fhed  from  the  foun-  M 
*'  dation  of  the  world,  fhould  be  required  of  that 

"  generation." 

I.  What  is  here  meant  by  the  wifdom  of  God. 
*'  Therefore  alfo  faid  the  wifdom  of  God,  I  will 
"  fend  them  prophets  and  apoftles,  &c."  In  St. 
Matthew  our  Saviour  fpeaks  this  in  his  own  name, 
"  wherefore  behold,  I  fend  unto  you  prophets  :" 
for  which  reafon  fome  think,  that  by  "  the  wifdom 
*'  of  God,"  our  Saviour  here  defigned  himfelf; 
as  if  he  had  faid,  therefore  I,  who  am  the  wifdom 
of  God,  declare  unto  you.  But  this  is  not  very 
probable,  our  Saviour  no  where  elfe  in  the  gofpel 
ipeaking  of  himfelf  in  any  fuch  flyle,  though  St. 
Paul  calls  him  "  the  power  of  God,"  and  "  the 
"  wifdom  of  God."  Others  think  that  our  Savi- 
our here  refers  to  fome  prophecy  of  the  old  tefta- 
ment,  to  this  purpofe ;  "  therefore  the  wifdom  of 
*'  God  hath  faid,"  that  is,  the  holy  Spirit  of  wif- 
dom, which  inf'pircd  the  prophets  in  the  old  tefla- 

ment. 


faint  si  and  perfecuting  the  living.  1 2  8 1 

ment.     But  this  conceit  is  utterly  without  ground  ;  SP:rm. 
for  we  find  no  fuch  palTage,  nor  any  thing  to  that 
fenfe,  in  any  of  the  prophets  of  the  old  teflament. 

But  the  moil  plain  and  fimple  interpretation  is  this, 
"  therefore  hath  the  wifdom  of  God  faid,"  that  is, 
the  mod  wife  God  hath  determined  to  fend  among 
you  fuch  meflengers  and  holy  men,  and  I  forefee  tliat 
ye  will  thus  abufe  them,  and  thereby  bring  wrath 
and  deftrudion  upon  your  felves.  And  whereas  our 
Saviour  fays  in  St.  Matthew,  "  behold  I  fend  un- 
"  to  you  prophets  •,"  it  is  very  probable,  he  ipeaks 
in  God's  name,  and  that  it  is  to  be  underftood,  "  be- 
'^  hold,  fays  God,  I  fend  unto  you."  And  this 
phrafe  of  the  wifdom  of  God,  for  the  moft  wife 
God  is  very  agr-eeable  to  other  ^  forms  of  fpeech, 
which  we  meet  with  in  the  jewifh  writers  ;  as,  dicit 
norma  judicii,  "  the  rule  of  judgment  fays,"  that 
is,  the  moft  jufb  and  righteous  God  ;  which  ferves 
very  well  to  explain  the  phrafe  in  the  text,  "  there- 
"  fore  faith  the  wifdom  of  God,  I  will  fend  them 
"  prophets  and  apoftles." 

By  apollles  is  here  meant  all  forts  of  divine  mef- 
fengers  :  for  fo  St.  Matthew  expreiTeth  it,  "  I  fend 
"  unto  you  prophets,  and  v/ife  m.en,  and  fcribes  -j^' 
that  is,  feveral  holy  and  excellent  men,  endowed 
with  all  forts  of  divine  gifts ;  "  prophets,  and  wife 
"  men,  and  fcribes,"  whii:h  were  the  moft  glorious 
and  admired  titles  among  the  Jews. 

"  And  fome  of  them  they  fhaii  fiay  and  perfe- 
"  cute."  St.  Matthew  expreiTeth  it  more  particu- 
larly, "  fome  of  them  ye  iliall  kill  and  crucify  j" 
as  it  was  afterwards  fulfilled  in  the  two  James's,  and 
Stephen,  >vho  were  (lain  by  them,  and  in  Simon  the 
fon  of  Cleophas,  and  before  him  in  "  Je  sus  the  fon  of 
^'  God,"  who  were  crucified  :  and  "  fome  of  them 

';  ye 


1282     ^he  vanity  and  wickednefs  of  honouring  dead 

S  E  R  M.  "  ye  fhall  fcourge  in  your  fynagogucs,"  as  we  read 
LX).X  .  ^.j^^y  ^^^  ^^  Petter  and  John  ;  and  "  perfecute  them 
"  from  city  to  city,"  as  they  did  Paul  and  Barna- 
bas. The  fending  of  thefc  meffengers  of  God 
among  the  Jews,  and  this  ill  ufage  of  them,  the  all-wife 
and  all-knowing  God  had  determined  and  forefeen. 

II.  Who  this  Zacharias  was,  here  mentioned  by 
our  Saviour.  And  there  are  fo  many  of  them  (no 
lefs  than  four .  of  this  name)  to  whom  it  may  with 
fome  probability  be  applied,  but  efpecially  to  two  of 
them,  that  it  is  very  hard  to  determine  which  of 
them  our  Saviour  means.  Three  Zacharias' s  are 
mention'd  in  fcripture,  and  one  more  in  the  hiflory 
of  Jofephus. 

There  was  Zacharias  the  father  of  John  the  Bap- 
tifl  \  but  whofe  fon  he  was,  we  do  not  read  ;  and 
though  of  his  death  the  fcripture  is  filent,  yet  there 
are  two  traditions  about  it ;  one  that  he  was  flain  by 
Herod's  officers,  becaufe  he  would  not  tell  where  his 
fon,  John  the  Baptiil  was,  when  Herod  fent  for  him. 
But  the  credit  of  this  relies  upon  very  doubtful  authors. 
The  other  is  mentioned  by  feveral  of  the  fathers, 
and  the  fubitance  of  it  is  briefly  this  •,  that  there  be- 
ing a  place  in  the  temple,  where  the  virgins  by  them- 
felves  ufed  to  pray,  the  virgin  Mary  coming  to  that 
place  to  pray  among  the  virgins,  was  forbidden,  be- 
caufe (he  had  had  a  child :  and  that  Zacharias  for 
maintaining  her  virginity,  was  fet  upon,  "  and  killed 
"  between  the  temple  and  the  altar."  But  this  tra- 
dition is  rejected  by  St.  Jerome  :,  and  I  doubt  there 
is  httle  ground  for  it. 

Zacharias,  one  of  the  lefTer  prophets,  was  "  the 
*'  fon  of  Barachias,"  which  agrees  fo  far  with  St. 
Matthew's  defcription  of  him  :  but  there  is  no  men- 
tion in  fcripture  that  he  was  flain  j  nor  could  he  well 

be 


faints^  and perfecuting  the  living,  1283 

be  in  the  temple,  which  was  but  building  in  his  time  ;  ^  ^  R  M. 
though  the  author  of  the  targum  fays,  that  Zacharias 
the  fon  of  Ido,  was  flain  by  the  Jews  in  the  houfe 
of  the  Lord's  fandluary,  on  the  day  of  the  pro- 
pitiation ;  becaufe  he  admonifhed  them  not  to  do 
evil  before* the  Lord.  Now  Zacharias  the  fon 
of  Barachias,  was  the  grandfon  of  Ido  ;  but  yet, 
I  think,  this  was  only  lapfe  of  memory,  and  that  he 
means  Zachary  in  the  Clironicles,  who  was  flain  by 
Joaih. 

And  he  is  the  third  Zacharias  I  mention' d,  2  Chr. 
xxiv.  21.  who  as  he  was  reproving  the  people  *'  for 
"  tranfgrefling  the  commandment  of  the  Lord,  was 
"  ftoned  v/ith  flones  at  the  commandment  of  the 
"  king,  in  the  court  of  the  houfe  of  the  Lord/* 
And  this  our  Saviour  feems  more  particularly  to 
refled:  upon,  immediately  after  the  text ;  "  O  Je- 
"  rufalem  Jerufalem,  thou  that  ftoneft  the  prophets," 
&c.  Now  this  one  would  think  v/as  certainly  the 
perfon  intended  by  our  Saviour,  and  fit  to  be  men- 
tioned with  Abel,  "  whofe  blood"  is  faid  "  to  have 
''  cried  to  the  Lord."  For  of  Zacharias  it  is  like- 
wife  faid,  that  "  when  he  died,  he  faid,  the  Lord 
"  look  upon  it,  and  require  it."  And  Drufius 
cites  a  Jewifh^  writer,  fpeaking  thus  by  way  of  com- 
plaint againil  the  Jewifh  nation ;  "  becaufe  in  the 
"  midft  of  thee  fell  the  priefts  of  the  Lord,  and  his 
"  prophets,  and  becaufe  before  the  holy  temple  in 
"  the  midft  of  thee,  was  flain  the  godly  and  lighte- 
"  ous  prophet  Zacharias,  who  lay  unburied,  nor  did 
*'  the  earth  cover  his  blood,  but  to  this  day  it  goes 
"  up  and  fpeaks  in  the  midft  of  thee."  So  that 
none  could  have  been  more  fit  to  have  been  joined 
with  Abel  in  this  refped. 

But 


1284  ^he  vajiify  and  wicked  fiefs  of  honouring  dead 
S  E  R  M.  But  as  probable  as  this  looks,  there  are  two  very- 
great  objedlions  againft  it.  One  is,  that  St.  Mat- 
thew calls  the  Zacharias  fpoken  of  by  our  Saviour, 
the  fon  of  Barachias  ;  whereas  this  Zacharias  flain  by 
Joafh,  was  the  fon  of  Jehoiada :  and  though  it  be 
very  confiderable,  which  St.  Jerome  ohferves,  that 
in  the  Hebrew,  or  Nazarene  gofpel,  it  is  Zacharias 
the  fon  of  Jehoiada  ;  yet  it  is  hard  to  rely  upon  that, 
againft  all  the  Greek  copies.  But  a  more  difficult 
objedion,  in  my  opinion,  is,  that  our  Saviour 
feems  to  defign  to  mention  the  two  extremes,  the 
firfl:  and  lafl  righteous  man  that  was  flain,  and  be- 
tween them  two  comprehended  the  good  men  of  all 
ages,  that  were  perfccuted  and  flain  ;  and  if  fo,  then 
that  Zacharias  in  the  Chronicles,  who  was  flain  fo 
long  before,  can  by  no  means  be  the  perfon. 

There  is  yet  a  fourth  Zacharias,  mentioned  by 
Jofephus,  lib.  4.  the  fon  of  Baruch  (which  is  proba- 
bly enough  the  fame  name  with  Barachias)  who  was 
the  lafl:  remarkable  good  man  that  was  flain,  imme- 
diately before  the  fiege  of  Jerufalem  ;  and  that  as 
Jofephus  tells  us,  in  the  midfb  of  the  temple  ;  which 
agrees  with  our  Saviour's  defcription  of  it,  "  be- 
''  tween  the  altar  and  the  temple  ;"  not  the  altar  of 
incenfe,  but  of  burnt-offerings,  which  was  in  the 
outward  court,  before  the  afcent  to  the  temple.  So 
that  Grotius  thinks  this  was  the  man  intended  by  our 
Saviour,  yet  fo  that  he  does  both  allude  to  the 
hiilory  of  the  former  Zacharias,  and  foretel  the  death 
of  this.  And  there  is  but  one  objection  againfl:  this  ; 
that  our  Saviour  fpeaks  of  this  as  already  pafl: 
*'  whom  you  have  flain ;"  whereas  this  Zacharias 
was  not  flain  till  after  our  Saviour's  death.  But  I 
think  that  a  fatisfadory  anfwer  may  be  given  to  this 
(viz.)   that  our  Saviour  foretelling  thofe  future 

perfe- 


famts^  and perfecuting  the  living,  1285 

perfecutions,  which  fhould  fill  up  the  meaflire  of  S  ^-^J^- 
their  fins,  and  bring  final  deflradion  upon  them,  he 
fpeaks  of  this  as  already  paft,  becaufe  before  that  de- 
ftru6tion  fhould  come  upon  them,  it  would  be  true, 
*'  they  had  {lain  himi :"  fo  that  fpeaking  of  the  ven- 
geance coming  upon  them,  well  might  he  fay,  "  that 
"  upon  them  fhould  come  the  blood  of  all  the  righ- 
"  teous  men,  from  Abel  to  Zacharias,  whom  they 
*'  had  Hain,"  &c. 

III.  The  third  difficulty  remains,  and  that  is,  in 
what  fenfe,  and  with  what  reafon  and  juflice  it  is 
here  threatned,  "  that  the  blood  of  all  the  prophets 
''  and  righteous  men,  fhed  from  the  foundation  of 
"  the  world,  Hiould  be  required  of  that  generation." 
Some  underfland  this  more  flrid:ly  ;  they  fhould  be 
charged  with  it,  and  formally  puniUh'd  for  it,  be- 
caufe in  imitating  their  cruel  predecelTors,  they  fhould 
be  guilty  of  all  their  cruelty.  But  there  is  no  necef- 
fity  of  this  :  all  that  our  Saviour  feems  to  intend, 
is  this,  that  their  punifhment,  in  the  deflmdion  of 
Jerufalem,  Ihiould  be  fo  horrible,  as  if  God  had  once 
for  all  arraigned  them  of  all  the  righteous  blood  that 
ever  had  been  fhed  in  the  world,  and  brought  the 
punifhment  of  it  upon  them  ;  though  in  truth  the 
punifhment  did  not  exceed  the  defert  of  their  own. 
lins.  And  if  this  be  the  meaning  of  it,  there  is  no- 
thing harfh  and  unreafonable  in  it.  And  thus  I  have 
explained,  as  well  as  I  can,  the  feveral  difficulties  in 
the  text.  I  fhall  make  two  or  three  obfervations 
from  the  main  fcope  and  defign  of  it,  and  fo  conclude. 
I.  That  it  hath  been  the  lot  of  holy  and  righteous 
men,  in  mofl  ages  of  the  world,  to  meet  with  very 
bad  ufage,  to  be  perfecuted  and  flain.  The  devil 
began  this  work  early.  When  there  were  but  three 
men  in  all  the  world,  and  two  of  them  brethren ;  the 
.  Vol.  V,  10  L  one 

3. 


12  86    Tthe  vanity  and  ivickednefs  of  honouring  dead 

?3^!^'  one  flew  the  other,  ''  becaufe  he  was  more  rio:hte* 
"  ous,"  and  ferved  God  better  than  he  did.  And 
this  trade  hath  continued,  and  been  pradtifed,  more 
or  lefs,  in  moft  ages  and  generations  of  the  world, 
as  might  be  deduced  through  the  hiflory  of  the  old 
and  new  tellament,  and  of  moft  ages  fince :  "  though 
''  the  rod  of  the  wicked  hath  not  always  abode  upon 
"  the  back  of  the  righteous/'  left  at  laft  piety  ihould 
be  quite  difcouraged,  and  "  the  faithful  fail  from 
"  among  the  children  of  men."  The  people  and 
the  church  of  God  have  had  many  intervals  of  peace 
and  profperity  \,  and  fometimes  for  a  long  continu- 
ance, the  favour  and  countenance  of  authority,  and 
the  powers  of  the  world,  and  the  laws  of  nations 
on  their  fide. 

But  yet  there  is  a  continual  "  enmity  between  the 
*'  feed  of  the  woman,  and  the  ferpent,  between  the 
*'  righteous  and  the  wicked,  between  thofe  that 
*'  ferve  God,  and  thofe  that  ferve  him  not-,"  be- 
caufe their  ways  are  contrary  one  to  another,  and 
quite  of  another  faftiion,  their  principles  and  prac- 
tices do  contradi(5t  and  clafh  with  one  another  •,  the 
virtues  of  good  men  are  a  continual  upbraiding  of 
the  bad,  a  living  reproof  and  reproach  to  them  •,  fo 
that  it  is  no  wonder,  that  evil  men  do  fo  violently 
hate  and  perfecute  the  good,  and  do  by  all  means 
endeavour  to  remove  out  of  the  way  thofe  who  are 
fo  oppofite  and  ofFenfive  to  them. 

II.  We  may  obferve  likewife  hence,  how  great  a 
fin  they  are  guilty  of,  who  perfecute  the  righteous, 
and  how  terrible  a  vengeance  from  God  waits  on 
them.  Particular  examples  of  this  have  been  in  all 
ages :  but  as  the  guilt  of  this  fin  never  went  higher, 
than  at  this  time  foretold  by  our  Saviour,  when 
God  fent  to  the  Jews  fuch  "  prophets,  and  wife- 


"  men. 


faints^  and perfecuting  the  living,  1287 

"  men,  and  fcribes,"  and  fuch  a  number  of  them  SERM. 
as  never  upon  any  occafion  were  fent  into  the  world, 
and  they  ufed  them  in  that  bloody  and  barbarous 
manner  ;  no  wonder,  if  the  vengeance  that  came 
upon  them  was  fuch  as  never  had  been  before  ;  and 
if,  after  they  had  *'  filled  up  the  meafure*'  of  their 
fins,  by  "  crucifying  the  Lord  Jesus"  and  "  per- 
''  fecuting  his  apoftles,"  and  "  ftoning  and  killing 
*'  all  the  prdphets"  that  were  fent  unto  them,  "  the 
"  wrath  of  God  came  upon  them  to  the  utmoft,'* 
and  fuch  a  terrible  deflruction  from  the  Lord,  as 
never  befel  any  people ;  infomuch  that  our  Saviour, 
upon  the  forefight  and  mention  of  it,  forty  years  be- 
fore it  happened,  could  not  but  "  weep  over  them," 
and  exprefs  himfelf  in  thofc  compaffionate  words, 
*'  O  Jerufalem,  Jerufalem,  thou  that  killed  the  pro- 
"  phets,  and  ftonefl  them  which  are  fent  unto  thee, 
*'  how  often  would  I  have  gathered  thee,^s  a  hen 
*'  gathereth  her  chickens  under  her  wings ;  but  ye 
''  would  not !  behold  your  houfe  is  left  unto  you 
"  defolate." 

III.  From  this  whole  paflagc  of  our  Saviour, 
which  I  have  been  explaining  to  you,  we  may  learn, 
how  vain  it  is  for  men  to  pretend  to  honour  the  dead 
faints,  when  they  perfecute  the  living.  This  was 
the  great  hypocrify  of  the  fcribes  and  pharifees  a- 
mong  the  Jews  in  our  Saviour's  time  ;  and  is  at 
this  day  of  the  rulers  and  governors  of  the  Roman 
church  among  us  Chriftians ;  nay,  they  exceed  the 
fcribes  and  pharifees,  not  only  in  their  veneration 
of  the  ancient  faints  and  righteous  men,  but  al- 
fo,  if  it  be  pofllble,  in  their  malice  and  cruelty  to- 
wards the  living.  For  they  not  only  build  coilly 
monuments  to  their  memory,  which  was  the  utmoft 
the  fcribes   and    pharifees  did,  but    they  honour 

10  L  2  them 


.12  88     'the  vanity  and  wickcdnefs  of  honouring^  See. 

TXYXif*  ^^^^^^  ^'^^^^  brines  and  rich  offerings,  with  prayers 
and  vows  to  them,  more  frequent  than  to  Ahuighty  ", 
God  himfelf,  and  our  blefled  Saviour  :  but  then  | 
they  hate  and  perfecute  the  living,  with  as  great  I 
violence  and  cruelty,  as  ever  was  ufed  by  any  part 
of  mankind  towards  one  another.  'Tis  true  they  do 
it  under  the  notion  of  herefy  -,  and  fo  did  the  fcribes 
and  pharifees  too,  as  St.  Paul  witneffeth,  "  After 
*'  the  way  which  ye  call  herefy,  fo  worihip  I  the 
"  God  ot  my  fathers,  believing  all  things  that  are 
"  written  in  the  law  and  in  the  prophets."  So  they 
call  us  hereticks  ;  though  we  receive  and  believe  all 
that  is  written  in  the  holy  fcriptures,  only  rejeding 
their  additions,  whereby  they  "  would  make  the 
''  commandment  of  God  cf  none  effed."  And  as 
Kome  is  parallel  with  Jerufalem  in  many  other  re- 
lpc6ls  ;  fo  efpecially  in  the  bloody  perfecution  of 
righteous  men  :  and  as  Jerufalem  is  charged  by  our 
Saviour  with  "  the  blood  of  all  the  prophets  and 
"  righteous  men"  of  all  ages*,  fo  St.  John  in  the 
Revelation  fays  of  Rome,  that  "  in  her  was  found 
"  the  blood  of  prophets,  and  of  faints,  and  of  all 
"  that  were  flain  upon  the  earth,"  chap,  xviii.  24. 
Which  is  no  lefs  true  of  Rome  chriftian,  than  of 
^  Rome  pagan.  In  all  the  churches  and  religions  in 
I  ,the  world,  and  perhaps  in  Rome  pagan  her  felf,  hath 
not  fo  much  innocent  blood  been  fhed,  as  in  Rome 
.  chriftian  and  catholick,  and  that  under  a  pretence 
I  of  religion:  and  no  doubt  there  is  a  day  com- 
j  ing,  when  fhe  fhall  be  called  to  a  heavy  account  for 
thefe  things,  "  when  the  heavens  fhall  rejoice  ovet 
her,  and  the  holy  angels  and  prophets,  becaufc 
**  God  hath  avenojed  them  on  her." 


Ki 


SER.^ 


1289 

SERMON     LXXXII. 


The  danger  of  zeal,  without  know-    Preached 

^  -      -  on  No-^ 

vember  5, 

1682. 


ledge. 


ROM.  X.  2. 

I  hear  them  record^  that  they  have  a  zeal  of  God  \ 
hut  not  according  to  knowledge, 

TH  E  R  E  is  nothing  more  commonly  cried  up,  S  E  R  M. 
than  zeal  in  religion ;  and  yet  there  is  no-  ^-^^^^^• 
thing  in  which  men  do  more  frequently  and  fatally 
miftake  and  mifcarry,  and  in  the  expreflions  and  ef- 
fects whereof  men  ought  to  govern  themfelves  with 
more  care  and  caution.  To  fpcak  the  truth,  zeal  is 
as  all  other  paffions  are,  in  it's  own  nature  indiffe- 
rent, and  of  itfelf  neither  good  nor  bad  ;  but  accord- 
ing to  the  objed:  and  degree  of  it :  for  zeal  is  no- 
thing elfe,  but  "  an  earneft  concernment  for,  or 
''  againft  fomething,  and  a  violent  purfuit  and  pro- 
"  fecution  of  it."  For  if  it  be  applied  to  a  right 
objedl,  fo  as  we  be  earneftly  concerned  for  things 
that  are  unqueftionably  good,  and  againft  things  that 
are  unqueftionably  evil  ^  and  in  a  due  degree  -,  that 
is,  if  the  expreilion  of  it  be  proportionable  to  the  lefs 
or  greater  good  or  evil  of  things  \  then  it  is  a  com- 
mendable quality  of  virtue :  but  if  it  be  wrong  plajced, 
and  we  be  earneftly  concerned  for  that  which  is  evil, 
and  againft  that  which  is  good,  or  about  things 
which  are  of  an  indifferent,  or  doubtful  nature,  as 
to  the  good  and  evil  of  them  >  or  if  we  notorioufly 
I  '  exceed 


1290  The  danger  of  zeal^ 

I  XYxn  ^^^^^^  ^^  ^^^  degree  of  it,  being  more  zealoully  con- 
cerned about  things,  than  they  deferve,  and  zealoufly 
concerned  about  leiTer  things,  to  the  prejudice  of 
greater  •,  in  any  of  thefe  cafes,  it  is  fo  far  from  be- 
ing a  virtue,  that  it  is  a  vice  of  a  moft  pernicious 
and  mifchievous  confequence,  and  many  times  hath 
as  bad  effe6ls,  as  can  proceed  from  the  worft  princi- 
ple or  difpofition  of  mind. 

It  is  fometimes  ufed  in  a  good  fenfe ;  but  it  is, 
when  it  is  applied  to  the  beft  things,  in  which  the 
honour  of  God,  and  the  falvation  of  men  is  con- 
cerned, to  the  great  and  unqueftionable  duties  of  re- 
ligion. As  zeal  for  the  honour  of  God,  and  the 
place  of  his  publick  worfhip,  in  oppofition  to  pro- 
fanenefs,  Johnii.  17.  "  The  zeal  of  thine  houfehath 
*'  eaten  me  up."  For  an  earneft  defire  of  thofe 
gifts,  whereby  we  are  to  edify  the  church,  i  Cor. 
xii.  31.  "  But  covet  earneftly  the  beft  gifts,"  fowe 
render  the  words  -,  *'  be  zealous  of  the  beft  gifts,'* 
fo  it  is  in  the  Greek.  For  a  forwardnefs  and  readi- 
nefs  to  relieve  the  necefTities  of  the  faints,  2  Cor.  ix.2. 
*'  I  know  the  forwardnefs  of  your  minds,  and  your 
*'  zeal  hath  provoked  very  many.'*  And  to  the 
fame  purpofe  is  that  expreffion.  Tit.  ii.  14.  "  Zea- 
''  lous  of  good  works."  And  then  for  a  zeal  for 
the  falvation  of  mens  fouls,  2  Cor.  xi.  2.  "  I  am  zea- 
*^  lous  of  you  with  a  godly  zeal." 

But  the  word  is  much  more  frequently  in  fcripture 
ufed  in  a  bad  fenfe,  for  a  malicious  and  furious  rage, 
againft  the  profefibrs  of  chriftianity.  Ads  v.  17,  18. 
"  Then  the  high  prieft,  and  they  that  were  with 
*'  him,  were  filled  with  indignation,"  (the  word  is 
zeal)  '*  and  laid  their  hands  on  the  apoflles,  and  put 
*'  them  in  prifon."  And  chap.  xiii.  45.  it  is  faid, 
"  the  Jews  were  filled  with  zeal,  and  fpake  againft 

"  thofe 


without  knowledge.  1 2  9 1 

thofe  things  which  were  fpoken  by  Paul,  contra-  ^  E J^  M. 
didting  and  blafpheming."     And  chap.  xvii.  5. 
The  Jews  which  believed  not,  moved  with  zeal, 
gathered  a  company,  and  fet  all  the  city  in  an  up- 


LXXXII. 


roar." 


'Tis  frequently  reckoned  amongft  "  the  works  of 
•'  the  fiefh,"  and  mentioned  in  the  company  of  the 
grcatefl  vices  and  crimes  -,  wrath,  contention,  divi- 
lion,  fedition,  murthers,  tumults,  confufions,  Rom. 
xiii.  13.  "  Let  us  walk  honeftly  as  in  the  day,  not 
*'  in  chambering  and  wantonnefs,  not  in  ftrife  and 
"  zeal."  I  Cor.  iii.  3.  "  Whereas  there  is  among 
*'  you  zeal,  and  flrife,  and  divifions  ;  are  ye  not 
*'  carnal  ?"  2  Cor.  xii.  20.  "  Left  there  be  debates, 
*'  zeal,  wrath,  ftrife."  Gal.  v.  19,  20,  21.  "  The 
''  works  of  thp  flefh  are  manifeft,"  among  which 
the  apoftle  reckons  "  hatred,  variance,  zeal,  wrath, 
"  ftrife,  feditions,  herefies,  envyings,  murthers.'* 
St.  James  calls  it  a  "  bitter  zeal."  Jam.  iii.  14, 15, 
16.  "  But  if  ye  have  bitter  zeal  and  ftrife  in  your 
"  hearts  ;  glory  not,  and  lye  not  againft  the  truth. 
"  This  wifdom  defcendeth  not  from  above  ;  but  is 
"  earthly,  fenfual,  devililh.  For  where  zeal  and 
"  ftrife  is,  there  is  conflifion  and  every  evil  work.'* 
By  which  it  appears  that  zeal  moft  frequently  goes 
under  a  bad  name  and  charadter  in  fcripture  ;  zeal, 
I  mean,  in  matters  of  religion  •,  for  of  that  moft  of 
the  texts  I  have  mentioned  fpeak  •,  and  this  is  that 
which  St.  Paul  means  here  in  the  text,  by  a  zeal  of 
God,  that  is,  a  zeal  about  religion,  and  divine  things. 
"  I  bear  them  record,  that  they  have  a  zeal  of  God  ; 
**  but  not  according  to  knowledge." 

In  which  words,  the  apoftle  being  defirous  to  fay 
the  beft  he  could  of  his  countrymen  the  Jews,  he 
commends  the  good  meaning  of  their  zeal,  and 

blam.es 


1292  The  danger  of  zealy 

S  R  R  M.  blames  the  ill  conduft  of  it,  "I  bear  them  record, 
'  '  '  •  "  fA^a^Tv^co  ctvToig^  I  give  this  teftimony  on  their  be- 
"  half,  that  they  have  a  zeal  of  God,"  that  is,  that 
by  all  this  fiercenefs  againfb  the  chriftian  religion, 
they  intend  the  honour  of  God,  and  think  they  do 
him  fervice :  but  yet  this  zeal  is  greatly  to  be  con- 
demned ;  becaufe  it  is  a  miftaken  and  mifguided 
zeal,  not  at  all  diredled  as  it  fliould  be  ;  "  they  have 
"  a  zeal  of  God  •,  but  not  according  to  knowledge." 
From  which  words  I  fhall  take  into  confideration 
thele  three  things. 

I.  What  are  the  qualifications  and  properties  of 
*^'  a  zeal  according  to  knowledge." 

II.  By  what  marks  and  characters  we  may  know 
**  that  zeal,"  which  here,  and  elfewhere  in  fcripture 
is  condemned,  as  "  not  being  according  to  know- 
"  ledge." 

III.  How  far  the  doing  of  any  thing,  out  of  "  a 
*'  zeal  for  God,"  doth  mitigate  and  extenuate  the 
evil  of  it.  For  when  the  apoftle  here  teftifies  con- 
cerning the  Jews,  that  they  had  "  a  zeal  for  God  i" 
he  fpeaks  this  in  favour  of  them,  and  by  way  of  mi- 
tigation of  their  faults.  When  I  have  handled  thefe 
three  particulars,  I  fhall  apply  my  difcourfe  to  the 
prefent  occafion  of  this  day. 

I.  What  are  the  qualifications  and  properties  of* 
"  a  zeal  according  to  knowledge."     I  fhall  mention 
thefe  three. 

1.  That  our  zeal  be  right,  in  refped  of  it's  ob- 
je6t. 

2.  That  the  meafure  and  degree  of  it  be  propor- 
tioned to  the  good  or  evil  of  things,  about  which  it 
is  converfant. 

3.  That  we  purfue  it  by  lawful  ways  and  means. 

I.  That 


without  knowledge,  1 2  9  3 

t.  That  our  zeal  be  right,  in  refped  of  it's  obje6t ;  ^.^^^V 
1  mean,  that  thofe  things  which  we  are  zealous  for, 
be  certainly  and  confiderably  good  ;  and  that  thofe 
things  which  we  are  zealous  againfl,  be  certainly  and 
confiderably  evil.  A  millake  in  any  of  thefe  quite 
mars  our  zeal,  and  fpoils  the  virtue  of  it :  and  though 
it  be  never  fo  much  intended  for  God,  it  is  not  at 
all  pleafing  and  acceptable  to  him ;  becaufe  it  is  a 
blind  and  ignorant  and  miftaken  zeal :  and  the  hot- 
ter, the  worfe  ;  it  is  not  an  heavenly  fire,  "  that 
"  comes  down  from  above  ;"  but  it  is  like  the  fire  of 
hell,  heat  without  light.  If  we  miftake  good  and 
evil,  and  be  zealouily  concerned,  againfl  that  which 
is  good,  or  for  that  which  is  evil ;  the  greater  our 
zeal  is,  the  greater  is  our  fault ;  and  inftead  of  do* 
ing  God  and  religion  fervice  and  credit,  we  do  the 
greateft  mifchief  and  dishonour  we  can  to  them  both  : 
or  if  the  thing  about  which  our  zeal  is  converfant,  be 
of  a  doubtful  and  uncertain  nature  •,  this  is  not  pro- 
perly an  obje6l  of  zeal.  Men  fhould  never  be  earnefl 
for  or  againfl  any  thing,  but  upon  clear  and  certain 
grounds,  that  what  we  contend  fo  earneflly  for,  is 
undoubtedly  good  ;  and  that  which  we  are  fo  violent 
againft,  is  undoubtedly  evil:  if  it  be  not,  we  are 
zealous  for  we  knov/  not  v/hat,  and  that  I  am  fure, 
is  a  "  zeal  not  according  to  knowledge/' 

And  if  the  thing  be  certainly  good  or  evil,  which 
we  are  fo  concerned  about ;  it  mufl  alfo  be  confide- 
rably fo  :  otherv/ife  it  will  not  warrant  our  being  zeal- 
ous about  it.  All  truth  is  good,  and  all  error  bad  ;■ 
but  there  are  many  truths  fo  inconfiderable,  and 
which  have  fo  fmall  an  influence  upon  pradice,  that 
they  do  not  deferve  our  zeal  and  earnefl  contention 
about  them  ^  and  fo  likcwife  are  there  many  errorsy 
and  miflakes,  of  fo  flight  and  inconfiderable  a  nature^ 

Vol.  V.  10  M  that 


LXXXII. 


1294  T'he  danger  of  zeal^ 

S  ERM-   that  it  were  better  men  fhould  be  let  alone  in  them, 
than  provoked  to  quarrel  and  contend  about  them. 

Thus  that  great  heat  that  was  in  the  chriftian  church, 
about  the  time  of  obferving  Eafter,  was,  in  my  opi- 
nion, "  a  zeal  not  according  to  knowledge."  They 
were  on  both  fides  agreed  in  the  main,  which  was 
to  celebrate  the  memory  of  our  Saviour's  refur- 
redlion  :  but  there  were  different  cufloms  about  the 
time,  which  was  a  matter  of  no  fuch  confideration, 
as  to  dcferve  fo  much  heat  and  zeal  about  it,  efpe- 
cially  confidering  the  uncharitable,  and  mifchievous 
confequences  of  that  difference. 

2.  That  our  zeal  may  be  according  to  knowledge. 
The  meafure  and  degree  of  it  mufl  be  proportioned 
to  the  good  or  evil  of  things,  about  which  it  is  con- 
verfant.  That  is  an  ignorant  zeal,  which  is  conver- 
fant  about  leffer  things,  and  unconcerned  for  greater. 
Such  was  the  zeal  of  the  fcribes  and  pharifees,  who 
were  mightily  concerned  about  external  and  leffer 
matters  -,  but  took  little  or  no  care  of  inward  purity, 
and  real  and  fubilantial  goodnefs  ;  they  were  very 
careful,  "  not  to  eat  with  unwaflied  hands,  and  to 
"  make  clean  the  outfide  of  the  cup  and  platter;" 
but  then  "  they  were  full  of  extortion,  and  all  un- 
"  hghteoufnefs  :  they  paid  tythe  of  mint,  and  anife, 
"  and  cummin ;  but  omitted  the  weightier  things, 
*'  judgment,  mercy,  and  fidelity  •,"  or,  as  St.  Luke 
expreffeth  it,  "  they  paft  over  judgment  and  the  love 
"  of  God." 

A  zealous  ftricStnefs  about  external  rites  and  mat- 
ters of  difference,  where  there  is  a  vifible  negledl 
of  the  fubflantial  duties  of  religion,  and  the  great 
virtues  of  a  good  life,  is  either  a  grofs  ignorance  of 
the  true  nature  of  religion,  or  a  fulfom  hypocrify. 
And  fo  likewife  is  a  loud  and  zealous  outcry  againft 
3  rites 


without  knowledge,  ^  ^  9  5 

rites  and  ceremonies,  and  the  impofition  of  indiffe-  S  E  R  M. 
rent  things  in  religion,  when  men  can  releafe  them-  ._  -  -,^' 
felves  from  the  obligation  of  natural  and  moral  du- 
ties, and  pafs  over  mercy,  and  juftice,  and  charity. 

3.  A  zeal  that  is  "  according  to  knowledge,'* 
muft  be  purfued  and  profecuted  by  lawful  and  war- 
rantable means.  No  zeal  for  God  and  his  glory, 
for  his  true  church  and  religion,  will  juflify  the  do- 
ing of  that  which  is  morally  and  in  itfelf  evil.  "  Will  \ 
"  ye  fpeak  wickedly  for  God,  and  talk  deceitfully  ' 
"  for  him  ?"  We  do  not  know  what  belongs  to  the 
honour  of  God  and  religion,  if  we  think  to  promote 
his  glory,  by  means  fo  difhonourable  and  offenfive 
to  him.  The  apoflle  pronounceth  it  a  damnable 
fm,  for  any  to  charge  this  do6trine  upon  chriftia- 
nity,  that  evil  may  be  done  for  a  good  end,  and 
to  promote  the  glory  of  God,  Rom.  iii.  S.  "  As 
"  we  be  flanderoully  reported,  and  as  fome  affirm 
"  that  we  fay,  let  us  do  evil  that  good  may  come  -, 
"  whofe  damnation  is  juft." 

And  yet  nothing  is  more  frequent,  than  for  men, 
out  of  a  zeal  for  God  and  religion,  to  overlook 
the  evil  and  unlawfulnefs  of  the  means  they  ufe,  for 
the  advancing  fo  good  an  end.  This  is  that  which 
hath  fan6titied  thofe  refined  arts  of  lying  and  perjury, 
by  equivocation,  and  mental  refervation  •,  thofe  fedi- 
tious  ways  of  diflurbing  the  peace  of  kingdoms,  by 
treafon  and  rebellion,  by  the  excommunicating,  and 
depofing  of  princes,  upon  pretence  of  herefy  ;  of  ex- 
tirpating thofe,  whom  they  pleafe  to  call  hereticks, 
by  inquifitions,  and  croifado's,  and  maffacres ;  and 
this,  not  only  in  the  opinion  of  private  perfons, 
but  in  the  judgment  of  popes,  and  of  general  coun- 
cils.    I  proceed  in  the 

10  M  2  II.  Place 


J  2  9  6  The  danger  of  zeal^ 

LX^xr'  ^^'  ^^^^^  ^^  ^^^  ^y  ^^^'^^  marks  and  charaders 
'  *  wc  may  know  the  contrary  zeal,  that  which  is  not 
according  to  knowledge,  which  is  condemned  here 
in  the  text,  and  very  frequently  in  other  places  of 
fcripiure  :  and  though  this  may  be  fufficiently  known 
by  the  contrary  marks  and  properties  (which  I  fliall 
but  briefly  mention)  yet  to  difcover  it  more  fully,  I 
fliall  add  one  or  two  more  very  grofs  and  fenfible  figns 
and  inftances  of  it. 
y  I.  It  is  "  a  zeal  without  knowledge,"  that  is  mi- 
fl:aken  in  the  proper  objed:  of  it,  that  calls  good  evil, 
and  evil  good  •,  a  zeal  for  grofs  errors  and  fuperfti- 
tions,  plainly  contrary  either  to  the  revelation  of 
God's  word,  or  the  light  of  reafon,  or  to  common 
fenfe  ^  any  or  all  of  thefe  cannot  be  "  a  zeal  accord- 
"  ing  to  knowledge."  A  zeal  for  the  worfliip  of 
images,  for  praying  to  faints  and  angels,  contrary  to 
the  plain  law  and  word  of  God  ;  a  zeal  for  the  facri- 
legious  depriving  of  the  people  of  half  the  facrament, 
contrary  to  our  Saviour's  plain  inflitution,  and  the 
acknowledged  pra6tice  of  the  catholick  church,  for 
a  thoufand  years  ;  a  zeal  for  that  mod  abfurd  of  all 
dodrines  that  ever  was  taught  in  any  religion,  I  mean 
the  do6lrine  of  tranfubftantiation,  not  only  without 
any  fufFicient  authority  fromx  fcripture  (as  is  acknow- 
ledged by  feveral  of  the  moft  learned  of  the  Roman 
church)  but  contrary  to  reafon,  and  in  defiance  of  the 
fenfe  of  all  mankind  ♦,  a  zeal  for  thefe,  and  many  more 
like  grofs  errors  and  pradices,  cannot  poffibly  be 
x/  *'  a  zeal  according  to  knowledge." 

2.  That  is  "  a  zeal  without  knowledge,"  the  de- 
gree whereof  is  manifellly  difproportioned  to  the 
good  or  evil  of  things  about  which  it  is  converfant ; 
when  there  is  in  men  a  greater  and  fiercer  zeal  for 

the 


*without  knowledge.  1297 

the  externals  of  religion  -,  than  for  the  vital  and  ef-  f  ^^^* 
fential  parts  of  it:  for  the  traditions  of  men;  than 
for  the  commandments  of  God  :  for  bodily  feverities  ; 
than  for  the  mortification  of  our  lufls  :  for  the  means 
of  religion  ;  than  for  the  end  of  it :  a  greater  zeal  a- 
gainft  the  omiflion  and  negled  of  fome  fenfelefs  and 
fuperftitious  pradlices  ;  than  againft  the  pradlice  of 
the  groiTefl  immoralities  :  and  againft  the  deniers  of 
the  do6lrines  of  tranfubftantiation,  and  of  the  pope's 
infalhbility,  an  equal,  if  not  a  greater  zeal  (I  am  fure 
a  more  fevere  profecution)  than  againft  thofe  who  de- 
ny our  Saviour  to  be  the  trueMelTias,  and  the  Son 
of  God  :  this  certainly  is  not  "  a  zeal  according  to 
"  knowledge."     Nor, 

3.  That  which  is  profecuted  by  unlawful  and  un- 
warrantable means.  That  cannot  be  "  a  zeal  of  God 
"  according  to  knowledge,"  which  warrants  "  the  do- 
"  ing  of  evil,  that  good  may  come  ;"  the  violating  of  ^ 
truth  and  faith,  and  of  the  peace  of  human  fociety, 
for  the  caufe  of  the  catholick  church  -,  and  breaking 
the  eternal  and  immutable  laws  of  God,  for  the  ad- 
vancing of  his  glory.     Nor, 

4.  An  uncharitable  zeal,  which  is  an  enemy  to 
peace  and  order,  and  thinks  itfelf  fufficiently  warrant- 
ed to  feparate  from  the  communion  of  Chriilians,  and 
to  break  the  peace  of  the  church,  upon  every  fcruple, 
and  upon  every  fancy  and  conceit  of  unlawful  impo- 
fitions,  though  in  the  moft  indifferent  things  •,  nay, 
upon  this  fingle  point,  becaufe  a  thing  which  they 
acknowledge  lawful,  and  indifferent  in  it  felf,  is  in 
the  worihip  of  God  enjoined  by  authority  *,  the 
moft  unreafonable  principle  that  I  think  ever  was  a- 
vowed  among  Chriftians  ;  not  to  do  a  thing,  v/hich 
otherwife  they  might  do,  only  becaufe  it  is  enjoined  \ 
and  to  fancy,  that  an  indifferent  thing  becom.es  pre- 

fently 


iV*V' 


1298  T'lp^  danger  of  zeal^ 

fently  unlawful,  becaufe  it  is  commanded  by  lawful 
authority  ;  and  that  it  is  a  fin  to  do  any  thing,  in  the 
worfhip  of  God,  which  is'  not  left  to  their  liberty, 
w^hether  they  will  do  it  or  not.  This  is  not  only 
a  zeal  without  knowledge  j  but  contrary  to  common 
fenfe.     Nor, 

5.  A  furious  and  cruel  zeal,  which  St.  James  calls 
a  bitter,  or  a  wrathful  zeal,  and  which  tends  to 
confufion  and  every  evil  work,  which  is  blind  with 
it's  own  rage,  and  makes  men,  as  St.  Paul  fays  of 
himfclf,  when  he  pcrfecuted  the  Chriflians,  exceed- 
ingly mad  againil  all  that  differ  from  them,  and  Hand 
in  the  way  of  their  fierce  and  outrageous  zeal. 

6.  And  laftly,  a  zeal  for  ignorance,  is  moll  certain- 
ly not  "  a  zeal  according  to  knowledge  •,"  and  this 
is  a  zeal  peculiar  to  the  church  of  Rome,  by  fuch 
flri(fi:  laws  to  forbid  people  the  ufe  of  the  holy  fcrip- 
tures  in  a  known  tongue  ;  nay,  not  fo  much  as 
to  allow  them  to  underlland  what  they  do  in  the  fer- 
vice  of  God  ;  to  require  them  to  be  prefent  at  their 
pubiick  prayers,  and  to  join  with  them  in  them., 
without  letting  them  know  the  meaning  of  them  ; 
to  pretend  to  teach  them,  by  reading  leiTons  to  them 
in  an  unknown  tongue  ♦,  and  all  this  under  pretence 
of  increafmg  their  devotion  ;  as  if  the  lefs  men  un- 
derfland  of  the  fervice  of  God,  the  more  they  would 
be  afFedled  with  it,  and  edified  by  it. 

And  yet  there  is  nothing  in  which  the  church  of 
Rome  hath  been  more  zealoufly  concerned,  than  to 
keep  the  people  in  ignorance  :  nothing  they  have  op- 
pofcd  with  more  obflinacy,  againft  the  repeated  ap- 
plication of  princes,  and  people,  at  the  beginning  of 
the  reformation ;  than  to  allow  the  people  the  ufe  of 
the  fcriptures,  and  their  pubiick  prayers,  in  an  un- 
known tongue.     And  their  obftinacy  in  this  point, 

was 


without  knowledge.  1299 

v/as  not  without  reafon  -,  nothing  being  more  certahi,  S  E  R  M. 

•  LXXXII 

than  that  if  the  people  were  once  brought  to  under- 

fland  the  fcriptures,  they  would  foon  quit  their  reli- 
gion, which  in  fo  many  things  is  fo  dirc(5lly  contrary/ 
to  the  word  of  God.     The 

III.  And  laft  thing  remains  to  be  fpokento,  viz. 
how  far  the  doing  of  things,  out  of  "  a  zeal  for  God,** 
doth  mitigate  and  extenuate  the  evil  of  them.  For 
when  the  apoftle  here  teftines,  concerning  the  Jews, 
that  they  had  "  a  zeal  of  God,"  he  fpeaks  this  in 
favour  of  them,  and  by  v/ay  of  mitigation  of  their 
fault.  "  I  bear  them  record  •,"  I  who  was  once  ad- 
ed  by  this  ignorant  and  furious  zeal,  which  now 
pofTeffeth  them,  and  perfecuted  the  Chriftians  in  the 
lame  outragious  manner,  as  they  ilill  continue  to  do, 
and  all  this  with  a  very  good  confcience,  as  I  thought, 
and  out  of ''  a  zeal  for  God,"  and  the  true  religion. 
So  he  tells  us,  A6ts  xxvi.  9.  ''I  verily  thought  v/ith 
"  myfelf,  that  I  ought  to  do  many  things  contrary 
"  to  the  name  of  Jbsfjs  of  Nazareth."  So  that 
his  zeal  was  (incere,  and  with  a  real  intention  to  do 
ferviccto  God  and  religion;  and  yet  for  all  that 
was  very  faulty  and  finful,  and,  if  he  had  perPifted 
in  it,  damnable  ;  fo  that  his  confidence,  that  he  was 
in  the  right,  and  the  fmcerity  of  his  zeal  in  acling  ac- 
cording to  the  perfuafion  of  his  confcience,  did  not 
alter  the  nature  of  the  actions  he  did  out  of  this  zeal, 
and  make  them  lefs  wicked  in  them.felves :  though 
it  was  fome  mitigation  of  the  fault  of  the  perfon,  and 
rendered  him  more  capable  of  the  mercy  of  God,  by 
repentance,  than  if  he  had  done  contrary  to  his  con- 
fcience, and  the  clear  convictions  of  his  own  mind. 

And  therefore  the  beft  way  to  underftand  the  grcc.t 
evil  and  wickednefs  of  this  furious  and  blind  zeal, 
will  be,  to  confider  the  account  which  St.  Paul,  after 

his 


T*he  danger  of  zeal ^ 

his  converfion,  gives  of  his  own  doings,  and  what 
load  he  lays  upon  hiinfelf,  notwithftanding  the  fince- 
rity  of  his  zeal,  and  that  he  a6led  according  to  his 
confcience.  A6ls  viii.  and  ix.  you  have  the  hiflo- 
ry  at  large  of  his  outragious  doings,  how  he  made 
havock  of  the  church,  entering  into  every  houfc, 
and  haling  men  and  women  to  prifon  ;  how  he 
breathed  out  threatnings  and  (laughter  againfh  the 
difciples  of  the  Lord.  Ad:s  xxii.  4.  "I  perfe- 
"  cuted,  fays  he,  this  way  unto  the  death,  binding 
*'  and  delivering  into  prifons  both  men  and  women." 
And  ch.  xxvi.  10,  11.  "  Many  of  the  faints  did  I 
"  fhut  up  in  prifon,  and  when  they  were  put  to  death, 
"  I  gave  my  voice  againfl  them  \  and  I  punifhed 
''  them  often  in  every  fynagogue,  and  compelled 
"  them  to  blafpheme  \  and  being  exceedingly  mad 
''  againfl  them,  I  perfecuted  them  even  to  ilrange 
*'  cities."  Gal.  i.  13,  14.  "  Ye  have  heard,  fays  he, 
''  of  my  converfation  in  times  paft,  in  the  Jews  reU- 
"  gion  ;  how  that  beyond  meafure  I  perfecuted  the 
"  church  of  God,  and  walled  it,  being  exceedingly 
''  zealous  of  the  traditions  of  my  fathers."  i  Tim. 
i.  13.  "  Who  was  before  a  blafphemer,  a  per- 
*'  fecutor,  and  injurious."  So  that  he  chargeth 
himfelf  with  the  guilt  of  blalphemy  and  murder,  and 
a  mofl  furious  and  outragious  perfecution  of  good 
men  \  for  which  elfewhere  he  pronounceth  himfelf 
the  chief  of  finners.  From  whence  it  evidently  ap- 
pears, that  men  may  do  the  mofl  wicked  and  dam- 
nable fins,  out  of  a  zeal  for  God. 

And  this  was  the  cafe  of  many  of  the  Jews,  as  our 
Saviour  foretold,  that  "  the  time  fhould  come, 
"  when  they  fhould  kill  them,  thinking  they  did  God 
"  good  fervice."  But  yet  for  all  this,  the  apofllcs 
of  our  Lord  make  no  fcruple,  to  charge  them  with 

down- 


nv'itboiit  hnwiedge.  "1301 

downright  murder.     A6ls  ii.  23.  fpeaking  of  their  S  E  R  M. 
putting  our  Saviour  to  death,  "  whom  ye  by  wick- 
"  ed  hands  have  crucified  and  flain."    And  Ads  vii. 
52,    "  The  juft  one,  of  whom  ye  have  been  now 
''  the  betrayers  and  murderers.'* 

Yet  notwithflanding  their  fin  was  of  this  high  na- 
ture in  itfelf ;  it  was  fome  mitigation  of  the  fault 
of  the  perfons,  that  they  did  thefe  things  out  of  an 
ignorant  zeal,  and  rendered  them  more  capable  of 
the  mercy  of  God,  upon  their  repentance.  And  upon 
this  account  our  Saviour  interceded  with  God  for 
mercy  for  them  •,  "  Father  forgive  them,  for  they 
*'  know  not  what  they  do."  St.  Peter  alfo  pleads 
the  fame  in  mitigation  of  their  fault,  Adls  iii.  1 7. 
"  And  now,  brethren,  I  wot  that  through  ignorance 
"  ye  did  it,  as  did  alfo  your  rulers."  And  St. 
Paul  tells  us,  that  he  found  mercy,  upon  his  repen- 
tance, on  this  account,  i  Tim.  i.  13.  "  But  I  ob- 
"  tained  mercy,  becaufe  I  did  it  ignorantly,  and  in 
"  unbelief."  But  itill,  for  all  this,  wicked  things 
done  out  of  confcience  and  zeal  for  God,  are  damna- 
ble, and  will  prove  fo,  without  repentance. 

I  fhall  now  draw  fome  inferences  from  this  dif- 
Gourfe,  by  way  of  application. 

I.  If  it  be  fo  necelTary,  that  our  zeal  be  diredted 
by  knowledge ;  this  Ihews  us  how  dangerous  a  thing 
zeal  is  in  the  weak  and  ignorant  fort  of  people.  Zeal 
is  an  edge-tool,  which  children  in  underftanding  fhould 
not  meddle  withal ;  and  yet  it  moil  frequently  pof- 
fefleth  the  weakefl  minds  ;  and  commonly  by  how 
much  the  lefs  knowing  people  are,  by  fo  much  the 
more  zealous  they  are :  and  in  the  church  of  Rome, 
where  knowledge  is  profefTedly  difcouraged,  and  fup- 
prefTed  in  the  common  people,  zeal  is  mightily  coun- 
tenanced  and  cherilhed.     And  they  make  great  ufe 

Vol.  V.  10  N  of 

8. 


1302  7 he  dajiger  of  zeal^ 

S  E  R  M.  of  it;  for  this  blind  and  furious  zeal,  is  that  which 
infpires  them  to  do  fuch  cruel  and  barbarous  things, 
as  were  hardly  ever  adled  among  the  heathen.  Zeal 
is  only  fit  for  wife  men  -,  but  it  is  chiefly  in  fafliion 
among  fools. 

Nay  it  is  dangerous  in  the  hands  of  wife  men,  and 
to  be  governed  and  kept  in  with  a  fli-id  rein  •,  other- 
wife  it  will  tranfport  them  to  the  doing  of  undue  and 
irregular  things.  Mofes,  one  of  the  wifeft  and  beft 
of  men,  and  mofl  likely  to  govern  and  manage  his 
zeal  as  he  ought,  and  to  keep  aloof  from  all  excefs 
and  extravagance,  being  the  meekefl  m.an  upon  earth, 
yet  he  was  fo  furprized,  upon  a  fudden  occafion,  that 
in  a  fit  of  zeal,  he  let  fall  the  two  tables  of  the  law, 
which  he  had  butjull  received  from  God,  and  dafh- 
ed  them  in  pieces.  A  true  emblem  of  an  ungovern- 
ed  zeal,  in  the  tranfport  whereof  even  good  men  are 
apt  to  forget  the  laws  of  God,  and  let  them  fall  out 
of  their  hands,  and  to  break  all  the  obligations  of  na- 
tural and  moral  duties. 

2.  From  hence  we  plainly  fee,  that  men  may  do 
the  v/orfl  and  wickedeft  things  out  of  a  zeal  for  God 
and  religion.  Thus  it  was  among  the  Jev/s,  who 
engrofTed  falvation  to  themfelves,  and  denied  the  pof- 
fibility  of  it  to  all  the  world  befides  •,  and  the  church 
of  Rome  have  taken  copy  by  them,  as  in  an  arrogant 
conceit  of  themfelves,  fo  in  the  blindnefs,  and  fury, 
and  uncharitablenefs  of  their  zeal  towards  all,  who 
refufe  to  fubmit  to  their  authority  and  directions. 

And  as  the  teachers  and  rulers  of  the  jewiih  church 
did  of  old,  fo  doth  the  church  of  Rome  now  ;  they 
take  away  the  key  of  knowledge  from  the  people, 
and  will  neither  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven  them- 
felves, nor  fuffer  thofe  that  would,  to  enter  in.  They 
brand  for  heretics  thofe  who  make  the  holy  fcrip- 

tures 


without  knowledge,  ^3^3 

tures  the  rule  of  their  faith,  and  worfhin  ;  as  St.  S  E  R  ivf. 

LXXXII 
Paul  tells  us  the  Jews  did  in  his  time,  A6l:s  xxiv.  14,  , ^ 

''  After  the  way  which  they  call  herefy,  fo  worfliip 
*'  I  the  God  of  my  fathers,  believing  all  things  which 
"  are  written  in  the  law,  and  the  prophets."  They 
eftabhfh  the  merit  of  their  own  righteoufnefs,  not 
fubmitting  to  the  righteoufnefs  of  God,  by  the  faith 
of  Jesus  Christ.  So  St.  Paul  tells  us  the  Jews 
did,  in  the  verfe  immediately  after  the  text^  "  for 
*'  they  being  ignorant  of  God's  righteoufnefs,  and 
"  going  about  to  eftablifh  their  own  rigliteoufnefs, 
''  have  not  fubmitted  themfelves  to  the  righteouf- 
*'  nefs  of  God."  And  as  the  Jews  anathematized 
and  excommunicated  the  firfl  Chriilians,  and  perfe- 
cuted  them  to  the  death,  as  our  Saviour  foretold, 
''  that  the  time  would  come,  when  they  fhould  put 
*'  them  out  of  their  fynagogues,  yea  and  kill  them, 
''  thinking  they  didGoD  goodfervice ,"  fo  the  church 
of  Rome  hath,  for  many  ages,  ufed  the  fincere  pro- 
feflbrs"  of  the  fame  reUgion,  perfecuting  them,  firll 
with  excommunication,  and  then  with  fire  and  fag- 
got \  and  with  all  the  violence  and  fury  in  the  w^orld 
endeavouring  the  utter  exrirpation  and  ruin  of  them, 
by  bloody  croifado's  and  a  barbarous  inquifition,  by 
treacherous  malTacres,  and  all  forts  of  hellilli  plots 
and  machinations  ,  witnefs  the  monflrous  defign  of 
this  day,  never  to  be  remembred  or  mentioned  with- 
out horror,  to  have  dellroyed  at  one  blow,  and  have^ 
fwallowed  up  in  one  common  ruin,  our  king,  and 
prince,  and  nobles,  and  the  reprefentative  body  of 
the  whole  nation ;  witnefs  the  bloody  maifacre  of 
Ireland,  and  all  their  wicked  defigns  and  prad:ices, 
continued  to  this  very  day. 

3.  And  laftly,  that  zeal  for  Gdd   and  religion, 

does  not  alter  the  nature  of  adions  done  upon  that 

JO  N  2  account. 


1304"  ^^^  danger  of  zeal. 


S  E  R  M.  account.     Perfecution  and  murder  of  the  fincere  pro^ 
LXXXII 

felTors  of  religion,  are  damnable  fins  ^  and  no  zeal 

for  God  and  religion  can  excufe  them,  or  take  away 

the  guilt  of  them  ;  zeal  for  God  will  juftify  no  ac^ 

tion  that  we  do,  unlefs  there  be  difcretion  to  juftify 

our  zeal. 

Y  There  is  nothing  oftner  miQeads  men,  than  a 
mifguided  zeal ;  it  is  an  ignis  fatiius^  a  falfe  fire, 
which  often  leads  men  into  bogs  and  precipices  ; 
it  appears  in  the  night,  in  dark  and  ignorant 
weak  minds,  and  offers  itfelf  a  guide  to  thofe  who 
have  loft  their  way  ;  it  is  one  of  the  moft  ungo- 
vernable pafTions  of  human  nature,  and  therefore 
requires  great  knowledge  and  judgment  to  manage 
it,  and  keep  it  within  bounds.  It  is  like  fire,  a  good 
fervant,  but  a  bad  mafter ;  if  it  once  get  head,  it 
confumes  and  devours  all  before  it,  and  the  great 
danger  and  mifchief  of  it  is,  that  it  is  moft  com- 
monly found  where  it  fhould  not  be,  and  pofiefles 
thofe  moft,  who  are  leaft  fit  to  govern  it ;  and  moft 
frequently  employed  about  what  it  ftiould  not  be  ; 
and  ten  to  one  but  it  is  either  miftaken  in  the  objed, 
or  in  the  meafure  and  degree  of  it ;  and  even  when 
it  is  a  virtue,  it  is  a  nice  and  dangerous  one  ;  for 
the  wifeft  men  are  apt  to  mingle  their  own  paftions 
and  interefts  with  their  zeal  for  God  and  religion. 
So  that  it  is  not  enough  that  men  are  a6led  by  a  zeal 
for  God,  and  fo  fincerely  follow  the  didtates  of  their 
confciences  ;  but  they  muft  be  carefi.1l  to  inform  their 
confciences,  and  not  fuffer  themfelves  to  be  violently 
tranfported  and  hurried  on  by  their  own  pafiions  and 
prejudice,  and  by  a  blind  and  furious  zeal  without 
knowledge. 

•^  But  what  then  ?  Would  we  have  men  not  follow 
their  own  confciences,  or  ad  contrary  to  them  ?  No^ 

by 


without  knowledge,  1305 

by  no  means :  for  though  confcience  be  not  our  rule ;  S  E  R  M. 

Lxxxir 
yet  it  is  our  immediate  guide ;  and  he  does  ill,  who 

does  adt  againfl  his  confcience.  But  men  mufl  be 
careful  how  they  fettle  their  practical  judgment  of 
things,  and  conclude  things  to  be  lawful  or  unlaw- 
,  ful,  duties  or  fins,  without  reafon  and  good  ground. 
God  hath  given  us  underilandings,  to  try  and 
examine  things,  and  the  light  of  his  word  to  diredt 
us  in  this  trial  ;  and  if  we  will  judge  rafnly,  and  fuf- 
fer  ourfelves  to  be  hurried  by  prejudice  or  paf- 
lion,  the  errors  of  our  judgment  become  faults 
of  our  lives :  for  God  expedls  from  us  that  we 
fhould  weigh  and  confider  what  we  do  j  and  when 
he  hath  afforded  us  light  enough  to  difcern  between 
good  and  evil,  that  we  fhould  carefully  follow  the 
diredion  of  it ;  that  we  fhould  be  fufpicious  of  our 
felves,  when  our  zeal  carries  us  to  do  things  that  are 
furious  and  cruel,  falfe  and  treacherous,  and  have  a 
horrid  appearance  even  to  the  light  of  nature ;  we 
fhould  queflion  that  zeal  which  is  fg  contrary  to 
chriftian  goodnefs  and  meeknefs,  to  peace  and  cha- 
rity, and  which  tends  to  "  confufion  and  every  evil 
"  work." 

I  will  conclude  all  with  that  excellent  pafTage  of 
St.  Jam.es,  which  will  fhew  us  how  little  regard  is 
to  be  had  to  many  mens  pretences  of  zeal  for  reli- 
gion. Jam.  iii.  13.  "  Who  is  a  wife  man,  and  en- 
''  dued  with  knowledge  amongil  you  ?  Let  him 
"  lliew  out  of  a  good  converfation  his  works  with 
"  meeknefs  of  wifdom.  But  if  ye  have  bitter  zeal 
"  and  llrife  in  your  hearts  ;  glory  not,  and  lie  not 
*'  againfl  the  truth.  This  wifdom  defcendeth  not 
"  from  above :  but  is  earthly,  fenfual,  devilifh.  For 
*'  for  where  zeal  and  flrife  is ;  there  is  confufion, 
*'  and  every  evil  work.     But  the  wifdom  which  is 

''  from 


i2o6  The  beji  men  liable  to  the 

*'  from  above,  is  firfl  pure,  then  peaceable,  gentle, 
'^  and  eafy  to  be  entreated  ;  full  of  mercy  and  good 
''  fruits  •,  without  partiality,  and  without  hypocrify : 
*'  and  the  fruit  of  righteoufnefs  is  fown  in  peace  of 
"  them  that  make  peace." 


^:^t:'  SERMON    LXXXIII. 

vember  5. 

The  beft  men  liable  to  the  worfl:  treat- 
ment, from  miftaken  zealots. 


1686. 


JOHN  XVI.  2. 

^hey  Jhall  put  you  out  of  the  fynagogues  :  yea^  the  time 
cometh^  that  ijohofocvcr  killeth  you^  will  think  that  he 
doth  God  fervice. 

SERM.  '  I  ^HESE  words  were  fpoken  by  our  blelTed 
LXXXIII.  J^  Saviour,  when  he  was  about  to  leave  the 
world  ',  at  the  thoughts  whereof,  finding  his  difci- 
pies  to  be  exceedingly  troubled,  he  comforts  them 
by  the  confideration  of  the  great  benefit  and  advan- 
tage which  from  thence  Would  accrue  to  them  ;  he 
tells  them  that  he  was  going  to  heaven  to  intercede 
for  them,  and  to  make  way  for  their  admifTion  there ; 
and  withal  promifeth,  that  his  Father  would  fend  the 
Holy  Ghoft,  who  fhould  abundantly  fupply  the  want 
of  his  prefence  with  them  :  but  he  tells  them  at  the 
fame  time,  that  they  fhould  meet  with  very  ill  en- 
tertainment and  ufage  from  the  world  :  but  fo  had 
he,  chap.  XV.  18.  "  If  the  world  hate  you,  ye  know 
I  '"  *'  that 


ivorjl  treatment^  from  mijlaken  zealots,         1307 
*'  that  it  hated  me,  before  it  hated  you  -,"  and  why  SE  R  M. 

LXXXIII 

fhoLild  they  expect  to  be  better  treated  than  he  was  ? 
ver.  20.  "  Remember  the  word  that  I  faid  unto  you, 
"  the  fervant  is  not  greater  than  the  Lord  ;  if  they 
*'  have  perfecuted  me,  they  will  alio  perfecute  you.'* 

And  at  the  beginning  of  this  chapter  he  tells  them, 
that  he  did  on  purpofe  forewarn  them  of  thefe  things, 
to  prepare  their  minds  beforehand,  and  to  arm  them 
againft  the  word  that  might  happen,  ver.  i.  "  Thcfe 
"  things  have  I  fpoken  unto  you,  that  ye  fhould  not 
*'  be  offended."  And  then  he  declares  more  par- 
ticularly, how  far  the  rage  and  malice  of  men  fhould 
proceed  againfl  them,  and  in  what  kind  they  fliould 
fliffer :  "  they  fhall  put  you  out  of  the  fynagogues : 
"  yea,  the  timecometh,  that  whofoever  killeth  you 
"  will  think  that  he  doth  God  fervice." 

So  that  our  Saviour  here  foretels  two  forts  of 
perfecution,  which  his  difciples  Ihould  be  exercifed 
withal,  excommunication  ;  "  they  ihall  put  you  out 
*'  of  their  fynagogues:"  and  excifion  •,  "  yea  the 
"  time  Cometh,  that  whofoever  killeth  you  will 
"  think  that  he  doth  God  fervice."  And  thefe  per- 
haps were  but  fevcral  kinds  and  degrees  of  excom- 
munication ;  for  the  clearer  underftanding  whereof 
it  will  be  requilite,  briefly  to  explain  the  three  de- 
grees of  excommunication  among  the  Jews. 

The  firil  called  Niddui,  is  that  which  our  Savi- 
our here  means,  by  "  putting  out  of  the  fyna- 
"  goguei"  ^i^<i  which  he  elfewhere  expreffeth  by 
cl(po^(rf^og^  or  feparation.  Luke  vi.  22.  "  Bleffed 
*'  are  ye  when  men  fhall  hate  you,  and  when  they 
**  fhall  feparate  you  from  their  company."  And 
the  effed  of  this  excommunication  was  to  exclude 
men  from  the  communion  of  the  church  and  people 
of  God,  and  from  his  fervice,  which  was  a  great 

difgrace  5 


ijoS  '^he  bejl  men  liable  to  the 

difgrace  ;  becaiifc,  after  this  fentence,  none  of  the 
Jews  were  to  converfe  with  them,  but  to  look  upon 
them  as  heathens  and  pubHcans. 

The  fecond  degree  of  this  cenfure  was  called  Che- 
rem  -,  which  included  the  firll,  but  extended  farther, 
to  the  confifcation  of  goods  into  the  facred  treafury, 
and  devoting  them  to  God  •,  after  which  there  was 
no  redemption  of  them.  And  of  this  we  find  ex- 
prefs  mention,  Ezra  x.  7,  8.  where  it  is  faid,  "  that 
*'  they  made  proclamation  tliroughout  Judah  and 
*'  Jerufalem,  unto  all  the  children  of  the  captivity, 
^^  that  they  fhould  gather  themfelves  together  unto 
"  Jerufalem  \  and  that  whofoever  would  not  come 
*'  within  three  days,  according  to  the  counfels  of 
*'  the  princes  and  elders,  all  his  fubftance  fhould  be 
"  devoted,  and  himfelf  feparated  from  the  congre- 
"  gation  of  thofe  that  had  been  carried  away." 
*  The  third  degree  was  Shammatha  when  the  re- 
bellious and  contumacious  perfon  was  anathematized 
and  devoted,  and,  as  fome  conceive,  according  to 
the  law  (Lev.  xxvii.  29.)  was  to  be  put  to  death  •, 
though  other  very  knowing  men  in  the  Jewifh  learn- 
ing think  it  amounted  to  no  more  than  a  final  fen- 
tence, whereby  they  were  left  to  the  judgment  of 
God,  by  fome  remarkable  judgment  of  his  to  be 
cut  off  from  the  congregation  of  Ifrael. 

Of  the  firfl  and  laft  of  thefe  degrees  of  excommu- 
nication, our  Saviour  feems  here  to  fpeak  •,  but 
whether  in  both  inflances  in  the  text,  he  alludes  in 
the  one  to  the  lowefl,  and  in  the  other  to  the  higheft 
degree  of  excommunication  among  the  Jews,  is  not 
fo  certain.  To  the  lirll  he  plainly  does,  when  he 
fays,  "  they  fhall  put  you  out  of  the  fynagogues  :'* 
and  then  he  adds,  that  they  fliould  proceed  much 
higher  againll  thena,  even  to  put  them  to  death ; 

''  the 


iJDorft  treatment^  from  mijlaken  zealots.         1 3 09 

*'  the  time  cometh,  that  whofoevcr  killcth  you  will  S  E  R  M. 
"  think  that  he  doth  God  fervice  ;"  that  is,  they 
fhould  not  only  think  it  lawful  to  kill  them,  but  look 
upon  it  as  a  duty,  as  a  high  a6t  of  religion,  as  an 
acceptable  piece  of  worfhip,  and  ''  a  facrifice  well- 
"  pleafing  to  God.*'  For  fo  indeed  the  word  does 
not  only  import,  but  moil  properly  fignify,  "  who- 
*'  focver  killeth  you  fliall  think,  Xccr^eictv  'zir^o(r(pi^ei]f 
*'  T&)  0gw,  that  he  offers  a  facrifice  to  God  -,'*  for  fo 
the  word  ?^ccT^eia  is  fometimes  ufed  for  "  a  facri- 
*'  iice  ;"  but  being  joined  with  9r^ccr(pg^gti/  feems  ne- 
celTarily  to  be  determined  to  that  fenfe. 

From  the  words  thus  explained,  I  fhall  make  thefe 
following  obfervations,  very  proper  for  our  confide* 
ration  upon  the  occalion  of  this  day. 
^f  1.  That  the  beft  of  men  may  be  feparated  and 
excluded  from  the  communion  of  thofe  who  may 
alTume  to  themfelves  to  be  the  true  and  the  only  true 
church  ;  yea  and  fuffcr  under  the  notion  of  very  bad 
and  criminal  perfons.  This  our  Saviour  here  fore-  ^ 
told  of  his  apoftles,  fome  of  the  beft  men  that  ever 
lived  :•  "  they  fhall  put  you  out  of  the  fynagogues.'*, 

2.  That  they  who  are  thus  excommunicated,  by>- 
the  pretended  true  church,  may  neverthelefs  be  real 
members  of  the  true  church  of  Christ.  Though 
the  apoftles  were  thus  dealt  withal  by  the  jewifh 
church :  they  did  not  ceafe  for  all  that  to  be  mem- 
bers of  the  true  church  of  God. 

3.  That  from  uncharitable  cenfures  men  do  eafily 
and  almoft  naturally  proceed  to  cruel  adlions.  Af- 
ter they  had  put  the  difciples  of  our  Lord  "  out  of 
*'  their  fynagogues,"  and  thereby  concluded  them 
to  be  hereticks  and  reprobates,  they  prefently  pro- 
ceed to  kill  them,  as  not  worthy  to  live.  "  They 
ihall  put  you  out  of  their  fynagoguesj'*  and  when 

Vol.  V.  10  O  they 

/      9. 


LXXXIII. 


1 5  I  o  ^he  bejl  men  liable  to  the 

SE  R  M.  they  have  done  that,  they  will  foon  after  think  it  a 
thing  not  only  fit,  but  pious  and  meritorious,  to  put 
you  to  death ;  "  the  tirne  will  come,  that  they  will 
"  think  it  a  good  fervice  to  God  to  kill  you." 

4.  That  men  may  do  the  vilefl:  things,  and  the 
mofl  wicked,  not  only  under  a  grave  pretence  of 
religion,  but  out  of  a  real  opinion  and  perfuafion 
that  they  do  religioufly.  Murder  is  certainly  one  of 
the  greateil  and  moll  crying  fins  •,  and  yet  our  Sa- 
viour foretels,  that  the  Jews  fliould  put  his  difci- 
ples  to  death,  being  verily  perfuaded  that  in  fo  do- 
ing they  offered  a  moft  acceptable  facrifice  to  God  ; 
"  Yea  the  time  fhaii  come,  that  whofoever  killeth 
^'  you  fhall  think  that  he  offers  a  facrifice  to  God." 

5.  That  fuch  adliions  are  neverthelefs  horribly  im- 
pious and  wicked,  notwithftanding  the  good  mind 
vv^ith  which,  and  the  good  end  for  which  they  are 
done.  The  Jews  were  not  excufed  from  the  guilt 
of  perfecution  and  murder,  for  ail  they  thought  they 
did  well  in  kilRng  the  difciples  of  our  Lord. 

6.  I  obferve  that  the  corruption  of  the  befl  things 
,is  the  worft.     Religion  is  the  higheft  accomplifh- 

ment  and  perfection  of  human  nature  ;  and  :ieal  for 
God  and  his  truth  an  excellent  quality,  and  highly 
acceptable  to  God  :  and  yet  nothing  is  more  barba- 
rous, and  fpurs  men  on  to  more  horrible  impieties, 
than  a  blind  zeal  for  God,  and  falfe  and  miftaken 
principles  in  the  matter  of  religion  •,  as  is  plain  from 
the  inftances  here  before  us'jn  the  text.  I  fhall  fpeak 
as  briefly  as  I  can  to  thefe  obfervations. 

I.  That  the  befl  of  men  may  be  feparated  and 
excluded  from  the  communion  of  thofe,  who  may 
affume  to  be  the  true  and  only  true  church,  and  that, 
under  the  no  don  of  very  bad  and  criminal  perfons. 
This  our  Saviour  foretels  in  the  text  fliould  be 

the 


'worji  treatment^  from  mijiaken  zealots.         1 3  1 1 
the  fate  of  his  apoftles,  fome  of  the  befl  and  holieft  S  E  R  M. 

LXXXIII« 

perfons  that  ever  hved  ♦,  "  they  fhall  put  you  out 
"  of  the  fynagogues." 

And  what  the  Jews  did  in  the  beginning  of  chri- 
ftianity,  to  the  apoftles  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour, 
hath  been  too  frequently  praclifed  fince,  by  fome  of 
the  profeftbrs  of  chriftianity  towards  one  another  ; 
and  very  good  men  have  in  feveral  ages  fallen  under 
the  cenfure  of  excommunication,  and  have  been  fe- 
parated  from  the  external  communion  of  the  church, 
and  branded  with  the  odious  names  of  hereticks  and 
apoftates,  by  thofe  who  have  arrogated  to  them- 
felves  to  be  the  only  orthodox  and  true  church,  and 
have  gotten  the  external  power  and  management  of 
religion  into  their  hands  *,  witnefs  the  cafe  of  Atha- 
nafius  and  others,  in  the  reign  and  prevalency  of 
Arianifm  -,  and  the  ill  treatment,  that  not  only  par- 
ticular perfons,  eminent  for  their  learning  and  piety, 
but  whole  churches  have  met  with  in  this  kind,  from 
that  haughty  and  uncharitable  church,  which  makes 
nothing  of  thundring  out  this  moft  fearful  fentence 
of  excommunication,  againft  perfons,  and  churches 
much  better  and  more  chrillian  than  herfelf,  and 
againft:  all  that  will  not  fubmit  to  her  pretended  in- 
falhbility,  and  ufurped  authority  over  the  fouls  and 
confciences  of  men. 

But  it  is  our  great  comfort,  that  the  apoftles  and 
difciples  of  our  Lord  and  mafter  were  thus  ufed,by 
a  church  that  made  the  fame  pretences  that  they  do, 
and  upon  grounds  every  whit  as  plaufible,  as  I  could 
clearly  ftiew,  if  I  were  minded  to  purfue  and  make 
out  this  comparifon. 

2.  They  who  are  thus  excommunicated,  by  the 

only  pretended  true  church,    may  neverthelefs  be 

true  members  Qfthe  church  of  Christ,     Though 

10  O  2  the 


1 3  I  li  ^he  lefl  men  liable  to  the 

S  E  R  M.  the  apoftles  were  thus  dealt  withal  by  the  lewilh 

LXXXIlL  J  J 

church,  they  did  not  ceafe  for  all  this  to  be  real 
members  of  the  true  church  of  God.  For  it  is  not 
calling  hereticks  firft,  that  proves  them  that  do  fo 
to  be  no  hereticks,  or  acquits  them  from  the  fame  or 
greater  crimes,  than  thofe  which  they  are  fo  for- 
ward to  charge  upon  other  men  •,  nor  will  Gop  con- 
demn all  thofe  who  are  excommunicated  by  men, 
and  deny  falvation,  to  every  one  whom  they  ihall 
pleafe  to  feparate  from  their  fociety,  and  to  call  by 
fome  odious  name.  Men  may  be  put  out  of  the 
fynagogue,  and  yet  received  into  heaven:  for  the 
judgment  of  God  is  not  according  to  the  uncharita- 
ble cenfures  of  men  j  but  according  to  truth  and 
right. 

The  fentence  of  excommunication  is  certainly  ve- 
ry dreadful  where  it  is  duly  inflidled  ;  and  next  to 
the  judgment  of  God,  men  ought  to  be  afraid  of 
juflly  incurring  the  danger  of  this  cenfure  -,  and  it 
ought  to  be  upon  very  plain  and  evident  grounds 
that  men  cither  feparate  themfelves,  or  endanger 
their  being  cut  off  from  the  communion  of  the 
church  they  live  in  :  but  when  it  once  come  to  this, 
that  a  church  is  infected  with  grofs  errors  and  cor- 
ruptions, plainly  contrary  to  the  word  of  GOd,  efpe- 
cially  if  that  church  will  impofe  her  errors  upon  all 
that  are  of  her  communion  -,  then  thofe  who  refufe 
to  comply,  do  not  feparate  themfelves,  but  are  cut 
off;  do  not  depart,  but  are  driven  out  of  the  com- 
munion of  that  church  -,  and  feparation  in  that  cafe 
is  as  innocent  and  free  from  the  guilt  of  fchifm,  as 
the  caufe  of  it  is  -,  for  the  terms  of  communion  are 
become  fuch,  that  thofe  who  are  convinced  of  thofe 
errors  and  corruptions  can  have  no  falvation,  if  they 
continue  in  that  communion,  and  then  I  am  fure 

their 


worjl  treatment^  from  mtjlahn  zealots,  1 3 1 3 
their  falvation  will  not  be  endangered  by  leaving  it,  S  E  R  M. 
or  being  excommunicated  out  of  it  *,  for  that  wbuld 
be  the  hardeft  cafe  in  the  world,  that  men  fhould 
be  damned  for  continuing  in  the  communion  of  fuch 
a  church,  and  damned  likewife  for  being  caft  out 
of  it. 

Therefore  no  man  ought  to  be  terrified,  becaufc 
of  the  boldnefs  and  prefumption  of  thofe,  who  witli 
fo  much  confidence,  and  fo  little  charity,  damn  all 
that  are  not  of  their  communion  •,  for  we  fee  plain^ 
ly  from  the  text,  that  men  may  be  in  the  right  and 
fureft  way  to  falvation,  and  yet  be  excommunicated 
by  thofe  who  call  themfelves  the  true  church,  and 
will  not  allow  falvation  to  any,  but  thofe  of  their 
own  communion.  The  difciples  of  our  Lord  and 
Saviour  were  certainly  very  good  men,  and  in  a 
fafe  way  of  falvation,  though  they  were  excommu- 
nicated, and  put  out  of  the  fynagogue,  by  the  chief 
priefts  and  the  rulers  of  the  jewifh  church.  I  pro- 
ceed to  the 

3.  Obfervation,  which  was  this,  that  from  un- 
charitable cenfures,  men  do  by  an  eafy  ftep  and  al- 
moft  naturally  proceed  to  cruel  adions.  After  the 
Jews  had  put  the  difciples  of  our  Lord  out  of  their 
fynagogues,  and  thereby  concluded  them  to  be  here- 
ticks  and  reprobates  \  no  wonder  they  fhould  pro- 
ceed to  kill  thofe,  whom  they  thought  not  worthy 
to  live  i  "  they  ihall  put  you  out  of  their  fyna- 
*'  gogues,'*  (fays  our  Saviour)  and  when  they  have 
done  that,  they  will  foon  think  it  a  thing  not  only 
fit  and  reafonable,  but  pious  and  meritorious,  and 
a  good  piece  of  fervice  done  to  God,  to  put  you 
to  death.  Uncharitablenefs  naturally  draws  on  cm-  -^ 
elty,  and  hardens  human  nature  towards  thofe,  of 
I  whom 


The  bejl  men  liable  to  the 

whom  we  have  once  conceived  fo  ill  an  opinion, 
that  they  are  enemies  to  God  and  his  truth. 

And  this  hath  been  the  fource  of  the  mofl  barba- 
rous cruelties  that  have  been  in  the  world ;  witnefs  the 
leverity  of  the  heathen  perfecution  of  the  Chriilians, 
which  juftified  itfelf  by  the  uncharitable  opinion 
whicli  they  had  conceived  of  them,  that  they  were 
defpifers  of  religion  and  the  gods,  and  confequently 
athcifts  •,  that  they  were  pertinacious  and  obilinate 
in  their  opinions,  that  is,  in  the  modern  flile,  they 
were  hereticks.  And  the  like  uncharitable  conceit 
among  Chriftians  hath  been  thought  a  fufHcient 
ground  (even  in  the  judgment  of  the  infallible  chair) 
for  the  juftification  of  feveral  bloody  maffacres,  and 
the  cruel  proceedings  of  the  inquifition  againft  per- 
fons  fufpeded  of  herefy  ;  for  after  men  are  once  fen- 
tenced  to  eternal  damnation,  it  feems  a  fmall  thing, 
to  torment  and  dellroy  their  bodies. 

4.  Men  may  do  the  vileft  and  mofl  wicked  things, 
not  only  under  a  grave  pretence  of  religion,  but  out 
of  a  real  opinion  and  perfuafion  of  mind,  that  they 
do  religioufiy.  Murder  is  certainly  one  of  the  great- 
efl:  and  moll  crying  fins  ^  and  yet  our  Saviour 
foretels,  that  the  Jews  fhould  put  his  difciples  to 
death,  being  verily  perfuaded  that  in  fo  doing  they 
fliould  offer  a  mofl  acceptable  facrifice  to  God  ,  "  yea 
"  the  time  cometh,  that  whofoever  killeth  you  fhall 
"  think  that  he  offers  a  facrifice  to  God." 

Not  but  that  the  great  duties  and  virtues  of  re- 
ligion are  very  plain  and  eafy  to  be  underflood  \  and 
fo  are  the  contrary  fins  and  vices  :  but  then  they  arc 
only  plain  to  a  teachable,  and  honefb,  and  well- 
difpofed  mind ;  to  thofe  "  who  receive  the  word 
*'  with  meeknefs,"  and  are  not  blinded  with  wrath 

and 


worjl  treatment^  from  mijlaken  zedofs.        1 3 1  C 

and  furious  zeal :  to  thofe  that  "  receive  the  truth  S  E  R  M. 
"  into  an  honeil  heart/'  and  "  entertain  it  in  the  ^^^^'^'• 
*'  love  of  it  •,"  they  are  plain  to  the  humble  and 
meek  ;  ''  for  the  humble  God  will  guide  in  judg- 
"  ment,  and  the  meek  will  he  teach  his  ways  ;'* 
fuch  as  thefe  God  feldom  fuffers  to  fall  into  fatal 
miftakes  about  their  fin,  or  duty,  fo  as  "  to  call 
"  good  evil,  and  evil  good  •,  to  call  light  darknefs, 
"  and  darknefs  light ;"  to  think  uncharitablenefs  a 
virtue,  and  downright  murder  a  great  duty. 

But  if  men  will  give  up  themfelves  to  be  fwayed 
by  felf-love  and  felf-conceit,  to  be  governed  by  any 
bafe  or  corrupt  intereft,  to  be  blinded  by  prejudice, 
and  intoxicated  by  pride,  to  be  tranfported  and  hui- 
ried  away  by  violent  and  furious  palTions  ;  no  won- 
der if  they  miftake  the  nature,  and  confound  the 
differences  of  things,  in  the  plaineft  and  moft  pal- 
pable cafes  ;  no  wonder  if  "  God  give  up"  perfons 
of  fuch  corrupt  minds  "  to  ftrong  delufions,  to  be- 
''  lieve  lies."  It  ought  not  to  be  ftrange  to  us,  if 
fuch  men  bring  their  underftandings  to  their  wills 
and  interefts,  and  bend  their  judgments  to  their  pre- 
judices, make  them  to  ftoop  to  their  pride,  and 
blindly  to  follow  their  pafTions,  which  way  foever 
they  lead  them  ;  for  God  ufually  leaves  fuch  per- 
fons to  themfelves,  as  run  away  from  him,  and  is 
not  concerned  to  feaire  thofe  from  fplitting  upon  the 
moft  dangerous  rocks,  who  will  fteer  their  courfe  by 
no  compafs,  but  commit  themfelves  to  the  wind  and 
tide  of  their  own  lufts  and  paffions. 

In  thefe  cafes  men  may  take  the  wrong  way  ;  and 
yet  believe  themfelves  to  be  in  the  right :  they  may 
oppofe  the  truth,  and  perfecute  the  profeflbrs  of  it, 
and  be  guilty  of  the  IJackeft  crimes,  and  the  moft 
horrid  impieties,  malice  and  hatred,  blafphemy  and 

murder  j 


1 3  1 6  The  lejl  men  liable  to  the 

Lx^xiii^*  murder  •,  and  yet  all  the  while  be  verily  perfuaded, 
that  they  are  ferving  God,  and  facrificing  to  him. 

Of  this  we  have  a  plain  and  full  inftance  in  the 
fcribes  and  pharifees,  the  chief  priefls  and  rulers  a- 
mong  the  Jews,  who  becaufe  "  they  fought  the 
"•  honour  of  men,  and  not  that  which  was  from 
"  God,  and  loved  the  praife  of  men,  more  than 
*'  the  pyaife  of  God  •,"  becaufe  they  were  prejudiced 
againft  the  meannefs  of  our  Saviour's  birth  and 
condition,  and  had  upon  falfe  grounds  (though  as 
they  thought  upon  the  infallibility  of  tradition,  and 
of  fcripture  interpreted  by  tradition)  entertained 
quite  other  notions  of  the  MefTias,  from  what  he 
really  was  to  be;  becaufe  they  were  proud  and 
thought  themfelves  too  wife  to  learn  of  him  j  and 
becaufe  his  dodlrine  of  humility,  and  felf-denial,  did 
thwart  their  intereft,  and  bring  down  their  authority 
and  credit  among  the  people  ;  therefore  they  fet 
themfelves  againft  him  with  all  their  might,  oppo- 
ling  his  do6trine,  and  blafting  his  reputation,  and 
perfecuting  him  to  the  death ;  and  all  this  while  did 
A  bear  up  themfelves  with  a  conceit  of  the  antiquity 
and  privileges  of  their  church,  and  their  profound 
knowledge  in  the  law  of  Gop,  and  a  great  external 
ihew  of  piety  and  devotion,  and  an  arrogant  pre- 
tence and  ufurpation  of  being  the  only  church  and 
people  of  God  in  the  world  :  and  by  virtue  of  thefe 
advantages,  they  thought  they  might  do  any  thing  ; 
and  that  whofoever  oppofed  the  authority  of  fo 
ancient  and  good  a  church,  muft  needs  be  very 
bad  men,  and  deferve  to  be  proceeded  againft  in  the 
fevereft  manner.  As  if  any  pretence  of  piety  could 
give  a  privilege  to  do  wickedly,  and  by  how  much 
the  wifer  and  holier  any  man  took  himfelf  to  be,  he 
-    might  do  fo  much  the  worfe  tJUngs, 

Tliere 


njDOrJl  treatment^  from  mijiaken  zealots,  1 3  1 7 

There  is  another  remarkable  infbance  of  this  in  fJI^i'^" 
St.  Paul, .  who  out  of  a  blind  and  furious  zeal,  for 
"  the  traditions  of  his  fathers,"  perfecuted  the  true 
church  of  God,  by  imprifonment  or  death,  and  all 
manner  of  cruelties  j  and  all  this  while  "  he  verily 
"  thought"  that  he  was  in  the  right,  and  "  that  he 
*'  ought  to  do"  all  thefe  "  things  againft  the  name 
"  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth."  And  if  God  had  not 
in  a  miraculous  manner  check'd  him  in  his  courfe, 
and  changed  his  mind,  he  would  have  fpent  his 
whole  life  in  that  courfe  of  perfecution  and  cruelty, 
and  would  (with  pope  Paul  the  IV.  upon  his  death- 
bed) have  recommended  the  inquifition  (or  if  he 
could  have  thought  of  any  thing  more  fevere)  to 
the  chief  priefts  and  rulers  of  the  jewifh  church. 

I  will  not  trouble  you  with  nearer  inftances ;  though 
the  jewifh  church  is  not  the  only  church  in  the 
world,  that  hath  countenanced  the  deftrudlion  and 
extirpation  of  thofe  who  differ  from  them,  as  a 
piece  of  very  acceptable  fervice  to  God,  and  meri- 
torious of  the  pardon  of  their  fins. 

5.  I  obferve  that  fach  adlions  as  thefe  are  never- 
thelefs  horribly  wicked  and  impious,  notwithfland- 
ing  the  good  mind  with  v/hich,  and  the  good  end 
for  which  they  are  done.  The  Jews  were  not  ex- 
cufed  from  the  guilt  of  perfecution  and  murder,  for 
all  they  thought  they  did  well  in  killing  the  difci- 
ples  of  our  Lord. 

For  to  make  an  a£lion  good  and  acceptable  to 
God,  the  goodnefs  of  all  caufes,  and  of  all  circum- 
ftances,  muft  concur  ;  and  any  one  defecSt  in  any  of 
thefe  does  vitiate  the  whole  adtion,  and  fpoil  the 
goodnefs  of  it.  We  muft  do  it  with  a  good  mind, 
being  verily  perfuaded  that  what  we  do  is  good  and 
acceptable  to  God  ;  in  whicti  fenfe  St.  Paul  faith. 

Vol.  V,  10  P  that 


I  3  I  8  ^he  befl  men  liable  to  the 

S  F  R  M.  t^iat  "  whatever  is   not  of  faith  is  fin  •,"  and  we 

LXXXIII.  - 

niuft  do  it  for  a  good  end,  for  the  honour  of  God, 
and  the  fervice  of  religion,  and  the  benefit  and  edi- 
fication of  men.  But  there  is  one  thing  wanting 
yet,  which  is  often  forgotten,  but  is  mainly  confi- 
derable,  viz.  what  we  do  with  a  good  mind,  and 
I  to  a  good  end,  muft  be  good  and  lawful  in  itfclf, 
commanded  or  allowed,  or  at  leaft  not  forbidden  by 
God  :  if  it  be  j  what  good  circumftances  foever 
may  belong  to  the  adion,  the  whole  adlion  is  ftark 
naught  -,  becaufe  the  very  matter  and  fubftance  of  it 
is  evil,  and  unlawful,  and  damnable,  though  done 
for  never  fo  good  an  end.  So  St.  Paul  tells  us, 
that  they  *'  who  faid  they  might  do  evil,  that  good 
"  might  come,  their  damnation  was  juft."  He 
tells  us  indeed,  that  fome  would  have  charged  this 
dodlrine  upon  the  Chriftians,  and  particularly  upon 
himfclf ;  but  he  rejedls  it,  with  the  greateft  detefta- 
tton  ;  and  (which  is  not  unworthy  of  our  obferva- 
tion)  in  his  epiftle  to  the  Roman  church  •,  as  if  the 
Spirit  of  God,  to  whom  all  times  are  prefent,  had 
particularly  diredled  him  to  give  this  caution  to  that 
church,  that  in  future  ages  they  might  be  warned 
againft  fo  pernicious  a  principle,  and  all  wicked 
pradices  that  are  confequent  upon  it. 

And  we  find  that  St.  Paul,  after  his  converfion, 
did  think  it  no  fufficient  plea  and  excufe  for  him« 
felf,  and  his  perfecution  of  the  chriftian  profefTion, 
that  what  he  did  was  out  of  zeal  for  God  and  his 
true  religion,  as  he  was  verily  perfuaded  ;  but  not- 
withftanding  that,  acknowledgeth  himfelf  a  mur- 
derer, and  "  one  of  the  greateft  finners  ;'*  for  which, 
without  "  the  great  mercy  of  God,'*  he  had  pe- 
rifti'd  evcrlaftingly. 

6.  And 


'worji  treatment^  from  mijiaken  zealots,         ^319 

6.  And  laftly,  I  ot^rve  that  the  corruption  of  the  S  E  R  M. 
beft  things  is  the  worft.  Rehgion  is  certainly  the 
highefl  accomphfhment  and  perfeclion  of  human  na- 
ture ;  and  zeal  for  God  and  his  truth  an  excellent 
quality,  and  highly  acceptable  to  God  :  and  yet  no- 
thiHg  is  more  barbarous,  and  fpurs  men  on  to  more 
horrid  impieties,  than  a  blind  zeal  for  God,  and  falfc 
and  miflaken  principles  in  the  matter  of  religion. 

Our  Saviour  compares  the  chriftian  rehgion,  and 
the  minifters  and  profefTors  of  it,  to  fait  and  light, 
the  moil  ufeful  and  delighthil  things  in  the  world* 
Religion  enlightens  the  minds  of  men,  and  direds 
them  in  the  way  wherein  they  fhould  go ;  it  feafons  the 
ipirits  and  manners  of  men,  and  preferves  them  from 
being  putrified  and  corrupted :  but  if  "  the  fait  lofc  it's 
"  favour,"  if  that  which  fhould  feafon  other  things, 
be  tainted  itfelf;  **  it  is  thenceforth"  the  moft  infipid 
and  offenfive  thing  in  the  world,  "  good  for  nothing, 
**  but  to  be  caft  upon  the  dunghil :  if  the  light  that 
''  is  in  us  be  darknefs,  how  great  is  that  darknefs  ?" 

Miftakes  and  falfe  principles  are  no  where  fo  per- 
nicious, and  of  fuch  mifchievous  confequence,  as  in 
religion.  A  blind  and  mifguided  zeal  in  religion  is 
enough  to  fpoil  the  beft  nature  and  difpofition  in  the 
world.  St.  Paul  (for  ought  appears)  was  of  himfelf  of 
a  very  kind  and  compafTionate  nature  •,  and  yet  what 
a  fury  did  his  miflaken  zeal  make  him  !  It  is  hardly 
credible  how  madly  he  laid  about  him,  but  that  he 
himfelf  gives  us  the  account  of  it,  Adls  xxvi.  9,  10, 
II.  ''  I  verily  thought  with  myfelf,  (fayi  he)  that 
"  I  ought  to  do  many  things,  contrary  to  the  name 
*'  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth;  which  thinglalfo  did  in 
*'  Jerufalem,   and  many  of  the  faints  I  fliut  up  in 

prifon,  having  received  authority  from  the  chief 

priefls.  And  when  they  were  put  to  death,  I  gave 
ig  P  2  !'  n^y 


C( 


1320  T^he  beft  men  liable  to  the 

Lxxxin  '  "  "^^  ^^^^^  againft  them  -,  and  I  puniflicd  them  oft 
'   ''  in  every  fynagogue,  and  compelled  them  to  blaf- 
"  pheme,  and  being  exceedingly  mad  againft  them, 
"  I  perfecuted  them  even  toilrange  cities." 

I  might  dcfcend  lower,  and  give  inllances  both 
of  former  and  latter  times,  of  emperors  and  princes, 
both  heathen  and  chriftian,  that  of  themfelves  were 
mild  and  gentle  •,  and  yet  through  a  miftaken  zeal, 
and  the  inlligation  of  the  chief  prieils,  have  been 
carried  to  cruel  and  bloody  things.  And  indeed  no- 
f  thing  gives  fo  keen  an  edge,  even  to  the  mildeft 
tempers,  as  an  erroneous  and  wild  zeal  for  God  and 
religion  ;  it  is  like  quicklilver  in  the  back  of  a  fword, 
that  is  not  very  Iharp  of  itfelf,  which  gives  a  mighty 
force  and  weight  to  it's  blow,  and  makes  it  to  cut 
V  terribly. 
u  And  it  is  very  fad  to  confider,  that  the  zealous 
profecution  of  mi  flakes  in  religion  hath  produced 
fadder  and  more  barbarous  effedls  in  the  world,  and 
more  frequently,  than  the  ordinary  corruptions  and 
degeneracy  of  natural  light  is  apt  to  do  ;  as  the  de- 
cay of  the  richeft  and  moft  generous  wines  makes 
the  fourefl  vinegar  -,  fo  that  the  pafquil  or  libel 
againft  pope  Urban  the  VIII.  upon  occafion  of  his 
taking  off  the  brazen  roof  of  the  old  capitol  (which 
had  held  out  fo  many  ages,  and  that  notwithftand- 
ing  Rome  had  been  fo  often  fack'd  by  barbarous 
nations)  and  his  felling  it  to  inrich  his  family  [quod 
nonjecerant  Barhari^  fecerunt  Barbermf\  may, 
with  changing  the  name  and  occafion,  be  applied  to 
a  great  many  others  ;  that  they  have  been  guilty  of 
thofe  cruelties  againft  Chriftians,  upon  account  of 
diflference  in  religion,  which  the  moft  barbarous  na- 
tions never  exercifed  upon  one  another. 

I  have 


ivorfl  treatment y  from  mijlaken  zealots.         1321 

I  have  done  with  the  obfcrvations  and  the  text ;  S  E  R  M. 
and  Ihall  I  now  need  to  make  any  application  of 
what  hath  been  faid,  to  the  occafion  of  this  day  ? 
The  thing  apphes  itfelf  •,  fince  the  horrid  defign  of 
this  day  was  undertaken  and  carried  on  upon  the 
fame  pretences  and  principles,  upon  which  the  Jews 
perfecuted  the  difciples  of  our  Lord,  and  much  in 
the  fame  method  •,  for  the  firft  thundered  out  an 
excommunication  againft  them,  and  then  took  it  for 
granted,  that  it  would  be  "  an  acceptable  facrifice 
*'  to  God,  to  deftroy  them." 

I  will  not  go  about  to  aggravate  the  confpiracy  of 
this  day,  it  is  pall  my  ffkill ;  nor  will  I  extend  the 
blame  and  guilt  of  it  any  farther  than  the  plain  evi- 
dence and  reafon  of  the  thing  does  enforce.  It  is  a 
thing  fo  fcandalous  to  human  nature,  and  fo  great 
a  reflexion  upon  any  church  and  religion,  to  be  ac- 
cefTory  to  the  contriving  or  countenancing  of  any  fuch 
deiign,  that  I  am  very  well  contented,  that  it  Ihould 
be  confined  to  as  narrow  a  compafs  as  may  be,  and 
none  efteemed  guilty  of  it,  but  thofe  that  were  openly 
in  it,  or  have  fince  endeavoured  to  excufe  it.  AU 
that  we  defire  of  others,  is,  that  they  would  declare 
their  hearty  deteftation  of  fuch  abominable  pradlices, 
and  be  as  good  as  their  word  -,  and  that  they  would 
not  account  it  a  fervice  and  facrifice  to  God,  to  de- 
ftroy all  that  cannot  be  of  their  mind. 

So  that  the  inference  from  all  this  difcourfe,  in 
fhort,  Ihall  be  this,  that  men  fhould  take  great  care 
to  inform  their  cpnfciences  aright,  and  to  govern 
them  by  the  plain  rules  of  good  and  evil,  the  law  of 
God  written  upon  our  hearts,  and  revealed  in  his 
word,  which  forbids  fuch  practices  as  I  have  httw 
fpeaking  of,  as  clearly  as  the  fun  lliines  at  noon- 
day ;  and  that  we  would  always  be  afraid  to  do  a 

bad 


1322  ^he  bejl  men  liable  to  they  &c. 

S  E  R  M.  bad  thing,  though  gilded  over  with  never  fo  glorious 
colours,  and  fpecious  pretences  of  zeal  for  God  and 
his  truth.  For  a  man  may  do  a  thing  with  alh  honeft 
mind,  and  for  a  religious  end,  aad  be  commifTioncd 
and  countenanced  (as  St.  Paul  was)  by  them  who 
take  themfelves  to  be  the  only  true  church  in  the 
world  •,  and  yet  at  laft  prove  to  have  been  all  the 
while  a  blafphemer,  and  a  murderer,  and  the  great- 
eft  of  finners  ;  for  none  of  thefe  pretences  are  fuffi- 
dent  to  warrant  and  fanftify  a  wicked  adion :  before 
this  can  be  done,  the  immutable  nature  of  good 
and  evil  muft  be  changed. 

I  will  conclude  all  with  that  gentle  reproof  of  our 
blefled  Saviour  to  his  difciples,  when  their  zeal 
for  him  had  tranfported  them  to  make  that  cruel 
requeft  to  him,  that  he  would  (as  Elias  had  done 
upon  a  like  occafion)  *'  call  for  fire  from  heaven  to 
•*  deftroy  the  Samaritans :  Ye  know  not  what  man- 
**  ner  of  fpirit  ye  are  of;  for  the  Son  of  man  came 
**  not  to  deftroy  mens  lives,  but  to  fave  them ;" 
hereby  declaring  to  us  the  true  temper  and  fpirit  of 
chriftianity,  and  that  they  that  adl  contrary  to  it 
are  ignorant  of  the  nature  of  the  chriftian  religion  ; 
"  ye  know  not  what  manner  of  fpirit  yc  are  of-,  for 
•*  the  Son  of  man  came  not  to  deftroy  men  lives, 
*'  but  to  fave  them.'* 


SER^ 


1323 
SERMON    LXXXIV. 

The  duty  and  reafoa  of  praying  for  Preached 

^^rr«-»,^-«  on  the 

governors.  ^^.hof 

May 
-.^ ■ ~ 1693. 

I  TIM.  II.  1,2. 

/  exhort  therefore^  that  firji  of  ally  fupplications^ 
prayers y  inter cejfions^  and  giving  of  thojiks  be  made 
for  all  men :  for  kings ^  and  for  all  that  are  in  au- 
thority \  that  we  may  lead  a  quiet  and  peaceable  life^ 
in  all  godlinefs  and  honefy, 

I  Need  not  tell  any  here,  that  this  day  is  appoint-  s  E  R  M. 
ed  by  authority  for  an  anniverfary  folemnity^  in  lxxxiv. 
a  grateful  commemoration  of  the  great  mercy  of 
God  to  thefe  nations,  in  putting  an  end  to  the  in- 
teftine  wars  and  confufions  of  many  years,  in  re- 
ftoring  to  us  our  ancient  government  and  laws, 
and  in  bringing  home,  as  upon  this  day,  the  right- 
ful heir  of  thefe  kingdoms,  to  the  crown  and  throne 
of  his  fathers :  And  though  the  glory  of  this  day 
hath  been  not  a  little  fullied  and  obfcured  by  many 
things  which  have  happened  fince  that  time,  fitter 
now  to  be  buried  in  filence  and  oblivion,  than  to  be 
mention' d  and  raked  upj  yet  it  hath  pleafed  God, 
in  fcattering  thofe  black  clouds,  which  not  long  fince 
hung  over  us,  to  reflore  this  day  to  it's  firft  luftre 
and  brightnefs ;  fo  that  we  may  now  with  great  joy 
look  back  upon  it,  as  defigned  by  the  wife  provi- 
dence of  God,  to  make  way  for  the  happinefs  which 
we  now  enjoy  under  their  prefent  majefties,  by  whom, 

under 


1324  ^^^  ^^^y  ^^^  reafon 

SERM.   under  God,  we  have  been  delivered  from  that  ter- 

£>XXXIV' 

rible  and  imminent  danger  which  threatned  our  re- 
ligion and  Jaws,  and  the  very  conftitution  itfelf  of 
our  ancient  government.  And  to  this  occafion,  no 
kind  of  argument  can  be  more  proper  and  fuitable, 
than  that  which  the  text  affords  to  our  confidcration, 
in  this  iiljundion  of  St.  Paul  to  Timothy,  to  take 
care  that  in  the  publick  worfhip  of  God,  fupplica- 
tions  and  thanl<.fgivings  be  put  up  to  God,  "  for 
**  kings,  and  all  that  are  in  authority.  I  exhort 
"  therefore,"  &c. 

In  which  words  there  are  four  things  confiderable. 

Firfl,  The  duty  here  enjoined,  which  is  prayer ; 
cxpreffed  to  us  in  feveral  words,  which  feem  to  de- 
note the  feveral  kinds  or  parts  of  prayer ;  "  I  exhort 
*'  therefore,  that  fuppllcations,  prayers,  interceflions, 
*'  and  giving  of  thanks  be  made  for  all  men :  For 
"  kings,  and  for  all  that  are  in  authority,  &c.'*  Some 
of  thefe  words  are  of  a  very  near  fignification ;  and 
yet  there  feems  fome  difference  betwixt  them,  moil 
probably  this: 

1.  By  AgjyVgi?,  which  we  render  fupplications,  is 
probably  meant  that  part  or  kind  of  prayer,  where- 
in we  fupplic^te  God  for  the  pardon  of  our  fins, 
and  for  the  averting  and  removing  of  evils,  whether 
temporal  or  fpiritual,  from  our  felves  or  others. 

2.  By  •3r(^!rgu;^^V5  which  we  render  prayers,  feems 
to  be  meant  petitions  for  bleffings  and  good  things 
from  God  ;  and  thefe  are  mod  properly  call'd  pray- 
ers. 

3.  By  'Evjiv^it;^  feems  to  be  particularly  meant 
pleadings  and  interceffions  on  the  behalf  of  others. 

4.  By  Eu;^flt£/9icfc?,  is  certainly  intended  praifes 
and  thankfgivings  to  God,  for  his  bleffings  and 
goodnefs  to  our  felves  and  others.  This  feems  to  be 

the 


of  pray  177 g  for  governors,  ^  3  2  ^ 

the  difference  between  them,  which    whether  it  be  ^  ^  ^'  ^^' 

exaftly  fo  or  not,  is  not  very  niaterial,  fince  thefe 

are  unqueftionably  the  feveral  kinds  or  parts  of  prayer. 

All  thefe  icveral  forts  of  prayer,  St.  Chryfoftom,  in 

his  comment  upon  this  text,  tells  us  were  publickly 

iifed  in  his  time,  in  the  daily  fervice  of  the  church; 

"  this  (fays  he)  all  communicants  do  know  is  done 

*'  every  day,  morning  and  evening-,  how  that  we 

"  pray  for  all  the  world,  for  kings,  and  for  all  that 

''  are  in  authority. 

Secondly,  For  whom  wc  are  to  pray ;  in  general, 
"  for  all  men."  Our  prayers  are  one  of  the  greateft 
and  bell  exprefTions  of  our  charity,  and  therefore 
ought  to  be  as  large  and  extenfive  as  our  charity  is. 
We  are  bound  in  common  charity  to  love  all  men, 
and  to  wifli  v/ell  to  them  •,  but  our  bare  wifhes  fig- 
nify  nothing,  unlefs  v/e  dire6l  them  to  God,  who  is 
able  to  confer  upon  them  the  bleffings  and  good 
things  which  v/e  wifh  to  them. 

And  this  is  a  charity  which  God  hath  put  into 
every  man's  power,  and  which  the  pooreft  man  in 
the  world,  as  well  as  the  richeil,  is  capable  of  ex- 
ercifing  at  all  times  and  upon  all  occafions :  For  the 
*'  ear  of  God  is  open  to  the  prayers"  of  the  poor,  as 
well  as  of  the  rich,  and  they  are  every  whit  as  pre^ 
valent  with  him  •,  nay,  the  fcripture  feems  to  fay^ 
that  God  hath  a  more  particular  regard  to  the  pray- 
ers of  the  poor.  So  that  we  may  be  liberal  and 
bountiful  in  our  prayers  to  thofe,  to  whom  we  are 
able  to  give  nothing  elie  \  and  when  oilr  hands  can- 
not reach  to  reheve  them,  we  may  pour  out  our 
hearts  to  God  for  them ;  we  may  pray  for  their 
ipiritual  and  temporal  good,  and  we  may  praifeGoD 
for  the  good  which  befals  them,  though  it  was  cue 

Vol.  V.  10  Q^  ©f 


1326  T^he  duty  and  reajon 

s  '  \i  M.  of  our  power  to  be  any  ways  inftrumental  to  procure 

LXXXIV.      .      r         y 

It  tor  them. 

Thirdly,  For  whom  we  are  m.ore  efpecially,  and 
in  the  firft  place,  to  pray,  viz.  for  thole  who  hav6 
the  greateft  and  moft  publick  influence  of  ail  others, 
upon  the  peace  and  happinefs  of  mankind,  "  for 
"  kings,  and  for  all  that  are  in  authority  i"  that  is, 
for  the  fupreme  magiftrate,  and  for  all  inferior  ma- 
giflrates,  who  derive  their  power  and  authority  from 
the  llipreme. 

Government  is  necefTary  to  the  welfare  of  man- 
kind j  becaufe  it  is  the  great  band  of  human  fociety, 
the  guard  of  it's  peace,  and  the  fecurity  of  every 
man's  perfon  and  property;  and  therefore  v/e  are 
concerned  as  much  as  is  pOiTible,  both  to  pray  for 
our  governors,  and  to  blefs  God  for  them-,  be- 
caufe without  them  we  fliould  be  In  a  moll  wretch- 
ed condition.  Mankind  would  be  unavoidably  mi- 
ferable  without  government  -,  human  fociety  would 
prefently  difband,  and  all  things  would  run  into 
confufion.  It  is  a  remarkable  faying  of  one  of  the 
jewifh  mailers,  pray  for  the  happinefs  of  the  king- 
dom or  government  \  for  if  it  were  not  for  the  fear 
of  that,  men  would  devour  one  another  alive.  And 
jofephus  tells  us,  that  when  the, Jews  were  made 
fubjedl  to  the  Romans  (though  it  was  by  conquefl) 
twice  a  day  they  offered  up  facrifices  for  the  life 
and  fafety  of  the  emperor.  And  this  was  very  a- 
greeable  to  what  God  had  commanded  that  people 
by  his  prophet,  in  a  much  like  cafe,  when  the  Jews 
were  conquered  by  the  king  of  Babylon,  and  car- 
ried away  captives,  Jer.  xxix.  7.  "  Seek  the  peace 
''  of  the  city  whither  I  have  caufed  you  to  be  car- 
"  hed  away  captives,  and  pray  unto  the  Lord  for 
'^  it  5  for  in  the  peace  thereof  Ihall  ye  have  peace." 

And 


S  R  R  M. 
LXXXIV. 


of  praying  for  governors.  1327 

And  furely  x!i\^  reafon  is  much  flronger,  why  we 
fhould  pray  for  our  natural  princes  and  governors. 
I  come  now  to  the 

Fourth  and  lail  thing  confidered  in  the  text,  and 
which  I  principally  defign  to  fpeak  to,  namely,  the 
reafon  or  argument  which  the  apoille  ufes,  to  engage 
us  "  to  pray  for  our  princes,  and  for  all  that  are  in 
"  authority,  that  we  may  live  a  quiet  and  peaceable 
"  hfe,  in  all  godhnefs  and  honefly."  The  manifold 
benefits  and  advantages  which  redound  to  us  from 
our  governors,  is  a  fufficicnt  argument  why  v/e 
fhould  pray  to  God  for  them,  and  praife  him  like- 
v/ife  for  fo  great  a  blelilng,  and  that  in  the  firft  place ; 
"  I  exhort  therefore,  firflofall"  (faith  the  apoflle), 
&c.  Now  the  apoflle  here  in  the  text  expreffeth  two 
great  advantages  of  government,  which  upon  the 
matter  do  comprehend  all  the  rell. 

1.  That  by  government  we  are  fecured  in  our  ci- 
vil rights  and  interefls,  in  the  quiet  and  peaceable 
poiTefTion  of  what  is  our  own. 

2.  That  we  may  thereby  be  protected  in  the  free 
pradiice  and  exercife  of  religion  and  virtue. 

Thefe  are  the  two  greateft  and  moil  defirable 
things  to  man  ;  and  neither  of  thele  can  be  had  v/ith- 
out  government.  I  fliall  briefly  confider  thefe  two 
particulars,  and  then  endeavour  to  fhew,  what  obli- 
gation the  confideration  of  thcmi  lays  upon  us,  both 
to  pray  to  God  in  the  behalf  of  our  princes  and  go- 
vernors, and  likewife  to  praife  God  for  them :  And 
then  I  fnall  conclude  all  with  a  brief  application  of 
this  whole  difcourfe  to  the  folemn  occafion  of  this 
day. 

Firfl,  I  fhall  begin  with  the  benefits  and  advantages 
of  government  mention' d  in  the  text,  namely,  thele 
two. 

10  0^2  I.  That 


T  3  2  8  T'he  duty  and  reafon 

F.  R  M.  J  ^  T\\^\.  by  it  we  are  fecured  in  our  civil  rights 
and  interefls,  in  the  quiet  and  peaceable  pofTeflion  of 
what  is  our  own. 

Without  government  there  could  be  no  luch  thing 
as  property  in  any  thing  beyond  our  own  perfons ; 
for  nothing  but  laws  can  make  property,  and  laws  are 
the  effe6l  of  government  and  authority :  Nay,  with- 
out government,  we  have  no  fecurity  of  our  perfons  ,. 
and  lives,  much  lefs  of  any  thing  that  belongs  to  us, 
and  is  at  prefent  in  our  polTefTion.  Were  we  not  pro- 
tedled  by  laws  (which  are  the  effe6l  of  government) 
we  could  haVe  no  fafety,  no  quiet  enjoyment  of  any 
thing ;  but  every  man  muft  be  perpetually  upon  his 
guard  againft  all  the  world,  and  expofed  to  continual 
violence  and  injuries  from  thofe,  who  are  too  many, 
and  too  flrong  for  him  •,  fo  that  all  our  quiet  and  fe- 
curity from  fear  and  danger,  from  the  fraud  and  op- 
prefTion  of  thofe  who  are  more  crafty  and  powerful 
than  our  felves,  from  endlefs  confufions  and  diffrac- 
tions, and  from  a  ftate  of  perpetual  feud  and  war  with 
all  mankind,  is  entirely  due  and  owing  to  civil  go-' 
vernment. 

And  this  alone  is  fo  unfpeakable  a  benefit,  that 
without  it,  men,  of  all  creatures,  would  be  the  mofl 
miferable ;  becaufe  all  that  wit  and  fagacity,  all  that 
cunning  and  contrivance,  which  mankind  hath  above 
the  brute  creatures  would  but  enable  them  to  do  fo 
much  the  more  mifchief  to  one  another,  and  to  de- 
vife  and  find  out  more  powerful  and  effedual  means 
and  inllruments  to  harm  and  defcroy  one  another. 

In  fhort,  that  we  live,  and  that  we  live  well,  in 
any  tolerable  condition  either  of  fafety  or  plenty,  and 
that  we  are  able  to  call  any  thing  our  own  for  one 
day,  or  for  one  hour  \  that  we  are  not  in  perpetual 
terror  and  apprehenfion  of  mortal  dangers,  and  that 

we 


of  praying  for  governors.  1329 

we  are  at  any  time  free  from  the  invafion  of  what  we^  ^  ^  ^- 

LXXXIV 

at  prefent  pofTefs,  by  the  fraud  and  force  of  others,  v— -^^.^ 
is  folely  the  effed  of  this  great  blefTing,  and  divine 
appointment  of  government,  to  preferve  the  peace  of 
human  fociety,  and  by  wife  and  wholefom  laws,  to 
tie  up  mens  hands  from  mutual  injuries  and  violence. 
Upon  this  all  the  comfort  and  all  the  fecurity  of  hu- 
man laws  do  depend.  From  hence  it  comes  to  pafs, 
(tliat  as  the  fcripture  expreffeth  it)  "  We  may  fit 
"  down  every  man  under  his  own  vine,  and  under 
"  his  own  fig-tree,  and  that  there  fhall  be  none  to 
*'  make  us  afraid.'*  So  that  if  fecurity  is  neceflary 
to  the  comfort  and  happinefs  of  mankind  -,  then  go- 
vernment is  fo  too :  For  without  this,  the  focieties  of 
men  would  prefently  diflblve  and  fall  in  pieces,  and 
all  things  would  run  into  confufion  and  diforder. 

2.  Another  great  benefit  which  may  reafonably  be 
expected  from  government  (though  it  does  not  always 
fo  happen)  is,  that  men  are  protected  by  it,  in  the 
free  exercife  and  practice  of  religion  and  virtue. 
Therefore  we  fhould  "  pray  for  kings,  and  for  all 
*'  that  are  in  authority,  (fays  the  apoftle)  that  we 
*'  may  lead  quiet  and  peaceable  lives  in  all  godlinefs 
*'  and  honefty ;"  that  is,  in  the  pradice  of  piety  and 
devotion  towards  God  ♦,  of  fobriety  and  temperance 
in  regard  to  our  felves :  and  of  juftice  and  charity  to- 
ward all  men. 

It  is  true  indeed,  (and  fo  the  apoftles  and  firft 
Chriflians  found  it  by  experience)  that  the  edge  and 
authority  of  laws  may  be,  and  fometimes  is  turned 
upon  the  true  religion,  and  the  fincere  profefTors  of 
it :  But  even  then,  though  good  men  may  receive 
great  harms  and  injuries  from  perfecuting  princes  and 
governors  •,  (as  the  primitive  Chritlians  did  from  fe- 
veral  of  the  Roman  emperors)  yet  then  it  fo  hap- 
pens. 


T'he  duty  and  reafon 

pens,  that  good  men  have  fome  confiderable  benefit 
and  protedion  from  the  civil  government  and  laws, 
being  for  the  moil  part  preierved  from  the  fury  and 
rage  of  the  multitude  j  fo  that  though  particular  per- 
fons  undergo  the  trial  of  cruel  futferings,  yet  much 
greater  numbers  do  efcape  and  are  preferved. 

And  which  is  very  confiderable  in  this  matter,  a- 
galnil  feveral  of  the  main  and  eilential  parts  of  reli- 
gion, there  never  was  any  human  law  made  \  as  a- 
gainft  inward  love,  honour,  and  reverence  of  Al- 
mighty God,  and  the  worfhipping  him  in  our  hearts, 
and  in  fecret  \  of  this  part  of  religion,  liuman  laws 
can  take  no  cognizance :  Nay,  farther  yet,  againit 
humility  and  meeknefs,  againft  modelly,  and  pati- 
ence, againil  temperance  and  chaility,  againfl  peace- 
ablenefs  and  obedience  to  government,  againfc  juflice 
and  gratitude,  againfl  charity  and  forgivenefs  of  in- 
juries, againfl  thefe  and  fuch  like  virtues,  the  apoflle 
has  told  us,  there  is  no  law.  Againfl  the  practice 
of  thefe  (without  fome  of  which  government  could 
not  pofTibly  fubfifl)  no  perfecution  was  ever  raifed, 
no  not  by  the  worfl  of  governors :  On  the  contrary, 
in  the  pradlice  of  thefe  virtues,  good  men  have  been 
in  all  ages  and  times  protedled  by  law. 

'Tis  true  indeed,  that  good  men  have  many  times 
been  grievoufly  perfecuted  by  the  civil  government 
and  authority,  for  the  external  profelTion  of  revealed 
religion ;  which  was  the  cafe  of  the  Chriilians  at  that 
time,  when  the  apoflle  commanded  them  "  to  pray 
"  for  kings,  and  for  all  that  were  in  authority  j"  that 
under  their  prote6lion,  "  they  might  lead  quiet  and 
''  peaceable  lives  in  all  godlinefs  and  honefly."  St. 
Paul  luiew  very  well,  when  he  gave  this  injunction 
to  them,  "  that  fupplications  and  prayers  be  made 
"  for  kings,  and  for  all  that  are  in  audiority,"  that 

the 


of  prayt7tg  for  governors,  ^  3  3  ^ 

the  powers  of  the  world  did  not  at  that  time  favour  S  E  R  M. 
chriftianity  :  But  he  knew  likewife,  that  government  vJJ-^^ 
was  neceflary  to  the  happinefs  of  mankind,  and  that 
Chriflians,  even  in  the  Hate  of  perfecution,  did  en- 
joy many  confiderable  benefits  and  advantages  by  it, 
fo  that  they  were  not  perpetually  expofed  to  popular 
rage  and  cruelty,  and  the  violence  of  wicked  and  un- 
reafonable  men  -,  which  would  not  only  have  hindered 
the  progrefs  of  chriftianity,  but  would  in  a  fhort  time 
have  endangered  the  extinguifhing  of  it :  Befides  that 
by  the  favour  and  protedlion  of  government,  th® 
Chriftians  had  many  confiderable  intervals  of  peace  and 
eafe,  which  gave  chriftianity  a  breathing  time,  and  op- 
portunity to  recover  itfelf  •,  and  though  the  fecular  au- 
thority did  for  a  long  time  difcountenance  chriftiani- 
ty, and  keep  it  under  hatches ;  that  was  but  an  ac-^ 
cidental  eftedl  and  abufe  of  government,  and  obedi- 
ence v/as  ftill  due,  and  prayers  for  it,  fo  much  the 
more  neceftary,  yea  and  thankfgivings  to  God  for 
it  very  reafonable,  upon  account  of  the  common  be- 
nefits and  advantages  of  it  to  human  fociety. 

Befides  that  Chriftians  did  hope  and  believe,  that 
the  civil  government  might  in  time  be  gained,  to  give 
it's  countenance  and  afTiftance  to  chriftianity,  and 
that  "  kings  and  princes  might  become  nuriing  fa- 
"  thers  to  the  church,"  as  was  cxpreQy  foretold  by  the 
prophets,  and  afterwards  in  God's  due  time  was  re- 
markably accomphHied.  In  the  mean  time  Chriftians 
were  patiently  to  obey  and  fuffer  in  expeftation  of 
thofe  glorious  rewards  in  another  world,  which  were 
promifed  to  their  faith  and  patience  -,  and  to  pray 
for  the  powers  that  perfecuted  them,  that  "  they  alfo 
*'  might  be  brought  to  the  acknowledgment  of  the 
*'  truth,"  and  might  ufe  that  power  which  God  had 
committed  to  them,  for  the  protedion  of  truth  and 

in- 


J  2  3  2  ^^^  ^^(y  ^^^^  reafo7i 

S  E  R  M.  innocency,  and  for  the  continuance  and  fupport  of 
the  true  religion-,  which,  blelTed  be  God,  was  after- 
wards the  cafe  of  chriftianity,  for  feveral  ages.  I 
proceed  in  the 

Second  place,  to  fhew  what  obligation  the  confi- 
deration  of  the  mighty  benefits  and  advantages  of 
government  lays  upon  us,  both  to  pray  to  God  on 
the  behalf  of  princes  and  governors,  and  likewife  to 
praife  God  for  them. 

Becaufe  in  their  welfare  and  profpcrity  the  publick 
peace  and  happinefs  doth  chiefly  confift,  and  in  the 
publick  good  confifts  the  good  of  particular  perfons  •, 
and  above  all,  the  piety  and  goodnefs  of  princes  and 
magiftrates  (efpecially  thofe  who  are  in  the  higheft 
place  of  authority)  have  a  general  good  influence  upon 
the  manners  of  men,  both  for  the  difcountenancing  of 
wickednefs  and  vice,  and  for  the  encouragement  of 
religion  and  virtue,  which  are  the  main  pillars  and 
foundation  of  publick  peace  and  profperity.  "  A  king 
^'  fitting  in  the  throne  of  judgment,  (faith  Solomon, 
Prov.  2o.  8.)  "  fcattereth  away  all  evil  with  his 
"  eyes."  The  pattern  of  a  religious  and  good  prince 
is  a  living  law  to  his  fubjecls,  and  more  than  the 
example  of  ten  thoufand  others,  to  mould  and  fafhion 
the  manners  of  the  people  to  a  conformity  to  it. 

Befides  that  there  is  (as  one  cxprefTeth)  a  kind  of 
moral  connexion  and  communication  of  evil  and  of 
guilt  betwixt  princes  and  people,  fo  that  they  are 
many  times  mutually  rewarded  for  the  virtues  and 
good  a<5lions,  and  punifhed  for  the  fms  and  faults  of 
One  another.  Of  which  proceedings  of  the  divine 
juflice  towards  the  people  of  Ifrael,  there  are  many 
remarkable  inftances  in  fcripture,  where  God  re- 
warded the  piety  of  good  princes,  with  great  blelTings 
upon  their  people,  and  punifhed  the  perfonal  faults  of 
5  their 


of  praying  for  governors.  133  3 

their  kings  with  publick  judgments  upon  the  whole  S  E  R  M. 
nation.  So  that  in  truth,  it  is  the  greatefl  kind- 
nefs  and  charity  to  our  felves,  to  pray  for  our  prin- 
ces and  governors  ;  bccaufe  our  welfare  is  involved 
in  theirs,  and  we  fuffer  not  only  in  all  the  misfor- 
tunes and  calamities  which  befal  them,  but  many 
times  upon  account  of  their  perfonal  faults  and  mif- 
carriages,  ^icquid  delirant  reges^  pleBuntur  A- 
chivi^  the  extravagances  of  princes  are  punifhed  in  the 
misfortunes  of  their  fubje6ts.  Thus  David,  (other- 
wife  a  very  good  king),  finned  in  numbring  the 
people,  and  the  plague  fell  upon  them ;  he  was  pu- 
nifhed in  the  calamity  of  his  people.  And  this  was 
in  no  wife  unjuft,  becaufe  there  are  always  fins  e- 
nough  in  any  nation  to  deferve  puniihment,  and 
God  may  take  what  occafion  he  pleafes,  to  fend  his 
judgments  upon  them  that  deferve  them  •,  for  princes 
and  people  make  but  one  civil  and  political  body, 
and  what  part  of  it  foever  is  punifhed,  the  other  fuf- 
fers.  And  this  is  the  true  ground  and  reafon  of  the 
communication  of  punifhments  betwixt  princes  and 
people. 

Another  confideration  which  fhould  engage  us 
*'  to  pray  for  thofe  that  are  in  authority,'*  is,  that 
we  reap  the  great  benefit  of  their  care,  and  pains,  and 
vigilancy  for  us,  "  iinder  their  fliadow  we  are  fafe." 
Our  innocency  and  our  rights  are  protedled  by  their 
power  and  laws,  and  by  the  jufl  punifhments  which 
they  inflid:  upon  evil-doers,  and  upon  thofe  who  go 
about  to  violate  our  rights  in  any  kind ;  fo  that  we 
ought  to  pray  and  to  praife  God  for  them,  as  our 
great  benefactors,  and  the  chief  inflruments  of  our 
lecurity  and  welfare  ^  and  therefore  not  only  in  duty, 
but  in  juftice  and  gratitude,  we  are  bound  to  wifh  all 
good  to  them,  and  to  intercede  with  God  for  them. 

Vol.  V.  10  R  for 

8  "^ 


1334  ^^^  ^^^y  ^^^  reafon 

S  E  R  M.  for  the  peace  and  profperity  of  their  governincnt, 
and  to  blefs  God  on  their  behalf:  yea,  we  ought  to 
do  this  out  of  love  to  our  felves  •,  becaufe  their  good 
and  profperity  is  ours,  their  goodnefs  and  righteouf- 
nefs,  their  perfonal  piety  and  virtues  extend  to  us, 
and  have  a  mighty  influence  upon  us,  to  excite  and 
encourage  us  to  follow  their  good  example,  and  "  to 
*'  go  and  do  likewife." 

And  we  ought  Ukewife  to  do  this  out  of  charity 
and  companion  to  our  princes  and  governors,  whofe 
condition  is  in  truth  rather  to  be  pitied  than  envied, 
and  whofe  high  place  and  dignity  is  much  more  to 
be  dreaded  than  defired  by  a  wife  man,  confidering 
how  heavy  a  burden  they  fuilain,  what  dangers  they 
are  continually  expofed  to,  what  cares  and  troubles 
and  cenfures  they  daily  undergo,  for  our  fafety  and 
eafe.  So  that  whatever  ambitious  and  inconfiderate 
men  may  think,  wife  men  do  certainly  know  and 
find  by  experience,  that  to  difcharge  with  care  and 
faithfulnefs  all  the  parts  of  a  good  governor,  is  a 
very  difEcult  and  troublefom  province.  Inferior  ma- 
giflrates  find  care  and  trouble  enough,  in  that  fmall 
fliare  and  part  of  it  which  they  fuilain ;  and  if  fo, 
then  certainly  the  care  and  concernment  of  the  whole, 
jnuft  needs  be  a  heavy  burden  indeed ;  and  what 
abilities  are  fufficient  for  it,  what  fhoulders  are  ftrong 
enough  to  ftand  under  it  ? 

And  as  upon  this  account  they  have  the  greateft 
need  of  our  prayers,  for  God's  diredion  and  affillance 
in  the  difcharge  of  their  high  office,  fo  likewife  for 
his  powerful  grace  to  preferve  them  from  fin  and  e- 
vil,  in  the  midft  of  thofe  manifold  temptations  to 
which  they  arc  continually  expofed,  in  appearance 
much  beyond  other  men,  from  the  height  of  their 
condition,  and  the  extent  of  their  power,  which  are 

ftrong 


of  praying  for  governors.  ^335 

ftrong  temptations  to  weak  minds,  to  pride  and  in-  S  E  R  M. 
folency,  to  injuftice  and  oppreflion ;  from  the  abun- 
dance of  all  things,  which  minifler  to  luxury  and  ex- 
cefs ;  and  from  the  officious  fervility  of  paralites  and 
flatterers,  who  footh  them  in  their  faults,  and  hu- 
mour them  in  their  paflions,  and  comply  with  their 
corrupt  and  vicious  inclinations,  and  are  always  ready 
at  hand,  and  forward  inilruments  to  execute  their 
commands,  and  to  ferve  their  lulls  and  vices. 

And  as  princes  greatly  need  our  prayers  upon 
thefe  accounts ;  fo  it  is  juft  matter  of  praife  and 
thankfulnefs  to  God,  when  a  nation  hath  wife,  juft, 
and  good  princes,  who  lay  to  heart  the  interefts  of 
their  people,  and  endeavour  by  all  the  wife  methods 
and  honeft  arts  of  government,  effedually  to  procure 
it ;  who  by  their  authority  and  due  execution  of  the 
law,  do  difcountenance,  and,  as  much  as  in  them 
lies,  reftrain  wickednefs  and  vice ;  and  by  their  own 
example  encourage  virtue  and  piety  in  their  fubjeds  j 
and  thereby  invite,  and  even  provoke  them  to  the 
like  practices :  the  life  of  a  good  prince  is  a  kind  of 
publick  cenfure  of  ill  manners,  and  reproof  of  wicked 
pradlices.  And  I  do  not  know  whether  there  be  a 
more  delightful  fight  on  this  fide  heaven,  than  to 
fee  thofe  who  are  in  eminent  place  and  power,  even 
if  they  might  do  whatever  they  would,  yet  continu- 
ally chufing  to  do  what  they  ought  •,  as  if  their  power 
were  fo  far  from  being  a  temptation  to  them  to  do 
evil,  that  on  the  contrary,  the  confideration  of  it  is 
one  of  the  beft  and  ftrongeft  arguments  to  reftrain 
them  from  it. 

Weak  minds  are  apt  to  meafure  their  liberty  by 

their  power,  and  to  think  that  the  higher  and  greater 

they  are,  fo  much  the  greater  privilege  they  have 

to  be  more  extravagantly  bad  than  others:  but  if  the 

iqR2  matter 


1336  ^h^  duty  and  reafon 

E  R  M.  niatter  be  really  confidered,  the  argument  runs  the 
other  way  •,  and  he  that  reafons  wifely,  will  certainly 
conclude  with  Tully,  in  maxima  qudqiie  fortund 
viinimum  licere^  that  they  who  are  in  the  higheft 
ftation,  and  greatefb  power,  have  of  all  others  the 
leaft  liberty  to  do  what  they  lift.  Their  power, 
fuppofing  it  never  fo  uncontroulable  and  unaccount- 
able, would  be  fo  far  from  being  in  reafon  a  temp- 
tation to  them  to  do  what  they  ought  not,  that  in 
truth  it  would  fct  them  above  the  temptation  of  do- 
ing an  ill  thing ;  becaufe  they  would  ftand  in  awe  of 
no  body,  and  there  would  be  nothing  that  could  hin- 
der them  from  doing  what  is  beft,  if  they  had  a  mind 
to  it :  and  every  one  ought  to  have  fuch  a  mind : 
and  nothing  can  be  more  mif-becoming,  and  more 
diredly  contrary  to  the  nature  of  their  office,  and 
the  power  wherewith  they  are  intrufted,  than  to 
give  an  example  of  breaking  thofe  laws,  which  they 
are  to  put  in  execution. 

God  himfelf,  becaufe  he  hath  all  power,  is  there- 
fore all  goodnefs,  and  is  therefore  "  holy  in  all  his 
"  ways,  and  righteous  in  all  his  works ;"  according 
to  the  reafoning  of  the  author  of  the  book  of  wifdom, 
who  argues  thus  with  God,  it  is  not  (fays  he)  a- 
greeable  with  thy  power  to  condemn  him  that  hath 
not  defer ved  to  be  punifhed ;  that  is,  it  is  not  agree- 
able with  infinite  power,  to  do  any  thing  that  is  un- 
juft  •,  for  thy  power  (faith  he  to  God),  is  the  begin- 
ning of  righteoufnefs,  and  becaufe  thou  art  the 
Lord  of  all,  it  maketh  thee  to  be  gracious  unto  all. 
Infinite  power  is  the  foundation  and  principle  of 
goodnefs  and  righteoufnefs,  and  an  all-powerful  be- 
ing is  good  and  righteous,  not  only  from  choice, 
but  from  a  neceflity  of  nature. 

And 


of  praying  for  governors.  1 3  3  7 

And  this  is  the  true  ground  and  reafon  of  that  S  Ej^  ^f . 
faying  of  St.  James,  that  "  God  cannot  be  tempted 
"  with  evil,"  becaufe  his  infinite  power  fets  him  above 
all  temptation  to  it :  for  what  reafon  can  be  ima- 
gined, why  he  that  hath  all  power,  ihall  have  any 
inclination  to  be  otherwife  than  good  ?  What  can 
tempt  him  thereto  ?  Since  he  that  hath  all  power  can 
neither  have  any  hopes  of  being  greater  than  he  is, 
nor  any  fear  of  becoming  lefs :  and  all  temptation  is 
founded  either  in  hope  or  fear,  and  where  neither  of 
thefe  can  have  any  place,  there  can  be  no  occafion, 
no  pofTible  motive  or  temptation  to  evil ;  for  to  be 
evil,  and  to  do  evil,  is  always  an  effed  of  weaknefs 
and  want  of  power. 

The  fum  of  what  I  have  faid  upon  this  argument, 
and  the  defign  indeed  of  it,  is  to  ihew,  that  the 
greater  power  and  authority  any  one  hath,  the  lefs 
liberty  he  hath  to  do  any  thing  that  is  bad.  And  I 
have  been  the  larger  upon  this,  becaufe  I  would  fain 
imprint  upon  the  minds  of  perfons,  whom  the  pro- 
vidence of  God  hath  invefted  with  great  power  and 
authority,  that  as  they  have  great  opportunities  of 
doing  more  good  than  others,  fo  they  have  greater 
reafon,  and  more  advantages  of  doing  it,  and  arc 
more  inexcufable  if  they  do  any  thing  that  is  bad  j 
not  only  becaufe  their  adlions  are  of  a  more  publick 
influence  and  obfervation ;  but  becaufe  their  tempta- 
tions to  evil,  how  great  foever  they  may  feem  to  be, 
are  in  truth  and  reality  much  lefs  than  other  mens. 
Happy  are  thofe  princes,  that  wifely  confider  this, 
and  make  their  power  and  autloority  over  others,  an 
argument  to  be  fo  much  better  themfelves,  and  to 
do  fo  much  more  good  to  others  j  and  becaufe  they 
are  lefs  fubje^  to  the  coercive  power  of  law,  do  for 
that  reafon  think  themfelves  fo  much  the  more  ob- 
liged 


1 2  3  8  ^he  duty  and  reafo?t 

S  E  R  M.  liged  to  be  a  law.  to  themfelves.  Blefled  be  God  for 
the  happineis  wliich  we  enjoy  in  this  refped  -,  and 
let  us  earnellly  befeech  him  that  he  would  be  pleafed 
to  bellow  fuch  a  plentiful  meafure  of  his  grace  and 
holy  Spirit  on  our  moft  gracious  king  and  queen,  as 
may  effedually  both  engage  and  enable  them  to  ufc 
their  power  to  the  belt  purpofes  for  the  publick 
good. 

And  thus  I  have  briefly  gone  over,  and  explained 
to  you  the  feveral  particulars  in  the  text ;  the  duty  of 
prayer  here  enjoined  -,  for  whom  we  are  to  pray,  in 
general  "  for  all  men ;"  and  for  whom  more  efpecial- 
ly,  and  in  the  firft  place ;  "  for  kings,  and  all  that 
*'  are  in  authority ;"  and  upon  what  confiderations 
we  are  to  pray  for  them,  and  to  praife  God  in  their 
behalf^  becaufe  of  the  great  benefits  we  receive  by 
them ;  and  becaufe  both  in  refpedl  of  the  dangers 
and  difficulties  of  their  condition,  they  Hand  in  need 
of  our  prayers  above  other  men ;  befides  that  in  pray- 
ing for  their  welfare  and  proiperity,  we  pray  for  our 
own  peace  and  happinefs» 

And  now  to  apply  this  to  our  felves,  and  to  the 
occafion  of  this  day.  By  all  that  hath  been  faid,  we 
cannot  but  be  convinced  what  caufe  we  have  to  blefs 
God  for  that  happy  government  which  we  live  un- 
der,  that  excellent  conftitution,  under  the  gentle  in- 
fluences whereof  we  enjoy  more  liberty,  more  plenty, 
and  more  fecurity  from  all  manner  of  injury  and  op- 
prefTion,  than  any  nation  this  day  on  the  face  of  the 
earth.  Therefore  with  what  thankfulnefs  fhould  we 
this  day  commemorate  the  happy  refloration  of  this 
governrifient  to  us,  after  the  miferable  diflradions 
and  confufions  of  twenty  years,  by  the  reftoration 
and  return  of  our  banifhed  fovereign,  in  fo  peacea- 
ble, and  yet  fo  wonderful  a  manner,  that  a  remem- 
I  brance 


of  praying  for  gonjernors,  ^  3  3  9 

brance  of  it,  even  at  this  diftance,  is  almofl  ftill  S  E  R  M. 

LXXXIV 

matter  of  amazement  to  us ! 

"  BlefTed  be  the  Lord  God  of  Ifrael,  who  alone 
**  doth  wondrous  things.'* 

And  with  our  joyful  praifes,  let  us  join  our  moft 
devout  and  fervent  prayers  to  Almighty  God,  for 
the  king's  and  queen's  majeflies,  "  and  for  all  that 
**  are  in  authority."  And  I  may  truly  fay,  that 
there  was  hardly  ever  greater  reafon  and  occafion  for 
it,  from  both  our  diitradions  at  home,  and  our 
dangers  from  abroad  j  never  was  there  greater  need 
of  our  earneft  fupplications  and  prayers,  than  at  this 
time,  when  our  armies  and  fleets  are  in  motion,  and 
when  God  feems  already  to  have  given  us  fomc 
earneft  of  good  fuccefs;  blelTed  be  his  great  and 
glorious  name. 

We  have  indeed  a  great  army,  and  a  more 
powerful  fleet,  than  ever  this  nation  fent  forth  •,  but 
unlefs  God  be  on  our  fide,  and  favour  our  caufe, 
in  vain  are  all  our  preparations  %  for  whenever  his 
providence  is  pleafed  to  interpofe,  by  ftrength  fhall 
no  man  prevail.  Have  we  not  reafon  then  to  cry 
mightily  unto  God,  when  the  only  ftrength  of  the 
nation  is  at  ftake,  when  our  fins  and  provocations 
are  fo  many  and  great,  and  there  lyes  fo  heavy  a 
load  of  guilt  upon  us  ?  When  the  perfon  of  his  fa- 
cred  majefty  is  expofed  to  fo  much  hazard,  not  on- 
ly in  the  high  places  of  the  field,  but  from  the  reft- 
lefs  attempts  of  the  malicious  and  implacable  ene- 
mies of  our  peace  and  religion,  that  he  would  be 
gracioufly  pleafed  to  go  forth  with  our  armies  and 
fleets,  and  not  remember  our  iniquities  againft  us, 
but  fave  us  for  his  mercies  fake  ? 

We  are  too  apt  to  murmur  and  complain  of  miA 
carriages,  and  the  ill  management  of  affairs  j   but 

furely 


134^  ^he  duty  and  reafon 

S  R  R  M.  lurely    the  beft  thing  we  can  do,   and  that  which 


LXXXIV. 


befl  becomes  us,  is  to  look  forward,  and  to  turn 
our  cenfures  of  our  governors  and  their  a6lions,  in- 
to humble  fupplications  to  God  in  their  behalf,  and 
in  behalf  of  the  whole  nation  •,  "  that  he  would  be 
*'  plcafed  to  turn  us  every  one  from  the  evil  of  our 
*'  ways,  that  he  may  return  to  us,  and  have  mercy 
*'  on  us,  that  fo  iniquity  may  not  be  our  ruin ;  that 
*'  he  may  rejoice  over  us  to  do  us  good,  and  may 
"  at  laft  think  thoughts  of  peace  towards  us, 
**  thoughts  of  good  and  not  of  evil,  to  give  us  an 
**  expeded  end  of  our  troubles." 

Let  us  then  betake  our  felves  to  the  proper  work 
of  this  day,  hearty  prayers  and  thankfgivings  to  Al- 
mighty God,  for  the  king  and  queen,  '•  and  for  all 
*'  that  are  in  authority  j"  that  as  he  hath  been 
pleafed  by  a  wonderful  providence,  to  refcue  us 
from  the  imminent  danger  we  were  in,  and  from 
all  our  fears,  by  the  happy  advancement  of  their 
majefties  to  the  throne  of  thefe  kingdoms  \  fo  he 
would  of  his  infinite  goodnefs  flill  preferve  and  con- 
tinue to  us  this  light  of  our  eyes,  and  breath  of  our 
noflrils,  princes  of  that  great  clemency  and  good- 
nefs, which  render  them  the  true  reprefentatives  of 
God  upon  earth,  and  the  mofl  gracious  governors 
of  men. 

And  let  us  earneftly  befeech  him,  "  that  he 
"  would  confirm  and  ftrengthen  them  in  all  good- 
"  nefs,  and  make  them  wife  as  angels  of  God,  to 
*'  difcern  betwixt  good  and  evil,  that  they  may 
*'  know  how  to  go  in  and  out  before  this  great 
*'  people ;  that  he  would  give  them  the  united  af- 
"  fedlions  of  their  people,  and  a  heart  to  fludy 
*'  and  feek  their  good  all  the  days  of  their  lives. 

And 


of  praymg  for  governors,  ^34^ 

And  finally,  that  he  would  be  pleafed  to  continue  f^xxiv-' 
fo  great  a  blefling  to  us,  and  to  grant  them  a  long 
and  profperous  reign  over  us ;  and  that  their  pofteri- 
ty  in  this  royal  family  may  endure  for  ever,  and 
their  throne  as  the  days  of  heaven  j  that  under  them 
the  people  of  thefe  nations,  we  and  the  generations 
to  come,  may  lead  quiet  and  peaceable  lives,  in  all 
godlinefs  and  honefty  ;  for  his  mercies  fake  in  Jesus 
Christ,  who  is  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords  *, 
to  whom  with  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Ghoft  be  all 
honour,  glory,  dominion  and  power,  now  and  for 
ever.     Amen. 


Vol.  V,  iqS  THE 

8. 


134^8 


THE 

CONTENTS. 


S  E  R  M.    LIX,  LX,  LXI,  LXII,  LXIIL 
Of  conftancy  in  the  profeflion  of  the  true  religion. 

H  E  B.  X.  23: 

J  ET  us  hold  f aft  the  prof ejfion  of  our  faith  without 

*^  wavering  ;  for  he  is  faithful  that  hath  pomifedy 

page  887,  903,  921,  940,  <jS3^ 

S  E  R  M.    LXIV. 

The  chriftian  life,  a  life  of  faith. 

2  COR.  V.  7. 

For  we  walk  hy  faiths  not  hy  fights  p.  978. 

S  E  R  M.    LXV. 

The  danger  of  apoftafy  from  the  true  religion. 

H  E  B.  X.  ^^. 

'But  if  any  man  draw  hck^  my  foul  fhall  have  no  plea* 
fure  in  him^  p.  ^^c^. 

S  E  R  M. 


The   CONTENTS.  1343 

S  E  R  M.    LXVI,    LXVII. 

Of  felf-denial,  and  fufFering  for  Christ's  fake. 

MATT.  XVI.  24. 

Tben /aid  Jesus  unto  his  difciples;  if  any  man  will 
come  after  me^  let  him  deny  himfelf  and  take  up  his 
crofs  and  follow  me^  p.  10 15, 1032. 

S  E  R  M.    LXVIII,  LXIX. 

Good  men  ftrangers  and  fojourners  upon  earth. 

HEB.  XI.  13. 

And  confeffed  that  they  were  fir  angers  and  pilgrims  on 
the  earth. 

S  E  R  M.    LXX,' 

The  prefence  of  the  Meffias,  the  glory  of  the  fecond 
temple. 

HAGGAI  II.  6,  7,  8,  9. 

For  thus  faith  the  Lord  of  hojls^  yet  once  it  is  a  lit- 
tie  while ^  and  I  will  fhake  the  heavens^  and  the 
earthy  and  the  fea^  and  the  dry  land:  and  I  will 
fhake  all  ?iations,  and  the  dejire  of  all  nations  fhall 
come^  and  I  will  fill  this  houfe  with  glory ^  faith  the 
Lord  of  hofts,  Thefilver  is  mine^  and  the  gold  is 
mine,  faith  the  Lord  of  hefts.  'The  glcry  of  this 
latter  houfe  fhall  he  greater  than  of  the  former^  faith 
the  hoKD  of  hofts  i  and  in  this  place  will  I  give 
peacCy  faith  the  Lord  of  bofts^  p.  1081. 

10  S  2  S  E  R  M. 


1344  The    CONTENTS. 

S  E  R  M.    LXXI. 

Christ  Jesus,    the  only  mediator  between   God 
and  men. 

Preached  on  the  feaft  of  the  Annunciation,  1 6^  i . 

I  TIM.  II.  s,6, 
For  there  is  one  God,  and  one  mediator  between  God 
and  mcn^  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  who  gave  him- 
felf  a  ranfo'm  for  all,  p.  1 1 03. 

S  E  R  M.     LXXII,    LXXIII. 

Christ    Jesus,  the  only  mediator  between  God 

and  men. 

I  T  I  M.  II.  5,  6. 

For  there  is  one  God,  and  one  mediator  between  God 
and  fnen^  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  who  gave  himfelf 
a  ranfom  for  alU  p.  1 118,  11 32. 

S  E  R  M.    LXXIV. 

^  The  general  and  efFedlual  publication  of  the  gofpel 

by  the  apoflles. 

Preached   on  Afcenlion  day,  1688. 

MARK  XVI    19,  20. 

So  then  after  the  Lord  had  fpoken  unto  them^  he  was 
received  up  into  heaven^  and  fat  on  the  right  hand  of 
God.  And  they  went  forth  and  preached  every 
where ^  the  hoKD  working  with  ihetn^  and  confirming 
the  word  wtthfeg7js  following^  p.  11 50. 


V    ^  S  E  R  M. 


The   CONTENTS.  1345 

S^E  R  M.    LXXV.      ' 

The  nature,  office,  and  employment  of  good  angels. 
Preached  on  the  feaft  of  St  Michael. 

H  E  B.  L  14. 

Are  they  not  all  miniftring  fpirits^  fent  forth  to  mimjier 
for  them  whojhall  he  heirs  of  falvation  ?      p.  1170. 

S  E  R  M.     LXXVI. 

The  reputation  of  good  men  after  death. 

Preached  on  St.  Luke's  day. 

PSAL.  CXII.  6.  The  latter  part  of  the  verfe. 
^he  righteous  fhall  he  in  everlafting  rememhrance^ 

p.  1 194* 

S  E  R  M.    LXXVII. 

The  duty  of  imitating  the  primitive  teachers,  and 
patterns  of  chriftianity. 

Preached  on  All-faints  day,  1 684, 

HEB.  XIII.  7.  Thelatter  part  of  the  verfe. 

IVhofe  faith  follow^  conjidering  the  end  of  their  con- 

verfation. 

The  whole  verfe  runs  thus  5 
Rememher  them  which  have  the  rule  overyou^  who  have 
fpoken  unto  you  the  word  ofGoD-,  whofe  faith  follow^ 
confidering  the  end  of  their  converfation^      p.  1209. 


S  E  R  M, 


J346  The    CONTENTS. 

S  E  R  M.    LXXVIII. 

The  encouragement  to  fuiFer  for  Christ  i  and  the 
danger  of  denying  him. 

Preached  on  All-faints  day. 

2  TIM.  n.  II,  12. 

//  ts  a  faithful  faying  ;  for  if  we  be  dead  tvith  him^  we 
fhdl  alfo  live  with  him :  if  we  fuffer^  we  fhall  alfo 
reign  with  him  :  if  we  deny  him^  he  alfo  will  deny  us. 

p.  1226, 

SERM.    LXXIX,  LXXX. 

The  bleflednefs  of  good  men  after  death. 
Preached  on  All-Saints  day. 

REV.    XIV.  13. 

Jnd  I  heard  a  voice  from  heaven^  faying  unto  me,  Write^ 
Bkffed  are  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord,  from 
henceforth  :  Tea^  faith  the  Spirit^  that  they  may  reft 
from  their  labours  \  and  their  works  do  follow  them. 

p.  1243,  1260. 

SERM.     LXXXI. 

The  vanities    and   wickednefs  of  honouring  dead 
faints,  and  perfecuting  the  living. 

Preached  on  AH  Saints  day. 

LUKE 


The   CONTENTS. 

LUKE  XL  49.50,51. 
Therefore  alfofaid  the  wifdom  of  God  ^  I  will  fend  them 
frophets  and  apojllesy  and  feme  of  them  they  fmlljlay 
and  perfecute :  that  the  blood  of  all  the  prophets, 
which  was  fhed  from  the  foundation  of  the  worlds  may 
be  required  of  this  generation  \  from  the  blood  of 
Abel,  unto  the  blood  of  Zacharias^  which  perifhed 
between  the  altar  and  the  temple :  verily  I  fay  unto 
you,  it  /ball  he  required  of  this  generation,     p.  1276. 

S  E  R  M.    LXXXII. 

The  danger  of  zeal  without  knowledge. 

Preached  on  November  5.  1682. 

R  O  M.  X.  2. 

/  bear  them  record,  that  they  have  a  zeal  of  God  ', 
but  not  according  to  knowledge,  p.  1289 

S  E  R  M.    LXXXIII. 

The  bcft  men  liable  to  the  worft  treatment,  from 
miftaken  zealots. 

Preached  on  November  5.  1686. 

JOHN  XVI.  2. 

T^ify  Jhall  put  you  out  of  the  fynagogues :  yea,  the  time 
Cometh,  that  •whofoever  killethyou,  -will  think  that  he 
doth  God  fervice^  p.  i^oC. 

I,  SERM. 


'347 


I34S 


The   CONTENTS. 

S  E  R  M.     LXXXIV. 

The  duty  and  reafon  of  praying  for  governors- 
Preached  on  the  29':h  of  May,  1693. 

I  TIM.  11.  I,  2. 

I  exhort  therefore^  that  firji  of  dly  fuppli cations^ 
•prayers^  inter cejfions^  and  giving  of  thanks  be  made 
for  all  men:  for  kings ^  and  for  all  that  are  in  au- 
thority \  that  we  may  lead  a  quiet  and  peaceable  life^ 
in  all  godlinefs  and  honefty^  P-  ^  3 2  3. 


The  End  of  the  Fifth  Volume, 


{ 


A 


4 


t. 


