h  >-  ^ 


^ 

^ 


OF   THE 

Theological   Seminary 

PRINCETON,    N.  J. 

Case, ^>?C--<V— Dmsi>     \... 

snelf,      I  ^XXJ    ^ 


Book, 


.bee.  jo: 


No, 


^  ; 


X' 


KO 


^ 


X- »' 


J 


r 


\ 


"Sy^ 


■^  :^K\j 


\ 


r^ 


^ 


•  V 


^  n 


/ 


THE 


Gentleman  Inftruded 


I  N    T  H  E 


^ 


r 


CONDUCT 

^      Virtuous  and  Mappy    IT  Mi^."^ 


L    I    F    E.^^ 


In  Three  Parts. 


Written  for  the  Instruction  of  a 

YouxNG  NOBLEMAN. 

To  which  is  added, 

A  Word  to  the  LADIES, 

By   Way    of  S  U  P  P  L  E  M  E  N  T   to   the 

F  I  R  S  T     P  A  R  T. 

The  Tenth  Edition. 


LONDON: 

printed  by  W.  Burton,  for  the  Executrix  of 
E.  Sm  I  T  H  •,  and  Sold  by  W.  Parker,  at  the 
Kir^s-Head,  in  St.  Faults  Church- Yard. 

MDCCX  "xxflT 


> 


To  the  Right  Honourable 

EDWARD. 

Lord  Vifcount  Cornhury^  &c. 

B^ron  Clifton  of  Leighton" 
Bromfwould  3 

Son  and  Heir-Apparent  of 

Edward  Earl  oiClarendon^Scc. 

My  Lord, 

I  Formerly  prefented  Tour  Lordfhip  njj'tth 
the  Firji  Volume  of  this  Book,  and 
for  the  fame  Reafon  I  noiv  prefent 
it  again  entire  in  all  its  Farts  to  Tou,  be- 
caufe  it  luas  made  for  Tou,  I  mean^  for 
Gentlemen  of  Tour  Nohle  Chara&er  ^  and 
hecaufe,  I  helieue^  the  perufal  of  it  nvill 
loth  profit  and  delight  Tou :  But  more 
efpeciallyy  My  Lord,  J  make  Tou  a  Pre-^ 
fent  of  it,  to  gi<ve  Tour  Lordjhip  an  Af» 
furance  of  the  unfeigned  Defires  I  ha've, 
A   2  that 


The  Dedication. 
that  Ton  JhouU  he  Goody  as  'well  as 
Great y  and  to  tejlify  therehy  to  the  Worldy 
the  great  RefpeB  I  ha^e  for  your  Noble 
Family ;  of  'which  Tour  Lordjhip  cannot 
fail  to  he  the  great  Ornament ,  as  ivell  as 
the  Glory  of  Tour  Country y  if  you  take 
this  Book  for  Tour  Companion y  and  Eu- 
febius,  the  Nohle  Author  of  ity  for  your 
Guide, 

My  Lord,  I  had  the  Honour  to  he 
long  acquainted  <with  my  Lord  Tour  Grand- 
father^  and  I  had  the  Happinefs  and  Blef- 
fing  to  he  hred  up  in  the  Family  of  Tour 
Great  Grandfather  of  immortal  Memory^ 
I  meany  in  the  mojl  famous  Uniiferjity  of 
Oxford,  to  nvhichy  after  a  long  Night  of 
Ignorance,  in  Times  "which  his  incompara» 
hie  Pen  hath  defcrihedy  he  reflored  true 
Learning  and  Difciplme,  to  the  great  Be- 
nefit of  the  Church  and  Kingdom y  and  go- 
werned  ity  all  the  Time  he  'was  Chancellor 
of  it^  'with  the  Cave,  AjfeBion  and  Au- 
thority of  a  Father  5  andy  My  Lord,  I've- 
rily  belie'vey  that  of  thofcy  'who  ivere  then 
Students  in  the  Univerjityy  there  is  not  a 
Man  of  any  Rank  or  Profe/Jton  noiv  li'v- 

ingy 


The  Dedication. 
ingy  ivho  doth  not  re'verence  his  Memory^ 
and  njuifh  all  Happinefs  to  his  Nolle  Fa- 
milyy  and  particularly  to  lour  Lordjhipy 
ivho  hear  his  Name^  andivhoy  ^we  all  hope^ 
nvillfolhiv  his  great  Example^  and  that  of 
another  in  e^very  RefpeB  as  Greaty  and 
Goody  I  mean  the  Example  of  Tour  He- 
roick  other  Great  Grandfather y  my  Lord 
Caps^l,  of  mojl  Venerable  and  Immor- 
tal Alemory. 

To  that  Endy  My  Lord,  this  Book,  noiu 
compkated  by  the  Author ^  comes  to  'wait 
upon  Tou  in  the  Fifth  Edition  j  ^hich  I 
mention  to  Tour  Lordjhip,  to  let  you  un- 
derjiandy  that  it  mujl  he  a  Book  of  more 
than  common  Value  ^  ^hich  in  fo  Critical 
an  Age  hath  made  its  Way  fo  ojten  in  its 
federal  Parts  through  the  World  ^without 
any  other  Tejiimonyy  or  Commendationy 
but  that  of  its  onvn  intrinjick  Worth. 

Wherefore y  My  Lord,  I  do  not  defire 
Tou  to  read  it  o'ver,  for  that  njjould  be  a 
Bifparagement  to  it^  and  all  the  Parts  of 
it  \  I  only  dejire  Tour  Lordjhip  ro  tafte  it, 
to  read  as  fmallapart  of  it  as  Tou  pleafey 
and  then  to  forbear  reading  the  ivhole  CoU 
A   3  leUiony 


The  Dedicatiok, 

leBion^  if  you  can.  I  dare  fay^  My  Lord, 
ijohen  Tou  have  begun,  Tou  njoill  no  more  he 
able  not  to  go  through  the  ^whoky  than  if 
Tou  ijjere  to  read  the  heji  Dramatick  Com- 
fofure  that  e^ver  'was  madey  Tou  could  give 
off  at  the  Firft  AU,  and  not  proceed  to  the 
End  of  the  Fifth.  It  is  not  ^without  Reafon, 
My  Lord,  that  I  liken  this  Book  to  a 
Play  'y  for  indeed  it  is  a  fort  of  Drama, 
^written  in  Dialogue,  ^without  Numbers,  in 
ivhich  federal  Perfons  under  feigned  Names 
exprefs  federal  Humours ^  and,  as  it  'were^ 
aU  federal  Parts  5  and  as  in  a  true  PJay, 
in  nvhich  the  Poet  defgns  to  profit,  as  much 
astopleafe,  and  to  couch  a  Noble  Moral  in 
the  Plot,  this  bright  and  ferious  Dramatift 
in  Profe,  the  Wife  Eufebius,  ^hofe  Piety  in 
his  Book  is  equal  to  his  Wit,  deftgns  through 
the 'whole  of  it  to  render  Virtue  amiable  and 
venerable,  and  mofl  becoming  the  Profeffion 
and  PraBice  of  Gentlemen,  and  to  reprefent 
Wictin  its  natural  Features,  as  hateful  and 
ridiculous,  and  mofl  dijhonourahle  and  re^ 
proachful  to  Gentlemen  of  all  Ranks,  de- 
fcrihing  all  along  the  Vanities  and  Follies 
and  M^dnefs  of  the  World,  and  difcover- 

ing 


The  Dedication. 
ing  the  finful  Arts  and  Snares  and  Temp^ 
tations  of  it  in  Juch  a  delightful  and  con^ 
evincing  manner,  that  it  mufl  he  faid  of 
e^very  one,  'who  can  turn  Afoftate  from 
Virtuey   after  reading  this  mofl  excellent 
Volume y  that  his  DejlruBion  is  ofhimfelf. 
My  Lord,    it  is  no'w  fome  Time  fince 
Your  Lordfhip  entered  on  the  Stage  of 
the  Worldy  and  gi've  me  leave  to  fay  a- 
gain,  that  the  Eyes  of  God,  and  all  good 
Men  'will  he  upon  ToUy  to  ohfer^ve  how 
Tou  'will  aU  Tour  Part^  and  'whether  Toull 
follonv  the  InJiruBions  nvhich  the  Honoura- 
ble Eufebius   gi'ves  in  the  frjl  Part  to 
Neandcr,  and  in  the  rej}  to  Theomachus  ^ 
or  'whether  forgetting  the  Honour  both  of 
Tour  natural  and  ffiritual  Birth ,  and  the 
facred  Obligations  of  Tour  Baptifmal  Vb'Wy 
Tou  'will  let  Tour  felfbe  carried  off  by  the 
great  Number  of  Acheifts,  Deifts,  Indif- 
f  erents,  and  Debauchees  among  us,  whofe 
^vile  Manners  and   Con'verfation  he  de-* 
fcribes  in  this  golden  Book.  My  Lord,  in 
fuch  an  Age  as  thisy  Tou  mujl  prepare 
Your  *  Soul  againft  the  Temp-  *  Ecdcfiaiii- 
tations  of  thefe    Men,   from    ^"s"^- 
A  4  'which J  * 


The   DEDICATlONr 

nxihich,  hy  the  Grace  of  God,  Ton  ha^ve 
hitherto  prefer^ved^  and  I  truft^  'will  al* 
ivays  prefer've  Tour  Self^  though  they  luill 
he  fure  to  ufe  all  their  ArtSy  particularly 
that  mojl  dangerous  one  of  Flattery ^  to  fe- 
duce  ToUy  and  to  ajfail  Tour  Virtue  mjith 
all  their  Force  and  Skill,  But  God^  if 
Ton  feeh  His  Ajjijlancey  and  Tour  cwn 
Chrfjtian  Courage  and  Refclutiony  nrill  fe- 
cure  Tour  Lordfiip  from  them ;  and  that 
Tou  may  Hue  to  he  a  bright y  heroick  and 
jfeady  Example  of  Chrijlian  Fietyy  in  a 
mofl  kicked  and  degenerate  A  gey  Jhall  he 
thd  conjlant  ana  moft  hearty  Prayery  My 
Lord,  of 

Your  Lordfhip's 

Mofl  Obedient  Servant, 


Geo.  Hickes. 


THE 


PUBLISHER 


TO  THE 


GENTRY 


Gentlemen, 

PROVIDENCE  having  put  the  fol- 
lowing Dialogues  into  my  Hands,  I  take 
the  Boldnefs  to  offer  them  to  the  View  of 
the  Publick  under  your  Protection.  They  were 
only  intended  by  the  Author  for  the  private  In- 
firuftion  of  a  young  Nobleman,  on  whom  they 
have  wrought  fuch  admirable  Effecfls,  that  it*s 
Pity,  methinks,  to  bury  them  in  Privacy,  and 
to  confine  them  to  one  Clofet.  The  Author's 
Defign  is  charitable,  I  am  fure  ;  but  whether  he 
has  been  happy  in  Execution,  I  wholly  leave  to 
your  Judgments.  He  runs  through  the  Duty  of 
a  Gentleman,  and  of  a  Chriftian  ;  he  points  at  the 
Ihorteft  Way  to  Greatnefs  and  Goodnefs,  and  fur- 
nifhes  you  with  Materials  to  live  with  Honour  in 
this  World,  and  in  Glory  in  the  next. 

Seeing 


Th  FuUtJher  to  theGm tky. 

Seeing  therefore  this  Treatife  comes  on  fo 
kind  an  Errand,  it  will,  I  prefume,  meet  with 
a  civil  Reception  *,  for  MefTengers  of  good  News 
are  feldom  unwelcome. 

But  nothing  has  embolden*d  me  fo  much  to 
call  thefe  Pages  at  your  Feet,  as  lincere  Tender- 
nefs  for  your  Perfons.  It*s  Wifdom  to  have  an 
Antidote  at  Hand,  when  we  fufpedl  Poifon  v  and 
dangerous  to  vifit  a  Peft-houfe  without  a  Prefer-- 
vative.  Alas,  Gentlemen,  you  fuck  in  Poifon, 
you  live  in  Infedlion  ;  IVealth,  Grandeur,  and 
Example  plot  your  Ruin,  and  Flattery  difguifes 
the  Danger ;  lewd  Books  are  of  the  Cabal,  they 
dart  Poifon  to  the  Heart  through  the  Avenues 
of  the  Eyes,  and  convey  Death  through  Plea- 
fure. 

In  St.  Peter's  Days  the  Devil  made  his  Round 
to  pray  on  the  unwary,  but  now  he  has  almofl 
eafed  himfelf  of  that  Labour  •,  he  afts  no  more 
in  Perfon,  but  by  Deputy  •,  he  has  commiflion'd 
Poets  to  rhime  you  into  Deftrudion,  and  fees  Li- 
bertines to  argue  you  into  Hell  •,  and  certainly 
he  has  had  greater  Succefs  againfl  Mankind,  un- 
der the  Shape  of  an  Author,  than  of  a  Lyon  5 
your  Clofets  are  ftock'd  with  defaming  Lam- 
poons, lewd  PlaySy  and  Icandalous  Poems ;  you 
read  thefe  hellifh  Papers  with  Pleafure  and 
Tranfport ;  they  foften  Nature,  emafculate  the 
Mind,  and  by  Degrees  metamorphofe  the  Rea- 
der into  as  errant  a  Beaft  as  the  Poet  •,  the  Style 
charms,  the  Expreflion  is  lufcious,  and  the  Con- 
trivance no  lefs  inviting  than  the  Subjed.  All 
thefe  petty  Artifices  confpire  to  enflame  Scnfe, 
to  enliven  Paflion,  and  debauch  the  Will. 

Again,  to  whet  Appetite,  and  increafe  Defire, 
Care  is  taken  to  fet  off  Ladies  with  all  the  Allure- 
ments 


^he  Puhllfher  to  the  Gentrv. 

merits  of  Eafinefs  and  Condefcendency ;  they  arc 
difcarded  not  only  of  Modefty,  but  of  Shame  ; 
fo  that,  if  the  Originals  refemble  the  Copies,  if 
the  Sex  be  as  ill  prepared  for  Defence  at  Home, 
as  on  the  Stage,  the  Conqueft  will  be  made  with- 
out the  Expence  o^  Artillery  or  Bombs. 

But  this  is  not  enough ;  the  Poets  take  upon 
'em  the  Office  of  Engineers  too  ;  they  trace  out 
the  Approaches,  point  the  Cannon,  order  the  At- 
tack, and  then  cry,  Gentlemen^  fall  on:  For  why- 
do  they  expofe  not  only  to  the  Eyes  in  the  Play- 
Houfe,  but  in  Print*  paft  Brutalities,  but  to  per- 
fuade  you  to  aft  them  over  again  ?  And  why  do 
they  enter  upon  Particulars,  but  to  Ihew  you  the 
Method  ?  They  ranfack  Mulberry  Gardens^  Ep- 
fom-lVells,  and  other  publick  Scenes  of  Debau- 
chery, for  the  Subjeft  of  your  Entertainment  j 
their  Plots  and  Counter-plots  are  only  laid  to 
trepan  Women,  and  gull  Heireffes  ;  befides,  few 
licentious  Intrigues  mifcarry.  This  is  a  fly  Innu" 
endo  to  the  Audience  and  the  Reader,  that  Suc- 
cefs  will  certainly  wait  upon  their  Attempts,  and 
by  confequence  'tis  a  ftrong  Provcation'  to  enter 
upon  Adion. 

And  becaufe  Nature  has  ftamp'd  on  the  Face 
of  Vice,  Deformity  and  Horror,  thefe  ungrate- 
ful Features  are  fhaded  with  charming  Appella- 
tions i  the  Sins  lie  out  of  fight  under  a  Varnifh, 
and  nothing  appears  but  the  Pleafure.  For  this 
Reafon  the  moft  overt  Invitations  to  Evil  muft 
be  chriften*d.  Billets  deux  ;  Lewdnefs  muft  be 
lliled  Gallantry^  and  the  Stews  Places  of  Diverji- 
on.  Why  are  innocent  Names  put  on  criminal 
Things,  but  to  confound  Notions  ;  but  to  gild 
over  Dilhonefty,  as  Apothecaries  do  Pills,  that  it 
may  go  down  without  any  Checks  or  Convulfi- 
pns  of  Confcience  ?  feeing 


*Ihe  Puhlifher  to  the  GiurKY, 


Seeing  you  thus  clofely  befieged  on  all  Sides, 
and  Handing  on  the  Brink  of  Deftrudtion  ;  and, 
what  is  worfe,  void  of  Fear  ;  nay,  lulled  into  a 
mortal  Lethargy,  without  any  Apprehenfion  of 
your  Danger,  I  have  brought  thefe  Dialogues  to 
your  Refcue,  and  may  aflure  you  with  fome 
Confidence,  they'll  prove  moll  ufeful,  and  high- 
ly beneficial,  if  you  will  vouchfafe  to  perufe  *em 
with  unprejudiced  Minds,  and  unbiafs'd  Affec- 
tions. 

They  lay  before  your  Eyes  the  moft  impor- 
tant Parts  of  your  Duty,  both  to  God  and  Men  j 
the  Snares  of  the  World,  and  Wiles  of  the  Devil  ; 
the  Caufes  of  your  Mifcarriage,  and  fure  Me- 
thods either  to  prevent  or  retrieve  them.  And 
what  can  you  defire  more,  but  a  fincere  Refoluti- 
on  to  apply  thefe  Remedies  that  are  defcrib'd  ? 

I  am  fenfible  we  live  in  an  Age  devoted  to  Cen- 
fure  and  Criticifm,  and  therefore  I  have  thought 
fit  to  obviate  an  Ohje^ion  or  two  :  Some  may 
think  the  Author  treats  Quality  with  too  much 
Freedom,  and  Nobility  with  too  little  Refped: : 
Bat,  Gentlemen,  pray  remember,  there  is  a  great 
Difference  between  your  Perfons  and  your  Vices  i 
thefe  be  Honours,  not  thofe. 

It  were  ridiculous  to  compliment  Criminals, 
or  to  reverence  Felons  on  the  Hurdle  ;  your  Fai- 
lures are  brought  upon  the  Scaffold,  not  for  Tri- 
umph, but  for  Execution  ;  to  receive  Punifh- 
ment,  not  Applaufe ;  what  Wonder  then  if  he 
handles  roughly  thofe  Faults  he  condemns  ?  If 
he  tears  off  the  Vizors  that  conceal  a  loathfome 
Deformity  under  a  falfe  but  tempting  Superfi- 
cies? He  has  a  mind  to  difcountenance  111,  to 
withdraw  you  from  the  Embraces  of  thefe  trea- 
cherous Syrens,  that  enchant  your  Reafon,  and 


capti- 


^he  Publifher  to  the  G'Ei^rK^, 


captivate  your  Affeftions  in  oi'der  to  murder 
your  Souls ;  that  offer  you  imaginary  Pleafures 
to  reward  your  Credulity  with  real  Torments. 
This  is  certainly  a  charitable  Defign,  but  withal 
impradicable,  unlefs  each  Vice  be  haled  to  the 
Bar,  and  all  their  Treafons^  Forgeries^  and  Im- 
pojlures  be  brought  to  Light,  and  proved  upon 
them  as  clear  as  the  Day. 

For,  Gentlemen,  give  me  leave  to  fpeak  free- 
ly, you  love  Vice  under  the -Mask,  of  Pleafure, 
almolt  to  Dotage ;  nothing  can  wean  your  Affec- 
tions from  its  bewitching  Charms,  but  a  Demon- 
ftratioh  that  you  are  mod  wretchedly  impofed 
upon. 

Others  may  perchance  take  it  ill  that  the  Au- 
thor fports  fometimes  upon  too  ferious  a  Sub- 
je6l,  and  by  confequence  tranfgreffes  the  Rules 
of  Decency. 

But  you  mud  confider  we  live  in  an  Age  that 
ranks  Serioufnefs  among  the  Vices,  and  Raillery 
among  the  Virtues.  Alas,  Gentlemen,  the  fpor- 
five  Facuhy  takes  place  of  tlie  reafonahle  -,  Rifihile 
and  Rationale  have  chang'd  Places  fmce  Arifio- 
tle's  Days ;  the  Propriety  has  flep'd  into  the  De- 
finition of  Man,  and  banifh'd  his  moft  effential 
Ingredient  among  the  jicculents :  Reafon,  with- 
out Force,  is  out  of  Fafhion  ;  it  muft  appear  in 
a  Scaramouches  Drefs  to  obtain  an  Audience,  and 
mufl.  bring  Delight  as  well  as  Inflrudion  to  be 
welcome. 

The  Author  condefcends  to  your  Weaknefs, 
and  furely  you  will  not  cenfurc  his  Civility,  nor 
burlefque  his  Judgment,  for  paying  Deference 
to  your  Quality  •,  befides,  he  is  fenfible,  Vice  has 
been  laugh'd  into  Praftice  and  Reputation,  and 
Virtue  into  Contempt :  Why  therefore  may  not 

Virtue 


fhe  TuhUfher  to  the  Glut Kyt, 

Virtue  regain  its  Pofl  by  the  fame  Method  it 
loll  it  ?  And  why  may  not  the  Gentry  be  fported 
into  their  Duty,  as  they  have  been  rallied  out  of 
it  ?  Some  Poifons  call  for  'Treacle^  others  for 
Fire ;  but  that  of  the  'Tarantula  muft  be  fetch'd 
out  by  Mufick.  A  Peal  of  Laughter  enervates 
the  Force  of  this  Neapolitan  Venom,  and  a  Brace 
of  Minutes  expel  it.  Who  knows  but  your  Di- 
itcmper  is  of  the  fame  Nature  ?  At  leaft,  defpe- 
rate  Difeafes  are  proper  for  Experiments ;  and 
tho*  no  Remedy  fucceeds,  it's  a  Satisfadion  to 
have  applied  all. 

In  fine,  I  fling  this  Treatife  at  your  Feet,  and 
if  you  will  be  pleafed  to  perufe  it  with  Leifure 
and  Reflcftion,  it  may  not  only  furnilh  you 
with  Inftrudion,  but  with  Pleafure ;  not  fuch  in- 
deed as  courts  Senfe,  and  gratifies  the  beaftial 
Part,  but  fuch  as  is  proportioned  to  the  fu- 
pream  and  leading  Faculty  i  fuch  as  feaft  a  Souly 
and  regales  an  Intelligence. 


Your  fnofl  humble  Servant, 


I T.  D. 


THE 


THE 


PREFACE- 


GI V  E  me  Leave,  dear  Reader,  to  ujher  its 
the  following  Conferences  with  a  Chara5fer 
of  the  Author.  He  is  dead,  and  by  confe- 
quence  cut  of  the  Reach  of  Vanity  ;  and  as  the  Re- 
gularity of  his  Life  gives  no  hold  to  Satyr,  fo  the 
Excellency  of  his  Virtues  raife  him  above  Flattery, 
Many  Reafons  perfuade  me  to  conceal  his  Name^ 
but  more  to  -publijh  his  rare  Merits. 

Example  has  flrange  Attra^ives  ;  the  Way  to 
Virtue  by  Precepts,  as  the  Philofopher  not^,  is  long, 
but  by  Example,  Jhort  and  eafy  ;  like  the  Laconick 
DiaUtl,  it  exprejfes  much  in  a  little,  and  drives  Ar- 
guments more  home  than  Logick  or  Rhetorick. 
Seeing  therefore.  Gentlemen  have  continually  before 
their  Eyes  fo  many  Statues  of  Vice  in  all  FoJlureSy 
it*s  time  to  prefeut  them  with  one  of  Virtue,  that 
they  may  be  convinced.  Piety  is  within  their  Tieacb^ 
as  well  as  within  their  Obligation  ;  and  that  they 
may  live  within  the  Circle  of  their  Duty,  without 
jiepping  out  of  the  fVorld,  or  debarring  themfelves 
the  Freedom  o/"  Society  and  Converfation. 

And,  indeed,  the  Life  of  this  Gentleman  is  ei  plain 
and  Jianding  Evidence,  that  Men  transform  Palaces 
into  Places  of  Debauchery,  not  Palaces  Men  into 

DebaU' 


ne   PREFACE. 

"Debauchees ;  and  that  Courts  would  he  innocent^  if 
Courtiers  could  refohe  to  remain  fo. 

Eufebius  was  of  a  Family  as  antient  as  the  Con- 
quejl,  and  what  is  particular^  in  all  the  civil  Wars 
and  Revolutions  of  State^  his  Ancefiors  were  fo  hap- 
fy,  as  to  Jlandby  their  Prince  in  fpight  of  Fa^ion 
and  Interejl ;  nor  could  they  ever  be  prevailed  upon 
to  part  with  their  Loyalty  for  any  Frofpe5l  of  Pre- 
ferment ;  they  chofe  rather  to  fall  in  the  Defence  of 
Jujiice^  than  to  triumph  with  profperous  Ufurpers, 

Eufebius  had  the  good  Fortune  to  be  born  of  a 
Mother^  whofe  Wijdom  vied  with  her  Piety,  and 
both  indeed  were  extraordinary :  She  trained  him  up 
from  the  Cradle  in  the  Duties  of  a  Chrijlian,  and^ 
I  may  fay,  he  both,  loved  God,  and  feared  him,  f§ 
foon  as  he  was  able  to  frame  a  right  Notion  of  bis  Per- 
feSiion  ;  and  thefe  firfi  Impreffions  funk  fo  deep,  that 
neither  Age  nor  Employments  were  able  to  wear  them 

"ff- 

He  was  fent  to  the  Univerfity  under  the  Conduct  of 
a  prudent  Governour,  who  endeavoured,  by  Precept 
and  Example,  to  improve  in  him  thofe  Seeds  of  Vir- 
tue, his  Mother  had  fcwed  fo  early.  He  applied 
himfelf  to  Philofophy  with  Eagernefs  and  Appetite, 
and  made  a  Progrefs  anfwerable  to  his  piercing  Wit 
and  affiduous  Application  \  yet  he  always  looked  on 
Learning  as  the  AccelTory,  and  Piety  as  the  Prin- 
cipal ;  that,  he  /aid,  was  a  rneer  Embellifhment, 
this  an  indifpenfiUe  Duty  :  So  that  in  Reality,  this 
was  his  Bufinefs,  that  his  Diverfwn. 

Tet  he  was  none  of  thofe  Plodders,  who  feem  to 
disband  from  Company,  and  to  forfivear  Converfati- 
cn,  who  place  Virtuje  in  Sournefs,  and  confound 
Piety  with  Spleen :  No,  he  was  free,  eafy,  and 
chearful,  and  never  refifed  to  partake  ofthoje  Sports 
that  recreate  the  Mind,  and  eafe  the  Body,  without 

.  P?'ejudice 


7%^  P  R  E  F  A  C  E. 

Prejudice  to  Confcience.  To  pawn  Innocence  for 
PJeafure,  /aid  he^  is  to  over- rate  the  one,  and  to 
undervalue  the  other :  To  laugh  whilft  we  fin, 
is,  in  fome  fort,  to  renew  the  barbarous  Cruelty 
of  Nero f  who  play'd  while  Rome  burn'd  -,  or  the 
foolifh  Temerity  of  the  Indian  Philofopher,  who 
fung  on  the  Funeral  Pile. 

Indeed^  fuch  an  unufual  ConduEl  was  gazed  at^  in 
a  Place  where  Touth  gives  more  time  to  the  FraEiice 
<^Epicurus'j  Morals^  than  to  the  Study  of  Arifto- 
tJe'j  Philofophy  •,  or  where  at  leajl  Learning  is  more 
a-la-mode  than  Piety  ;  hut  this  Admiration  foon 
pafs^d  into  EJleefn^  and  he  who  atfirjl  wa^  look  d  on 
as  a  Monlter,  in  Vrocefs  oftimewasjliledan  Angel. 

He  left  the  Univerfity  to  vifit  the  Camp^  and 
made  fever al  Campaigns  under  N.  N.  Neither  In- 
tereft  nor  Ambition  called  him  into  the  Field  ;  the 
only  Ahn  of  his  Refoluiion  was  to  learn  the  Myfle- 
■  ries  of  War ^  that  he  7night  he  one  Day  in  a  Capacity 
to  ferve  his  Prince  with  Honour,  and  his  Country 
with  Succefs. 

Vitty  feldom  follfiws  an  Army\  Soldiers  feem  to 
leave  Confcience  in  their  Winter-Barters^  as  well 
as  Religion^  that  they  may  fin  without  Check,  and  he 
damned  without  Ap-prehenfion.  Eufebius  difappro- 
ved  this  ill  Husbandry.  Our  Care,  faid  he, 
mud  rife  with  the  Danger,  and  feeing  we  are 
not  affured  of  an  Hour,  it's  Madnefs  to  neglect 
our  Soul  one  Moment.  I  fuppofe,  continued  he 
to  a  Friend^  when  we  put  on  a  red  Coat,  we  put 
not  off  Chriflianity,  nor  receive  a  Commiflion 
from  God  to  live  at  Pleafure,  when  we  enter  in- 
to the  Service  of  our  Prince  :  No,  no,  let  us  die 
like  Men,  but  live  like  Chriftians,  this  is  the  on- 
ly way  to  leave  an  honourable  Memory  in  this 
World,  and  to  find  a  glorious  Reception  in  the 
next,  [  a  ]  Hn 


T'y^^  P  R  E  F  A  C  E. 

His  Life  in  the  Camp  was  anfwerahle  to  his  Prin- 
ciples ',  heprafi  half  an  Hour  on  his  Knees  Morning 
and  Evenings  and  never  omitted  to  he  prefent  at 
publick  Prayers,  when  he  was  not  on  Duty  ;  he 
would  never  fuffer  either  prophane  er  ohfcene  Dif- 
courfe :  For,  faid  he,  it's  hard  to  hear  without 
Sin  thofe  Things  that  cannot  be  fpoke  without 
Offence  ;  to  permit  Crimes  is  to  abet  them. 
IVhen  he  could  not  excufe  an  Officer *j  Fault,  he  al- 
ways leffen'd  it,  and  fpoke  ill  of  no  Body  but  him- 
felf.  He  cojnpar'^d  Detractors  to  your  Italian  Bra- 
voes,  who  attack  People  behind,  and  ftab  Bodies  at 
unawares,  whilji  thofe  kill  a  Man*s  Reputation. 

One  Day  an  Offcer  told  him.  War  called  for 
Courage,  not  Vertue  ;  that  Refolution  carried 
the  Day,  not  Confcience. 

That  is,  replied  he.  Ambition  challenges  the 
Time  of  War,  Diverfion  the  Time  of  Peace, 
and  Sin  every  Moment  of  your  Life  ;  but  then 
who  will  claim  the  Mo4nent  of  your  Death  ? 
God.  Alas,  Sir,  you'll  neither  have  the  Time 
nor  the  Thought  to  difpofe  of  it  fo  advantage- 
pufly,  as  you  live  in  Sin,  fo  in  all  Probability 
you'll  die  in  it.  You  are  miftaken.  Sir,  Sin  en- 
ervates the  Mind,  not  Piety  ;  and  could  we  read 
the  Thoughts  of  our  Soldiers,  we  fhould  find 
too  lictle  Confcience  drove  more  of  them  out 
of  the  Field  at  the  Battle  of  N.  tlian  too  much. 
A  Man  muf^  be  either  an  Atheift,  or  mad,  to 
front  Danger  in  Sin. 

F.ufebius  proved  beyond  Demonftnation  thai  Vir- 
tue is  no  Enemy  to  Valour  \  he  breathed  nothing  but 
Sieges,  Battles,  and  Expeditions  -,  he  went  to  Com- 
bats with  as  compofed  a  Countenance,  as  others 
fnarch  to  'Triumphs  ;  and^  like  Hannibal,  was  the 
frjl  in  the  Field,  and  thslajl  out  of  it  ;  he  generally 

nsk'd 


3^/^<?  P  R  E  F  A  C  E. 

^,sPd  the  moft  dangerous  Poji,  and  fought  Penlsy  aS 
if  he  had  a  mind  to  fall ^  yet  he  always  came  off  ivith 
Safety  and  Applaufe ;  Providence  feemed  to  have 
made  him  Proof  againfl  Ball  and  Sword y  and  his 
Virtue  arnr'd  him  againfl  Fear. 

Being  challenged  once  to  a  Duel,  he  anfw&r^d  cold- 
ly. Sir,  though  I  fear  not  your  Sword,  I  trem- 
ble at  my  Maker's  Anger ;  I  dare  venture  my 
Life  in  a  good  Caufe,  but  cannot  hazard  m^" 
Soul  in  a  bad  one.  PJl  charge  up  to  the  Can- 
non's Mouth,  but  want  Courage  to  ftorm  HelJ. 
And  when  a  Friend  told  him,  he  mufi  either  fight, 
or  forfeit  his  Honour:  You  are  millaken,  replied 
Eufebius,  I'll  gain  Honour  by  my  Difgrace,  and 
fhew  the  World  I  am  no  Coward,  by  daring 
Cenfure  and  Obloquy.  He  is  couragious  and 
brave,  who  (lands  up  for  Confcience  againft  the 
falfe  but  prevailing  Maxims  of  Cuftom  and  Opi- 
nion ;  not  he  who  betrays  his  Duty,  and  dreads 
tnore  an  imaginary  Imputation  than  a  real  Crime. 
Eufebius  returned  from  the  Army  with  Glory,  and 
hrought  off  his  P  iety  in  Triumph',  he  was  received 
hy  his  Mafier  with  open  Arms,  and  advanced  to  an 
honourable  Pofi  ;  he  laboured  for  his  BenefaSfor'' s  In- 
ter efi,  not  his  own  -,  and  ufed  to  fay.  The  Pi- i nee 
ihould  always  carry  off  the  Profit,  and  the  Sub- 
jedl  the  Glory  of  doing  well. 

He  could  not  endure  to  pur  chafe  Attendants  with 
fair  Promifes,  and  then  to  reward  their  Expeulation 
ivith  Difappointment  •,  his  Intentions  were  as  fincere 
as  his  tVords,  andhe  never  promifed  a  Favour,  hut 
he  defigned  it ;  he  could  not  endure  to  tantalize  Pre- 
tcndants  with  gay  Hopes,  and  in  the  End  difmifs 
them  with  an  airy  Complejnent.  This  is,  faid  he, 
to  fpend  their  Time,  and  drain  their  Purfe  with 
infignificant  Waiting,  to  tempt  their  Paiisncej 
[  a  2  1  and 


Th  V  RE  F  A  C  K 

and  in  the  End  to  draw  them  to  be  your  Enc-* 
mies. 

Eufebius  found  at  iajl,  that  Innocence  is  not  a- 
hove  the  reach  of  Envy,  and  that  in  Courts  Virtue 
is  often  pmifhed,  and  Vice  rewarded.  A  Club  of 
Courtiers  caballed  againfl  hifn,  and  perfuaded  the 
Prince  to  difcard  him,  He  bore  this  Dijgrace  with 
an  Evennefs  of  Temper,  that  fur  prized  his  Enemies., 
and,  like  the  Sun  in  an  Eclipfe,  all  gazed  on  hiin 
with  Adfniration.  'Though  he  was  overpowered,  he 
could  not  be  overcome.  He  looked  brighter  under  a 
Cloud,  than  in  the  full  Meridian  of  his  Grandeur, 
and  all  concluded  he  was  no  lefs  in  Misfortune,  than 
he  had  been  in  the  higheji  Splendor  of  Glory. 

A  Friend  tempted  him  toftrike  in  with  a  Fa^ion 
againjl  his  Prince  •,  but  he  received  the  Propofition 
with  Indignation  and  Horror.  No,  faid  he,  I  had 
rather  be  wretched  without  a  Fault,  than  great 
with  a  Crime :  Duty  called  me  to  my  Mailer's 
Service,  not  Interell ;  and  I'll  rather  pawn  my 
Life,  than  forfeit  my  Loyalty  ;  my  high  Pre- 
tenfions  lie  in  the  other  World,  not  in  this ;  my 
Prince  raifed  me  to  a  confiderable  Fortune,  now 
he  thinks  fit  to  difcharge  me,  Pll  thank  him  for 
the  Favour,  and  not  repine  at  his  Juftice.  I  ac- 
cepted the  Station  at  his  Command  with  Grati- 
tude, and  I  quit  it  with  Refignation. 

He  was  received  again  into  Favour  ;  yet  this  un- 
expe^ed  Turn  wrought  no  Alteration  in  his  Humour  ; 
he  rofewith  the  fame  Unconcernednefs  he  fell-,  he  was 
above  the  Charms  of  Frofperity,  and  Proof  againfi 
the  Stroke  of  Adverfity:,  neither  good  Fortune  puft 
him  up,  nor  bad  deprefs^d  him  -,  he  never  thought  of 
revenging  thofe  Affronts  he  had  received  from  his  Ri- 
vals, but  iftd  his  Power  with  Moderation,  and  re- 
turned Civility  for  Unkindncfs. 

He 


fkVK'EFACE, 

He  retired  at  the  Revolution  from  Buftnefs,  an^ 
gave  Jmnfelf  wholly  to  the  Practice  of  Virtue ;  he  was 
advanc  d  in  TearSy  and  refolv'd  to  devote  the  remain- 
der of  his  Days  to  Eternity.  I  may  die  foon,  faid 
he,  but  cannot  live  long  ;  it's  Prudence  therefore 
to  manage  every  Moment  as  the  lafl,  becaufe  it 
may  be  fo.  He  difcharged  his  Debts  i?nf?iediately\ 
faying.  This  was  too  prefling  and  too  important  a 
Bufinsfs  to  be  trufted  to  an  Hour's  Integrity, 
that  many  fuffer  in  the  next  World  for  a  Sue- 
ceflbr's  Negledl  in  thris. 

One  that  liv'd  fo  well,  could  not  die  ill  %for  every 
Man's  Death  is  a  Copy  of  his  Life,  and  exa^ly  re~ 
fembles  the  Original.  In  his  lafl  Sicknefs  he  fhewed 
all  the  Bravery  of  a  Soldier,  and  all  the  Piety  of  a 
Chriftian  ;  he  hore  the  Dolours  of  his  Difiemper  not 
only  with  Patience,  hut  Tranfport,  and  looked  Death 
in  the  Face  with  the  fame  Undauntednefs  he  often  be- 
held the  Enemy  in  Battle.  Sir,  faid  he  to  his  Ne- 
phew ftanding,  remember  you  are  born  to  the 
fame  Fate,  you  may  read  your  Deftiny  in  mine  ; 
you  v/ill  once  be  in  the  fame  Circumflances  you 
fee  me  ;  you  know  not  when  you  muft  take  the 
lad  Farewel  of  Life  -,  Death  fteals  upon  us  like  a 
Thief,  and  flrikes  without  Noife,  without  Warn- 
ing. Seeing  therefore  you  are  never  fecure,  be 
always  prcpar'd,  leave  nothing  to  Chance  or  Ha- 
zard -,  a  Surprize  is  pofTible,  and,  what  is  worfe, 
irreparable.  Never  pretend  to  fhew  your  Wit 
by  diluting  Principles,  nor  think  you  own  your 
Reafon  molt,  when  you  leaft  own  your  Faith  ; 
this  is  to  place  Wit  in  Folly,  and  Reafon  in  Im- 
piety. Pracftice  Virtue,  this  is  your  only  Bu(i- 
nefs,  it  will  make  you  content  in  this  World, 
and  open  a  fair  Profpe<5t  of  Felicity  to  the  next. 

Hij 


fhe  PREFACE. 

His  Words,  feem^d  tip  with  Fire,  they  pierced  the 
Hearts  of  all  that  were  ■prefent,  and  warmed  their 
Affe5fions  ;  whiljl  all  mourned,  he  alone  was  joyful. 
In  fine,  recommending  his  Soul  to  the  Mercy  of  his 
Redeemer,  he  gently  expired,  leaving  behind  a  Pat- 
tern for  Gentlejnen's  Imitation.  Thus  died  Eufebius, 
a  Scholar,  Soldier,  and  Courtier,  and  in  all  thefe 
States  a  Saint. 

Let  Gentlemen  learn  hy  this  Exa??iple,  they  may  he 
Great  and  Good  •,  and  that  they  tjiay  difcharge  them- 
felveswith  Glory  of  all  the  Offices  of  Society,  without 
betraying  the  Duty  of  a  Chrijiian. 


THE 


THE 


CONTENTS. 


fpAith  ionjuted  hyTraEl'ice  p.  5 
*  Virtue  may  ba  praBifed  i» 
1'o'Wns  as  well  as  in  Deferts  5 
I'he  Tart  of  a  Gentleman  7 
Not  io  bjaft  of  Family  8 

Nor  Performances  9 

Io  avoid  O.iths  and  Curfes  10 
How  to  fpend  Time  1 5 

Reading  recommended         ibid. 
Not  to  he  Covetousy  nor  Pre 
fu/e  1 7 

{Recreations  1 8 

Gaming  1 9 

C  loathing  2 1 

Falfe  Notions  of  Honour  2  z 
Of  Duelling  25 

itbe  CharaUer  of  Bmus  24 
Duties  of  a  Chrijlian  25 

Heaven  and  Helt^  why  defcribed 

in  Scripture  2  7 

'True  Virtue^   what  29 

Of  Rejignation  and  Suhmijfion 

to  God  30,  32 

God  the  bejl  Friend  to  Men  5  I 
His  Ubiquity  32 

Of  Debauchees  3  5 

God's   Grace^   and   Aians  Co- 

operationj    neceffary    to    pre 

dure  Repentance.  35 


The  Cafe  of  the  Penitent  Tkiff 

Miftakes  about  Religion  39,40 

It  confijis  r.8t  in  mere  Ncg..' 

iivts  41 

A   Gentleman's    true   B'/flnefs 

4^,  47 

IVfjether  Gentlemen  are  obliged 

fopraBife  Vittue  42 

And  Lades,  the  fame  'y6 

Of  Duties  to  Neighbours        6x 

Univerfrl  Love  ibid; 

Againji  DetraBion  dj 

Of  the  Sources  of  Detraffion, 

viz.  Pride  and  Envy  71,72 

Of  Thefty   Injufiicey   and  Op' 

prejpcn  75 

Of  Reftitution  77 

Of  Lewdnefs  and  Fornication  79 

Prefervatives  againfl  Leivdntfs 

81 

Of  the  PlayHoufe  82 

Of  infiruBing    Children     and 

Servants  84,  §7 

Of  Charity^  and  its   Meafure 

Chrijlian     Behaviour    out     of 

Fafhion  Z9 

The  Cham  Bcr  of  an  Atheijl  92 


The  Supplement. 

Ives  of  Chrijiians  contradic-     Cards y  become  a  Calling     J2l 


•f-*  tory  to  their  Faith  1 1  3 
The  worth  and  ufe  of  Time  1 1  5 
Ladies  Employment  in  the  Aborn- 
ing and  Ever.ing  1 1 7 ,  1 1  8 
Jfith  their  Bufinefs  at  Church 
ISO 


Inflames  of  brave  Women     125 
Bad  Education  ythe  Caufe  of  La- 
dies Mif  demean  our  127 
Remedies  ad-vifed   the  Ladies  : 
Ory  The  Ob^acks  of  Virtue 
removed  1  3  * 
Pojitive 


The  CONTENTS. 


"BcfitlveDHties  recommendedi^ 
Humility  148 

Modejiy  1 5  5 

Rules  for   Ladies    dally  l*ra~ 


Bice 
The  Jjnty  of  a  Mother 
The  Duties  of  a  Sol  diet- 


157 
J  75 


The  Duties  of  a  Courtier   199 


The  Second  Part 

ir^T^iIether   any  real  Atheifts 
^  249 


One  Religion  only  favino     5  3  5 

Proofs  of  a  Deity. 
ijl  Vroofi  from  the    milvirfal 

Confent  of  Mankind   ^    35^ 
Notion  ofGody  not  merely  jrom 

Education  365 

Nor  from  State-Folicy        3  69 
Tolythelfm  373 

From  ivhat  Caufes  37  5 

The  Caufes  of  Error  377 

S,d  Proofy  Of  a  Deity  from  the 

Creation  of  the  World      393 
5^  Proof  from  the  Characters  of 

PVifdoniy  vifible  in  the  Frame 


and  Conjlitution  of  the 
World  406 

^th  proof.  From  Invention  of 
Arts  and  Sciences  4 1 Z 

^th  Proof y  That  the  Wofldwaj 
not  Eternal  418 

6th  Proof  429 

Atheijis  Exceptions  agabiji  the 
World's  Creation  confuted ^"^  5 

The  Endy  TJfe,  and  Defign  of  the 
fniallejl  vileji  CreatureSy  as 
Fleas,  Liccy  Toadsy  &C.44I 

Vk  Proof,  viz.  The  palpable 
A/if urdi ties  which  follow  jrora 
the  Belief  or  Suppojition  of  no 
God  446 


The  Thir 

Qf^  Q^tng .  Gentlemen  d/Jfuaded 
'  from  a  Town  Life  469 
Should  Jhun  III  Examples  473, 
484 
The  Ml/chief  of  Plays  480 
ToivnSparks  474,  48 z 

Ladles  In  Hyde-Park  485 
Vocal  Muflck  cenfurad  486 
A  Countrji  Gentleman  \,  4^9 
Advice  to  Parents  to  fettle  Chil- 
dren In  time  490 
How  to  manage  an  EJlatc  493 
A  Duny  defcribed  49  7 
Of  Dice  505 
^ufebius'j  ConduEl  in  the 
Houfe  ibid. 
R''fieciions  onLawyers  512,518 
Good  Rules  for  Lawyers     527 


D   Part. 

of  Reflitution  530 

Eufebius'i  Behaviour  to  Neigh- 
bours 555 
Excejfve  Drinking  556 
A  drutiken  Crew  537 
Eufcbins  J  Recreations  539 
How  to  tak3  the  Death  of  a  he-  ■ 

loved  R'i.xtion  541 

Of  Ph\fi:iansy  and  their    A-ie- 
tho'ds  54- 

Ol  T^aveUing  544 

Rules  for  Travellers  55? 

Of  the  Soul's  hi:njortality  5  5^ 
The  Soul  is  Immaterial  5  ?  I 
Man  compared  withBeafls  574- 
Difference  of  Men  from  Brajls 
577- 


T  H  E 


( I ) 


THE 


Gentleman  Inftru^ed,  &c 


D  I  A  L  O  G  U  E    I. 

Neander,  a  young  Gentleman^  dejirei  Eufebius /o  ;;?/7r«^ 
him  in  the  Duty  of  a  Gentleman. 


W 


Etifebius.  IJf  If  "T"  E  L  C  O  M  E,    dear  Neayider  ; 

what  fair  Wind  has  blown   me 

the  Favour  of  fo  early  a  Vifit  ? 

This  is  extraordinary. 

Neander.  Pray,    why  fo  ?    my  Bufmefs  has  been  up 

and  abroad   thefe  two  Hours ;    is  it  not  high  time   to 

follow  it  ? 

Euf.  Ah!  but  our  Town-Sparks  have  fomething  of 
the  Ovjly  they  rife  at  Night,  and  lie  down  in  the  Morn- 
ing :  They  obferve  a  moll  exa6l  Symmetry  in  Diforder, 
and  \\\.t  Lobftcrs  go  backwards ;  in  a  word,  they  turn 
Nature  topfie-turvie,  or  read  i^  backwards :  It's  genteel 
and  modifh  to  out-fleep  the  Sun,  and  an  Argument  of 
Peafantry  to  do  like  other  Men. 

Nean.  I  have  left  the  College  too  lately-  to  be  ac- 
quainted with  the  Cuftoms  of  the  Town  :  I  have  not  o- 
pen'd  the  Ceremonial^  nor  perufed  the  Ritual  alamode  ; 
yet  methinks,  to  turn  Night  into  Day  is  an  odd  A^eta- 
morphoiis;  Nature,  fure,  never  intended  Eyes  for  Dark- 
nefs :  Gloeworms  indeed  are  obliged  to  Night,  it  fets  'em 
off,  and  makes  their  faint  Luftre  fparkle  with  more  Eclat. 
But  why  Men  (hould  dote  on  Shades,  and  range  in  Ob- 
fcurity,  I  can't  divine,  unlefs  they  long  to  duel  with 
Pefts,  and  try  a  Rubber  at  Loggerheads  ;  in  ihort,  it's  a 
battifh  Humour,  and  jars  with  my  Constitution. 

•  B  E»f^i, 


2  T'he Gentleman  In/^ru^ed. 

Eufeb.  For  all  that,  you  muft  take  up  with  Night,  and 
bereconcil'd  to  Darknefs,  if  you  intend  to  Hand  fair  with 
our  own  'Fown-Sparks  j  they  are  of  the  Family  oiMaga- 
ra,  true  Sons  of  Night  and  Erebus.  Light  lirikes  too  hard 
on  their  Eyes,  it  dazles  'em  like  Opium :  It  even  works  on 
the  Brain  and  ftupifies ;  but  then,  towards  the  Evening 
they  return  to  themfelves,  and  adjourn  to  the  Tavern,  and 
from  thence  lally  out  upon  theV/atch,and  manfully  ftorm 
Glafs-windows.  In  fine,  their  Bufinefs  and  Reafonfleep 
in  the  Day,  and  rife  when  wife  Men  go  to  Bed. 

Now  I  fuppofe  you  intend  to  enter  into  the  Confraterni- 
ty, you'll  not  want  moil  kind  Invitations :  Thefe  Blades  lie 
on  the  Catch  ;  and  place  Centinels  on  Oxford  Road  to  give 
Notice  when  a  Prize  draws  near ;  that  is,  when  a  Gen- 
tleman leaves  the  College ;  and  then  they  fly  to  the  inno- 
cent Youth  like  Eagles  to  the  (^arry  ;  they  proffer  their 
Service,  admire  his  Parts,  compliment  him  into  Snares, 
wheedle  him  into  Debauchery,  empty  his  Pockets,  wound 
his  Soul,  and  ftab  his  Reputation;  and  when  they  have 
martyr'd  his  Innocence,  and  imbezzl'd  his  Eftate,  kick 
him  out  of  their  Company,  and  fo  exit  the  young  'Squire. 

Nean.  A  Man,  I  fee,  muft  carry  his  Wits  about  him 
at  Loftdon ;  he  muft  ftand  on  his  Guard  to  prevent  a  Sur- 
prize, and  fufpedt  Friends,  not  to  be  ovcr-reach'd  by 
Enemies :  Like  the  Lion  he  muft  fleep  with  his  Eyes  open : 
Well,  a  Danger  forefcen  is  half  avoided.  Eufehius,  I 
have  been  dilbrder'd  lince  my  Arrival,  and  thought  laft 
Night  more  Hours,  than  I  flept  Minutes. 

Eufeb.  What !  are  you  fmitten  fo  foon  ?  Some  Female 
Beauty  has,  I  fuppofe,  Ktorm'd  your  Heart,  and  Good- 
nature has  beat  the  Chamade.  The  Articles  are,  no  doubt, 
drawn  up  and  figned,  unlefs  perchance  you  refolve  to  fur- 
render  at  Difcretion:  But,  in  good  earneft,  has  Liberty 
given  you  a  Surfeit?  Has  Freedom  gall'd  you ?  Will  you 
try  how  neatly  you  can  dance  in  Fetters,  and  caper  in 
Trammels?  This  is  a  Sample  of  Univeriity  Breeding  ; 
your  Collegians  are  a  pack  of  aukward  Animals,  full  of 
Wit,  but  without  Judgment  to  manage  it;  one  would 
think  they  ftudied  not  to  grow  wife,  but  Fools ;  to  lofe 
their  Reafon,  or  to  forget  the  Ufe  of  it.  They  no  fooner 
enter  into  the  World,  but,  like  Children,  they  chace  every 
Butterfly,  and  run  on  the  Spur  to  their  Ruin.  Ah,  dear 
Neander  \  take  Care  j  a  precipitate  Choice  makes  way 

for 


fhe  Gentleman  In  fir  ticked,         3 

for  a  long  Repentance ;  ftifle  the  firft  Sparks  of  Lo^'e, 
time  will  quickly  fan  them  into  a  Flame;  a  green  Wound 
is  eafily  healed,  but  a  fellered  one  ends  in  a  Gangrene. 

Nean.  Under  Favour,  you  run  riot  on  ^  falfe  Conjec- 
ture.  I  am  not  Heart-fick,  butTown-fick. 

Eufeb.  Town-fick !  this  is,  without  peradventure,  an 
outlandifh  Diftemper  ;  there  is  not  one  Reape  for  it  in 
our  Zo»iJ/o»  Difpen  fa  to  ry:  However,  the  Dileafe  is  not 
dangerous,  for  I  find  no  mention  of  it  in  our  Weekly  Bills 
of  Mortality.  In  what  Mould,  for  God's  Sake,  were 
you  caft  ?  furely  you  are  of  fome  more  refined,  more  Ce- 
Icftial  Temper  than  other  Gentlemen,  without  Senfe, 
without  Pafiion ;  in  fine,  all  Angel,  all  Seraphin. 

Nean.  Not  fo  neither. 

Euj'eb.  What  then  ? 

Nean.  Why,  Sir  ;  I  am  a  Man,  fubjeftto  all  the  Infir- 
mities of  human  Nature;  but  I  would  not  willingly  fur- 
render  my  Reafon,  nOr  quit  the  Privilege  of  Nature ;  I 
would  not  throw  up  my  Claim  to  Heaven  for  any  earthly 
Pretcnfion ;  in  fine,  I  have  no  Inclination  to  go  to  Grafs 
wiXhNebiichodomzor ,  nor  to  lie  in  the  fame  Bed  with 
Brutes :  I  am  a  A4an  by  Nature,  and  a  Chriftian  byGrace, 
and  would  neither  debar  my  Reafon,  nor  throw  a  Scandal 
upon  my  Profeffion:  In  a  word,  I'll  fave  my  Soul. 

Eufeb.  Neander^  let  me  embrace  thee;  I  was  juft 
lighting  a  Candle  (as  Dioge'/ies  did  at  Athens)  to  find  a 
Man  in  London.  I  thought  Piety  had  taken  leave  of  out 
Nation,  and  that  Chriftianity  had  flown  over  to  the  Con- 
tinent; but,  God  bethank'd,  we  have  left  among  us  one 
Man,  and  one  Chriftian ;  fo  that  the  whole  Species  is  nor 
cxtinft.  We  live  in  a  mad  World,  without  Method, 
without  Order  ;  we  feem  to  play  at  crofs  Queflions :  Vir- 
tue and  Vice  have  changed  Places,  and  almoft  NameSj 
and  even  Wit  is  confounded  with  Folly  ;  Reafon  confifts 
no  more  in  the  Ule,  but  in  the  Abufe  of  it.  Gentlemen 
debauch  themfelves  into  Credit,  and  draw  Fame  from 
Impiety  ;  the  whole  Bufinefs  of  Chriftians  lies  in  confut- 
ing their  Belief  by  their  Practice:  Thefe  monftrous  Ir- 
regularities have,  more  than  once,  moved  me  to  lulpecl, 
that  the  moft  wile  and  thinking  Part  of  Mankind  is  coop'd 
u;^  in  Bedlam,  whilft  Mad-men  and  Fools  range  about 
the  I'own  in  Coaches, 

B  2  Thii 


4         T'^^  Gentleman  InflruBed, 

This  Man  whines  away  at  a  Strumpet's  Feet  his  Eftate, 
his  Health,  and  his  Soul  too;  another  drowns  his  Rcaibn 
in  Claret  and  Canary ;  he  plays  the  Brute  all  the  Week, 
and  rifesa  Man  on Sunc/ay  Morning;  a  third  delivers  him- 
lelf  up  to  his  Palate,  and  condemns  his  Wit  to  drudge  for 
his  Gluttony,  he  judges  of  Meats  by  the  Price,  not  by 
the  Tafte ;  and  thofe  only  regale  his  Appetite  that  drain 
his  Purfe;  his  Study  is  to  provoke  Hunger,  not  to  lay  it, 
and  leldom  rifes  from  the  Table  till  a  Surfeit  forces  him 
to  call  for  a  Bafott, 

A  fourth  has  perchance  received  the  Lye^  and  in  a  HufF 
hauls  out  for  Satisfa6lion,  /.  e.  a  Stab  ;  the  Stage  is  pre- 
pared, and  up  the  He.^ors  '}\xmp  with  drawn  Swords,  like 
the  RomAfi  Slaves,  to  give  Diverfion  to  the  Spedlators: 
If  this  be  not  Folly  and  Madnefs  without  Mask  or  Dif- 
guife,  pray  give  me  their  Definition ;  it's  hard  to  deter- 
mine whether  this  Condudt  be  a  fitter  Objeiffc  for  Hera- 
clitus's  Tears,  or  Democrltus's  Laughter;  it's  a  Compound 
of  Farce  and  Tragedy,  but  a  Vein  of  Folly  runs  through- 
out the  whole  Mafs. 

Religion  keeps  pace  with  our  Reafon,and  is  juft  regard- 
ed.as  much.  Methinks  ourWorfhip  fmells  fomethingofPa- 
ganifm,  for  we  adore  God,  as  the  Heatnens  did  Hercules^ 
with  Showers  of  Stones  and  Brickbats,  viz.  of  Oaths 
and  Blafphemies ;  this  is  the  only  Homage  we  think  fit  to 
pay  our  Maker;  and  indeed  it  is  a  kind  of  Recognizance, 
and  is  lb  far  commendable,  as  it  puts  us  in  mind  there  is 
fuch  a  thing  to  believe  in,  and  to  pray  to,  as  well  as  to 
fwe'ar  by.  Now,  why  we  fhould  be  fo  fparing  of  our 
Prayers  is  a  hard  Qiieltion. 

Some  may  perchance  imagine  the  Pofture  of  a  Suppli- 
ant is  below  an  Englijh  Courage  ;  befides,  it's  an  uneafy 
F'igure,  and  argues  much  Want  or  great  Covetoufnefs, 
two  heavy  Imputations  for  a  Gentleman  ;  moreover. 
Kneeling  is  a  Mark  of  Subjedion  and  Bafenefs ;  for  I 
was  once  told,  that  a  Yeoman  on  his  Legs  was  taller  and 
greater  than  a  Prince  on  his  Knees:  This  is  a  rough 
Draught  of  our  Town  Wit  and  Religion,  without  one 
Dafh  of  Satyr,  or  Hyperbole;  they  are- both  at  a  low 
Ebb,  and  God  knows  when  the  Tide  will  turn.  Neander, 
Hand  on  your  Guard,  and  look  to  your  Confcience,  as 
well  as  to  your  Purfe  ;  for  I  allure  you,  the  one  is  in  lefs 
Danger  than  the  other  i  unlefs  you  carry  a  watchful  Eye 

over 


^he  Gentleman  InjlruEied.         s 

over  your  Thoughts  and  Anions,  you  will  fall  into  Snares 
that  are  laid  to  entrap  Innocence. 

Nean.  However,  furely  God  has  not  tied  up  our  Duty 
to  ImpofTibilities ;  he  tells  us,  his  Yoke  is  eafy,  and  his 
Burden  light  ;  and  then  aflures  us,  by  the  Mouth  of  his 
Apoftle,  that  our  Power  is  always  equal  at  leaft  to  the 
Temptation  ;  we  may  therefore  difcharge  our  felves  of  all 
the  Offices  of  Life  and  Converlation,  without  over-look- 
ing the  Duty  of  a  Chriftian  ;  for  certainly  God  never 
framed  our  Tongue  for  Silence,  nor  our  Reafon  for  So- 
litude ;  we  may  handle  them  both  rights  as  well  as  vjrong^ 
and  employ  them  to  a  good  ufe,  no  lefs  than  to  an  ill 
one.  I  hope  there  is  no  Neceffity  of  failing  into  Egypt ^ 
and  of  taking  up  in  the  Wildernefs  of  Thebais  ;  nor  of 
running  into  a  Convent^  or  of  receiving  Holy  Orders  at 
Rome;  for  though  thefe  good  Fathers  may  walk  pretty 
fecurely  to  Heaven,  yet  I  underlland  they  make  the  Voy- 
age alone :  Now  I  feel  no  Charms  in  Celibacy  ,  and  be- 
fides,  they  are  by  Law  difleized  not  only  of  their  Birth- 
right, but  even  of  the  Benefit  of  the  Clergy ;  fo  that  they 
can  claim  no  Liberty  but  that  of  the  Prifon,  no  Property 
but  the  Gallows.  I  have  no  Inclination  to  fling  up  my 
Eftate,  and  as  little  to  lay  it  at  the  Mercy  of  greedy  Fa- 
vourites; nor  to  fly  to  Heaven  by  the  way  oiTybiim :  I 
would  not  withdraw  from  Society,  not'  forfwear  Compa- 
ny, nor,  like  old  'Timon^  disband  from  my  own  Species. 

Eufeb.  You  have  Reafon ;  God  condemns  us  not  as 
'  Pharaoh,  to  the  Drudgery  of  making  Bricks  without  fur- 
nifliing  us  with  Materials  ;  he  proportions  his  Grace  to 
our  Wants,  and  never  commands  us  to  fight  on  unequal 
Terms ;  the  Advantage  lies  on  our  fide,  and  if  we  give 
our  Adverfary  the  higher  Ground,  our  Defeat  muft  lie  at 
our  own  Door ;  we  may  be  overcome,  but  can't  be  over- 
powered ;  our  Cowardife  gives  Temptation  the  Day, 
not  our  Weaknefs. 

Befides,  Virtue  is  not  confin'd  to  Place  or  Condition  ; 
it  may  be  praftifed  in  Towns  as  well  as  in  Defarts; 
and  no  lefs  by  Courtiers  than  Peafants  ;  nay,  it  fhines, 
methinks,  in  a  Palace,  like  the  Sun  in  thQ  Meridian, 
with  Pomp  and  Majefty  ;  for  what  can  even  Fancy  paint 
more  charming  and  more  glorious  than  Grandees,  nei- 
ther abjedt  in  Adverfity,  nor  infolent  in  Profperity ;  than 
Courtiers  peaceable  in  the  Noife  of  Affairs,  temperate  in 
B  3  thd 


6         The  Gentleman  Infru^ed. 

the  midft  of  Excefs,  unchangeable  in  Viciflitudes,  and 
conftant  in  all  the  Turns  of  Fortune  ;  untainted  with 
Lulls,  compofed  in  Tumults,  and  fmiling  at  all  thofe 
things,  that  are  either  expected  or  feared  by  others;  than 
Men  who  have  the  Power  to  do  what  they  will,  and  the 
Will  to  do  nothing  but  what  is  juft  and  reafonable  ?  This 
is  no  Platonic  but  a  Chriftian  Virtue ;  it  is  not  only  found 
in  Fidion  and  Romance,  but  has  been  commended  to 
Pradice  ;  it  has  appeared  more  than  once  onom Horizoft, 
fupported  by  Dignity,"  and  waited  on  by  all  the  Magnifi- 
cence of  Power  and  Royalty  :  You  may  therefore  hold 
your  Eftate,  without  flinging  up  your  Title  to  Heaven, 

Nean.  Indeed,  had  Providence  cut  off  my  Claim  to 
Heaven,  when  it  intruiled  me  with  a  Lordjhip^  I  ihould 
have  been  no  Gainer  by  the  Bleffing  ;  notwithilanding 
though  Virtue  be  in  my  Power,  if  Vice  be  in  my  Will, 
I  fhall,  without  Queftion,  be  miferable  :  Let  me  there- 
fore defire  you  to  favour  me  with  fome  Rules,  by 
which  I  mayfhape  my  Courfe;  you  have  ftemm'd  the 
Tides  of  Youth,  and  beat  back  Temptation  with  Cou- 
rage and  Succefs;  thofe  Waves  that  have  pafs'd  by  you, 
rufh  on  me  ;  fo  that  the  Danger  is  certain,  my  Efcape 
doubtful.  I  fling  myfelf  into  your  Arms.  I  have  at  lealt 
learned  the  firfl  Lefibn  of  Prudence,  viz.  to  fubmit  to 
the  Advice  of  thofe  whom  Age  and  Experience  have  fuf- 
ficiently  inllruiled. 

Eufeb.  A-ly  Age  is  on  its  Declenfion,  yet  I  am  not, 
God  be  thanked,  afliamed  to  live,  or  afraid  to  die  :  I 
neither  contemn  Life,  nor  over-value  it ;  and  therefore 
tX'^Q&i  my  quietus  e/^  with  Patience,  and  will  welcome 
my  Difcharge.  I  have  withdrawn  from  the  Huriy  and 
Tumult  of  worldly  Affairs,  and  now  lead  a  retired,  but 
not  an  ignoble  Life :  I  gave  my  laft  Farewel  to  the  Court, 
not  by  Force,  but  Choice  ;  and  indeed,  it  deferves  no 
Thought  but  of  Contempt.  I  have  tailed  of  bad  Fortune, 
and  of  good ;  but  never  placed  my  Happinefs  in  the  one, 
or  my  Mifery  in  the  other  ;  nor  have  I  entred  into  the 
World  like  a  Mute,  meerly  to  fill  the  Stage:  No,  I 
once  made  no  contemptible  Figure  by  my  Prince's  Bene- 
volence, and  tho'  in  the  Confufion  of  the  Government, 
J  fell  from  my  Poll,  I  carried  ofi'my  Honelly  inTriumph, 
^nd  expofed  my  Ellate  tofecure  my  Loyalty  ^  yet,  God 
beprais'd,  I  am  not  brought  to  the  Basket;   though'  I 

had 


The  Gentleman  Inftru^ed.        7 

had  rather  live  on  Charity  than  Rapine,  and  wou'd  foon- 
er  earn  my  Bread  by  the  Sweat  of  my  Brow,  than  of  my 
Confcience.  In  my  Retirement,  I  have  had  occafion  to 
ftudy  Things,  and  to  reiieft  on  Men,  qjid  have  made  Ob-, 
fervations  on  both,  fo  that. I  am  not  quite  unprovided  of 
thofe  QuaUties  the  Office  you  impofe  upon  me  requires  :- 
ril  therefore  take  the  Liberty  to  counfel  you  as  a  Friend, 
not  as  a  Mailer  j  let  us  retire  into  my  Clofet. 


DIALOGUE    IL 

Eufebius  ittjlru^s  Neander  in  the  Duty  of  a  Chrijiiafj. 
Eufeb,  ^rOV  muft  a6t  tw©  Parts ;  of  a  Gentleman, 


Y 


latter  at  our  next  meeting,  and  at  prefent  only  touch  the 
former.  Some  Gentlemen  keep  up  to  their  Chnrader 
without  the  advantageous  Helps  of  Precepts,  or  Educa- 
tion ;  you  may  read  their  Birth  on  their  Faces ;  their 
Gate  and  Mein  tell  their  Quality  ;  they  both  charm  and 
awe,  and  at  the  fameTime  demand  Love  and  Reverence ; 
their  Extraction  glitters  under  all  Difguifes  ;  it  fparkles 
in  Sack-cloth,  and  breaks  through  all  the  Clouds  of  Po- 
verty and  Misfortune;  there  is  a  /V  nef^ay  qmy  in  their 
whole  Demeaifour,  that  tears  off  the  Vizor,  and  difco- 
vers  Nobility  though  it  fculk  incognito  ;  they  are  refer- 
ved  without  Pride,  and  familiar  without  Meannefs;  they 
time  their  Behaviour  to  Circumftances,  and  know 
when  to  Hand  on  Tip-toe,  and  when  to  Hoop  :  In  fine, 
their  moft  trivial  Aftions  are  great,  and  their  Difcourfe 
is  noble. 

Others  feem  to  be  born  Gentlemen  to  fliame  Qtiality  ; 
one  would  fwear  Nature  intended  to  frame  'em  for  the 
Dray,  and  Chance  flung  'em  into  the  World  with  an 
EfcHtcheon  :  They  are  all  of  a  Piece,  Clown  without,  and 
Coxcomb  within  ;  and  fo  like  Foplingtons  are  graced 
with  Titles  to  play»  the  y^pe  by  Patent :  Thofe  of  the 
iirft  Clafs  need  no  Precepts,  and  thofe  of  the  fecond  de- 
ferve  none ;  however,  Counfel  may  be  ufeful  to  others ; 
for  Behaviour  is  acquired  like  other  Arts,  by  Study  and 
Application. 

B  4  I.  To 


S  fhe  Gentleman  Inflru^ed, 

I. 

To  begin  the  Part  of  a  Gentleman,  perfuade  your 
felf,  it's  your  Duty  and  Intereft  to  ad:  it  well  ;  for 
whoever  looks  upon  it  as  a  Matter  of  fmall  Con-, 
cern,  will  come  off  with  Dif-efleem ;  he  will  follow  the 
Bent  of  Nature,  and  fwim  down  the  Stream  of  Inclina- 
tion, rather  than  ftrlveagainft  it;  for  who  will  baulk  Hu- 
mour, or  fence  againft  ill  Cufloms  for  nothing  ?  This  I 
take  to  be  the  Reafon,  why  fo  many  in  Converfation  fall 
below  their  Station;  they  fancy  a  Title  fupported  with 
Means,  places  them  in  a  Region  above  the  Niceties  of 
Breeding  ;  that  a  Sir  gilds  the  moll  unbefeeming  Beha- 
viour, and  a  Coronet  dignifies  Rufticity  ;  but  this  is  a  mi- 
Hake  ;  for  as  Gentlemen  Hand  above  the  Crowd,  fothey 
lie  more  open  to  View  and  Cenfure :  For  A6lions  are  not 
rated  by  Men,  but  Men  by  Aftions;  and  if  thefe  fmell 
of  the  Clown,  or  fute  with  the  Peafant,  Right  ^■^orpjip- 
ful  muft  be  content  with  thofe  Titles ;  for  the  Mob 
knows  well  enough,  that  Gentlemen  can  claim  no  Refpedl 
from  Nature;  they  are  all  of  the  fame  Matter,  and  the 
Soul  of  a  Lazarus  is  of  as  refined  a  Metal  as  that  of 
Dives ;  and  therefoi'e,  if  they  fee  no  Advantage  on  Qua- 
lity's fide,  but  a  Coach  and  Six;  they  will  be  apt  to  think 
themfelves  as  good  Men  as  their  Mafters,  though  not  fo 
rich ;  and'  that  they  are  beholden  more  to  Chance  or  In- 
juftice  for  their  Fortune,  than  to  Merit. 

IT. 

Let  not  your  Family  be  the  Subjeft.of  your  Difcourfe, 
nor  fling  the  Regifters  of  your  Genealogy  on  the  Table 
before  all  Company ;  this  Topick  is  both  fulfom  and 
ungenteel;  it's  a  fhrewd  Argument  you  are  big  of  Con- 
ceit, and  more  obliged  to  your  Anceliors  for  your  Blood, 
than  for  your  Wit ;  though  your  great  Grandfather  rode 
Admiral  at  Sea  with  2000/.  per  Annum^  if  he  has  leftPo- 
fterity  no  other  Mark  of  his  Greatnefs,  but  his  Vices, 
I  fhall  rank  him  among  the  moft  wretched  Creatures 
that  ever  breathed  ;  feeing  the  Height  of  his  Station  only 
raifed  him  above  the  Vulgar  to  proclaim  his  Shame,  and 
render  his  Infamy  more  perfpicuous;  it  is  a  Madnefs  to 
take  the  Meafure  of  our  Deferts  by  the  parts  of  our 
Forefathers ;  their  perfonal  Worth  adds  not  one  Hairs- 
breadth 


^he  Gentleman  InJruM,         p 

breadth  to  our  Stature:  We  may  enter  upon  their  Eftates, 
and  perchance  upon  their  Titles,  but  not  upon  their  Vir- 
tues ;  thefe  are  neither  entailed  on  the  Family,  nor  alie- 
nable by  any  Deed  of  Conveyance. 

Befides,  whoever  rakes  in  the  Afhes  of  the  dead,    may 
fall  upon  the  Stench  inftead  of  Perfumes;  for  after  En- 
quiry, who  knows  but  you  may  find  the  Source  of  your  . 
Nobility  tainted  with  Treafon,  and  that  the  very  Title 
you  bear  is  the  price  of  Diiloyalty  ?  Now  though  accord-   . 
ing  to  the  Proverb,  Thofe  Children  are  happy  ivhofe  Parents 
are  in  Hell-^  yet  certainly,  a  Son  fhould  not  boaft  of  the 
Purchafe,  nor  look  big  becaufe  his  Father  is  miferable:  Let 
your  Anceftors  therefore  fleep  in  their  Graves,  and  be  not 
fo  foolifh  as  to  difturb  them  by  your  Vanity  ;  adopt  their 
Virtues  by  Imitation  and  Practice,  but  have  a  care  of  their 
Vices.     I  honour  Nobility  fet  otF  with  Merit,  but  when 
he  has  no  other  Prop  than  Money  and  Patent,  I  always 
compare  it  to  thofe  proud  Temples  of  Egypt^  that  under 
gilt  Frontifpieces,  and  azur'd  Vaults,  lodged  nothing  but 
Statues  oi Rats  and  Crocodiles.  lvalue  more  an  innocent 
Plowman,  than  a  vicious  Prince;  and  prefer  his  Nobility 
who  has  built  a  great  Fortune  upon  Worth  and  Virtue, 
before  his  who  by  Succeffioh  receives  one. 

III. 

As  it  is  ungenteel  to  boaft  of  our  Family,  fo  it  is  no 
lefs  mean  and  childifli  to  fpend  Rhetorick  on  our  Perfor- 
mances. If  your  Prince  and  Country  honour  you 
with  a  high  Employment,  either  in  the  Carnp  or  the 
Bench,  difcharge  your  felf  of  the  Truft  with  Reputation: 
deferve  Panegyrick,  but  play  not  the  Orator  your  felf; 
though  you  are  as  eloquent  as  Tk//y,  you'll  only  labour 
to  fpoil  a  good  Subjedt,  and  whilft  you  vainly  fet  oft' 
your  own  Feats,  you'll  meet  with  nothing  but  Shame 
and  Infamy.  N.  N.  was  an  excellent  Soldier,  he  feared 
nothing  but  Fear ;  he  chofe  always  the  Fan.,  and  was  of- 
ten the  firft  Man  on  the  Breach  ;  all  admir'd  his  Cou- 
rage, and  prais'd  it;  and  even  thofe  who  difapproved  Ins 
Conduft,  did  Juftice  to  his  Valour  ;  but  this  Gentleman 
loft  at  Table  the  Glory  he  had  won  in  the  Field,  and 
talking  awyiy  in  his  Winter  Qiiarters  the  Honour  he  had 
purchafed  the  whole  Campaign.  I  did  this,  faid  he,  at 
the  Siege  of  R.^  and  this  at  the  Battle  of** ;  had  I  not 

feized 


lo      ^he  Gentleman  InJinSed, 

feizedon  fuch  a  Poll  at**,  the  Army  bad  been  in  Dan- 
ger. One  would  have  thought  all  the  Generals  and  Sol- 
diers had  been  in  Garrifon,  and  that  N.  N.  with  his  fmall" 
Brigade  alone,  defeated  the  Defigns  of  the  French.  This 
overgrown  Vanity  coft  him  dear  ;  for  inftead  of  gainino- 
the  Reputation  of  a  General,  he  went  oiFwith  that  of  a 
Fop,  and  all  concluded  he  was  too  ambitious  of  Praife  to 
deferve  any.  Your  deep  Rivers  move  with  a  iilent  Ma- 
jefty,  {hallow  Brooks  alone  make  a  Noife  and  Tumult  a- 
mong  Pebbles.The  great  Marfhal  de  'Turenne  never  fpoke 
of  himfelf,  but  when  forc'd,  and  even  then,  with  Modefty; 
and  though  the  King  was  wholly  indebted  to  the  wife 
Conduct  of  this  gallant  Man  for  many  Victories,  yet  he 
never  faid  fo  :  No,  he  wou'd  lay  Mifcarriages  at  his  own 
Door,  and  Succefs  at  that  of  his  Officers  and  Soldiers  ; 
this  made  him  appear  great  even  in  his  Overthrow,  and 
generally  his  Moderation  was  more  glorious  to  him  than 
Viftory.  Imitate  the  Silence  of  this /Zero,  not  thenoify 
Impertinence  of  Fools ;  carry  off  the  Satisfaction  of  great 
Actions,  and  let  others  go  with  the  Honour  of  praifing 
'em,  and  let  People  rather  learn  your  Atchievements  at 
the  Stationers,  than  at  your  Table. 

IV. 

Avoid  the  modifh  Rant  of  Oaths  and  Imprecations : 
It's  an  ungenteel  Dialect,  as  well  as  unchriftian,  and 
clafhes  both  with  the  Rules  of  Breeding,  and  of  the  Go- 
fpel.  Cuftom  indeed  has  made  'em  fafliionable,  but 
neither  civil  nor  lawful ;  for  Vice  can  never  plead  Pre- 
fcription.  I  know  it  lies  under  the  Protedion  of  Num- 
ber and  Quality  ;  but  ill  things  have  no  right  to  Sanftu- 
ary :  Becaufe  Vermin  fwarm,  muft  they  be  permitted  to 
encreafe  ?  Shall  the  Number  of  Felons  plead  for  Pardon  ? 
No,  no,  the  Cuitomarinefsof  ill  things  makes  'em  worfe ; 
and  the  more  they  muft  be  difcountenanced,  and  taught 
Difcipline.  In  a  Word,  whatever  jars  with  Religion, 
and  cuts  upon  good  Breeding,  is  below  a  Gentleman  : 
And  therefore  in  Spiglit  of  Example  and  Practice,  I  mufl: 
caution  you  againft  i'ome  Parts  of  Englijh  Civility  ;  for 
though  they  go  for  Confem  in  the  Englip  Dominions, 
they'll  not  bear  the  Tefts  of  other  Nations. 

For  Example  ;  Daynnye,  fays  one,  I  am  glad  to  fee  yon: 
Is  not  this  a  quaint  Salutation  ?    Firft,  to  pack  me  away 

to 


^he  Gentleman  InJlraBed.        \ \ 

to  Hell,  and  then  proteft  he  is  glad  to  fee  me  fo  conveni- 
ently lodg'd  ?  What  Provifion  will  thele  Blades  make  for  ■ 
their  Enemies,  if  they  place  their  Friends  fo  unto.wardly  ? 
Certainly,  they  fancy  Hell  is  a  fine  Seat,  and  that  the 
Damned  are  in  a  fair  Way   of  Promotion  ?  , 

Damnye  Dog\  how  do  ft  do '^.  cries  another:  This  feat 
Compliment  implies  Damnation  and  Transformation 
too :  It's  a"  Compound  of  Curfe  and  Raillery.  I  am 
plunged  into  Hell,  dafhed  out  of  the  Lift  of  Rationals, 
and  then,  with  a  Taunt,  asked  how  I  do  ?  V/hy,  a  Man 
in  Fire  and  Brimftone,  is  not  altogether  at  his  Eafe, 
and  a  reafonable  Creature  curft  into  a  Dog,  not  very 
fond  of  the  Metamorphofis. 

A  third  very  genteelly  accoftsa  Friend  he  has  not  per- 
chance feen  of  a  Twelve-month,  Te  Son  of  a  M'uore^  where 
have  you  been '^.  This  is  an  Engl'ijh  Addrefs  to  a  Tittle: 
It  is  a  kind  of  a  ftaple  Commodity  of  the  Nation,  and 
like  our  Wool,  muft  not  be  tranfported  under  Pain  of 
Confifcation  :  But  furely  we  need  not  lay  fo  fevere  an 
Embargo  on  the  Ware,  for  it's  ten  to  one  'twill  never  find 
Vent  in  any  other  Nation  on  this  Side  of  the  Canaries  ; 
a  handful  of  Dirt,  well  applied,  is  as  civil  a  Compliment, 
though  not  quite  fo  cleanly.  Son  of  a  Whore  !  There  is 
abundance  of  Freedom  in  the  Exprcflion,  but  not  a  Grain 
of  Breeding  :  Unlefs  you  meafure  Behaviour  by  the' 
Dialeft  of  a  BilUnfgate,  and  the  Bear-garden.  Certain- 
ly thefe  Gentlemen  are  Admirers  of  Charity  ;  why  elfe 
do  they  dignify  Whoredom  ?  For  Whore  ftands  for  a 
Mark  of  Quality,  a  diftinguifliing  Charadter  ;  otherwife 
the  Salutation  would  appe^tr  coarfe  and  homely  ;  but,  by 
their  leave,  few  are  in  Love  with  Crofs-Bars  ;  and  to  be 
Brother  to  a  By-blow,  is  to  be  a  Ballard  once  removed. 

I  know  we  fling  a  Veil  on  thefe  ExprelTions,  and 
wafh  over  their  Foulnefs  with  fair  Pretences.  Damnye^ 
fays  one,  and  Son  of  a  Whore  ftand  meerly  for  Cvphers, 
or  only  ferve  to  enliven  a  Period,  and  to  make  the  Ex- 
preflion  more  bluftering  ;  I  confefs  Whore  and  Damnatiott 
are  near  a-kin,  and  often  go  together  ;  but  for  all  that, 
the  Sillinefs  of  the  Excufe  can't  ftifle  the  monftrous  In-. 
civility  of  the  Compliment;  for  though  it  fignifies  no- 
thing to  him  who  receives  it  m  good  time,  it  will  fignify 
much  to  him  that  fpoke  it:  For  though  a  Friend  may  let 
fCich  Curfes  fall  to  the  Ground,  God  will  put  'em  to  Ac- 


count 


II        ^he  Gentleman  Infiru^ed. 

count ;  and  though  they  ftand  for  Cyphers  in  Englandy 
they  may  purchafe  eternal  Torments  in  Hell. 

They  are,  fays  another,  Marks  oi EagUp  Familiarity^ 
pure  Sallies  of  Kindnefs  and  Demonftrations  of  Friend- 
fhip.  No  doubt,  to  deliver  over  to  Satan  an  old  Ac- 
quaintance, without  asking  his  Confent  to  the  Convey- 
ance, is  Freedom  with  a  Vengeance  ;  but  at  which  end 
of  the  Compliment  is  his  Kindnefs  ?  In  fhort,  Neander^ 
fuch  Expreffions  grate  the  Organ,  and  turn  the  very  Fa- 
culty of  Hearing  into  a  Burden;  they  are  high  Symp- 
toms of  a  lewd  Inclination,  and  of  a  depraved  Complexi- 
on ;  for  M'hen  the  Breath  fmells  rank,  the  Stomach  is 
infefted.  In  fhort,  fuch  a  'Jargon  is  a  Breach  of  Civili- 
ty, it's  a  ruilick  Cant.^  an  uncreditable  Diale(5l  ;  nor  is 
the  whole  l^offe  of  Bullies  able  to  ennoble  it. 

V. 

When  Civility  obliges  you  to  vifit  Ladies,  pray  keep 
your  Compliments  to  the  Rules  of  Chrillianity  ;  there 
is  no  Neceffity  of  laying  Religion  at  the  Door  with 
your  Golojlooes^  nor  of  denying  God  when  you  entertain 
her  Ladyfliip  :  For  certainly  Breeding  is  not  incompati- 
ble with  Religion,  and  a  Man  may  make  an  Addrefs 
alamode  without  apoftatizing  from  Chriftianity  :  Yet 
though  the  Worfliip  of  the  Virgin  Mary  be  difallowed  of, 
we  may  adore  Ladies  without  the  Breach  of  a  Statute, 
and  commit  Idolatry  not  only  without  Reproof,  but  e- 
ven  without  Sin  :  One  fwears,  Heaven  fits  in  her  Smiles, 
and  Hell  in  her  Frowns.  A  fecond  lliles  her  Saint ;  tho' 
perchance  her  Ladyfhip  is  more  ftock'd  with  Beauty  than 
Piety,  and  her  Face  better  provided  with  Grace  than 
her  Soul ;  A  third  enlarges  her  Perfe6lions  ;  he  ranks 
her  among  the  Angels ;  and,  to  compleat  the  Folly  with 
Blafphemy,  a  fourth  deifies  her  :  Thefe  Pagan  Compli- 
ments are  the  Standard  of  Courtfhip,  the  Scale  of  Ce- 
remony, and  the  Mcafure  of  good  Breeding.  But  after 
all,  Praftice  can  never  blanch  over  the  Foulnefs  of  thefe 
daring  ExprefTidns ;  every  Syllable  breathes  Frenzy  and 
Blafphemy  ;  nor  is  there  any  way  to  acquit  thefe  raving 
Platonicks  of  a  Crime,  but  by  fuppofmg  'em  unreafonable. 
A  few  Pimples  handfomely  fprinkled  would  very  effi- 
cacioufly  dillodge  the  yJngel,  as  perchance  her  Lewd- 
nefs  has  banifli'd  the  Saint;  and  a  few  Small  Pox  would 

chequer 


T'he  Gentleman  Infrared.       13. 

chequer  her  Divinity,   and  tumble  the  Goddefs  into  a 
Monfter  j  and  then  Holl  might  as  well  perch  on  her  Smiles, 
as  on  her  Frowns.     But  Raillery  apart,  tho'  we  fling 
Impiety  out  of  the  Queftion,   fuch  Addrefles  are  plain 
Satyr,    and  Inveftive  on  the  Sex  :    For  they  fuppofe 
Women  either  extravagantly  proud,  or  fuperlatively  ijl- 
ly  ;  now  the  very  Suppolition  is  both  ungenteel  and  Ican- 
dalous.  I  am  fenlible  indeed  the  Sex  is  no  Enemy  to  Hy- 
perbole in  Courtlhip ;  Women  are  more  fond  of  thofe 
Glafles  that  conceal  Difproportions,  than  of  thofe  that 
reprefent  them  ;  they  can't  well  diftinguifll  between  Flat- 
tery and  Merit,  and  as  they  eagerly  deli  re  thofe  Perfec- 
tions that  are  proper  to  their  Sex,  fo  they  cafily  are  per- 
fuaded  they  pofl'efs  them  j  for  we  foon  believe  what  we 
earneftly  delire :  So  hence  it  is,  that  they  take  a  pleafing 
Raillery  for  a  ferious  Truth,  and  even  fometimes  a  Lam- 
foQft  for  a  Panegyrick  ;    but   then  an  ungrateful  Truth 
puts  them  into  a  Ferment ;  it  ruffles  their  good  Humour, 
and  fours  their  Blood.     Something  therefore  may  be  al-  . 
lowed  toCultom  and  their  Conftitution;  flatter  their  La- 
dypips  into  an  even  Temper,  rather  than  reafon  them  out 
of  it,  provided  you  keep  within  a  mean,  and  ftep  not 
beyond  the  Bounds  of  Decency  ;  but  to  break  into  Flights 
of  Impiety,  into  Raptures  of  Blafphemy,  is  to  play  the 
Fool  and  the  Atheift. 

VI. 

Gentlemen  have  fo  much  time  on   their  Hands  that 
they  know  not  how  to  fpend  it ;  it's  a  Burthen  and  a 
Charge,  and  fo,  like  Prodigals,  they  rather  fling  it  away 
than  take  Pains  to  improve  it.     I  counfel  you  therefore 
to  fet  afide  fome  Hours  for  Reading;  it's  a  handfome 
Diverfion,   and  conveys   Profit   through  Pleafure ;    the 
Intelled  is  a  grateful  Soil ;  but  then,  like  a  Field,  it  re- 
quires manuring.     By  Reading,  you  join  paft  Ages  to  the 
prefent,  you  travel  into  /ijia^   Africa  and  America^  with- 
out Expence,  without  Danger,  nay,  without  v/alking  out 
of  your  Glofet.     Senfual   Fleafufes  rather  ftupify  than 
delight,  they  play  upon  the  Organ,  and  dull  the  Appetite, 
they  are  often  brutal,  and  feldom  innocent;  but  thofe  of 
the  Underftanding  fliine  brighter,  they  are  of  a  more  re« 
fined  Metal,  free  from  Drofs,  and  void  of  Repentance  ; 
they  extend  the  Facuity,and  render  it  more  rational ;  they 

rather 


14         fhe  Gentleman  hiflru5fed. 

rather  whetDefire  than  glut  it,  and  fcrew  Man's  topping 
Prerogative,  Reafon,  up  to  the  higheft  Pitch.  A  Gentle- 
man furnifli'd  with  Reading,  can  never  be  at  a  Lofs  to 
fet  on  foot,  and  cany  on  a  handfome  Convcrfation  ;  he 
is  always  well  flocked,  and  carries  his  Provifions  about 
him;  whereas  others  are  forced  to  fetch  Matter  from  the 
Kennel,  or  the  Stable,  and  too  too  often  from  the  Stews ; 
their  Difcourfe  is  a  Compound  of  Smut  and  Raillery,  en- 
livened always  with  Foolleries,  and  fometimes  feafoned 
with  Oaths  and  Blafphemies:  Nonfenfe,  in  fine,  thou2;h 
not  the  raoft  creditable,  is  the  moft  innocent  and  lefs 
blamed  Ingredient.  Good  God !  how  often  have  I  loft 
Patience,  and  fretted  away  good  Humour  in  the  Com- 
pany of  Gentlem.en  o*-"  fair  Eftates,  and  of  noble  Ex- 
tradtion  ;  methought  they  had  ferved  an  Apprenticefhip 
under  Grooms  or  Dog-boys  ;  they  eternally  grated  my 
Ears  with  Hounds  and  Horfes,  and  broke  out  into  fuch 
clamorous  Tumults,  as  if  they  had  been  drawing  up  tlie 
Grievances  of  the  Nation,  or  pelting  the  Prerogative;  yet 
after  all,  the  Qiieftion  was  only,  whether  P///}  or  L/^^;- 
foot  got  the  better  laft  Chace.  Racing  and  Hunting  are 
indeed  laudable  Recreations ;  and  upon  Occalions  may  be 
difcourfed  of;  but  then,  to  harp  perpetually  upon  thefe 
Creatures,  is  an  infallible  Argument  their  Thoughts  are 
mean,  and  too  weak  winged  to  foar  above  the  Beaft. 
Some  Years  ago,  I  took  a  Turn  beyond  the  Seas,  and 
made  a  connderaliile  Stay  in  thofe  Parts:  At  my  return 
I  gave  a  Vilit  to  an  old  Acquaintance;  a  Man  of  Cha- 
racter, of  Eltate,  of  an  ancient  Family,  and  Deputy 
Lieutenant  of  a  County  ;  he  was  at  Table ;  a  Hawking- 
bag  hung  on  the  left-fide,  and  a  Bumpkin  guarded  the 
right;  his  Hat,  Coat  and  Wig  were  all  of  a  piece,  more 
fir  for  a  Scare-Crow  than  a  Deputy  ;  his  Memory  was  as 
fhort  as  his  Wig;  for  fome  Years  Abfeix:e  had  wiped 
out  our- Acquaintance ;  he  knew  me  not,  and  indeed, 
I  was  no  lefs  puzzled  to  find  my  Friend  under  fo  ilo- 
venly  a  Difguife :  However,  at  length  we  ren*wed  our 
old  Species,  and  then  he  very  warmly  embraced  me  with 
this  Salutation  ;  Eufebius,  byGod^  I  ain  ^InU  to  fee  thee : 
I  expected  he  would  follow  this  quaint  Compliment 
with  an  Enquiry  into  my  Health,  or  latisfied  hisCuriofity 
with  a  Rchearfal  of  my  Travels  ;  that  he  would  ask  in 
what  Poilurc  I  left  our  Allies ;  whether  they  made  Pre- 
parations 


^e  Gentleman  Inftni0ed,       15 

parations  for  the  Siege  o^  Namur,  ox  Monfieur  ior  Xhdit 
of  Maejirichf  ;  whether  Prince  Eugefie  entered  CremoMa 
with  greater  Glory,  or  left  it  with  greater  Infamy;  whe- 
ther Fribergen  did  better  to  receive  a  Stab  from  Mahoni^ 
than  Quarter ;  or  whether  this  brave  Baron  died  hke  a 
Fool  or  a  Hero  :  In  fine,  what  Advantage  ihelyKperialiJii 
got  by  the  Vidtory  at  Lttzzara,  or  whether  the  Profit 
would  balance  the  Expence  of  Powder  and  Shot,  laid 
out  in  the  Empire  on  the  Thankfgiving-Day. 

No,  the  Gentleman's  Curiofity  never  travelled  fo  far: 
He  had  confined  his  Knowledge  within  the  Bounds  of 
his  own  Country  ;  all  the  reft  of  the  World  was  Terra 
incognita  to  his  IVer^ip  :  "He  fell  immediately  upon  the 
Excellency  of  Tobacco^  and  then  hailed  me  up  to  the  Stable, 
that  I  might  pay  my  Refpedl  to  Bobtail ;  and  in  the  way 
honoured  me  with  an  accurate  Account  of  his  Poultry, 
Oh  !  faid  I  to  myfelf,  had  this  LieuteKant  hunted  lefs, 
and  read  more  ;  had  he  cultivated  his  Underftanding,  and 
let  a  Field  or  two  We  fallow^  he  might  have  been  Com- 
pany for  Men :  But,  alas !  he  was  the  Darling  of  the  Fa- 
mily ;  he  heftored  it  at  Home,  whilft  he  fhould  have 
been  at  School  and  Abroad  ;  was  made  a  Man  at  fif- 
teen, to  be  a  Child  and  a  Coxcomb  at  threefcore. 

I  would  not  have  you,  upon  all  Occafions,  difcourfe 
in  Syllogifm^  nor  deliver  your  Thoughts  in  Alood  and 
Figure  :  Such  philofophical  Cant  fuits  better  with  a  Pe- 
dant than  a  Gentleman  ;  and  may  pafs  in  the  School,  but 
not  in  the  Parlour.  Neither  prefsupon  Company  a  f^a- 
cuur/i^nor  Mr.  Boyle's  Pondus  Atmojphara^  a  civil  Con- 
verialion  may  be  managed  handfomely  in  either  Hypothc- 
fis  5  and  I  conceive  Difcourfe  prolpered  no  leis  in  the  Days 
of  good  old  Materia  Prima,  than  in  the  Reign  of  des 
Cartes's  third  Element. 

You  may  alio  let  the  Grand  Afo^;// fit  quietly  at/f^r^, 
and  Prefter  John  in  Ethiopia ;  few  Gentlemena  Know- 
ledge travels  fo  far  from  Home.  France,  Spain  and 
Italy  lie  more  conveniently  ;  htMesClaret, Malaga,  and 
Flasks  of  Florence,  have  given  us  fome  Notions  of  thofe 
Kingdoms. 

Time  your  Subject ;  good  things  fpoke  out  of  Seafon, 
lofe  their  Value.  I  would  not  harangue  a  Lady  in  Greek, 
nor  a  Country  Vicar  in  Hebrew :  For,  alas !  her  Learning 
goes  not  beyond  French,  nor  his  above  L(»?/»;  Difcourfe 

muit 


i6       Ty^^  Gentleman  Injirii^ed, 

muft  be  adapted  to  the  Company  ;  and  it  takes  more 
when  it  naturally  Aides  in,  than  when  drawn  in  by  Head 
and  Shoulders.  In  a  word,  Neander^  enrich  your  Un- 
derilanding  by  the  Knowledge  of  Things  that  become 
your  Quality  ;  and  when  you  are  doubly  equipp'd  (I  mean 
with  a  fair  Eftate,  and  a  good  fund  of  Learning)  what 
can  you  defire  more,  but  an  ordinary  Stock  of  Prudence 
to  lay  them  out  to  Advantage  t 

VII. 

Converfe  not  ordinarily  with  Perfons  above  your  Rank, 
nor  with  thofe  that  are  below  it ;  that  will  endanger  your 
Eftate,  this  your  Breeding.  A  Man  of  a  thoufand  Pound 
per  Anmim^  can't  long  keep  pace  with  one  of  -ten  thou- 
fand ;  he'll  infallibly  lag,  and  jade  by  the  way  ;  and  per- 
chance be  forc'd  to  take  in  at  the  next  Goal :  Or,  if  in 
time  he  refolve  to  foreftal  his  Ruin,  he  muft  faft  out  the 
Riot  of  a  fhort  Carnaval  with  a  long  Lent ;  he  muft 
ftint  himfelf  to  a  fhort  Pittance,  and  lop  off  a  Branch  to 
fecure  the  Stock  :  For  Eftate- Wounds  fefter  into  a  Gan- 
grene, and  nothing  but  the  Saw  or  Seering-Iron  can  ftop 
the  Infedlion. 

But  on  the  other  fide,  to  herd  with  Peafants  is  a  kind 
of  voluntary  Degradation ;  it's  to  break. your  Efcutcheqtt^ 
and  to,  commence  Yeoman.  Peafantry  is  a  Difeafe,  like 
the  Plague,  eafily  caught  by  Converfation  ;  it's  a  Colour 
that  takes  on  any  Subjeft,  and  feldom  wears  off:  why 
then  (hall  a  Perfon  of  Honour  forfeit  his  Patent  without 
Treafon  ?  Clowns  are  a  fort  of  encroaching  Animals ; 
give  an  Inch,  they'll  take  an  Ell,  and  repay  your  Famili- 
arity with  Contempt  and  Outrage:  If  you  intend  to  oblige 
them  to  a  Diftance,  ftoop  not  below  your  Station,  nor 
fet  them  on  equal  Ground  ;  if  once  you  make  them  Com- 
panions, they'll  ufurp  the  Authority  of  Mafters ;  for  they 
want  Prudence  to  manage  a  Familiarity,  but  not  Impu- 
dence to  abufe  it:  But  take  care  not  to  brow-beat  them, 
nor  pretend  to  keep  them  under  too  fevere  Difcipline ;  for 
the  moft  defpicable  and  cowardly  Creatures,  if  forc'd, 
will  turn  and  fly  in  your  Face. 

VIII. 

Some  Gentlemen  are  fo  pundilious  and  nice,  thnt  they 
look  on  Bufmefs  as  a-thing  below  their  Level :  No,  they'll 

not 


The  Gentleman  Infru^ed.       ly 

not  look  on  their  Accounts,  tho'  their  Eltr  .e  lies  in  an 
Agony;  as  if  there  were  no  Difference  between  Pru- 
dence and  Trading.  But  certainly,  Wifdom  jars  not  with 
Quality;  and  I  hope,  one  may  be  a  good  Husband  with- 
out turning  Clown :  It's  no  Branch  of  a  Gentleman's  Pre- 
rogative to  be  bubbled  out  of  Houfe  and  Home.  V/hen 
Expences  run  high,  is  it  not  fit  at  leaft  to  provide  agAiuft 
Fraud  and  Circumvention  ?  Prodigality  on  the  one  Side, 
and  Fraud  on  the  other,  will  foon  dram  an  Eltate  to  the 
Lees.  Do  not  therefore  ail  by  Deputy  :  To  trutt  a 
Steward  too  much,  is  to  expofe  his  Vertue.  Honefty  is 
not  always  Proof  againft  Temptation :  Men  often  ciieat 
without  Scruple,  when  they  can  do  it  without  Fear.  Re- 
member, that  Nobility  ftript  of  Means,  makes  no  gen- 
teel Figure ;  it  can't  ftand  without  golden  Supporters : 
Model  therefore  your  Expences  by  your  Income,  and 
refledt  you  poflefS" Lands,  not  Mines;  two  thouiand  ex- 
pended, and  one  received,  will  not  balance  Accounts  at 
the  Year's  End:  If  you  are  wife,  live  on  the  Crop,  not 
on  the  Land ;  convey  not  a  Lordfliip  to  London  in  a  Bill 
of  Exchange,  nor  Qdixvf  Acres  in  your  Pocket;  they  thrive 
well  in  Country  Air,  but  fall  into  Confumptions  and 
Hefticks  at  Whtte-hall  and  Groom-Porters.^  and  foon  ex- 
pire ;  and  then  you  muft  run  upon  the  Common.^  or  live 
on  Charity  ©r  Courtefy  ;  or  Chameleon-X^t.,  on  the  Air, 
unlefs  you  had  rather  turn  Knight-Errant  on  the  King's 
Highway,  or  take  up  your  Quarters  at  Ty^^''^-  Believe 
me,  Neander^  Poverty  is  unfafhionable  in  our  Days,  and 
Dependance  uneafy ;  take  Care  therefore  of  the  main 
Chance,  lay  by  a  Referve  for  Age  and  Accidents:  Anew 
Lordfliip  does  not  (like  a  Phoenix)  jump  out  of  the  Afhes 
of  the  old:  No,  when  it's  gone,  Hope  follows  it;  no- 
thing remains  but  Beggary,  Contempt,  Defpair,  and  Re- 
pentance. 

Be  neither  covetous  nor  profufe  ;  Extreams  are  vicious ; 
that  feems  lefs  genteel,  and  this  more  foolifli.  I  hate 
to  fee  a  Gentleman,  like  a  Snail,  draw  in  his  Figure  to 
fave  his  Purfe,  and  not  only  want  the  Conveniences,  but 
even  the  Neceflaries  of  Life  in  the  Face  of  Abundance  : 
This  is  almoft  to  antedate  Mifery,  and  to  turn  the  Fa- 
ble of  Tantalus  into  a  real  Story.  I  would  no  more  truft 
fuch  a  Mifer,  than  a  Foot-Pad  or  a  Cut  Purfe ;  he  who 
loves  Money  more  than  himfelf,will  infallibly  rate  it  above 
C  Honelly, 


1 S       fhe  Gentleman  InJlruBed. 

Honefty,  and  he'll  ftretch  a  Point,  and  anloofe  Confci- 
cnce  when  Opportunity  opens  any  Profpeft  of  Gain: 
For  to  a  Mifer,  Knavery  and  Cozenage  are  unqueftiona- 
ble  Axioms^  and  ought  to  be  fuppofed  as  a  Poftulatum : 
In  a  word,  it's  a  bale  Employment  to  lie  on  Earth,  and 
to  {land  Centinel  to  Intereft ;  I  would  neither  fawn  on 
Money  for  Money's  Sake;  nor  dftck  and  drake  it  away 
for  a  Frolick :  No,  I  would  not  part  with  my  Liberty 
for  a  Sp(i»ip  Flota,  nor  with  a  Shilling  for  a  good  Mor- 
row i  that  would  be  to  over-value  Slavery ;  and  this  to  un- 
der-rate  Silver. 

Let  your  Equipage  run  even  with  your  Purfe  and  Qua- 
lity. Starve  not  yourfelf  to  feed  Lackeys ;  nor  give  *em 
a  Coach  (as  N.  N.  did)  to  fave  their  Liveries.  Hand- 
fom  Regales  fometimes  buoy  up  Credit,  cherifh  Friend- 
fhip,  nourifli  Mirth,  and  breathe  Life  and  Spirit  into 
Converfation ;  tho'  they  fink  your  Purfe,  they  do  not 
drain  it ;  at  leaft  you  receive  Credit  for  your  Money. 

IX. 

A  continual  Application  to  Bufinefs  works  upon  the 
Brain,  it  exhaufts  the  Spirits,  and  undermines  Health: 
Nature  muft  not  be  run  down,  allow  it  Time  to  breathe ; 
if  you  are  always  on  the  Spur,  you'll  jade  it.  Exchange 
therefore  fometimes  your  ferious  Employments  for  ho- 
neft  and  genteel  Recreations ;  they  refrefh  the  Mind,  un- 
burthen Nature,  enhven  the  Faculties,  and  pour  new  Life 
and  Vigour  into  the  Body :  Chufe  thofe  that  are  more 
diverting  and  lefs  expenfive;  a  Pleafure  over-purchafqd  is 
a  real  Torment,  and  then  if  they  require  Study  and  Ap- 
plication, you  do  not  fo  much  eafe  Nature  as  change  the 
Burthen.  I  would  not  have  you  venture  upon  Games 
of  Hazard,  unlefs  Civihty  oblige  you,  and  even  then 
ftake  no  more,  than  you  dare  lofe  without  Faflion  : 
Thofe  Plays,  like  Quick-Sands,  fwallow  Eftates  at  a 
fitting ;  they  devour  a  Man's  Patience,  and  caft  Nature 
into  a  Ferment.  Good  God !  how  uneafy  have  I  feen 
Gamefters  ?  Methought  they  fate  on  Thorns  or  Tenters ; 
you  might  fee  Paffion  in  their  Geftures,  and  read  De- 
fpair  on  their  Faces;  they  broke  through  all  the  Barri- 
ers of  Modefty  and  Decorum,  and  diced  away  their  Mo- 
ney firft,  and  then  flung  patience  after  it.  Had  Force 
itretcht  thefe  Gamefters  on  that  Rack,  I  fhoald  have  pi- 

tietj 


'  ^he  Gentleman  InJiriiBed.        ip 

tied  their  Misfortune ;  but  when  I  refleded  they  were 
their  own  Executioners,  let  'em  fuffer,  faid  I,  nothing 
but  Stripes  can  teach  Fools  Wifdom,  nor  reftore  Mad- 
Kien  to  their  Wits. 

I  met  once  Sir  N.  N.  an  old  Acquaintance ;  whither 
fofaft,  faid  I,  old  Friend  ?  lam,  replied  he,  on  an  Ex- 
pedition :  You  are  methinks,  anfwered  I  again,  too  cra- 
zy for  a  Winter  Campaign,  and  too  old  to  turn  Maro- 
deur,  or  Partizan  :  Nay,  faid  he^  my  Bufinefs  lies  withi'- 
in  Doors:  In  fhort,  I  am  bound  for  St.  James's,  where  I 
intend  to  fling  away  a  hundred  Guineas.  To  fling  away 
a  hundred  Guineas!  faid  I,  Prithee,  if  you  are  over- 
charged with  Coin,  favour  me  with  the  Burthen  ; 
you'll  play  the  Fool  at  lead  with  a  better  Grace,  and  lefs 
Trouble.  But  the  Propofal  did  not  relifh;  he  would, 
Gentleraan-like,  keep  his  Word,  though  he  loft  his 
Purfe ;  and  had  rather  forfeit  his  Eftate  than  his  Credit. 
He  invited  me  to  accompany  him  ;  away  we  drove  to 
the  Place  of  Rendezvous,  where  we  found  his  Antago- 
nift  ready  to  encounter :  Down  they  fat,  and  to  it  they 
went ;  at  the  beginning  the  Dice  favour'd  my  old  Knight 
fo  ftrangely,  that  I  thought  good  Luck  and  he  were  of 
Intelligence.  Lord !  how  the  old  Gentleman  crow'd ! 
Joy  danc'd  through  every  Joint,  you  might  fee-it  flufli 
in  his  Face,  and  gild  the  Decays  of  Nature.  In  fine, 
good  Luck  fecm'd  to  have  fil'd  oiF  his  Account  twenty 
Years,  and  to  have  put  as  many  more  to  his  Credit ; 
but  then  if  good  Humour  fat  on  this  Side  of  the  Table, 
bad  fat  on  the  other ;  the  young  'Squire  firft  took  the  Pet, 
then  Clouds  began  to  rife,  which  made  me  expe6l  a 
Tempeft ;  nor  was  I  deceived  in  my  Conjedlure  ;  for 
immediately  away  fly  the  Dice  with  a  Brace  of  Gurfes 
at  their  Heels;  then  Fortune  is  hailed  to  the  Bar,  ar- 
raigned and  condemned :  Providence  brings  up  the  Rear 
of  the  Criminals ;  you  wou'd  have  thought  this  one  and 
twenty  came  in  a  dired  Line  from  Hercules,  he  play'd 
the  Furiofu  fo  lively. 

And  now  Sir  N.N.  was  entring  the  Haven  with  his 
golden  Fleece ;  when  on  a  fudden  the  Wind  chopt 
about,  and  blew  in  his  Teeth ;  the  Tables  are  turned, 
the  Scene  is  changed,  the  Knight  fumes,  and  the  Squire 
triumphs;  one  curfes  the  Dice,  the  other  gives  'em  his 
Blefling:  They  fteer  their  Pafllons  by  theC^^^,  and  vary 
C  2  with 


20        I'he  Gentleman  Inflrti^fed, 

with  the  Cafts.  In  fine,  my  Friend  flood  to  his  Word, 
he  left  the  Field,  and  a  hundred  Guineas  to  the  Vidor, 
and  loft  all  Gravity  and  Moderation.  I  accompanied 
him  to  his  Lodgings ;  but  I  found  he  was  even  lurcht 
of  good  Nature  alfo.  Well,  faid  I,  do  you  call  this 
Play  ?  Can  Sport  and  Anxiety,  Fear  and  Defpair  ftand 
together  ?  Hell  and  Heaven  are  as  compatible  :  I  would 
as  foon  for  Diverlion  take  a  Turn  upon  the  Rack,  or 
lay  my  Head  between  the  Anvil  and  the  Hammer  ;  thefe 
Torments  are  not  greater  j  but  I  am  fure  are  lefs  expen- 
live. 

Neaytder^  You  may  learn  by  this,  how  ill  thefe  Plays 
deferve  the  Name  of  Recreations;  fly  'em  therefore  as 
the  Plague,  they  prey  upon  Content,  corrode  Satisfadi- 
on,  and  in  Conclufion  fwallow  Eilates,  and  commend 
Nobility  to  the  Parifh, 

Hawking  and  Hunting  are  more  manly,  more  genteel, 
and  more  diverting  j  thefe  Sports  are  almoft  as  antient 
as  our  Nature,  they  have  kept  up  their  Reputation  in 
fpight  of  all  the  Viciffitudes  of  Time  and  Fortune ;  but 
then  they  muft  be  taken  with  Moderation,  like  Phyfick 
for  Health,  not  like  Meat  for  Diet.  To  range  eternally 
in  Woods  and  Thickets  after  Beafts,  is  rather  the  Office 
of  a  Keeper,  than  the  Sport  of  a  Gentleman.  I  blame 
not  the  Recreation,  but  the  Excefs :  For  though  Hunting 
be  a  royal  Paftime,  it's  certainly  a  bafe  and  fervile  Em- 
ployment. 

Nean.  Pray,  what  is  your  Opinion  of  Dancing  and 
Mufick  ?  Are  they  genteel  Accomplifhments  ? 

Eufeb.  No  doubt:  They  embellifh  Qiiality,  and  give 
a  pretty  turn  to  Breeding ;  they  furnifh  a  Man  with  all 
the  little  Ingredients  neceflary  for  a  quaint  Addrefs^  and 
ulher  him  into  Company  with  Advantage ;  they  relieve 
a  drooping  Difcourfe  :  For  when  Reafon  runs  low,  and 
Converfation  languilhes,  a  Stroke  of  the  Fiddle,  a  Song 
or  a  Sarahand^  well  performed,  may  enliven  it :  But  don't 
over-rate  thefe  Talents,  nor  place  'em  among  the  firft- 
rate  Qualifications  of  a  Gentleman  ;  for  in  Reality  they 
only  fit  you  up  for  a  modifh  Addrefs,  and  a  Female  En- 
tertainment. Let  a  Man  rather  trim  up  his  A-lind  than 
his  Body :  Thofe  Embellifhments  are  more  nobis  and  rich 
that  lie  in  the  Brain,  than  thofe  that  link  into  the  Feet, 
or  perch  on  the  Finger's  End, 

X,  When 


f7%^  Gentleman  J«/?r^^^i.       ai 

X. 

When  Innocence  left  the'Wortd,  Cloaths  came  into 
Fafhion  ;  they  were  only  invented  as  a  Screen  to  Naked- 
nefs,  and  a  Defence  to  Decency  ;  you  muft  not  there- 
fore invert  the  Inftitution,  nor  turn  the  Marks  of  Infamy 
into  Badges  of  Grandeur  ;  for  it's  a  Madnefs  to  pride  in 
our  Shame,  and  to  look  big  becaufe  we  are  poor  and  indi- 
gent: Indeed  a  Gentleman  fhould  not  clatter  in  Sabots^ 
nor  trudge  about  in  Linfy-lVoolfy.  Quality  under  fuch  a 
Difguife  would  make  a  llovenly  Figure:  Be  neat  with- 
out Gaudinefs,  genteel  without  Aftedation :  In  fine,  the 
Taylor  muft  take  meafure  both  of  your  Purfeand  of  your 
Quality,  as  well  as  of  your  Perfon  :  For  a  Suit  that  fits 
the  Charadter,  is  more  alamode  than  that  which  fits  well 
on  the  Body.  I  have  feen  fome  Fops  over-flioot  Extra- 
vagance ;  they  ranfack'd  all  the  Shops  in  Pater-Moller- 
Row  and  Cheapjide  for  the  Matter,  and  confulted  the. 
whole  Company  of  Merchant-Taylors  for  the  Form ;  a 
Man  of  Wat;  might  be  rigg'd  with  lefs  Noife,  and  fome- 
times  at  lefs  Expence :  Now,  though  fine  Feathers  make 
fine  Birds,  yet  furely  gaudy  Trappings  can't  make  fine 
Gentlemen  :  for  the  Embellifliments  of  Quality  are  Wit, 
Judgment,  and  Behaviour;  an  Air  that's  noble  without 
Haughtinefs,  and  condefcending  without  Mean-nefs. 
Now  thefe  Qualifications  lodge  in  the  Soul,  they  lie  in 
the  Head,  not  on  the  Back ;  the  EfFedls  indeed  run  to  the 
Superficies,  but  the  Caufe  fculks  out  of  fight. 

I  fuppofe  we  put  not  off  our  Nobility  at  Night,  nor 
put  it  on  in  the  Morning  at  the  Toilet-^  why  then  are  we 
imitten  witli  Drapery,  and  doat  on  Finery  ?  This  muft 
be  underftood  with  Regard  to  Decency  ;  Allowance  mull 
be  given  to  Cuftom  and  Opinion ;  a  Gendeman  muft 
not  be  fo  unpretending  in  Appearance,  as  to  affect 
Slovenlinels;  this  is  to  facrifice  one  Vice  to  another,  to 
atone  for  Vnnity  with  Naftinefs:  Walk  between  thefe 
two  Extremes;  though  you  ufe  both  Shops  and  Taylors, 
depend  on  neither;  build  not  your  Reputation  on  Silks, 
nor  your  Worth  on  StuiFs :  For  in  a  Word,  they  are  mere 
Excrements  of  poor  Animals.  Now,  to  make  the  bafeft 
Part  of  Worms  and  Sheep  the  Top  of  our  Grearnels, 
is  in  Effeft  to  commence  Beaft.  Meander^  put  on  a  good 
Humour,   a  fine  Behaviour,  a  noble  Difpofition,    and 

C  3  you'U 


22        fhe  Gentleman  Injiru^ed, 

you'll  keep  the  Mob  at  a  Diftance  j  but  whofoever  pre- 
tends to  dazzle  Men  into  Refpeft,  merely  with  Scarlet 
and  Gold  Lace,  will  fall  fhort  of  his  Pretenfions-  Men 
are  not  awed  by  Cloaths,  but  Vertue :  Old  Fabricius  in  his 
^erkiny  and  Curius  in  the  Chimney  Corner,  were  more 
efteemed  and  feared  than  Caligula  or  Heliognbalus^  in  all 
their  State  and  Bravery. 

XI. 

Let  not  one  Aftlon  ftoop  below  the  Level  of  your 
Quality ;  be  not  deceived  in  the  Notion  of  Honour;  this 
is  a  necefl'ary  Caveat  in  the  mad  Age  we  live.  Some 
confound  Honour  with  Profit,  others  with  Pleafure  ; 
but  by  the  Rules  of  this  new  Syftem,  Pilfering  and  Lewd- 
nefs  are  dignifying  Qualifications  :  And  fo  Foot-pads, 
Cut-purfes,  and  Debauchees  may  pretend  to  the  Right  of 
Peerage ;  but  others  feat  it  on  the  Sword's  Point,  and  per- 
fuade  themfelves  it  confifts  in  Slaughter;  as  if  there  were 
no  Difference  between  Honour  and  Savagenefs,  between 
a  Gentleman  and  a  Butcher :  Thefe  are  a  Race  of  Eu- 
ropean Canibah^  who  worry  their  Species^  and  devour 
Man's  Flefli ;  true  Anthropophagi,  who  fport  in  Blood, 
and  turn  Slaughter  into  a  Diverfion ;  they  are  known  by 
the  Names  of  Scowrers  and  Duellijis ;  but  thefe  Apella- 
tions  are  too  innocent  for  fo  bafe,  fo  barbarous  an  Em- 
ployment ;  they  ftand  guilty  of  Murder  by  the  Laws  of 
the  Land,  and  therefore  are  mark'd  with  Shame  and  In- 
famy by  the  Government:  But  befides  they  are  condemn'd 
by  the  Law  of  God,  and  fp  are  at  once  outlav/ed  by  Re- 
ligion and  the  State.  What,  I  befeech  you,  can  ftigma-^ 
tize  and  degrade  a  Practice  more  efficacioufly  than  this 
double  Excommunication  ? 

But,  fays  a  Gentleman,  fhall  I  receive  an  Affront  ? 
Yes,  I  hope,  rather  than  a  Stab,  or  a  Halter ;  that  may 
bejetrieved,  but  a  Wound  in  the  Heart,  or  a  disjointed 
Neck,  are  irremediable.  But  muft  I  fwallow  the  Lye 
too  ?  Why  not,  if  you  deferve  it  ?  The  Puniftiment  ex- 
ceeds not  the  Crime,  and  methinks  it's  reafonable  for  the 
Penalty  and  the  Fault  to  go  together :  For  prey  refledl 
if  the  Imputation  of  a  Lye  be  fo  oftenfive  to  Quality,  the 
thing  itfelf  is  much  more ;  and  thcicfore  you  ought  rather 
tQ  take  thofe  Imputations  as  Admonitions  than  Affronts. 

But 


^he  GENTtEMAN  Inftru^ed.       ^3 

But  fuppofeit  be  a.Calumny,  I  would  either  contemn 
it  or  pardon  it ;  a  Man  muft  undervalue  the  Benefit  of 
"Eafe,  and  the  Price  of  Life  to  fell  it  for  fo  inconfiderable 
a  Trifle;  for  in  the  Judgment  of  the  Law  it's  nothing,  it 
will  not  bear  an  Adlion.  Now,  feeing  we  fubmit  to  the 
Opinion  of  the  Judges  in  other  Differences,  why  are  we 
refradory  in  this  Cafe  ?  The  Law  is  the  Standard  not 
only  of  Right  and  Wrong,  but  of  Honour  and  Infamy : 
And  feeing  it  will  not  take  Cognizance  of  fo  petty  an 
Afperfion,  it  fuppofesit  below  Notice. 

Ay !  But  cuftom  has  ennobled  Revenge :  And  we  had 
better  be  out  of  the  World,  than  out  of  the  Fafliion, 
Under  Favour,  the  King  is  the  only  Fountain  of  Ho- 
nour, and  I  cannot  find  he  ever  made  over  ta  Cuftom 
this  Prerogative  Royal. 

But  what  is  this  Cuftom  you  talk  of  ?  (/.  ^.)  a  Club  of 
Defperadoes^  without  Religion,  without  Confcience,  a 
Pack  of  Renegado  ChriJiiaMs,  who  are  a  Scandal  to  their 
ProfelTion,  and  a  SJiame  to  their  Nature ;  vote  Murder  a 
brave  Adtion,  and  you  obtrude  this  atheiftical  Error  from 
the  univerfal  Opinion  of  Mankind,  for  the  Standard  of 
Honour  and  Bravery.  Why  ?  Such  Mens  Judgments 
are  as  falfe  as  their  Principles,  and  their  Opinions  as  de- 
praved as  their  Manners ;  becaufe  Rafcals  extol  Perjury, 
Highwaymen  Robbery,  and  Debauchees  Lewdnefs,  are 
thefe  creditable  and  innocent  Vocations?  Becaufe  Per- 
jury, Robbery,  and  Licentioufnefs  are  common,  are  they 
lawful  ? 

Befides,  can  any  thing  be  more  extravagantly  foolifli, 
than  the  Pundtilio's  of  a  Duellift  ?  One  has  given  me 
the  Lye ;  to  wipe  off  the  Affront,  I  muft  provoke  him  to 
tilt  at  my  Lungs.  Ah,  but  Right  ftands  for  you !  But 
what  if  Fortune  ftands  for  your  Antagonift  ?  Right  is  a 
dull  Weapon,  unlefs  Skill  and  good  Luck  manage  it  ; 
the  clandeftine  Revenges  of  the  Italians  are  cruel  and 
diabolical,  but  at  leaft  they  are  lefs  foolifh  than  ours; 
they  will  not  bathe  their  wounded  Honour  in  their  own 
Blood,  but  in  that  of  their  Enemy  .;  and  therefore  they 
attack  unawares,  or  by  Proxy ;  but  we  revenge  at  our 
ownExpence,  nay,  and  upon  our  felves,  and  fometimes 
at  a  Difadvantage  too ;  as  if  to  retrieve  our  Honour 
we  muft  die  like  Fools.  I  know  not  what  Charms  others 
may  fee  in  a  Stab,  I  had  rather  be  fent  into  the  other 
C  4  World 


24        'ff^^  Gentleman  InJiruM. 

World  by  the  Hangman  than  a  Duellift;  a  Duel  isan  ill 
Diitemper  to  die  of,  though  polTibly  Atheifts  may  think 
it  a  genteel  one;  and  I  am  confident  thele  Martyrs  of 
Honour  will  bedifcompofed  when  they  find  their  Recep- 
tion in  the  next  Life  falls  Ihort  of  their  Expedation. 

Death,  Neander^  is  a  great  Leveller.  Titles,  Quali- 
ty, Wealth,  with  all  their  Appurtenances,  leave  us  with 
the  laft  Breath :  A  Clown  will  meet  with  Refpecl  if  he 
be  innocent,  and  a  Prince  with  Contempt  if  guilty  ;  our 
Treatment  will  anfwer  our  Adlions,  not  our  Birth;  a 
Sca-f/enger  that  dies  in  Peace  with  God  will  be  conveyed 
into  Glory ;  and  a  Lord  that  expires  in  Sin  into  Tor- 
ments. 

xn. 

Some  Gentlemen  refine  Breeding  too  much;  they  af- 
fe6l  a  Singularity  in  Behaviour  as  well  as  in  Religion, 
and  fo  make  themfelves  ridiculous  to  appear  genteel  ; 
thefe  are  a  heterogenous  Race  of  Gentlemen  fome  call 
Fops,  and  others  Beaus ;  they  are  a  Compound  of  Farce 
and  Ceremony,  a  Mixture  of  Mimick  and  'tragedian  ; 
had  their  Mothers  made  a  Voyage  to  the  Indies,  I 
ihould  fufpe6l  they  had  fome  Relation  to  an  >ipe :  For 
certainly  they  are  of  a  mixt  Species,  and  often  the  Beaft 
•predominates,  but  always  the  Coxcomb ;  if  the  Beau 
hai  more  Wit,  the  Ape  has  more  Judgment ;  thefe  Gen- 
tlemen fpeak  like  Puppets,  and  walk  like  Clock-work ; 
they  pals  the  Morning  between  the  Glafs  and  the  Toilet^ 
and  fummon  to  their  Levee  the  whole  Po^e  of  Taylors, 
Barkers,  and  Sempjirejfes  ;  they  value  more  the  Art  of 
drefling  well,  than  the  Knack  of  paying :  And  whilft  o- 
thers  admire  their  Folly,  like  young  Narcijfus,  they 
contemplate  their  own  Beauty :  Pray  leave  the  People 
and  their  Behaviour  to  themfelves,  and  if  you  can't  avoid 
their  Company,  catch  not  their  Grimaces.  It's  true, 
you  muil  prepare  for  an  Attack  ;  for  like  People  llruck 
with  the  Plague,  they  love  to  give  the  Infedtion  ;  if  they 
find  you  refty,  they'll  not  fail  to  direft  your  Motions, 
and  anatomize  your  Comportment,  and  then  you  mult 
expedl  to  be  lampoon'd  in  Verfe,  or  pelted  in  Profe ; 
but  they  always  meet  with  poor  Cajfdndra's  Fortune, 
never  to  be  believed ;  their  yea's  go  for  »o's,  and  their 
Satyrs  for  Panegyricks :  I  might  enlarge  upon  this  Sub- 


The  Gentleman InfiruBed*       25 

jeft,  but  I  fear  I  have  already  trefpafled  upon  your  Pa- 
tience. 

Nean.  I  fee,  dear  Eufebius^  you  are  a  Stranger  to  my 
Conftitution,  I  am  not  fo  foon  talk'd  down ;  how  can 
I  fpend  my  Time  better,  than  in  learning  how  to  fpend  it 

well  ? 

After  a  fhort  Difcourfe  of  indifferent  things,  Neander 
took  leave  of  Eufehius  with  a  Promife  to  return  the  next 
Morning.     He  kept  his  Word,  and  Eufebius  fpoke  thus. 


DIALOGUE    III. 

Eufebius  injiruds  Neander  in  the  Duty  of  a  Chri/iiav. 

Eufeb.  TT's  harder,  dear  Neander^  to  defcribe  the  part 
1  of  a  Chriilian  than  that  of  a  Gentleman,  and 
a  matter  of  higher  Importance  to  aft  it  well ;  if  a  Gen- 
tleman falls  below  his  Charader,  his  Reputation  may 
fuffer,  but  not  his  Soul :  He  may  not  Hand  fair  in  Mens 
Opinion,  but  this  is  a  trivial  Misfortune;  for  pray  what 
great  Advantage  is  it  to  be  efteem'd  by  thofe,  who  cannot 
be  fufficiently  blam'd  ?  Alas !  their  Elleem  is  fo  infignifi- 
cant,  that  it's  neither  able  to"  credit  nor  difgrace. 

But  oh !  if  our  Life  fwerves  from  the  Laws  of  Chri- 
ilianity,  and  if  Death  takes  us  away  in  this  Diforder, 
we  are  undone  for  ever,  eternally  loft  /  without  Hope  of 
Change,  or  of*  retrieving  our  Misfortune  :  Upon  this 
Point  our  All  depends ;  if  we  z€t  a  Chriftian  well,  we 
fliall  be  well  received  into  the  Joys  of  the  Juft;  but  if  ill, 
into  the  Punifhments  of  the  Impious:  And  both  thefe 
States  are  everlafting,  both  immenfe,  that  in  Pleafure, 
this  in  Pain. 

Now,  when  the  Gain  on  the  one  fide  is  fo  vaft,  and  the 
Lofs  on  the  other  fo  exorbitant,  does  not  Reafon  tell  us 
that  we  ought  to  bend  all  our  Care,  all  our  Application, 
to  difcharge  our  felves  of  the  Duties  of  a  Chriftian?  I 
will  therefore  draw  up  a  fhort  Scheme  of  the  moft  pref- 
fing  Offices  of  your  Profeffion,  and  furnifh  you  with 
Motives  able  to  perfuade  you  to  comply  with  'em. 

I.  The 


i6       7^5  Gentleman  InftruS^ed, 

I. 

The  chief  Reafon  why  Men  live  at  random  is,  becaufe 
they  have  forgot  their  Errand ;  they  fancy  themfelvea 
to  be  the  Woric  of  Chance,  the  Off-fpring  of  Hazard, 
Creatures  of  Pleafure  placed  on  the  Land  (as  the  Levia- 
than is  in  the  Water)  to  fport  and  play ;  but  certainly  we 
muft  have  fmall  Acquaintance  with  the  Dignity  of  our 
Nature,  and  a  mean  Opinion  of  our  Greatnefs,  to  frame 
fuch  wild  Ideas.  Our  Underftanding  is  too  noble  to  be 
buried  in  Dung  and  Rubbifh ;  and  our  Soul  too  fpiritual  to 
be  condemned  by  Nature  to  the  bafe  Employments  of 
Brutes. 

No,  no,  Neander :  God's  Omnipotence  framed  us,- 
and  his  Goodnefs  defigned  us  for  himfelf  alone.  He  has 
ennobled  us  with  Reafon  to  know  his  Greatnefs,  with  a 
Will  to  love  his  Goodnefs,  and  with  a  Soul  to  enjoy  his 
Perfe6tion.  He  is  our  Alpha  and  our  Ome^a^  the  Origin 
of  our  Being,  and,  the  End  of  our  Creation.  It's  im- 
poflible  for  us  to  be  miferable  with  him,  or  happy  with- 
out him. 

11. 

But,  though  we  are  made  to  enjoy  God  in  Heaven, 
it's  uncertain,  whether  we  fhall  ever  land  at  this  thrice 
happy  Haven  of  the  BlelTed  ;  for  God  has  decreed  to 
communicate  the  fupreme  Felicity  as  a  Reward,  not  as 
^  Gift :  We  muft  take  this  City  by  Storm,  not  by  Capi- 
tulation :  We  muft  enter  Repee  a  la  tn»'tn :  ^  violenti  ra- 
piunt  illtid.  But  if  the  Difficulty  cramps  our  Courage, 
if  it  baulks  our  Refolution,  if  we  mifcarry  in  the  Enter- 
prize,  or  fail  in  the  Execution,  we  are  undone  for  ever; 
we  muft  take  up  our  Habitation  in  Hell,  and  dwell  per- 
petually with  Fire  and  Brimftone.  This  we  believe, 
Neander^  and  the  bare  Thought  of  it  fometimes  con- 
geals the  very  Blood  in  our  Veins,  and  ftrikes  us  with 
Horror  and  Amazement.  One  Theft,  one  Murder,  one 
Fornication  unrepented,  cafts  us  into  a  Lake  of  Fire,  in- 
to a  Vale  of  Torments,  into  a  fad  Manfion  of  Defpair, 
where  we  fhall  always  burn,  and  never  be  confumed ; 
always  die,  and  ever  live  the  Objed:  of  God's  Wrath, 
and  the  perpetual  Monuments  of  our  Folly  and  Difobe- 
dience.  Thcfe  two  Points  are,  as  it  were,  Poftulatums 
in  Morality,  and  God  has  been  pleafed  to  reveal  'em  in 

almoft 


7%e  Gentleman  InJiruBed,       ij 

almoft  every  Chapter  and  Page  of  the  New  Teftament, 
that  he  might  allure  us  to  our  Duty  by  the  charming  Pro- 
fped  of  Heaven,  or  fcare  us  to  it  by  the  difmal  Repre- 
fentation  of  Hell. 

in. 

We  can't  tax  God  of  Severity,  nor  complain  of  his 
Unkindnefs ;  for  though  on  the  one  Hand  he  draws  up 
in  Battalia  all  the  Terrors  of  an  unhappy  Eternity  to 
fright  us ;  on  the  other  he  difplays  all  the  Treafures  of 
Heaven  to  whet  our  Hope,  and  animate  our  Courage  ; 
nor  does  he  lay  our  Salvation  in  the  Hands  of  Chance, 
or  truft  it  to  the  Care  of  our  Enemies.  Yet,  he  has  en- 
trufted  every  Man  with  his  own  Welfare ;  fo  that  we 
■  cannot  be  miferable,  unlefs  we  confpire  againft  our  felves, 
and  turn  Traytors  to  our  own  Intereft.  If  therefore  we 
mifcarry,  muft  not  the  Fault  lie  at  our  own  Door?  If  we 
will  be  fo  ftupid  as  to  fling  up  our  Claim  to  Heaven ;  fo 
void  of  Reafon  as  to  leap  into  Hell ;  do  not  we  deferve 
to  forfeit  the  one,  and  feel  the  other?'  A  Man,  who  in 
fpight  of  Prayers  and  Tears  will  vault  down  a  Precipice, 
delerves  to  meafure  the  height  of  it  by  the  Fall ;  and  if 
he  breaks  his  Neck,  who  will  not  rather  laugh  at  his 
Misfortune  than  pity  it  ? 

IV. 

Had  God  tied  up  our  Happinefs  to  harder  Conditions, 
he  had  not  over-rated  it.  For  all  we  can  either  do  df 
fuffer  in  time,  bears  no  Proportion  with  an  Eternal  Re- 
ward ;  though  he  be  our  Mafter,  he  has  behaved  him- 
felf  to  us  with  all  the  Tendernefs  of  an  indulgent  Father. 
For  he  has  drav/n  up  Articles  fo  advantageous  for  us, 
that  we  muft  be  mad  to  complain,  either -of  Circumven- 
tion or  hard  Dealing:  He  requires  nothing  but  Love  and 
Obedience.  Now  who  can  in  ReafoTrtefufe  to  love  an 
infinite  Beauty  ?  Or  to  obey  an  omnipotent  Power  ?  We 
pay  him  Love  and  Obedience  by  keeping  his  Command- 
ments, which  are  only  hard  to  thofe  that  refolve  to 
tranfgrefs  'em.  £?  mandata  ejus  ^ravia  non  funt.  Nay, 
they  are  fo  agreeable  to  Reafon,  that  we  muft  crofs  upon 
our  Nature,  before  we  can  violate 'em,  and  almoft  ceafe 
to  be  Men,  when  we  begin  ,to  be  Sinners.  In  a  Word, 
to  be  happy  in  the  next  World  we  muft  be  vertuous  in 
this,     Vertue  is  yow  Duty,  Neander^  and  if  you  pradlife 

it 


i8        ^he  Gentleman  InJfruBed, 

it  ferioully,  'twill  prove  your  Pleafure.  For  God  has  fo 
interwoven  our  Duty  with  our  Satisfadion,  that  it's  im- 
poflibk  for  a  Man  to  be  innocently  unhappy. 

V. 

Though  Vertue  be  an  excellent  Thing,  it  may  be  abu- 
fed.  It  lies  within  the  Reach  of  Fancy,  lUuiion,  and 
Mifapplication  ;  there  is  falfe  Vertue  as  well  as  adulterate 
Coin  :  And  as  the  Lacedemonians  trickt  up  their  Gods  in 
Xht  S^artan'Drtis],  fo  oftentimes  Men  model  Vertue  by 
their  own  Paffions.  I  have  feen  a  morofe  Zealot  eternal- 
ly harangue  againft  the  Corruption  of  the  Age ;  all  was 
wrong,  all  vicious,  that  crofs'd  his  four  Humour.  One 
would  have  thought  God  had  conftituted  him  Inffedor- 
General  of  Mankind  ;  he  kickt  and  flung  after  fo  unchri- 
llian  a  rate,  'twas  dangerous  to  come  within  his  Reach. 
Now,  though  Scripture  and  Reafon  call  this  Sin^  he  mif- 
took  it,  good  Man,  for  Vertue.  His  Error  was  Proof 
againft  Homily  and  Exhortation.  You  might  have  fooner 
perfuaded  him  out  of  his  Chriftian  Name,  than  out  of  his 
peevifh  Humour. 

As  I  efteem  nothing  more  than  true  and  genuine  Ver- 
tue, fo  I  abhor  a  Hypocrite.  I  hate  thofe  Mountebanks 
of  the  Spirit,  who  turn  Piety  into  a  Trade ;  who  pray 
themfelves  into  Livings,  and  whine  themfelves  into  Re- 
putation ;  who  pradife  Humility  out  of  Pride,  and  Cha- 
rity out  of  Spight ;  who  preach  up  the  moft  fevere  Mo- 
rals in  publick,  and  condemn  'em  in  private  ;  whofe  Zeal 
is  Cenfure,  whofe  Juftice  is  Intereft,  and  Piety  a  Cover 
to  Vanity.  I  have  heard  thefe  Tartars  lafli  the  World  to 
Excefs,  whilft  they  courted  it  to  Extravagance :  They  ex- 
tolled Solitude,  yet  were  always  in  Company,  and  prai- 
fed  Vertue,  when  they  pradifed  Vice.  In  one  Word,  this 
Race  of  Men  is  a  Medley  ofOppofites,  humble  without, 
and  proud  within ;  arrogant  to  Excefs,  and  on  Occalions 
fubmiflive  beyond  Meafure;  all  Fire,  and  all  Smoakj 
Saints  in  Appearance,  and  Sinners  in  Effed. 

Others  place  Dagon  and  the  Ark  on  the  fame  Altar. 
Like  Jehu^  they  blend  Good  with  Evil,  adore  God  in 
the  Temple,  and  golden  Calves  in  Dan  and  Bethel  t 
Sometimes  they  are  all  Spirit,  fometimes  all  Body :  Now 
they  regale  their  Senfes  with  a  thoufand  Ragoufts  of 
the  moft  refined  Lewdnefs  :  By  and  by  they  feaft  their 

Souls 


^he  Gentleman  Infni^fed.        0.^1 

Souls  with  the  moft  high-feafon'd  Piety:  One  Day  they 
furfeit  with  Falling,  another  with  Feafting:  Yellerday 
they  were  tired  with  Kneehng,  to  Day  with  Dancing: 
They  feldom  mifs  a  Sermon,  never  a  Play  :  If  you  fee 
a  Prayer- Book  in  their  Hand,  you  may  fwear  there  is  a 
Lampoon  in  their  Pocket ;  and  if  the  Bible  lies  on  their 
Desk,  a  Romance  ftands  on  the  Shelf;  fo  that  they  are 
half  Saint,  and  half  Devil,  but  all  Monfter.  I  knew  a 
He-Devotee,  who  would  fpeak  fo  feelingly  of  the  Ex- 
cellency of  Chaftity,  one  would  have  taken  him  for  a 
Baptijl ;  yet  at  the  fame  time  he  entertain'd  a  Mifs  in  a 
Corner ;  and  though  on  Sunday  he  appear'd  in  the  Church 
with  Refpeft  before  the  Lord,  all  the  Week  he  paid  Ho- 
mage to  the  Lady  :  This  is  not  Vertue,  but  an  Oleo  of 
Vices :  This  is  to  worfhip  God  as  the  Soldiers  did  our  Sa- 
viour, with  Outrage  and  Blafphemy.  You  may  eafily 
infer,  that  the  Duty  of  a  Chriftian  obliges  you  to  deteft 
and  abhor  fuch  a  Conduft,  but  not  to  imitate  it,  one 
Defeat  tarnifhes  Vertue.  Bonum  ex  Integra  cojifa,  ma- 
lum ex  quolibet  defeSiu. 

That  Man  is  truly  vertuous,  who  is  neither  proud  in 
good  Fortune,  nor  abjedt  in  bad ;  who  defires  nothing  but 
Heaven,  and  fears  nothing  but  Hell ;  who  avenges  Af- 
fronts with  Favours,  and  Injuries  with  Pardon;  who  is 
fevere  to  himfelf,  and  eafy  to  his  Neighbour;  who  fpeaks 
well  of  all  but  himfelf;  and  never  pardons  his  own  De- 
fers, nor  cenfures  thofe  of  his  Brethren.  In  a  Word,  Ne- 
ander^  Do  good,  and  fly  from  evil,  is  the  Sum  of  your  Du- 
ty. This  is  Vertue  in  Short-Hand,  Perfedtion  in  Epi- 
tome, and  Heaven  in  Reverlion. 

VI. 

That  Part  of  your  Duty  is  of  the  greateft  Importance, 
that  immediately  belongs  to  God ;  he  is  our  Maker  and 
our  Sovereign,  we  are  indebted  to  his  Power  for  our 
Being,  to  his  Goodnefs  for  our  Converfation ;  from  him 
we  expeft  the  Reward  of  our  Vertues,  and  the  Puiiifh- 
ment  of  our  Vices.  Return  him  therefore  a  thoufand 
Thanks  for  the  Favours  you  have  received  from  the  firfi: 
Moment  of  your  Creation;  you  can't  begin  the  Ac- 
knowledgement too  foon,  you  can't  repeat  it  too  often, 
becaufe  you  can  never  thank  him  enough  j  refpedt  him 
as  your  Father,  ferve  him  as  your  Mafter,  and  fear  him 

as 


30       1'he  Gentleman  Infru^ed. 

as  your  Judge ;  neither  forget  his  Kindnefs  in  Profperity, 
nor  blafpheme  his  Condu6l  in  Adverfiry  :  He  is  no  lefs 
amiable  when  he  frowns,  than  when  he  fmiies ;  when  he 
wounds,  than  when  he  heals.  And  therefore  kifs  the 
facred  Hand  that  ftrikes,  as  well  as  t.iat  which  flroaks 
you :  He  always  defigns  your  Good,  unlefs  by  Murmurs 
and  Impatience  you  turn  his  Bleffing  into  Curfes;  and 
then  praife  his  Condudl,  but  condemn  your  own. 

Ah  !  Neander^  a  thoufand  thoufand  times  happy  is 
that  Man,  who  flings  up  all  his  Concerns  into  the  Hands 
of  Providence,  and  ties  up  his  Defires  to  the  Laws  of 
Obedience ;  he  carries  in  his  Breaflr  a  little  Paradife,  and 
a  Heaven  in  Profpecl ;  he  fits  above  the  reach  of  For- 
tune, and  beholds  with  an  Air  of  Unconcernednefs  un- 
der his  Feet,  all  thofe  Storms  and  Tempefts  that  dafh  in 
Pieces  other  Mens  Felicity  ;  he  neither  defires  good 
Succefs,  nor  fears  Difappointmentj  he  opens  his  Door 
no  lefs  chearfully  to  Want,  than  to  Abundance:  Infine^ 
he  knows,  that  Command  is  God's  Prerogative,  and  Sub- 
miffion  his  Duty.  Can  Imagination  paint  a  more  folid, 
a  more  fincere  Satisfadlion,  than  neither  to  languifh  un- 
der the  Torments  of  Hope,  nor\o  fink  under  the  Billows 
of  Defpair  •,  than  to  fubjedt  our  Appetite  to  Reafon,  and 
this  to  God,  our  omnipotent  Maker  and  merciful  Re- 
deemer ? 

This  SubmifTion  raifes  Man  to  the  Height  of  Vertue 
and  Happinefs:  For  whofoever  bows  his  Neck  to  the 
fweet  Yoak  of  Providence,  neither  amufes  his  Thoughts 
with  vifionary  Hopes,  nor  extravagant  Fears ;  he  lives  on 
his  own  Fund,  and  keeps  his  Defires  within  the  Compais 
of  his  Power  i  he  is  content  with  the  Portion  God  has 
affigned  him :  This  he  holds  only  in  Fee,  and  is  ready  to 
leave  it  at  the  firft  Command.  He  neither  affedts  to  be  . 
lefs,  nor  afpires  to  a  higher  Station ;  he  would  be  juft  as 
he  is,  becaufe  God  has  made  him  fo. 

Nean.  This  State  of  Indifference  is  a  fine  thing  in 
Theory  and  Speculation,  but  impoflible  in  Pradtice,  and 
is  rather  to  be  wifhed,  than  hoped  for. 

Eufeb.  Pray  remember  that  defponding  Thoughts  only 
ferve  to  pall  the  Spirits,  and  to  blaft  generous  Refolutions. 
Things  are  often  impoflible,  becaufe  Cowardife  makes 
'em  fo:  Check  Fancy,  and  you'll  not  encounter  thofe 
Difficulties  in  the  Prad^ice;  Pufillanimity  and  Non-Expe- 
rience 


fhe  Gentleman  InfiniEied,       3 1 

rience  conjure  up  to  fright  you.  For  God  is  no  Epicurean 
Deity,  fo  taken  up  with  the  Enjoyment  of  his  own  Fe- 
licity, that  he  has  no  leifure  to  call  a  Thought  on  the 
Concerns  of  poor  Mortals  below :  No,  no,  Neander^ 
his  Providence  is  as  boundlefs  as  his  Being;  he  did  not  di- 
vert: himfelf  of  the  Government  of  the  World,  when  he 
had  made  it ;  he  can't  either  forfeit  his  Title  to  the  Ad- 
miniftration  of  the  Univerfe,  or  abdicate  it.  That  Hand 
which  made  all  Things  muft  of  Neceflity  continue  'em, 
otherwife  they'd  make  a  fpeedy  Exit^  and  fink  into  their 
primitive  Nothing:  He  has  affigned  every  Being  its  Sta- 
tion ;  even  the  Worm  and  the  Pifrnire^  he  fets  'em  their 
Task,  teaches  them  to  work,  and  through  a  thoufand 
Labyrinths  leads  all  things  to  their  perfed:  Ends.  Now 
certainly,  he  that  created  all  fublunary  Beings  for  Man, 
cannot  be  thought  to  withdraw  his  Care  from  him,  as  if 
he  were  below  his  Love  or  Concern :  No,  no,  he  counts 
the  Hairs  of  his  Head,  and  regifters  his  Steps  in  the  Folio 
of  his  Omniscience, 

Now  God  being  Goodnefs  it  felf,  he  can't  wait  upon 
us  with  an  ill  Defign.  He  Hands  over  us  as  a  Guardian, 
not  as  a  Spy ;  as  a  Friend,  not  as  an  Enemy ;  he  confi- 
ders  our  Conftitution,  and  pries  into  all  Circumftances, 
that  he  may  time  his  Favours,  and  fo  enhance  their  Va- 
lue, by  adapting  them  to  our  NecefTities. 

As  his  Goodnefs  afluresushe  means  well,  fo  hisWif- 
dom  gives  us  Security  and  Caution,  that  he  can't  be  de- 
ceived in  the  Choice  of  thofe  Things  he  defigns  for  us ;  he 
can't  give  us  a  Stone  for  a  Loaf,  nor  a  Scorpion  for  a 
Fifh,  nor  Poifon  for  a  Medicine :  So  that  we  are  fure 
on  the  one  fide,  that  nothing  befals  us  unawares,  but  ei- 
ther by  his  Permiflion  or  Command ;  and  on  the  other, 
that  he  either  permits  or  commands  it  for  our  Good ;  and 
that  it  will  certainly  prove  fo,  unlefs  we  defeat  his  chari- 
table Defigns  by  Impatience  or  Blafphemy,  and  by  a 
llrange  felf-creative  Power  turn  his  Bleffings  into  Curfes. 
Now,  what  Misfortune  can  make  Imprefllion  on  a  Mind 
fo  ftrongly  fenced  ?  It  will  Hand  the  moft  fiery  Trial, 
without  an  Oh^  without  a  wry  Face  ;  for  it  has  both 
Faith  and  Reafon  to  fupport  it  ?  And  then  he  that  will 
weep  that  has  all  the  Reafon  in  the  World  to  laugh,  muft 
be  fond  of  Tears,  and  in  Love  with  Torment. 

It's 


32        "the  Gentleman  InftruM. 

It's  true,  this  Do6lrine  is  extinft  in  Praftice :  We 
fnarl  at  Providence,  we  difpute  his  Orders,  and  burlefque 
his  Decrees  J  we  fcream  out  at  the  lighteft  Touch  of  his 
gentle  Hand,  and  turn  our  felves  into  all  the  Poftures  of 
Impatience  ;  we  neither  receive  his  Favours  with  Thanks, 
nor  Correftion  with  Patience. 

But  this  irrational  Condud  argues  much  Peevifhnefs 
and  more  Infidelity.  For  thefe  People  muft  either  doubt 
of  his  Power,  or  dare  not  trull  his  Goodnefs ;  and  then 
they  deny  both  by  Illation. 

Ah!  dear  Neander^  commit  your  Concerns  to  the  Ma- 
nagement of  God  J  ask  no  temporal  Blefling,  but  with 
a  fiat  "voluntas  tua  ;  refufe  no  Afflidlion  ;  receive  that 
with  Gratitude,  this  with  Refignation;  and  if  you  can't 
defire  Croffes,  at  leaft  accept  'em,  and  remember  always, 
that  thofe  things  often  prove  more  prejudicial  we  pray 
for,  than  thofe  we  fear. 

We  are  an  America,  an  undifcovered  Region  to  our 
felves,  our  Defires  fly  not  only  before  Reafon,  but  Re- 
fledtion ;  fo  that  we  are  fo  far  from  knowing  what  is 
good  for  us,  that  we  know  not  what  we  would  be  at: 
Our  Fancy  over-fhoots  Nature,  and  (like  a  Fool's  Para- 
dife)  reprefents  Objects  in  borrowed  Colours  and  falfe 
Shapes:  Deluded  therefore  by  vain  Glailes  and  deceitful 
Opticks,  we  dote  by  Hazard,  and  hate  at  Random  j  we 
embrace  a  deformed  Leah  for  a  charming  ^a^/^*?/;  court 
Happinefs,  and  efpoufe  Mifery.  But  God,  who  built  our 
Fabrick,  knows  our  Conftitution ;  he  dives  into  our  Tem- 
per, and  comprehends  all  thofe  Things  we  either  eagerly 
purfue,  or  paffionately  fly  from ;  he  fees  the  Employment 
of  thefe  will  convey  us  to  etei'nal  Felicity,  and  the  Pof- 
feflion  of  thofe  into  endlefs  Torments.  He  therefore 
gives  what  we  feared,  and  refufes  what  we  defired.  Now, 
is  it  not  a  Kindnefs  to  be  thus  mercifully  cruel  ?  Is  it  not 
a  Favour  to  baulk  our  Pretenfions,  and  a  real  Misfor- 
tune to  be  fortunate? 

VII. 
We  can  never  withdraw  our  felves  from  God's  Im- 
menfity  :  He  reigns  in  Hell  no  lefs  than  in  Heaven  :  He 
exercifeshis  Juftice  among  the  Damned,  and  his  Mercy 
among  the  Blefled  ;  he  dwells  in  Woods,  and  walks  in 
Cities  i  he  retires  with  us  into  Solitude,  and  accompa- 

pie? 


The^  Gentleman  tnjlru^ed.       3  3 

hies  us  in  Converfation  j  he  is  in  all  Places,  and  fees  all 
Things ;  he  fathoms  our  Deiires,  he  counts  our  Words, 
he  fcatis  our  A.clions,  and  reads  our  Thoughts. 

Imprint  this  Truth  witli  indelible  C]iata6Lei"s  in  your 
Memory,  and  recommend  it  to  your  daily  Confiderati- 
ons  it  will  teach  you  both  Caution  ahd  Refped  ;  it  will 
curb  the  diforderly  Sallies  of  Nature,  and  bind  your  Paf- 
fion  to  its  good  Behaviour.  You  will  not  have  the  Face 
to  ftep  beyond  the  Bounds  of  Duty,  nor  fcarce  be  tempted 
to  tranfgrefs  it.  Nature,  I  confefs,  is  unruly,  it  will  run 
iaway  ■Vvith  us,  unlefs  we  keep  a  ftrong  and  watchful  Hand 
over  it;  but  then  the  very  Thought  that  God  itands  by, 
will  blow  over  thofe  Flames  of  Paflion,  that  dim  Rea- 
ibn,  and  hurry  us  into  Tranfgreffions. 

Before  a  grave  Man  we  dare  not  fall  into  Indecency  ; 
his  very  Prefence  gives  a  Check  to  Appetite,  and  ftops 
Senfuality  in  its  full  Career  ;  So  that  Lewdnefs  and  De- 
bauchery are  forced  to  retire,  and  give  Place  to  Shame. 

He  who  violates  the  Law  in  the  Face  of  Authority,  that 
has  both  Will  and  Power  to  revenge  the  Contempt, 
gives  an  evident  Proof,  that  either  Life  isuneafy  to  him, 
or  that  he  is  not  compos  mentis^  and  by  confequence  de-* 
ferves  Bedlam  rather  than  'Tyburn.  Yet  human  Juftice 
adts  in  a  narrow  Sphere  ;  it  reaches  but  to  Lifcj  and  can- 
not purfue  the  Criminal  beyond  the  Grave.  If  there- 
fore the  Sight  of  a  Man,  and  the  Apprehenfion  of  Death, 
have  fuch  a  Tranfcendency  oVer  us,  as  to  cool  the  Fire 
of  Paflion,  to  difcountenance  an  unbefeeming  Sally,  and 
to  repel  any  Afiault  upon  our  Vertue ;  certainly,  a  llrong 
Perfualion,  that  God  is  prefent,  that  he  looks  on  us  ta 
trown  our  Vertues,  and  to  chaftife  our  Vices,  cannot  be 
lefs  efficacious ;  for  he  is  Sovereign  Difpofer  of  our  Souls 
and  Bodies;  he  is  able  to  tumble  thefe  into  nothing,  and 
thofe  into  Hell ;  v/e  may  baffle  human  Juilice,  either  by 
Flight,  Money,  or  Favours,  but  we  cannot  fly  out  of 
God's  Dominion  ;  his  Anger  can  neither  be  appeafedwith 
Bribes,  nor  foftned  with  Tears,  nor  overcome  with  En^ 
treaties. 

Now  a  Alan  who  with  the  Eyes  of  Faith  continually 
beholds  this  dreadful  Majefl:y  hovering  about  him,  with 
the  Reward  of  Vertue  in  one  Hand,  and  the  Sword  of 
Revenge  in  the  other,  will  take  Care  of  his  Behaviour, 
f:nd  not  ie>ll  his  Innocence  for  a  fleet  Pleafure  in  Hand, 

D  ij^d 


34        ^^^  Gentleman  Injlru^ed, 

and  eternal  Torments  in  Remainder.  Let  me  therefore 
once  more  intreat  you,  by  all  that  is  dear,  by  all  that  is 
facred,  to  carry  this  Conlideration  along  with  you  in  all 
your  Bufinefs,  in  all  your  Paftimes,  its  Company  will 
neitlier  be  troublelbm'e  nor  expenfive,  but  I  am  fure  it 
will  be  advantageous. 

VIII.    . 

God's  infinite  Greatnefs  intitles  him  to  Homage,  and 
our  Dependance  calls  upon  us  to  pay  it :  We  cannot  ac- 
knowledge too  foon  his  Authority,  becaufe  we  cannot 
refpedt  it  too  much  :  We  are  the  Work  of  his  Hands, 
the  Ohjeft  of  his  Mercy,  and  fliall  once  be  eternally 
that  of  his  Love,  or  of  his  Hatred  ;  of  his  Love,  if  we 
execute  his  Commands ;  but  of  his  Hatred,  ifwetranf- 
grefs  'em.  Juftice  therefore  and  Gratitude  ;  Hope  of 
.Heaven,  and  Fear  of  Hell,  preach  Vertue  and  Obedience 
tohis  moft  holy  Injun6tions.  Yet,  alas!  this  Voice  of 
Thunder  is  not  able  to  awake  our  young  Gallants, 
like  lb  many  bewitched  Samffons^  they  fleep  in  the  Bo- 
fom  of  flifcinating  Pleafures,  that  lull  'em  into  plealing 
Trances,  imaginary  Delights,  to  plunge  'em  into  real 
Torments.  One  would  think  they  either  disbelieved  a 
future  State,  they  are  fo  unconcerned  for  the  prefent ;  or 
that  they  had  a  Patent  to  do  ill ;  or  at  leaft  an  Allurance 
of  Pardon  and  Repentance.  Their  Study  is  to  learn 
Sins;  their  Employment  to  commit  'em,  and  grand  Di- 
verlion  to  applaud  their  Impieties.  Tell  thefe  deluded 
Creatures  they  walk  over  Precipices,  and  fport  on  the 
Brink  of  Deftrudlion  :  That  to  live  a  Debauchee,  is  to 
die  a  Reprobate :  They  anfw^er  your  charitable  Admo- 
nition with  a  Joak,  or  a  Frown,  and  very  coldly  reply, 
that  Youth  was  made  for  Pleafure,  and  old  Age  for 
Repentance.  Good  God  !  that  Men  of  Wit  and  Parts 
ftiould  fo  wretchedly  fool  themfelves  into  Ruin.  Were 
our  Souls  no  longer  lived  than  our  Bodies,  did  they  fmk 
into  nothing  when  vi'e  ceafed  to  breathe,  that  atheiftical 
Rant,  £fl'^,  btbe^  gaude^  eras  moriemur,  would  not  be 
quite  unreafonable.  Could  we  look  into  the  Future,  and 
read  our  Delliny,  could  we  call  up  a  Horofcope  of  our 
Death,  as  Aftrologers do  of  our  Life;  were  we  fure  that 
eras  moriemur^  we  might  equip  ourfelves  to  Day  for  a 
Journey  to  Hell,  and  make  to  Morrow  great  Prepara- 
tions 


fhe  Gentleman  TnftniBed.       3 j 

tions  for  Heaven.  But,  alas!  we  dwell  in  a  P.egion, 
where  Certainties  are  fo  twifted  with  Uncertainties  that 
though  v/e  know  we  muft  die,  yet  we  are  as  igno- 
rant of  the  Time,  Place,  and  Manner,  as  the  Child  un- 
born. Perchance  Divine  Juftice  may  arreft  us  in  the  ve- 
ry Heat  of  our  Lewdnefs :  It  may  drag  us  from  the  Stews 
to  Judgment :  The  firft  time  we  clofe  our  Eye-lids  may 
be  the  laft :  VVe  may  only  fleep  in  this  World  to  wake  in 
the  next ;  we  may  only  open  our  Eyes  to  fee  llrange 
Flames,  and  return  to  our  Ssnfes  to  feel  them. 

Sudden  Deaths  are  not  miraculous*  The  Bills  of  Mor- 
tality alliire  us  they  are  too  ordinary :  But  thefe  Accidents 
furprize  your  Debauchees  oftner,  than  thofe  who  live 
within  the  Bounds  of  Temperance  and  Moderation. 
They  over'chai"ge  Nature  with  continual  Excefs,  and  fet 
all  the  Humours  of  the  Body  in  an  Uproar:  And  how 
eafy  is  it  for  thefe  Humours  in  fuch  a  Hurry  and  Tu- 
mult, to  crowd  in  upon  the  Heart?  or  to  fly  up  to  the 
Brain?  or  to  impede  the  playing  of  the  Lungs,  and  on  a 
fudden  flop  Refpiration  ? 

But  though  God  fhould  deal  more  mercifully  with 
thefe  Men  than  they  deferve,  though  he  fhould  give  them 
both  Time  and  Leifure  to  repent,  it's  ten  to  one  they  wili 
die  in  their  Sins,  and  carry  into  the  next  World  thofe 
Crimes  they  committed  in  this. 

For  two  Things  are  neceflary  for  a  thorough  Repen- 
tance ;  God's  Grace  and  Man's  Co-operation  ;  without 
that  we  cannot  repent,  and  without  this  he  will  not  par- 
don. If  therefore  the  DifKculty  to  be  overcome  be  greater 
at  Threefcore,  than  at  Twenty,  and  Grace  be  lefs,  it's 
odds  they'll  not  repent  at  Threefcore,  but  that  certainly 
will  be  greater,  and  this  infallibly  will  be  lefs.  There- 
fore it's  odds,  that  the  final  Refolutions  of  thefe  unfortu- 
nate Gentlemen  will  vanifh  into  Smoak,  and  end  in  eter- 
nal Dcfpair  and  Punifhment. 

I  prove  the  Difficulty  will  certainly  be  greater.  Phi- 
lofophy  and  Experience  teach  us,  that  a  frequent  Re* 
lapfe  into  any  Diforder  ingenders  a  Habit,  that  is,  a 
Facility  and  Propenfion  to  reiterate  the  fame  A6lions. 
And  this  takes  its  Force  from  the  Frequency  of  the  Pra- 
d;ice :  For  though  in  natural  Produdtions  there  is  a  cer- 
tain Point  of  Growth  and  Perfcdion,  yet  in  Morals 
there  is  no  fuch  Term,  both  vicioi:s  and  vcrtuous  Habits 
D  2  may 


^6        T/^^GENTtEMAN  InflruBed. 

may  go  on  in  infinitum  :  Hence  it  happens,  that  an  inve- 
terate Cuilom  twifls  and  winds  itfelf  into  our  very  Na- 
ture; it  fmks  into  our  Bones;  and  enters  into  our  Confti- 
tution.  Now,  if  all  the  frightful  Reproaches  of  Confci- 
ence,  all  the  Calls  or  Grace,  thedifmal  Profpect  of  thofc 
Shades  below, the  charming  Allurements  of  Heaven  above, 
were  too  feeble  to  reftrain  Nature  alone;  will  theyfilence 
the  Clamours  of  mutinous  rafiions,  curb  the  Violence  of 
Nature  back'd  by  Cultom,  and  inflamed  with  ill  Habits  ? 
No,  no:  Nature  feconded  by  a  Habit  (.like  a  Loadftone 
armed  with  Iron)  draws  ten  times  ftronger.  He  who 
groans  under  the  Weight  of  a  Feather,  will  fall  under 
that  of  a  Mill-ilone. 

Now,  as  ill  Habits  biafs  Nature,  and  make  it  more 
impetuous,  and  leis  governable ;  fo  in  our  Suppolition, 
Grace  the  chief  aftive  Principle,  is  lefs.  For  Grace  is 
a  free  Gifr,no  Debt,  aliter  Gratia  nun  ejfet'y  we  mull  re-^ 
ceive  it  as  a  mere  Benevolence,  and  cannot  ask  it  as  our 
Due. 

It  is  probable  God  will  pour  down  upon  his  mortal  Ene- 
mies thefe  Streams  of  Favour  and  Beauty,  as  plentifully 
as  on  his  Friends  ?  On  thofe  who  blafpheme  him  twenty 
Years  together,  as  on  thole  who  adore  him?  On  thole 
who  abandon  their  Duty  out  oi  a  determinate  Malice, 
as  on  thofe  who  fall  by  Surprize  ?  It  is  certain  he  will 
not:  For  God  will  not  be  laught  at ;  and  can  the  Wit  of 
Man  invent  a  more  coinpendipus,  and  at  the  fame  time 
a  more  biting  Raillery,  than  by  trampling  under  Foot 
this  Divine  Gift,  that  coft  our  great  Redeemer  Torrents 
of  Sweat,  and  Rivers  of  Blood,  than  by  making  his 
Goodnefs  the  Ground  of  our  Ingratitude  ?  Than  by  refu- 
iing  to  repent,  becaule  he  is  prone  to  pardon?  If  God  be 
juft,  as  certainly  he  is,  he'll  ilop  the  Conduit  of  his  Mer- 
cy, and  rain  down  a  Deluge  of  Maledictions  on  thofe  re- 
bellious Giants,  that  attack  the  moft  High,  and  turn  his 
greateft  Attributes  againll  his  own  Breaft. 

Nean.  What  you  fay,  as  to  the  main,  is  true ;  but 
give  me  leave  to  tell  you,  there  is  a  Dafli  of  Hyper- 
bole in  your  Difcourfe:  Man's  Malice  can't  weary  God*s 
Mercy ;  he  can  pardon  more  Sins  than  Man  is  able  to 
commit  ;  nay,  and  will,  if  we  fling  ourfelves  at  his 
Feet,  and  fue  for  Mercy.  A  contrite  Heart,  Eufebius, 
is  a  moving  Spedlackj  it  difarms  God's  Juftice,  and 

melts 


The  Gentleman  Injiru^ied.       3  7- 

melts  it  into  Mercy ;  and  as  he  receives  thofe  Prodigals 
that  return,  io  he  furnifhes  them  with  Grace  for  tlieir 
Voyage. 

Eufeb.  Neander,  God's  Goodnefs  weighs  down  Man's 
Mahce  ;  our  Obllinacy  can't  tire  his  Mercy  ;  he'll  give 
both  Pardon  and  Heaven  to  thofe  who  ask  'em  ;  his  Word 
Hands  engnged,  and  he  can't  flyback.  But  then,  where 
has  he  promifed  that  inveterate  Sinners  fhall  ask  Pardon  .'' 
It's  true  alfo,  that  the  moll  profligate  Debauchees  have 
Grace  fufficient  to  work  Repentance.  But  what  fignifies 
a  Power  to  do  Good,  v/ith  a  Will  to  do  Evil?  There  is 
not  a  damned  Soul  in  Hell,  that  did  not  once  find  it  I'elf 
in  the  fame  Circumilances.  Is  it  lefs  miferable,  becaufe 
once  it  might  have  been  happy?  Alas !  this  fad  Medita- 
tion fuggeftsnew  Matter  to  their  Defpair,  becaufe  it  re- 
preients  their  Mifery,  together  with  their  Folly,  as  the 
fole  Caule  of  their  Misfortune. 

Nean.  Fray,  Eufehtus,  dpn't  djfgrace  God's  darling 
Virtue,  Mercy  ;  nor  condemn  poor  Sinners  to  the  worft 
of  Torments,  Defpair.  Whilll  there  is  Life,  there  is  Hope. 
They  who  never  thought  of  Pardon  in  their  Lives,  found 
it  at  their  Death.  What !  he  who  died  for  Man,  can  he 
have  the  Heart  to  damn  it  ?  The  very  Thief  on  the  Crofs, 
though  abandon'd  by  Men,  was  carefl'ed  by  his  loving  Sa- 
viour; and  for  one  humble  memento  mei,  received  Mercy 
in  this  World,  and  Paradife  in  the  other. 

Eufeb.  Miftake  me  not,  dear  Neander.,,  -I  am  not 
for  grafping  an  Immenlity,  nor  for  prelcribing  Bounds 
to  an  infinite  Being;  I  know  God's  Mercy  is  above  the 
Skies;  but  then  his  Juftice  finks  below  the  Abyfs;  jw 
dicio  ejus  abyjfus  muha.  We  can't  take  the  Height  of 
that,  nor  fathom  the  Depth  of  this.  They  are  both  equal, 
i.  e.  infinite ;  nay,  they  are  the  fame  thing :  For  Ju- 
ftice is  Klercy,  armed  with  Revenge  ;  and  Mercy  is  Ju- 
ftice, difpofed  to  Pardon.  Why  then  fhould  we  dread 
it  in  one  Drefs,  as  well  as  dote  on  it  in  the  other  ?  I  am 
not  for  cafting  Men  into  Defpair.  As  it  is  the  greateft 
of  Torments,  fo  it's  the  blackeft  of  Crimes,  and  the  moft 
irrational:  This  antedates  Damnation,  and  gives  us  over 
to  Execution  before  God  has  pronounced  the  Sentence. 
To  damn  your  felves  out  of  a  Fear  of  being  damned,  is 
the  Top  of  Madnefs ;  the  ne  plus  ultra  of  Frenfy  :  To 
think  my  Salvation  impofiible,  is  to  make  it  io  ^  not  to 
D  3  hope 


3S         7^^  G  E  N  T  L  E  M  A  N  Ififtru^ed. 

hope  for  Heaven,  is  the  next  way  to  lofe  it.  But  then 
if  I  hate  Defpair,  I  abhor  Prefumption  ;  if  that  leads  us 
to  Hell  by  a  diredl  Line,  this  does  the  Bufinefs  as  effica- 
ciouily.  For  can  we  outrage  our  great  Mafter  more, 
than  when  we  bend  his  augult  Attributes  to  our  Lewd- 
nefs  ?  and  build  the  Babel  of  our  Abominations  upon  his 
Goodnefs  ?  and  our  Crimes  upon  his  Mercy  ?  Is  not  this 
to  fport  with  Majeily?  to  rally  Authority?  and  to  play 
with  Goodnefs?  And  pray  what  difference  is  there  be- 
tween defpairing  of  Mercy,  and  burlefquingit?  This  im- 
pious Mirth,  Ne under ^  will  once  end  in  Sorrow,  and 
thefe  Peals  of  Laughter,  in  gnafhing  of  Teeth  :  But  be- 
caufe  our  Libertines  put  a  great  Strefs  on  the  good  Thief's 
Converfion,  and  fancy  their  Deaths  will  refemble  his, 
no  lefs  than  their  Lives ;  'twill  not  be  amifs  to  examine 
the  Point. 

Firfi^  St.  Bi'r^^ri  tells  us,  that  this  Thief's  Converfion 
is  the  only  Example,  to  be  found  in  Scripture,  of  a  de- 
ferred Repentance  that  was  fuccefsful.  But,  with  Sub- 
lnifTion,  St.  Bcrfiard  miftook  in  the  Calculation :  For  this 
was  not  properly  a  deferred  Repentance.  The  Thief  an- 
fwered  the  firft  Call  of  his  agonizing  Saviour ;  the  firft 
Glance  of  his  Sacred  Eyes  wounded  his  finful  Soul,  and 
melted  his  hard  Heart  into  Love  and  Sorrow. 

Secondly,  The  Thief  received  Pardon  and  Paradife : 
But  what  did  he  to  defervc  this  miraculous  Favour  ?  He 
adored  Chrift,  not  feated  on  a  Throne  of  Glory,  but  co- 
vered vv'ith  Shame  and  Infamy,  torn  with  Whips,  pierced  • 
with  Thorns,  outraged  by  his  Enemies,  forfaken  by  his 
Friends :  Befide,  fome  fay.  Life  v/as  offered  this  Male- 
fador,  if  he  would  deny  Chrilt :  But  he  chofe  rather  to 
die  with  him,  and  for  him,  than  to  live  without  him.  So 
that  now  the  Caufe  of  his  Death  was  changed,  and  he 
who  was  faftened  to  the  Crofs  a  Robber,  expired  on  it  a 
Martyr. 

Juird/y,  God  fealed  his  Pardon ;  but  this  Aa  of  Grace 
was  granted  on  the  Day  of  Mercy ;  and  yet  of  fo  many 
Sinners  that  were  Spedlators  of  this  bloody  Tragedy,  we 
know  but  this  Thief,  who  was  fo  fortunate  as  to  ask 
Pardon,  and  to  receive  it.  Tell  me  then,  dear  Neander^ 
Should  we  not  rather  draw  Motives  of  Fear  from  the  Mis- 
fojtune  of  thoufands,  than  of  Prefumption  from  the  good 
Luck  of  one  ?  If  you  look  on  the  right  Hand  of  our  dy- 

ing 


^he  Gentleman  In/iruffed.       ^p 

ing  Lord,  pray  call  an  Eye  upon  the  Left;  and  if  you 
behold  on  the  one  fide  a  Saint,  you'll  difcover  a  Repro- 
bate on  the  other.  Let  therefore  Gentlemen  learn  Fear 
from  the  Damnation  of  the  one,  as  well  as  from  the 
other  a  dangerous  Security.  And  I  counfel  all  Chriftians 
to  draw  this  Conclufion  from  the  different  Deaths  of  thefc 
two  Malefadors,  that  it's  a  Madnefs  to  defpair,  and  Te- 
merity to  prefume;  Unus  eji  nc  difperes,  unicus  ne  pr<c_ 
fumas. 

Wherefore  confecrate  the  firft  Fruits  of  Reafon  to  God ; 
you  can't  begin  the  Pradict;  of  Piety  too  focn,  but  may 
t^olate;  Nature,  untainted  with  Vice,  may  be  wrought 
with  Eafe  into  any  Form,  and  caft  in  any  Mould.  It's 
a  kind  of  tabula  rafa,  a  Blank,  that  almoft  with  the  fame 
Facility  receives  the  Chara6ters  of  Angel,  and  of  Devil ; 
but  when  once  it'sftained  with  Sin,  when  it's  biaffed  by 
ill  Habits,  and  worfe  Principles,  you  will  find  it  ftubborn 
and  rebellious.  Be  not  then  fo  foolifh  as  to  prefer  Dan- 
ger before  Security,  and  to  turn  Pleafure  into  Toil.  Take 
Occafion  by  the  Fore-top,  it  quickly  pafles,  and  feldom 
returns. 

IX. 

Religion  is  the  Ground-work  of  Salvation  ;  and  there- 
fore you  cannot  be  too  tender  of  a  thing  that  fo  nearly 
concerns  your  eternal  Happinefs.  I  recommend  this 
Point  to  your  Care  with  greater  Eagernefs,  becaufe  at 
prefent  it  lies  under  all  the  Difadvantage  of  Contempt, 
and  I  fear  the  Gentry  have  a  greater  Hand  in  the  Scan- 
dal, than  the  Commonalty.  Nothing,  indeed,  enters 
more  frequently  in  Difcourfe  ;  it's  the  vulgar  Topick  of 
Converfation,  the  Subjeft  of  our  Heats,  the  Source  of 
Dlvifions,  and  by  Confequence  of  our  Misfortunes : 
Yet  not  one  of  a  hundred  knows  the  very  Meaning  of 
the  Word,  and  not  two  in  a  thoufand  agree  upon  the 
Thing  J  the  very  Ideas  we  have  of  it  are  wild  and  mon- 
ftrous. 

I  have  heard  with  Indignation  and  Horror,  fome  Gen- 
tlemen pronounce  ex  Cathedra^  That  Religion  is  a  Grie- 
vance ;  noDuty,  becaufe  it  controuls  our  moft  noble  Fa- 
culty, the  Underftanding,  and  enflaves  us  to  blind  Obe- 
dience. 

D  4  Otb«rt 


40        ^he  Gentleman  InjiruBe^, 

Others  weigh  Religion  by  Intereft,  and  proteft,  tha^ 
Orthodoxy  and  Profit  go  together:  So  thatinthofeMens 
Theology,  'Turcifm,  with  a  i  ooo  /.  per  Annum^  is  more 
credible,  than  Chriltianity  with  foo. 

Others  again  confound  Religion  withFa6lion,  and  fp 
to  carry  on  a  black  Defignilrikc  in  with  any  Conventicle  i 
they  cry  out  for  Liberty  of  Confcience,  although  they 
have  none  for  Reformation,  though  they  delight  in  Tu- 
mults, and  feign  the  Angel  to  play  the  Fiend. 

Others,  like  an  abandon'd  Brat,  drop  it  at  Church- 
mens  Doors,  and  fancy  it  is  a  Monfter  of  their  begetting. 
Craft  (fay  they)  Jugling  an^i  Intereft  brought  it  forth, 
whilft  Superftition  and  Poliq'  maintains  it. 

Bat  by  thefe  Gentlcmens  leave.  Religion  is  neither  the 
Produft  of  Spleen,  nor  the  Fruit  of  Imagination;  it  is 
neither  a  Statift's  Engine,  nor  a  Parfon's  Invention  ;  it 
came  from  Heaven,  and  was  planted  on  Earth  by  Chrift 
and  his  Apoftles  ;  and  we  muft  either  believe  it  here,  or 
burn  for  our  Infidelity  hereafter ;  He  that  believeth,  and 
is  baptized,  /ball  be  faved  j  bui  he  that  believeth  not.^ 
Jloall  be  damned, 

Thefe  are  our  Saviour's  Words,  and  they  will  be  re- 
ceived, I  fuppofe,  by  Chriftians.  The  Apoftle  delivers 
the  fame  Dodtrine  ;  Without  Faith  it  is  irnpojfible  topleafe 
God.  Nov;  without  doubt  God  made  Heaven  for  his 
Friends,  not  for  his  Enemies;  for  thofe  who  pleafe  him, 
not  for  thofe  who  contemn  his  Laws,  and  fport  with  his 
moft  peremptory  Commands.  Again,  St.  Augujiine  tells 
us,  "^Ubi  vera  fides  non  ejl^  nee  poteji  vera  ejj'e  juflitia. 
But  it's  Frenzy  and  Illufion  to  Excefs,  to  fancy,  that  a 
Man  not  truly  juft,  will  be  admitted  into  the  eternal  Joys 
of  Heaven  ;  it  follows  therefore  very  juftly  that  Salvation 
is  a  Chimaeraoutof  Chrift's  Church,  and  by  confcquence, 
that  all  thofe  libertine  Gentlemen,  who  play  with  Reli- 
gion, and  fport  with  Faith,  are  in  a  fair  way  to  deplore 
eternally  their  fadious  Impiety.  I  would  have  'em  fpend 
fome  cool  Thoughts  on  the  Matter, '  and  confidcr  fcrir 
pufly,  whether  a  petty,  brutifh,  nay,  atheiftical  Satis- 
fadlion  can  countervail  a  perpetual  Mifery,  and  whether 
they  would  not  give  more  pregnant  Proofs  of  Wit  an4 
Judgment  bj  enquiring  after  the  true  Religion,  than  by 
kmpooning  all. 

*  Dc  Ser.  Dciin  monte.  C.  19. 

Tell 


^ie  Gentleman  InJIruBed.       41 

Tell  me  not  you  lead  a  moral  Life,  you  walk  by  the 
3_ight  of  Reafon,  and  frame  your  Condu6t  by  its  invio- 
lable Maxims ;  that  you  neither  curfe  God,  nor  wrong 
your  Neighbour ;  that  you  neither  invade  his  Lands,  nor 
impeach  his  Reputation  ;  that  your  Hands  are  not  dipt  in 
Blood,  nor  your  Tongue  in  Gall ;  that  you  defile  no 
Man's  Bed,  nor  encroach  on  his  Property.  Thefe  Nega- 
tives will  never  unlock  Heaven's  Gate,  nor  place  you  in 
Blifs.  Faith  muft  carry  a  Torch  before  you,  otherwife 
you'll  ramble  in  the  Dark,  and  wander  in  Error,  till  the 
Flames  of  Hell  difplay  the  Miftake,  and  at  the  fame  time 
puniftj  it. 

But  do  you  think,  Neander^  that  thofe  Men,  who  talk 
down  Religion,  and  cry  up  Morals,  are  at  the  Bottom 
greater  Friends  to  the  one,  than  to  the  other?  Alas !  no; 
their  Actions  are  as  libertine  as  their  Belief;  and  if  we 
may  judge  by  Appearance,  they  have  no  more  of  the 
Man,  than  of  the  Chriftian.  For  whoever  faw  thefe 
mighty  Advocates  of  Morals,  thefe  Aflertors  of  Regula- 
rity, ever  ftand  up  in  Defence  of  Vertue,  but  when  they 
adlually  condemn'd  it  in  Pra6lice  ?  I  have  often  indeed 
heard  your  qualified  Debauchees  talk  moft  feelingly  of 
Sobriety  over  Champaigne,  of  Temperance  at  a  full  Ta- 
ble :  And  I  once  met  with  a  Proftitute,  that  extolled 
Chaftity  like  a  Veftal.  You  muft  therefore,  when  you 
meet  with  Infidel  Moralifts,  fuppofe  they  only  commend 
Verlue  in  jeft,  but  praclife  Vice  iixgood  earneft ;  and  that 
they  are  as  far  from  enflaving  their  Paffionsto  the  Laws  of 
Nature,  as  their  Judgments  to  Divine  Revelation. 

Take  not  Religion  upon  Credit  ;  there  are  in  the 
World  Teachers  of  falfe  Tenets,  as  well  as  Coiners  of 
falfe  Crowns  ;  and  as  you  bring  thefe  to  the  Touch- 
Stone,  fo  you  muft  bring  thofe.  To  believe,  you  know 
not  why,  is  rather  Stupidity  than  Faith;  it  is  to  unfence 
Religion,  to  lay  it  open  to  the  weakeft  Allault  of  Schifm 
and  Herefy.  In  fine,  to  believe  nothing  is  Madnefs,  and 
to  believe  any  thing  Folly.  He  is  truly  happy  who  walks 
between  thefe  two  Extreams,  and  neither  believes  too, 
jnuch  por  too  little. 

X. 

The  Religion  you  muft  embrace,  is  that  which  Chrift 

i'evealed,  and  his  Apoftles  preached :   This  may  be  de- 

' ■  ■  ■ '  nied 


42       ^he  Gentleman  InJlraBed. 

nied  by  a  Jew  or  7«ri,  but  not  by  a  Chriftian.  For,  be- 
ing God,  he  had  Authority  to  command,  'and  we  have 
an  indifpenfible  Obligation  to  obey  ;  nor  could  he  fet  up 
Impoftures  for  Truths,  or  impofe  Falfehoods  under  the 
Ma^k  of  Divine  Revelation.  The  Apoftles  indeed  were 
Men,  but  inlpired  from  Heaven,  and  confequently  no 
more  fubject  to  Error,  than  the  Divine  Spirit  that  gave 
his  Oracles  through  the  Organs  of  their  Mouths. 

This  is  a  Summary  of  your  Duty  to  Goa  :  That  vou 
owe  your  Neighbour  fhall  be  the  Subject  of  our  next  En- 
tertainment. In  the  mean  time  you  mull  be  my  Gueft 
to  Day,  pray  refufe  me  not  the  Favour. 

Neai2.  I  sm  at  your  Command  J  but  let  me  defire  you 
to  give  me  thefe  excellent  Documents  in  Writin*  - 
they  are  too  long  to  be  remembered,  and  too  ufeful  to  be 
forgot. 

Eufeb.  ril  comply  w^ith  your  Defires,  and  at  my  Lei- 
fure  fet  down  vv'hat  I  can  call  to  Memory. 


DIALOGUE    IV. 

Whether  Gentlemen  are  obliged  to  praiiife  Vertue. 

"  O  Carce  was  Dinner  ended,  but  in  came  Eleuthcrius, 
*'  O  an  Acquaintance  of  Eufebius ;  he  was  a  Gentleman 
*'  of  a  worthy  Family,  and  of  an  Eftate  fuitable  to  his 
**  Chara<^er.  Liberty  and  Pleafure  were  his  darling 
"  Pallions ;  and  I  have  heard  him  fay,  he  had  rather 
"  want  Grace  than  Wit,  although  he  had  no  great  Pro- 
"  villon  of  either.  He  could  not  endure  to  be  crowded 
*'  with  Vifits,  or  yoaked  in  Ceremony,  becaufe  fuch 
*'  Formalities  entrenched  on  Freedom,  and  put  Liberty 
'*  under  Conftraint ;  and  for  this  Reafon  he  never  went  to 
*'  Court:  For  he  compared  Courtiers  to  fo  many  Slaves, 
*'  who  move  in  Fetters,  and  live  for  others,  not  for  them- 
**  felves;  fometimes  to  worlc'd-down  Labourers,  more  fit 
**  for  Sleep  than  ricafare.  In  fine,  he  valued  Eafe  above 
*'  Greatnefs,  and  Senfuality  above  Confcience,  fo  that  his 
*'  Name  jumpt  with  his  Humour  ;  his  Religion  was  of 
"  the  laft  Edition,  that  is,  Puritanifm  cut  on  Independency^ 
^'  and  garnillvd  with  an  Oleo  of  upftart  Novelties ;  he 

"  afcribed 


T'he  Gentle M 'AN  Injlru^ed,      43 

««  afcribed  Man's  Juftification  to  Faith  alone,  and  there- 
*'  fore  condemned  good  Works  as  heterodox,  as  En- 
'*  croachments  upon  Chriftian  Liberty,  and  a  Grievance 
*'  to  the  Subjeft:  Hence  he  hated  Humiliation-Days, 
*'  and  could  never  be  perluaded  to  fail  till  he  had  regaled 
"  his  Appetite.  One  Day  he  moved  that  the  Statute  de 
"  comburendo  Hceretico  might  be  revived  and  executed 
*'  upon  a  Perfon  for  faying  that  ejiote  perfect  was  ad-^ 
"  drefled  to  Gentlemen  ;  he  looked  upon  it  as  a  fcan- 
*'  datum  magnaium^  and  a  clipping  of  the  Privilege  of 
*^  Peerage.  In  fine,  he  was  of  Opinion,  that  Fancy  was 
*'  the  only  Rule  of  a  Gentleman's  Faith,  and  Pleafure 
•«  that  of  his  A6lions. 

Eufeb.  Welcome,  Eleuiherius^  pray  fit  down.  Why 
fo  thoughtful  and  recollefted?   I  fuppofe  you  are  come 
from  your  Devotions,  Morning- Service  is  juft  done. 
Eletithe.  Why,  Man,  this  is  not  the  Lord's-Day. 
Efifeh.  Pray  of  what  Religion  are  you  ? 
Eleuthe.  I  am  a  Chrijlatt. 

Eufeb.  Ah,  that  may  be,  butof  what  Perfuafion?  For 
that  Notion  reaches  a  great  way ;  There  are  Chriflian 
Papijls,  Chriflian  T'nrki^  and  Chriftian  Infidels ;  and  then 
there  are  Proteftants,  and  T'rue  ProteftuMtSy  and  in  fine, 
there  are  Et  C(Ctera  ChrifHans^  with  which  of  thefe  do 
you  convene  ? 

Eleuthe.  With  all,  and  with  neither;  that  is,  I  have 
drawn  off  the  Spirits  from  each,  and  left  the  Caput  mor- 
tuum  behind ;  in  (hort,  my  Religion  is  new  and  modifh : 
'Tis  grinned  at  indeed  by  fome,  but  pradlifed  by  the 
greater  and  more  witty  part  of  the  Nobility ;  'tis  Refor- 
mation upon  Reformation. 

Eufeb.  Metal  upon  Metal  is  a  Solecifm  in  Heraldry, 
and  why  not  Reformation  upon  Reformation  in  Religi- 
on? But  under  Favour,  if  general  Pradlice  hits  right  with 
the  Precepts  of  your  Religion,  they  are  fly-blown ;  and 
were  I  difpofed  to  doggrel  it,  I  would  only  glofs  upon 
that  Texx.  Follow  my  Counfel,  Eleutherius ;  fay  com- 
mon Pradlice  clafhes  with  its  Maxims,  or  elfe  you'll  give 
too  great  an  Advantage  to  Criticifm  and  Enquiry.  For 
i^  what  you  fay  be  true,  your  Religion  is  without  Fence, 
without  Rampart,  and  a  little  Reafon  will  batter  the 
whole  Fabrick  about  your  Ears ;  for  when  the  Queftion 
jis  about  Good  and  Evil,  Practice  Hands  on  the  wrong  fide. 

3ut, 


44        ^he  Gentleman  Lijim^ed. 

But,  Sir,  let  us  wave  Difpute ;  fuppofing.  you  are  a 
Chriftian,  what  Harm  is  there  in  going  to  Church  on  a 
Feria  ? 

Eleuthe.  What  Harm  is  it  to  fink  my  Charadler,  and 
fling  up  my  Charter? 

Eiifeb.  Why,  Pray ing  and  good  Workscome  npt  with- 
in the  Statute  of  Treafon,  I  hope.    ■ 

Eleuthe.  Take  care,  you  may  flip  into  a  Praemunire 
before  you  are  aware.  Liberty  and  Property  are  edged 
Tools  now-a-days,  few  have  meddled  with  them  with- 
put  a  Scar. 

Enfeb.  You  are  in  a  very  merry  Vein  to  Day,  but  me- 
thinks  the  Subjed:  bears  no  Raillery.  Prithee  (Drollery 
apart)  what  do  you  mean  by  Liberty,  Property,  and 
Prsemunjre  i* 

Eleuthe.  In  fhort  then,  Gentlemen  are  not  tied  up  tQ 
Works  of  Supererogation,  to  Vertue,  Perfection,  and 
twenty  other  Niceties ;  all  the  World  knows  that  Chri- 
llians  are  free-born  Subjedls,  exempt  from  the  Bondage 
of  Precept  and  Ceremony.  They  date  their  Liberty  from 
the  Moment  of  their  Baptifrn ;  and  a  learned  Clerk,  let 
me  tell  you,  was  of  Opinion,  that  the  very  7>n  Com- 
mandments expired  v/ith  the  Synagogue.  Now,  Sir,  to 
bring  Gentlemen  upon  their  Knees  to  incumber  their  Li- 
berty with  Laws  and  Statutes,  is  to  touch  them  in  the 
molt  fenfible  Part.  Engl'ijhmen  will  Hand  for  their  Birth- 
right, and  not  give  up  tamely  foconfiderable  a  Privilege; 
^nd  if  you  ilrive  to  wreft  it  out  of  their  Hands,  you  may 
perchance  repent  of  the  Attempt.  You  will  have  to  do 
with  Numbers  and  Power:  And  though  Truth  Hands  for 
you,  if  Force  fides  againft  you,  the  field  will  be  loft. 

Eufeb.  This  is  Liberty  indeed  with  a  Vengeance.  Na- 
ture at  this  rate,  and  Senfuality,  are  let  loofe,  and  have 
a  large  Field  to  walk  in.  Becaufe  Chrift  came  into  the 
World  to  banifli  Sin,  A'lan  may  open  the  Gate  to  all 
Abominations  ;  he  may  break  through  all  the  Barriers  of 
Nature,  Reafon  and  Religion  ;  he  may  cozen  and  mur- 
der not  only  with  Impunity,  but  alfo  with  Devotion.  I 
would  have  you  draw  up  a  Petition  againft  Goals,  Pillo- 
ries, and  Execution ;  nay,  it  would  not  be  amifsat  your 
pext  Coffee-Houfe  Aflembly,  to  vote  down  Hell  alio  as 
a  Grievance  to  the  free-born  Subjects  of  the  Covenant. 

Eleuthe, 


^'he  Gentleman  Injfru^ed.       45 

Eleuihe.  Nay,  indeed  the  Parfon  ftrain^  the  Point,  he 
has  over-ftiot  the  Truth  and  himfelf  too;  but  I'll  main- 
tain at  leaft  that  Gentlemen  are  not  bound  up  to  what  Di- 
vines call  Vertue  and  Perfeftion ;  thefe  Fooleries  look 
well  enough  in  a  canonical  Caflbck,  or  a  Clergyman's 
Drefs,  but  in  Scarlet  and  Gold  Lace  they  make  a  lean 
Figure,  they  walk  in  Embroidery,  as  little  David  did  in 
Saul's  hrmoVi^^  very  aukwardly,  and  rather  furnifli  Mat- 
ter for  Diverfion,  than  for  Edification. 

Etifeb.  Though  this  Thefis  has  lefs  of  Scandal  than  the 
former,  I  am  fure  it  is  equally  falfe.  For  tell  me,  have 
not  our  Gentlemen  and  topping  Mortals  received  from 
the  liberal  Hands  of  God,  a  far  greater  Allowance  of 
Favour,  than  Vulgars  ? 

Eleuihe.  No  doubt  of  it;  Nobility  it  felf  is  a  Favour 
of  the  firft  Clafs ;  it  raifes  a  Man  above  the  Crowd  and 
Smoak  of  the  World,  it  entitles  him  to  Honour  andRe- 
fpe6t ;  the  Prince  moves  here  below,  as  the  Sun  does  a- 
bove  in  Glory  and  Magnificence  ;  Gentlemen  are  Stars 
placed  above  him  for  Pomp,State,and  Ornament ;  befides, 
Gentlemens  Bodies  have  a  finer  Texture  of  Parts,  than 
thofe  of  a  meaner  Condition ;  their  Complexion  is  more 
bright  and  fprightly ;  their  Air  more  polite ;  in  fine,  Na- 
ture is  like  Carvers,  who  flubber  over  thofe  Pieces  that 
are  condemn'd  to  Obfcurity,  and  polifh  thofe  with  the 
laft  Exaftnefs  that  ftand  in  View. 

Eufeb.  You  argue  right  for  me  ;  but  then  you  confute 
your  own  Thefis.  For  if  Gentlemen  have  received  more 
Favours  than  the  Peafant,  certainly  they  are  obliged  in 
Honour,  as  well  as  Duty,  to  make  a  more  ample  Return 
of  Gratitude.  For,  fuppofe  a  Prince  has  raifed  one 
from  the  Degree  of  a  Page  to  that  of  a  Lord  or  Captain 
of  his  Guards,  that  he  has  at  the  fame  time  flung  in 
1 2000  /.  per  Ann.  to  fupport  the  Title,  and  fet  ofFhis  Dig- 
nity ;  has  not  this  new-dated  Peer  a  more  ftrait  Obli- 
gation to  ferve  his  Royal  Benefaftor,  than  a  Dray-man, 
that  only  enjoys  the  common  Protection  of  the  Govern- 
ment? This  is  our  Cafe  to  a  Hair.  You  grant  on  the 
one  Hand,  that  fuch  a  Man  lies  not  only  under  the  com- 
mon and  fundamental  Duties  of  a  Subjedl,  but  alfo  un- 
der the  additional  Ties  of  Gratitude  to  ferve  his  Prince  ; 
anion  the  other  you  confefs,  that  God  has  with  greater 
Profufcnefs  pour'd  out  his  Liberality  on  Gentlemenj  than 

en 


^6      ^he  Gentle  m'a  n  Injlru^ed, 

on  Clowns  and  Tradefmen  ;  why  then  is  not  their  Obli- 
gation greater  to  lerve  him  ? 

Eleuthe,  Their  very  Station  and  Rank  is  their  Patent 
of  Exemption  ;  in  fhort,  they  have  no  time :  For  you 
mull  allow  a  Gentleman  ten  Hours  for  Sleep,  a  Quarter 
for  his  private  Affairs ;  two  Hours  to  faunter  from  the 
Stable  to  the  Dog-kennel ;  three  for  Dinner,  and  as  ma- 
ny for  Supper  j  almoft  fix  for  the  Tavern,  Coffee-houfe, 
and  Theatre  :  So  that  you  may  fee  here  remains  no  time 
for  God  and  Vertue. 

Eufeb.  Your  Arithmetick  over-balances  your  Chriftia- 
nity.  Is  it  not  ridiculous,  I  mean  impious,  to  take  the 
length  of  a  Man's  Duty  by  his  Pradlice,  to  argue  from 
Fa61:  to  Right,  and  Subpaene  Tranfgreffion  to  witncfs  for 
the  Breach  of  a  Precept  ?  You  have  carv'd  out  a  Gentle- 
man's Time  exadtly  enough,  but  not  juftly ;  and  I  doubt 
much  whether  he  will  ftand  to  it  in  the  next  World,  tho' 
he  may  perchance  in  this.  God  bids  'em  watch  and  pray 
in  the  Gofpel ;  and  St.  Paul  in  his  Epillle  recommends 
Sobriety  and  Chaftity.  Now  I  think  Men  feldom  watch 
or  pray  while  they  fleep,  and  as  feldom  learn  Sobriety  in 
Taverns,  or  Chaftity  in  Brothels,  or  Morality  in  profligate 
Converfation  ;  tell  me  then  not  what  Gentlemen  do, 
but  what  they  fliould  do,  which  in  fhort  is  this :  As  they 
have  but  one  Affair  to  manage,  which  is  their  Salva- 
tion, fo  all  their  Thoughts  and  A6lions  muft  look  that 
way;  if  any  Motion  warps  from  this  Center,  they  fwerve 
from  their  Duty  >  they  muft  baulk  Appetite,  not  gratify 
it;  and  either  ilifle  Paflions  or  fetter  them  ;  they  mult 
be  humble  in  Profperity,  and  great  in  Adverfity ;  /.  e.  they 
muft  bear  that  with  Moderation,  this  without  Clamours 
or  Impatience;  they  muft  rather  forfeit  their  Lives  than 
Confcience,  and  poftpone  Pleafure  to  their  Duty.  Thefe 
are  the  Offices  of  Gentlemen :  For  Men  were  plac'd  in 
this  World  to  cultivate  Vertue,  and  to  enjoy  the  Fruit 
of  it  hereafter  ;  though  they  labour  and  fweat  from  the 
Cradle  to  the  Coffin,  to  advance  their  temporal  Concerns, 
they  forward  their  Mifcry,  and  interrupt  their  Happi- 
nefs;  they  are  Strangers  tp  themfelves,  and  only  Guefts 
in  their  own  Houfe  i  they  drudge  continually,  yet  do 
nothing,  and  arc  laborioufly  idle.  Tell  me  not  then  of 
Sleep, Vilits,  Hories,  Hounds,  Taverns, and  Playhoufes ; 
thefe  Things,  with  fome  grains  of  Allowance,  may  be  per- 
mitted- 


^e  Gentleman  InfrttBed.        47 

mitted  Gentlemen  as  Amufementsand  Diverfions,but  not 
as  Bufinels;  their  Bufmefs,  their  grand  Concern,  and 
their  only  Concern,  is  God*s  Service,  and  their  Salva- 
tion ;  and  if  they  fquander  the  precious  Moments  of 
Time  he  has  afforded  them,  they  abule  the  Gift  and  the 
very  end  of  their  Creation. 

Eleuthe.  You  are  warm,  methinks,  and  prefs  very  hard 
on  Quality;  but  I  fuppofe  you  are  only  in  the  Vein  of 
Bantering,  and  intend  to  (hew  how  well  you  can  manage 
an  ill  Caufe,  and  that  Wit  and  Dedamation  can  fome- 
timesfupply  the  Place  of  Reafon  and  Argument;  thou 
ait  excellently  qualified  for  the  Pulpit ;  thou  haft  Words 
and  Inveftive  at  Command;  prithee  off  with  thy  Jump,' 
and  on  with  a  Caflbck  ;  thou  wilt  run  down  Vice  at  an 
unmercii'ul  Rate,  and  talk  Debauchery  out  of  Counte- 
nance ;  no  Sin  will  ftand  thee,  no  Herefy  aiTront  thee; 
but,  by  the  by,  Eufebius,  you  are  fubjed:  to  flip  as  well 
as  your  Neighbours;  and  fometimes  your  Paffion  runs  fo 
faft,  that  it  dillances  your  Reafon  :  For  I  think  you  grant 
that  the  bare  Obfervation  of  God's  Commandments  will 
carry  a  Man  to  Heaven,  what  then  have  we  to  do  with 
your  Works  of  Supererogation,  Mortification,  andAufte- 
rities?  The  very  Word  implies  Counfel  only,  not  a  Pre- 
•ccpt,  and  by  Confequence  no  Obligation. 

Eujeh.  I  grant  what  you  defire,  but  then  I  mull  add, 
that  without  thefe  Works  of  Supererogation,  as  you  call 
'em,  you'll  never  keep  ihofe  Commandments.  You  can't 
hit  a  Mark  unlefs  you  level  higher.  Gravity  finks  the 
Arrow  under  the  firft  Line  of  Direction  in  Spight  of 
the  Impulfe.  This  is  our  Cafe,  Nature  draws  towards 
the  Center,  no  lefs  than  Weight ;  'tis  wanton  and  liber- 
tine, and  loves  to  range  in  the  Latitude  of  fenfual  Plca- 
fure,  not  vv'ithin  the  Compafs  of  Law  and  Regularity. 
Now  if  you  loofe  the  Rein,  and  give  it  the  whole  Line 
of  Duty  to  play  in,  'twill  break  through  that  Rcilraint, 
and  carry  you  beyond  it.  For,  let  me  tell  you.  Appe- 
tite .is  not  carefied  into  Duty,  but  beaten  into  it,  and 
Pallions  are  not  to  be  tamed  by  Condefcendence.  .Like 
the  Mobile,  the  more  Liberty  you  give  'em,  the  more 
they  ask;  they  muft  be  dieted  and  brought  low,  other- 
wile  they'll  fly  in  your  Face.  In  fine,  if  you  v/ill  not 
have  'cm  ask  what  is  unjufr,  refufe  'em  v.'hat  is  lawful  ; 
befides.  Indulgence  anus  'em,  it  gives  'em  a  Profpecl:  of 

their 


48         51^5  G  E  N  t  L  E  M  A  N  InflruBeL 

their  own  Power  and  your  Weaknefs;  and  then  if  each 
iingle  one  be  a  Match  for  a  Giant,  who  can  refift  the 
whole  Band  drawn  up  in  a  Body?  You  boggle  at  great 
Sins,  but  fwallow  httle  ones  Without  Scruple  or  Rcmorfe ; 
you  fhut  your  Ears  againft  the  inward  Calls  of  God's 
Grace,  and  ftruggle  with  his  Infpirations.  All  thefe  things 
are  pfetty  Quarrels  with  your  Maker ;  they  are  Contempts 
and  Difrepeds",  though  not  Treafons.  In  fine,  they  are 
Sins.  Now,  whofoever  dare  look  a  little  Sin  in  the  Face 
without  Horror,  Will  foon  commit  great  Ones  with 
Pleafure;  for  they  are  both  really  Sins,  and  muft  be  re- 
ipented  of;  the  Difference  lies  only  in  the  Greatnefs  on  the 
one  lide,  and  in  the  Littlenefs  on  the  other.  When  Ma- 
r'tus  was  fent  againft  the  Cimbrl,,  his  Soldiers  durft  not 
look  the  Enemy  in  the  Face  ;  their  gygantick  Stature 
and  barbarous  Afpeft  cow'd  the  Roman  Bravery :  But 
when  they  had  beheld  thefe  barbarous  Germans  three 
Days  from  the  Camp^  their  Spirits  revived,  and  their 
congealed  Courage  began  to  circulate  through  every 
Vein  ;  they  not  only  fought  'em,  but  overcame.  Juft  fo 
a  Man  educated  in  the  Principles  of  Chriftianity,  can- 
not think  of  the  Breach  of  a  Commandment,  without 
Trembling,  without  Convulfions ;  but  then  he  Hides  into 
trivial  CommilTions:  At  Irrft,  a  Damp arifes  over  his  Sto-' 
mach,  he  is  crop-fick,  uneafy,.he  continues  on  his  Courfe, 
and  Confcience  begins  to  ilumber;  its  Reproaches  are 
faint,  its  Strings  fcarce  perceptible;  Cuftom  flings  in  a 
Dofe  of  Opium,  and  then  it  falls  into  a  Lethargy  ;  and 
Xvhen  Man  is  once  arrived  at  this  Pitch  of  Infenfibility^ 
he  boggles  at  no  Impiety ;  he  breaks  through  God's  Com- 
mands, and  will  foon  ftorm  Hell  to  fatisfy  Paffion. 
From  whence  comes  this,  but  from  your  Principle,  That 
Gentlemen  are  not  tied  up  to  Vertue,  Patience,  Humility  ? 
For  did  fuch  Gentlemen  mortify  Appetite,  and  crufh 
Senfuality  in  the  Cradle ;  did  they  place  all  their  Satis- 
fadlions  in  an  abfolute  Obedience  to  their  Maker's  Will, 
and  never  allow  Nature  and  Senfes  any  Play-days,  they 
would  not  have  broke  open  the  Inclofures  of  Duty,  nor 
left  all  in  common  to  Licentioufnefs ;  they  had  never 
made  their  Inclinations  their  Law,  nor  Pleafures  the  fole 
Boundaries  of  their  Aftions:  For  thatAphorifm  is  moft 
true,  Nemo  repente  fit  turpijjimus^  no  Body  jumps  into 
ill  on  the  fuddain^  Negligence  and  Diftruft  weaken  God's 

Com- 


T'h  Gentleman  IiiftruM,        4p 

Commands,  before  we  venture  to  break  'em.  Now  fup-^ 
pofing  all  Men  are  oblig'd  to  Vertue,  it  naturally  follows, 
that  this  Obligation  lies  harder  on  Gentlemen. 

Firji,  They  lie  more  in  the  reach  of  Temptation, 
than  People  of  an  inferior  Rank  ;  more  in  view  of  the 
Enemy  ;  their  Circumllances  then  require  Vigilance  ; 
they  muil  Hand  Centinel,  and  place  Out- Guards  for 
fear  of  a  Surprize.  A  poor  Man  that  can  fcarce  furnifli 
Necellaries  for  Life,  has  neither  the  Means  nor  Thought 
to  pamper  Luxury ;  Nature  is  work'd  down,  and  ra- 
ther cries  out  for  Reft  than  Pleafure.  In  fhort,  he  can 
fcarce  Live,  much  lefs  Riot;  Pride  can't  come  at  liim, 
it  muftpafs  through  Muck,  Smoak,  and  Penury  to  reach 
him.  Now  this  Vice  is  too  high  ftomach'd  to  ftoop  fo 
low,  it  loves  not  to  lie  on  a  Dunghil,  or  fleep  on  Straw  ; 
and  a  Man  that  daily  fees  a:nd  feels  nothing  but  Want 
and  Mifery,  muft  be  mad  before  he  can  be  proud,  or 
grow  vain  upon  any  fond  Prefumption :  Befides,  Appetite 
is  fo  kept  under  by  Neceflity,  that  it  can  fcarce  crawl ; 
its  very  Delires  reach  no  higher  than  Bread  to  fubdue 
Hunger;  and  Clothes  to  fence  off  Cold,  and  veilNaked- 
nefs.  No  ill  Objeft  palles  through  the  poor  Man's  EyeS 
into  the  Heart ;  they  draw  in  no  Species,  but  thofe  of 
Beafts  and  Dunghils;  fo  that  whatever  they  behold  is 
either  rebating  or  innocent.  Li  fine,  they  are  below 
Temptation;  and  like  a  fmall  difmantled  Village,  not 
worth  feizing.  But  Gentlemen  ftand  the  Mark  of  every 
Temptation,  the  World,  the  Flefli,  and  the  DeviJ,  feem 
to  have  enter'd  a  tripple  League  againft  them  ;  they  are 
mark'd  out  for  a  Slaughter  and  Sacrifice,  they  live  in 
the  midft  of  Plague  and  Infe6lion,  and  can't  take  one 
Step  without  meeting  Danger,  nor  breathe  without  ta- 
king in  Contagion ;  the  World  fawns  on  them ;  PalTions 
revolt,  and  the  Devil  cafts  Nets  to  enihare  them  ;  line 
Sights  debauch  the  Eyes,  Mufick  the  Ears,  Ragou's  the 
Tafte,  Perfumes  the  Smell,  and  falfe  Principles  the  Un- 
derftanding  ;  Wine  heats  the  PafSons,  and  Delicacies  put 
*em  in  a  Ferment;  fo  that  a  Gentlem:in  is  befetonall 
fides ;  each  Vice  batters  his  Conftancy,  and  ail'aults  his 
Innocence.  Now,  what  way  can  he  come  off  with  Vi- 
d:ory?  He  muft  raife  Counter-Batteries,  and  difmount 
thofe  Engines  that  play  upon  him  ;  he  muft  make  a  Sally, 
and  f.\ce  Pride  with  Humslii-v,  I  uxury  with  Continency, 

E  Intern- 


50        ^he  Gentleman  Inftni^ed, 

Intemperance  with  Sobriety,  and  Love  of  Pleafure  with 
that  of  Duty  :  In  Morals  as  well  as  Phyficks  Contraries 
alone  defeat  Contraries.  Does  not  Nature  tell  us,  as 
well  as  Experience,  that  when  the  Attack  is  brisk  and 
vigorous  the  Place  will  infallibly  be  taken,  unlefs  the 
Defendant  beat  off  Force  with  Force,  and  tire  out  the 
Affailants  with  Refolution? 

Secondly^  The  Faults  of  the  bafer  fort  of  Mankind  are 
perfonaL  They  never  fpread  ;  like  an  Apoplexy  they 
llnke  but  one  ;  the  Mifchief  ends  where  it  begun,  and 
one  Lifefatisfies  its  Fury.  But  Gentlemen's  Crimes  be- 
come univerfal,  like  the  Plague,  they  fweep  away  whole 
Families,  and  drive  Mortality  and  Defolation  before  'em. 
For  the  vulgar  are  an  apifli  Generation,  rhey  live  on  Imi- 
tation, and  are  carried  away  by  the  Example  of  great 
ones,  as  the  inferior  Orbs  by  the  Motion  of  the  fuperi- 
or ;  fo  that  if  a  Mailer  throws  his  Vices  among  the 
Family,  they  are  foon  pick'd  up,  and  wore  as  Robes  of 
Honour.  For  Servanes  that  know  their  Fortune  depends 
on  a  Mafter's  Smile,  will  not  eafily  difpleafe  him.  They 
eye  every  Motion,  ftudy  his  Humour,  and  ftrikein  with 
his  Inclination  :  They  applaud  his  Extravagancies  firft, 
and  then  adopt  them  by  Practice.  And  thus  by  this  abo- 
minable Complaifance,  Slaves  oftentimes  work  them- 
felves  into  their  Mafter's  Favours,  and  not  fcldom  into 
their  Eftates  and  Dignities.  And  then  when  Vice  is  fo 
extravagantly  rewarded,  both  with  Eftate  and  Pleafure, 
when  a  Man  can  debauch  himfelf  into  a  competent  For- 
tune, without  other  Charges  or  Expence,  than  that  of 
Confclence,  'tis  odds  he'll  venture  on  the  Enterprize. 
Beiides,  Sin's  fupported  with  Efcritcheon  and  Title  pafs 
for  Grandeur:  Nay,  and  Vice  at  the  Head  of  a  pompous 
Retinue  is  often  miftaken  for  Vertue.  For  the  Vulgar 
judge  by  the  Eyes,  not  by  Reafon ;  and  whatever  ap- 
pears great,  they  conclude  good,  as  if  Glittering  and  ya- 
lue  were  fynonymous.  Who  has  fpread  this  Illulion 
through  tlie  whole  Mafs  of  thefe  Morals,  but  the  Nobi- 
lity ?•  Gentlemen  therefore,  befides  the  dired  Obligati- 
on of  Obedience  they  owe  to  God,  lie  under  a  col- 
lateral one  of  Charity  towards  their  Neighbours,  and 
by  Confequence,  their  Failings  carry  Scandal  along  with 
'em,  as  well  as  Difobedience ;  fo  that  every  Crime  they 
commit  may  be  call'd  Legion, 

Eleuths, 


the  Gentleman  Infiru^ed.      ji 

Eleuthe.  'Tis  time  to  take  a  little  Breath,  you'll  over- 
heat your  Lungs,  and  difcompofeyour  Fabrick.  But  pray. 
Sir,  under  favour,  are  Mafters  Gaolers  ex  officio  ?  or  muft 
they  be  Bail  for  their  Servants  good  Behaviour  ? 

kufeb.  No,  but  then  they  muft  not  be  their  Murderers. 

Rleutbe.  Why,  I  fuppole  you  don't  intend  to  caft  Ican- 
dalous  Refledlions  upon  the  vi^hole  Progeny  of  Mafters  ? 
Have  a  care,  they  may  bring  an  A6tion  of  Calumny  a- 
gainlt  youj  'tis  dangerous  for  a  fmgle  Man  to  engage 
with  Numbers. 

Enfeb.  Let  us  not  difpute  of  the  Name,  I  fay  you  ftab 
Souls ;  if  this  be  not  Murder,  'tis  fomething  worfe  ^  and 
if  our  Laws  take  no  Cognizance  of  it,  God's  do. 

Eleuthe.  What,  Mafters  muft  play  the  Chaplains  to 
their  Family,  as  N.  N.  did ;  they  muft  on  with  the 
Surplice  and  Tippet,  and  preach  to  the  Text  o^  Fifth ly^ 
Belo'ved,  it  itfo^  Is  our  Brother  gone  aflray  ?  Tea  verily 
to  Perdition. 

Eufeb.  Laughing  and  Drollery  are  great  Reliefs  at  a 
non-plus.  I  have  often  feen  fome  in  Converfation,  when 
their  Stock  of  Reafon  was  laid  out,  extream  lavifli  of 
fuch  Impertinencies.  Leave  the  Pulpit  to  the  Parfon,  but 
preach  within  your  own  Walls  ;  at  leaft  by  Example : 
This  is  more  perfuafive  than  Words ;  'tis  within  your 
Sphere,  within  the  Liberties  of  your  Office  and  Obliga- 
tion too;  or  at  leaft  flirowd  your  own  Abominations  un- 
der a  Cover ;  let  them  not  take  Air,  they'll  lit  more 
eafy  on  your  Confcience,  and  not  entangle  others;  if 
you'll  not  couple  together  the  Office  of  Chaplain  and 
Mafter,  don't  that  of  Gentleman  and  Devil. 

Eleuthe.  I  perceive  by  your  Difcourfe,  that  Gentlemen 
will  not  gain  your  good  Will,  unlefs  they  put  on  Fetters, 
and  fee  their  Keepers.  Slavery  is  not  fo  valuable  a  Blef-^ 
iing,  as  to  be  purchas'd.  People  often  buy  Liberty,  but 
feldom  Chains.  I  muft  ftand  forfooth  upon  Refervednefs 
and  Ceremony  with  my  Lacquey  or  Groom.,  put  a  Re- 
ftraint  upon  my  Freedom,  mure  up  my  Mouih,  andftifle 
Mirth,  or  elie  cry  out,  Jack^  under  Favour  !  Or,  prt^y  be 
not  fcandaliz\il  Is  not  this  to  put  Jack  in  the  Coach,  and 
perch  my  Lord  behind  it  i*  To  place  Tom  in  the  Parlour, 
and  bind  over  Right  Worjjjipful  to  the  Kitchen  ?  -In  fhort. 
Speculation  and  Theory  may  approve  your  Morals,  Pra- 
dice  cannot.  We  hire  A-Ien's  Service,  not  their  Devotion* 
E  i  Eujel>> 


52        ^he  Gentleman  Injiru^ed, 

Etifeb.  Very  well,  according  to  your  Cafuiftry,  Prece- 
dents vie  the  standard  of  Right,  and  then  in  the  hmi 
Figure  and  A4ode  it  follows  plain  enough,  that  becaufe 
Men  damn  themfelves,  they  do  it  luftly,  and  we  are  e- 
ternall}'  miferable  by  Law.  The  Confequence  is  logical 
enough,  but  not  too  Chriftian.  However,  if  Hell  have 
fuch  wonderful  Charms,  run  into  its  Embraces :  But  re- 
member there  is  no  return;  and  look  before  you  jump, 
elfe  you  may  condemn  your  Folly,  but  not  amend  it. 
quick  Refolutions  are  foon  repented. 

Eleuth -i  lu  arofe  in  a  Heat^  and  walked  about  the  Room, 
his  Pulje  beat  high^  and  one  might  read  the  Trouble  of  his 
Mind  on  hii  Cheeks. 

Eleuthe.  I  love  not  thofe  fevere  Morals,  they  cow  the 
Spirits,  disjoint  Converfation,  and  clog  Freedom.  Spleen 
begot  'em.  Melancholy  nurs'd  'em,  and  Envy  recom- 
mended them  to  the  Pulpit.  For  I  find  thofe  Men  are 
the  great  Companions  of  Vertue,  that  are  not  able  to 
be  vicious  ;  and  thofe  declaim  moil  againft  Pleafure 
that  are  pall  enjoying  it.  Yet  thele  falfe  Devotees  will 
needs  impofe  on  Gentlemen,  and  let  their  Impotence  as 
a  Law  for  others. 

Eufeb.  Look  ye,  there  is  no  Harm  done  ;  you  are  ftill 
Mafler  of  your  Pradlice,  though  neither  of  us  can  com- 
mand Principles ;  thefe  come  not  within  the  Precin6l  of 
your  Liberty  ;  are  neither  fubjedl  to  Change  or  Alterati- 
on ;  Semper  idem  is  their  Motto.  In  a  Word,  Sir,  I 
mould  not  my  Difcourle  to  an  Humonll's  Inclination,  but 
to  the  Rules  of  Truth.  Judgment  and  Convidlion  move 
my  Tongue,  not  Adulation.  If  I  have  impofed  on  you, 
unmafk  the  Impofture  ;  if  not,  let  good  Humour  run  in 
its  ordinary  C!)hannel.  To  llrike  in  with  a  Patient's  Dif- 
eafe,  is  not  Kindnefs  but  Cruelty;  and  I  believe  you 
had  rather  be  eafed  of  a  Dillemper  with  Coloquintida, 
than  to  be  lent  into  the  next  World  with  Juleps. 

Eleuthe.  It's  true,  but  I  would  not  be  debarred  of  El- 
bow-Room, not  willingly  fit  in  the  Stocks^  or  be  awed 
by  a  Groom  or  a  Foot-Boy.  I  would  not  bid  Defiance 
to  Confcience,  nor  War  upon  the  Almighty.  I  am  wil- 
ling t©  condefcend  to  an  Agreement  upon  honourable 
Conditions. 

Eufeb.  What  ?  Will  you  Hand  upon  Terms  with  your 
Maker!  and  Article  with  your  Creator?  id  eji,  you'll 

vouchfafe 


7'he  Geutl^maij  ItifiruBed        ^^ 

vouchfafe  to  be  his  Servant,  provided  he  takes  off  all 
Reftraint  from  Nature,  and  give  you  leave  to  live  at 
Difcretion  ?  Fye,  fye,  Eleutherius,  you  are  too  weak  to 
grapple  with  the  (Omnipotent,  when  he  commands  you 
muft  obey. 

Eieuthe.  Right,  when  he  commands  ;  the  Queftion  is 
not  de  jure,  but  de  fado,  not  whether  he  can  command 
thele  Trifles  you  fpokeof,  but  whether  he  has  commanded 
'em.  For  in  fhort,  wc  bawl  upon  the  Topick  ofVertue 
and  Vice,  and  yet  we  fcarce  know  what  we  wou'd  be  at. 
For  what  one  Country  approves  another  condemns;  and 
what  defervesthe  Halter  under  one  £/?z^(a^/o«  merits  a  Pa- 
tent under  another.  The  Lacedemonians  rank'd  fubtil 
Thefts  among  the  Vertues,  and  punifh'd  your  clumfy 
Lurchers;  as  if  the  Sin  conlifted  in  the  Difcovery  alone. 
In  other  Places  it's  an  A6t  of  Piety  to  feed  heartily  on  a 
deceafed  Relation,  and  an  unpardonable  Crime  to  de- 
liver a  Father  over  to  the  Mercy  of  Worms. 

Eufeb.  What  do  you  mean  ? 

Eleuthe.  I  mean,  that  Good  and  Evil,  Right  and 
Wrong,  Vertue  and  Vice,  lie  much  in  Fancy  and  Educa- 
tion ;  that  Policy  and  Cuftom  coin  thefe  different  Noti- 
ons. Why  elfeisthe  fame  thing  Good  under  one  Meri- 
dian, and  Evil  under  another  ?  Popery  in  ltaly\  France, 
and  Spain,  is  voted  orthodox ;  in  England  heterodox. 
Beyond  Seas  Fafting  and  Celibacy  are  meritorious.,  in  Eng- 
land Celibacy  is  fuperftitious,  vain  and  hypocritical. 
So  that  in  Conclufion,  Good  and  Bad  vary  with  the  Cli- 
mate, and  by  Confequence  take  their  Being  from  Imagi- 
nation, Interefl,  or  Civil  Authority,  unlefs  you'll  lay 
that  all  Mens  Reafon  is  not  of  the  fame  Species. 

Eufeb.  No  doubt,  you  have  harangued  excellently  on 
the  Text  of  Libertinifm ;  why  don't  you  confound  all 
Religions,  as  well  as  all  Adlions? 

Nean.  I  believe  he  does :  For  if  Vertue  and  Vice  differ 
only  in  Name,  .Faith  and  Infidelity  may  eaiily  be  recon- 
ciled, and  then  Mahometifm  may  be  put  in  as  good  Pre- 
tenfions  to  Revelation  as  Chriflianity. 

Eufeb.  Prllhee  Eleutherius,  talk  no  more  of  Faith,  of 
Church,  of  Religion  ;  thy  Breath  fmells  rank  enough  to 
fly-blow  Truth,  and  to  taint  the  Gofpel. 

Eleuthe.  Adieu  ;  my  Bufmefs  calls  upon  me.  Pray  let 
pur  next  Converfation  be  more  palatable. 

E  3  Enfek, 


J4      *f^6  Gentleman  InfiruBed, 

Eufeb.  By  all  means;  we'll  talk  of  Wine,  Women,  and 
Venfon  Pafties;  thefe  are  palatable  Topicks  for  Epicures 
and  Scavingers,  but  not  for  Gentlemen  and  Chriftians. 

Eleuthe.  Gentlemen,  your  humble  Servant. 

Etifeh.  You  fee,  Neander^  Eleutherius's  univerfal  Pra- 
(flice,  drawn  up  in  fhort;  can  Blindnefs,  Stupidity  and 
Madnefs  foar  higher?  Like  crowned  Vidims  thefe  un- 
happy Creatures  dance  and  fing  under  the  fatal  Stroke 
without  Concern,  without  Senfe  of  the  Danger!  They 
laugh  and  droll  one  Moment,  and  begin  the  next  to  weep 
eternally.  Oh  Frenzy  !  They  poft  in  full  Speed  in  the 
broad  Way  to  Perdition,  and  will  needs  be  told  they  fpur 
to  Heaven  !  What  Notions  have  thefe  Men  of  the  other 
World,  who  live  fo  madly  in  this !  Surely  they  fancy  the 
Soul  fiafhes  into  nothing,  when  the  Body  falls  into  Dull, 
and  that  they  die  like  Beafts,  they  live  fo  like  'em.  Yet 
thefe  are  your  well-bred  Gentlemen,  your  Men  of  Parts 
and  Merit :  And  indeed  one  muft  have  extraordinary 
Breeding  to  compliment  our  felves  into  Hell;  one 
muft  be  witty  to  Madnefs,  and  prudent  to  Folly,  to  con- 
trive our  eternal  Mifery  fo  efficacioufly,  But  feeing  they 
will  not  profit  by  our  Inftrudions,  let  us,  Neander,  by 
their  Stupidity:  We'll  leave  them  to  the mfe Ives  ;  their 
Vices  can't  damn  us ;  both  Glory  and  Punilhment  are 
perfonal ;  we  have  made  a  Day's  Work  of  it ;  to  mor- 
row we'll  profecute  the  fame  Subjedt. 


DIALOGUE    V. 

A  Profecution  of  the  fame  SubjeSi. 

""  JpLcHther'sus  at  his  return  to  his  Lodging,  grew  un- 
*'  •'-■^  eafy  and  fullen ;  the  late  Difcourfc  had  alarm'd 
''  his  Fears,  and  awak'd  his  Confcience,  which  began  in 
*'  good  Earneft  to  call  him  to  an  Account,  and  flung  be- 
■^^  fore  him  an  ungrateful  youmal  of  his  Vices.  The  un- 
"  happy  Gentlem.an  was  unacquainted  with  fuch  Re- 
*'  proacbes,  he  fcarce  underftood  the  Language,  and 
"  found  in  himfelf  no  Inclination  to  learn  it.  He  thought 
*'  he  had  treated  Confcience  fo  ill,  it  would  net  have  the 
*'  Confidence  to  return  ;  and  indeed  for  fereral  Yeare  he 
^^,  heard  no  News  of  it  i  which  made  him  fufpedl  it  was 

'*'  deceafed^ 


"fhe  Gentleman  Injirn^ed,       55 

*'  deceafed,  or  had  taken  a  Turn  to  the  lndle%  for  Di- 
*'  verfion. 

*'  So  that  he  knew  not  what  to  make  of  thefe  unufu:.I 
*'  Gripes,  of  thefe  Aches  of  the  Stomach.  Atfirfthelu- 
"  fpedted  Etifchius  had  Intelligence  with  Satan  ;  and  cried 
*'  out  for  a  Divine  and  Exurcifm.  For  v/hy,  faid  he,  can't 
**  Potions  conjure  up  from  Hell  the  Devii  offe-ar,  as  well 
*'  nsPhtltrunjs  raife  the  Fury  of  Love?  But  he  loonc'^n- 
*'  feis'd,  the  Devil's  Eufinefs  was  to  deaden  kemorfe, 
"  not  to  quicken  it  ;  to  gag  Confcience,  not  to  provoke 
*'■  it  into  Clamours  and  Reproaches. 

*'  Though  Eufehius  had  argued  down  the  Gentleman's 
'*  Underftanding,  hemadeno  Impreflion  upon  his//- ///; 
*'  though  this  Faculty  be  really  blind,  it  afFe6ts  Com- 
"  mand,  and  feldom  fails  to  ufurp  the  Government  tn- 
"  tail'd  on  Reafon,  whenever  it's  feconded  by  the-Re- 
*'  bellious  Mobile  of  unruly  Paffions.  Hence  it  comes 
*'  that  our  Judgment  generally  ftrikes  in  with  our  Incli- 
**  nation,  and  feldom  pronounces  againft  our  Intereft 
"  and  Pleafure. 

"  Eleutherius  had  been  train'd  up  in  the  wild  Princi- 
**  pies  of  Libertinifm  ;  and  having  tafted  the  Sweetnefs 
*'  of  an  uncontrouled  Liberty,  he  found  in  himfelfno 
**  Propenfion  to  enllave  his  Reafon  to  the  Rules  of  Reve- 
"  lation,  nor  his  Praftice  to  the  Laws  of  Morality; 
*'  wherefore  he  brib'd  his  Will  to  over-reach  his  Reafon, 
"  and  very  eagerly  helpt  on  the  Impofture.  His  Endea- 
*«  vour  proved  fuccefsful;  for  in  Spight  of  Conviftion 
"  he  queftioned  the  Arguments  of  Eufebius,  and  laid  his 
"  late  Defeat  on  the  Weaknefs  of  his  own  Abilities,  not 
"  on  the  Force  of  his  Adverfiiry's  Reafons:  And  now 
"  his  Confcience  began  to  fpeak  in  a  lower  Tone  ;  it 
*'  upbraided  him  with  a  fainter  Accent  and  a  kind  of 
"  Refped ;  nor  did  he  doubt  but  a  fecond  Conference 
*'  would  fend  it  again  beyond  Sea  -,  but  he  would  not 
"  leave  the  Caufe  to  his  own  Management,  but  pitch 
*'  upon  his  Friends,  a  Barifter  and  a  Courtier,  whom  he 
*'  fuppofed  to  be  mighty  Wits,  becaufe  they  laught  at 
*'  Piety  to  Scandal.  The  Defign  was  laid  handfomely, 
*'  and  had  a  promifing  Afpedl  ;  for  though  the  Lawyer 
*'  managed  his  ill  Tongue,  the  other  was  excellent  at 
^'  his  Weapon,  and  fo  might  pufh  on  the  Caufe  with  a 
**  fleel  Point,  as  well  as  with  a  brazen  Forehead. 

^     E  4  Eleuthe- 


j;6        ^he  Gentleman  InftruBed, 

■  ''  £/(f«^^^m// next  Morning defired  £«/£?^/»;  to  favour 
"  him  with  a  Vifit  in  the  Evening;  hepromired  to  meet 
*'  him  at  his  Houfe,  and  put  off  Neander  till  the  next 
"  Day.  He  went  at  the  Time  appointed,  but  found 
*'  only  Eleutherimh  Lady  at  home.  She  received  Eu[e- 
«'  bim  with  Civility,  and  defired  him  to  exped  her  Hus- 
*'  band's  Return. 

"  She  was  a  Lady  of  the  Town,  an  Admirer  of  Eafe, 
"  and  a  mortal  Enemy  to  Conllraint.  One  Part  of  the 
^'  Morning  fhe  lay  in  her  Bed,  the  other  fhe  fat  at  her 
*'  Toilet.  She  fpent  the  Evening  either  in  receiving  Vi- 
**  fits,  or  returning  'em.  Her  Wit  run  before  her  Judg- 
*'  ment,  but  her  Tongue  diftanc'cl  both.  In  fine,  her 
f'  Thoughts  foared  not  an  Inch  above  Earth.  She  was 
"  wedded  to  the  World,  enchanted  with  the  prefent, 
?'  and  unmindful  of  the  future, 

"  After  fome  ufual  Civilities,  pray  Sir,  faid  fhe, 
^'  give  me  leave  to  enquire  what  pafs'd  between  my  Hus- 
^'  band  and  you  Yefterday,  he  return'd  in  Djforder;  I 
^'  hope  there  was  no  Blood  drawn. 

'Eufcb.  None:  My  Duelling-Days,  Madam,  arepaft, 
my  Sword  has  llept  fome  Years  in  the  Scabbard,  and 
nothing  but  an  extraordinary  Occafion  fhall  releafe  it 
from  that  Confinement. 

Lady,  Perchance,  you  bled  his  Pocket;  Bleeding  is 
fenfible  to  fome  Conftitutions  in  that  Vein  ;  and  I  have 
feen  Perfons  who  would  let  out  feven  Ounces  of  Blood 
with  fewer  Grimaces,  than  one  of  Silver.  And  indeed 
KleuthertHs  is  of  this  Humour,  his  Money  and  Patience 
go  together. 

Eufeb.  We  paft  the  Afternoon  in  Difcourle,  not  in 
Play,  and  I  fuppofe  he  took  Pet  becaufe  we  could  not  a- 
gree  upon  the  Point  in  Quellion. 

Lady.  You  furprize  me,  Sir;  he  and  I  play  at  crofs 
Queftions  every  Day  ;  nay,  we  feldomare  of  the  fame 
Opinion:  Yet  you  v/ould  take  him  for  a  Dove  without 
Gall,  without  Fail'ion,  yea  without  Senfe,  he  bears  my 
Humour  fo  tamely:  Certainly  you  difcufs'd  a  Matter  of. 
Importance,  to  talk  him  into  fuch  an  extraordinary  Di- 
flemper.  May  I  be  fo  rude,  as  to  ask  you  the  Subjeft  of 
your  Converfation.'' 

Eufeb.  Madam,  the  Subjedl  was,  Whether  the  Gentry 
be  not  obliged  to  pradtife  Chriftian  Vermes  ^  and  whether 

thb 


^he  Gentleman  InJiruSied. .      57 

this  Precept,  be  perfeft,  falls  not  as  heavy  on  Lords  and 
Ladies,  as  on  Valets  de  Chambres  and  Waiting  Women  ? 
Eleutheriui  maintained  the  Non-obligation,  and  treated 
me  with  Heat  and  Paffioni  becaufe  I  would  not  give  up 
-the  Gofpel  to  efpoufe  his  Error. 

Lady.  Indeed,  Sir,  I  do  not  enter  into  Men's  Concerns, 
but  I  am  of  Opinion,  that  Precept  reaches  not  our  Sex. 
Our  Conllitution  is  delicate,  foft,  and  unattemptlng,more 
fit  for  Eafe  than  Labour,  and  more  inclinable  to  Pleafure 
than  Pain.  Befides,  Liberty  is  our  Favourite,  andCon- 
ftraint  our  mortal  Enemy.  The  very  Name  of  a  Precept 
chills  our  Blood,  and  the  Obligation  of  a  Command  is 
an  invincible  Temptation  to  tranfgrefs  it.  God  therefore 
feeing  our  Nature  unapt  for  Burden,  cannot  furely  over- 
charge it  with  Prohibitions  or  Commands. 

Eufeb.  But  I  fuppofe,  Madam,  you  have  fome  Preten- 
fions  for  Heaven ;  you  hope  to  enjoy  God  in  the  next 
World,  as  well  as  his  Creatures  in  this. 

Lady.  I'll  endeavour  to  be  happy  here,  and  hope  to  be 
fo  hereafter.  Surely,  Sir,  you  don't  take  me  for  a  Japo- 
nefe  without  Soul,  without  Expedation  of  a  future  State  ? 

Eufeb.  No,  Madam ;  but  of  too  much  Liberty  of 
Principle  and  Education  too.  But  pray,  how  will  you 
find  God  unlefs  you  feek  him  ?  And  how  will  you  be  re- 
ceived into  Heaven  at  your  Death,  unlefs  you  prepare 
the  Way  to  it  by  Vertue  in  your  Life  ? 

Our  Saviour  was  pleafed  to  aflure  Mankind,  that  the 
Way  to  Heaven  is  narrow  and  uneven :  Perchance  your 
Ladyfhip  has  fallen  upon  a  more  convenient  Road,  and 
intend  to  ride  thither  in  a  Coach  and  Six. 

Lady.  I  feek  his  Will  in  the  Bible,  and  his  Prefence  in 
the  Church. 

Eufeb.  But  do  you  alfo  in  your  Adions  ?  Alas,  Ma- 
dam, the  Knowledge  of  God's  Commands  will  not  fave 
you ;  and  I  fuppofe  many  mourn  in  Hell,  who  fometimes 
vilited  the  Church  on  a  Sunday.  You  know.  Madam, 
the  greateft  part  of  human  Anions  are  of  themfelves  in- 
different, and  take  their  Value  from  the  Intention:  They 
muft  be  directed  to  God's  Honour,  to  benefit  our  Souls ; 
and  tend  to  his  Glory,  to  forward  our  Salvation.  May 
I  be  fo  bold,  as  to  entreat  your  Ladyfhip  to  favour  me 
with  a  brief  Account  of  the  Method  you  ufe  in  the  Obla- 
tion of  your  Adions  ? 

Lady, 


58       7'he  Gentleman  InJlruBed. 

Lady.  Sir,  I  have  not  yet  refolved  on  a  GonfcfTor;  1 
own  no  fuch  Obligation  ;  and  I  am  notdifpofed  to  Works 
of  Supererogation ;  and  therefore  you  mull  not  expedt 
to  found  my  Confcience,  or  to  read  my  Thoughts. 

Eufch.  I  confefs,  I  am  not  quite  furnifh'd  for  the  Em- 
ployment of  Direction  ;  and  I  had  rather  be  condemn'd 
to  the  driving  of  Lyons^  than  to  be  leading  of  Beatas. 
But  however  feeing  yoif  are  pleas'd  to  refufe  me  the  Fa^ 
vour  I  demanded,  you  will  let  me  try,  at  Ieaft,lf  I  can  hit 
on  your  method.  • 

"  Omnipotent  Eternal  God!  for  thy  fake  I  intend  to 
"  devote  evtry  Action  of  this  Day  to  the  World,  with- 
"  out  leaving  one  Thought  for  Heaven.  My  only  C^re 
*'  fhall  be  to  have  none,  and  my  only  Study  to  avoij  So- 
"  licitude.  I'll  glitter  in  Silks  and  Silver,  and  hang 
"  Lordfliips  in  my  Ears  ;  tho'  my  Sons  become  \^?x]y^r\<^ 
"  my  Daughters  Chamber-maids,  and  my  Husbanu  i.uls 
*'  out  my  Bravery  in  the  King's-Bench  or  the  MurJ}jr,:iea. 
"  I'll  v^ant  nothing  at  Table  but  Appetite,  and  n.iher 
*'  run  upon  Tick,  than  keep  within  the  Bounds  of  Fru- 
**  gality  or  Decency.  After  Dinner  I'll  either  give  or  re- 
*'  turn  Vifits,  and  entertain  the  Company  at  the  Expence 
*'  of  Modefty  and  Charity.  And  in  the  Evening  I'll 
"  drive  to  Hide-Park,  and  from  thence  ftrike  off  to  » 
*'  Ball  or  a  Comedy.  I'll  pleafc  thofe  Gallants  who  pleafe 
*'  me  J.  and  fmile  on  thofe  wjio  extol  my  rare  Perfedli- 
"  ons.     Ail  this,  O  God!  I  offer  up,  ef^. 

In  good  Earnell,  Madam,  dare  you  banter,  the  Moll 
High  at  this  monftrous  Rate  ?  Would  not  fuch  an  Offer- 
ing (like  that  of  Cain)  draw  down  a  Curfe  inftead  of 
a  Bleffing?  What!  do  we  feek  God  by  trampling  upon 
his  Commands ;  and  merit  Heaven-  by  deferving  Hell ! 
Or  is  not  this  a  faithful  Copy  of  your  Pradice  ?  Is  it  not 
your  Study,  your  Bufinefs,  your  only  Employment  to 
invent  new  Pleafures,  and  then^to  enjoy  'em?  Now, 
Madam,  if  you  dare  not  offer  up  your  A6lions  to  God, 
with  what  Face  can  you  exped  a  Reward  !  Will  he  re- 
compenfe  Vice,  and  crown  Impiety  ?  Or  have  I  miire- 
prcfented  your  Conduct  ?  Don't  you  rave  after  Pleafure, 
Vanity,  and  Gallantry. 

Lady.  What  then  r 

Eufeb.  S  t.  Paul  is  very  pcfi  tive^T'hat  a  Woman  that  li-veth 
in  Pieafure^  is  dead  while  pe  iiveth :  She  lives  in  Appea- 
rance, 


The  Gentleman  Injim^ed.       jp 

ranee,  but  is  dead  in  EfFedl ;  fhe  has  indeed  the  Life  of 
Senfe,  but  not  that  of  Grace,  and  by  Confequence  will 
never  enjoy  that  of  Glory. 

Ladv.  Pray,  Sir,  can't  a  Woman  wear  fme  Apparel 
without  forfeiting  her  Robe  of  Innocence  ?  Mull  fhe  rife 
from  a  full  Table  to  fnfFer  eternal  Hunger?  Muft  fhe  be 
convey'd  from  thePIay-Houfe  into  a  Place  of  Torments  ? 
Can't  we  be  happy  in  the  next  World,  unlefs  we  lie  con- 
tinually ftretcht  on  Racks  and  Tortures  in  this  ? 

Eufeh.  Our  Blefied  Saviour,  Madam,  fliall  be  heard, 
if  you  pleafe,  upon  this  Point.  IVoe  be  to  the  Rich,  t» 
thufe  that  feajl,  to  thofe  that  laugh.  You  have,  Madam, 
a  plentiful  Ellate,  you  regale  your  Appetite,  you  laugh 
fometimes  at  your  Neighbour's  Vertues,  and  as  often  at 
the  Expence  of  his  Reputation  :  Do  not  therefore  our  Sa- 
viour's Malediftions  concern  your  Lady fhip  ?  And  will 
he  receive  you  in  the  next  World  with  an  Euge,  who 
ftrikes  you  with  a  tripple  Fie  in  this  ? 
'  Lady.  You  mifapply  Scripture,  to  forge  an  Argument, 
and  play  the  declaiming  Pedaint:  Is  it  a  Sin  to  vifit  the 
Play-Houfe,  to  dance  at  a  Ball,  to  have  a  comfortable 
Eftate,  a  well-furnifh'd  Table,  and  upon  Occafion  to 
.  fmile  ? 

Eufeb.  I  anfwer  firft,  though  thefe  A6tions  taken  in 
Retail  are  not  criminal,  yet  taken  in  a  Lump  they  can't 
be  innocent.  For  is  it  lawful,  do  you  think,  to  confe- 
crate  all  the  IVToments  of  your  Life  to  Eafeand  Pleafure, 
to  carefs  Pallion,  and  court  Senfuality,  to  make  Satis- 
faction the  Principle  and  End  of  all  your  Defires  and 
Endeavours,  and  not  to  give  Vertue  the  very  Place  of  an 
Accellbry?  What  mean  thofe  Precepts  of  Self-Denial,  of 
fufFering,  of  mortifying  the  Sallies  of  the  Flefh  r  Do  they 
Hand  for  Cyphers  in  the  Gofpel,  or  were  they  made  mere- 
ly to  tranfgrefs  ?  Did  the  Son  of  God  efpoufe  our  Nature 
with  all  its  Infirmities?  Did  he  fufFer  Hunger,  Perfecu- 
tion,  Whips  and  Death  to  purchafe  us  Grace,  to  be 
drawn  from  Hide-Park  to  the  Theatre,  from  thence  to 
Balls  and  Feafts  ?  Did  we  come  into  the  World  to  dance 
Minuets  and  Rigadoons  ?  To  fing  Air?  either  amorous  or 
yncharitable  ? 

Secondly,  To  fee  a  Play  that  is  either  innocent  or  in- 
ilru6live,  is  no  Sin.  But  then  to  fee  five  hundred  Plays, 
that  from  the  Prologue  to  the  Epilogue,  are  either  ftuft 

with 


6o      'The  Gentleman  InJlrtiBed. 

with  Blafpliemy,  or  larded  with  Atheifm,  or  embroide- 
red with  Smut  and  Ribaldry,  is  a  Sin.  Can  a  Chriftian 
with  a  late  Confcience  take  Pleafure  in  hearing  the  Name 
of  his  Redeemer  reviled,  in  feeing  every  part  of  his  cru- 
cified Saviour  recrucified  in  horrid  Oaths  ?  Does  a  Spe- 
ctator of  this  fecond  Crucifixion  bear  him  more  Reve- 
rence than  thofe  of  his  firft  ?  Can  you  fee  without  a 
Crime,  Vertue  brought  every  Evening  to  the  Scaffold 
either  as  a  Criminal  or  a  Harlequin  to  be  punifh'd  or  hoot- 
ed atj  and  Vice  ticad  the  Stage  firft  with  Pomp,  and 
then  go  oiF  with  Reward  ?  Is  it  not  a  Sin  to  countenance 
one  ?  And  who  countenances  thofe  Scenes  of  Libertinifm 
but  thofe  who  pay  the  Players  and  applaud  the  Poet  ? 

I  do  not  fay  it's  a  Crime  precifely  to  dance  fometimes 
at  a  Ball,  to  ling  an  Aire  alumode^  to  enjoy  a  fair  Eftate, 
to  fit  at  a  full  Table,  or  to  wear  a  gaudy  Mantua,  if  you 
clear  Accounts  with  Merchants  and  Taylors.  But,  Ma- 
dam, thcfe  Amufements  are  waited  on  by  fo  violent,  fo 
provoking  Tempations,  that  a  Lady  fmitten  (to  Tran- 
fport  and  Dotage  with  thefe  Vanities)  will  certainly  fall 
into  many  crying  Olfences,  and  by  confequence  draw 
<Jown  upon  her  finful  Head  both  the  Maledidions  and 
Vengeance  of  our  Blefled  Saviour. 

For  alas!  if  the  moft  watchful  are  fometimes  furpri- 
zed,  are  not  thole  in  Danger  who  fleep  in  the  very  Camp 
of  their  Enemies  ?  If  thofe  Chriftians  can  fcarce  over- 
pome  the  Allurements  of  Vice,  who  confine  themfelves 
to  Retirement  and  Solitude;  who  check  Appetite,  who 
balk  Paflion,  and  crucify  the  Flelh;  will  thofe  withftand 
the  Attacks  of  Concupifcence,  the  Aflaults  of  Satan,  the 
fawning  Charms  of  the  World,  who  inflame  the  Blood 
with  high  feeding,  who  embolden  Paflion  by  a  criminal 
Condefcendence,  and  foolifhly  brave  the  Force  of  the 
Devil's  battering  Engines  without  the  Armour  of  Pray'r, 
Humility,  and  Mortificat'on? 

Lady.  Pray,  Sir,  be  pleafed  to  cut  out  fom.e  Work  for 
Ivadies ;  fet  'em  a  Task,  regulate  their  Employment;  I 
fuppofe  you'll  remove  us  at  leaft  four  Miles  from£oWo», 
as  the  Governniefit  does,  on  Occnfion,  Papijis;  or  pro- 
vide us  with  Wheels  and  Flax ;  or  confine  us  to  the  Dairy 
to  make  Cheefe-Cakes  :ind Cujiards  for  the  Family. 

Enfei;.  Kfo,  Madam,  Town- Air  is  proper  for  your 
Complexion.  I  am  not  for  Removal  into  the  Campaign^ 

nor 


nor  for  gracing  your  Ladyfliip  with  the  Title  of  Spin- 
ftrefs;  (tho'  perchance  the  Law  does ;)  I  am  of  no  level- 
ling Principles ;  Qiiality  has  Prerogatives,  and  I  would 
have  you  maintain  'em  :  But  then  if  you  are  a  Lady,  you 
are  alfo  a  Chriitian,  and  mull  make  good  the  Character, 
ideji,  you  mull  love  thofe  very  things  you  hate,  and  hate 
thofe  you  dote  on:  Eafe  is  your  Darling,  ?.nd  Pleafure 
your  Favourite  Inclination ;  you  muft  withdraw  your 
Affeftion  from  the  one,  and  profecutc  the  other  with  A- 
verfion;  you  pamper  your  Body  to  Excefs,  and  carefs  it 
almoft  to  Idolatry  ;  you  muft  treat  itii'cean  Enemy  ;  you 
muil  cut  off  all  fuperfluous  Sollicitude,  and  Itint  it  to 
what  is  meerly  necefiary  ;  your  Equipage  and  Furniture 
muft  anfwer  your  Rank,  not  your  Vanity;  and  you  muft 
meafure  'em  alfo  by  your  Husband's  Eftate,  as  well  as  by 
his  Quahiy  ;  you  muft  educate  your  Children  in  the 
Fear  of  God,  and  give  'em  Breeding  fuitable  to  their 
Excradtion. 

"  Her  Ladyfhip  flew  out  into  a  Paflion;  and  had  not 
«'  EleuiheriHs  returned  in  the  Nick  of  Time,  Eufebius 
"  might  have  found  by  Experience,  that  good  Counfel 
*'  is  oftentimes  ill  received:  But  Eleutherius^  Prefence 
«'  conjured  the  Tempeft.  He  begg'd  £a/£-/^/aj's  Pardon 
"  for  having  difappointed  him,  and  told  him  ingenu- 
"  oufly,  he  came  from  beating  the  Drum,  to  invite  two 
*'  Volunteers  to  continue  the  Combat,  but  they  refufed 
"  to  enter  into  Service. 

"  Pray  Sir,  replied  Eufehius^  let  the  Controverfy 
"  fleep,  I  have  delivered  my  Opinion,  if  it  jars  with 
*'  yours,  I  cannot  help  it ;  you  are  your  own  Mafter. 
*'  After  fome  indifferent  Difcourfe,  Eufebius  returned 
***■  home,  and  the  next  Day  gave  a  Vifit  to  Neauder,  and 
*'  profecuted  his  former  Difcourfe  thus. 


DIALOGUE    VI. 

Eufebius  injirudi  Neander  in  the  Duties  that  regard  our 
Neighbour. 

Eufeb.  T  Touched  briefly  at  our  laft  Meeting  the  Branch 
X  of  Cliriftian  Duty  that  relates  to  God.  Pil  now 

lum 


61        "fhe  Gentleman  lnjiru5ied, 

fum  up  the  moft  eflential  Parts  of  your  Obligation  to- 
wards your  Neighbour. 

I. 

Love  your  Neighbour  ns  yourfelf^  fays  the  Text  j  arid 
our  blefled  Redeemer  afliires  us,  that  Love,  Concord 
and  Union  are  the  moft  diftinguifhing  QuaUties  of  a 
Chriftian.  The  primitive  Believers  fet  fuch  a  Value  on 
this  darling  Vertue  of  God  made  Man,  that  one  Heart 
feem'd  to  animate  all  their  BodieSj  and  one  Soul  to  go- 
vern all  their  Aftions :  So  that  the  very  Heathens,  who 
hated  their  Religion,  admired  their  Charity,  and  were 
forc'd  to  confefs,  that  nothing  but  a  Divine  Hand  could 
ftrike  that  heavenly  Concord  from  fuchaDifcord  of  Hu- 
mours, Inclinations  and  Interefts, 

And  left  Self-Love  might  reftrain  the  Word  Proxiums^ 
as  xhtjeivs  confine  it,  to  Countrymen,  Friends  and  Re- 
lations, our  Saviour  has  been  pleas'd  to  extend  it  to  all 
Mankind  ;  fo  that  without  Diftindion,  without  Limita- 
tion, it  takes  in  the  whole  Species.  Whofoever  bears  the 
Imprefs  of  God  on  his  Forehead,  though  he  carry  that 
of  the  Beaft  on  his  Heart,  is  ftiil  our  Neighbour.  No 
diftance  of  Place  can  cut  off  the  Affinity,  no  length  of 
Time  can  wear  out  the  Obligation. 

Nor  muft  this  Divine  Vertue  only  play  on  our  Tongue^ 
or  evaporate  into  genteel  Difcourfes,  or  fmooth  Compli- 
ments wrapt  up  in  Terms  of  Courtfliip  j  no,  it  muft  not 
end  in  Grimace  or  Ceremony,  but  ftand  the  Tcft  of  A- 
<5lion  ;  fine  Proteftations  of  Kindnefs  too  too  often  veil 
traiterous  Defigns,  and  fugar'd  Words  poifonous  Inten- 
tions :  Nor  is  it  a  new  Treachery  to  prefent  the  Olive 
of  Peace  with  one  Hand,  and  the  Stiletto  with  the 
other. 

II. 

Chriftian  Charity  taken  in  its  full  Latitude,  implies 
Precepts  both  negative  and  pofitive  ;  by  thofe  you  are 
moft  feverely  forbid  to  contrive  any  Mifchief  againft 
your  Neighbour  J  by  thefe  you  are  commanded  to  be  as 
ufeful  to  him  as  your  Circumftances  permit,  and  his  Ne- 
ceflities  require. 

III. 

Hence  you  muft  not  invade  )'Our  Neighbour's  Honour, 
nor  make  any  Attempt  upon  hi?  Reputation:  A  good 

Nam? 


'fhe  Gentleman  InftruHed.       63 

Name  is  no  contemptible  Treafure ;  the  wife  Man  pri- 
zes it  above  an  Eftate ;  it  fets  off  Birth,  and  gives  an 
Air  even  to  Poverty ;  it  fhines  brighter  than  Wealth,  and 
fparkles  more  than  all  the  Tinfel  Gawdry  of  Fortune; 
it  fupports  Grandeur,  and  fweetens  Misfortune.  A  Bank- 
rupt that  has  loll  his  Coin,  if  he  has  not  forfeited  his 
Honour,  has  a  Refource  at  Command.  Though  his  For- 
tune be  fallen,  he  has  a  Fund  to  rebuild  it  on !  But  a  Man 
without  Honour  is  dead  to  all  the  Offices  of  Society  and 
Commerce  ;  now  when  his  moral  Capacity  lies  in  the 
Grave,  his  phyfical  one  alone  creates  Mifery  and  Con- 
tempt to  himfelf ;  Sport  for  feme,  and  Pity  for  others. 

God  has  fo  entailed  this  Bleffing  to  every  individual, 
that  it's  not  at  our  Difpofal  ;  we  can  neither  make  over 
this  Property  by  Deed  of  Gift,  Bill  of  Sale,  or  Mort- 
gage It  at  Pleafure.  Much  lefs  can  any  other  Man  lay  a- 
ny  claim  to  it.  You  may  commence  a  Suit  of  Law  a- 
gainft  me,  if  you  think  I  am  your  Debtor;  but  you  can't 
put  in  a  Bill  againft  my  Honour.  If  I  have  wrong'd  you, 
fae  for  Satisfadlion  ;  llrain  my  Goods,  but  aflail  not  my 
good  Name. 

Yet,  Good  God  !  with  what  Freedom,  with  what 
Bcldnefs  do  we  attack  our  Neighbour's  Reputation  ?  One 
would  think  Fame,  like  bona  adefpota^  Goods  without 
Owner,  belonged  to  the  flrll  Invader. 

Detraftion  is  universally  the  Difcourfe  alamode,  not 
only  among  the  Fry,  but  alfo  among  the  Nobility,  Our 
Converfations  are  begun  and  carried  on  at  our  Neigh- 
bour's Expence,  and  fo  we  laugh  and  riot  at  free-coft  ; 
we  drag  out  his  molt  fecret  Failings  to  the  Bar,  nay,  and 
haul 'em  to  Execution  without  Authority,  without  War- 
rant, yes,  with  a  greater  Crime. 

Suppofe  his  Crimes  were  real ;  what  then  ?  Who  made 
us  Judges  ?  Who  commiffioned  us  to  hang  the  Delinquent 
in  Effigy  ?  To  proclaim  on  the  Houle  Tops  what  he 
committed  in  his  Clolet  ?  Though  he  has  loll  his  Honour 
in  the  Sight  of  God,  he  Hands  fair  in  the  Efreem  of  ?ylen, 
and  has  Right  to  continue  fo,  till  his  Crimes  betray  them- 
felves,  and  expofe  his  Iniquity  to  the  Publick :  If  he  lias 
done  ill,  God  will  call  him  to  a  fevere  Account,  but  we 
muft  not  intermeddle.  ■  It's  our  Duty  to  p'ity  a  Sinner, 
and  to  pray  for  him,  but  not  to  upbraid  him. 

I  onlv 


^4       ^^^  Gentleman  InflruM. 

I  only  jelled,  fays  one.  But  why  muft  I  pay  for  your 
Diverfion?  Though  you  publifh  my  Faults  in  Jeft,  yois 
ftab  my  Reputation  in  Earneft.  But  belides,  by  this  ve- 
ry Excufe  you  acknowledge  yourfelf  a  Fool,  to  prove 
your  Innocence  :  For  to  jeft  and  to  play  the  Fool  are  in 
Practice  fynonymous. 

He  is  my  Enemy,  fays  another.  Did  you  inform  the 
Company  of  this  Circumftance,  you  might  perchance 
detrad  more,  and  fin  lefs ;  for  who  believes  an  Enemy  ? 
On  fuch  an  Occafion  all  goes  for  Satyr  and  Invedlive. 
When  the  Heart  is  out  of  Tune,  the  Tongue  never  goes 
right;  but  you  whet  and  oyl  your  Darts,  that  they  may 
pierce  deeper.  You  command  me  to  conceal  your  Paf- 
fion,  and  then  dete6l  my  Life  to  fKew  me  for  a  Mon- 
fter;  and  thus  you  call  in  Artifice  to  fecond  Malice,  and 
mifufe  your  Wit,  to  ruin  an  Innocent,  and  to  enhance 
your  Guiltd 

But  why  am  I  your  Enemy  i*  Becaufe  I  would  not  re- 
folve  to  be  your  Dupe.  You  fet  Traps  to  enfnare  me; 
I  difcovered"  the  Ambufcade,  and  had  Wit  to  avoid  it : 
And  thus  you  take  the  Liberty  to  bcfpatter  my  Fame, 
becaufe  you  wanted  Power  to  affront  my  Perfon. 

Yet,  though  I  am  yoar  Enemy,  you  are  not,  I  fup- 
pofe,  an  Infidel.  If  I  have  failed  in  my  Duty,  muft  you 
betray  yours  for  Company  ?  You  are  a  Chriftian,  and 
muft  therefore  either  forget  or  forgive.  My  Impiety  can- 
not warrant  yours.  Revenge  is  caufa  major ^  and  only  be- 
longs to  the  Court  of  the  moft  High.  At  his  Bar  alon6 
we  muft  plead  our  Caufe,  and  from  his  upright  Judgment 
we  muft  expeft  Redrefs. 

Ah,  dear  Neander !  Let  us  turn  our  Eyes  homeward, 
and  examine  our  own  Conduft ;  we  may  perchance  find 
there  Matter  for  Satyr,  and  Work  for  Repentance.  Here 
we  may  blame  without  Detradlion,  and  condemn  with- 
out Sin.  But  it's  both  mean  and  unchriftian,  like  Flies> 
to  hover  about  our  Neighbour's  Stores,  Put  a  Centinel 
over  your  Tongue ;  it's  a  flippery  A/iember ;  Nature  has 
framed  it  for  Motion,  and  Malice  has  fitted  it  for  any 
Mifchief;  a  Child  can  fet  it  a  running,  but  all  the  Force 
of  Reafon,  all  the  Checks  of  Confcience  are  not  able  t6 
ftop  it  in  its  Career. 

But  above  all  things  be  cautious  and  tender  of  Ladies 
Reputations;  A  Woman's  Honour,  like  her  Sex,  isfoft 

com- 


fhe  Gentleman  Injiru^ed,       6^ 

complexion'd ;  the  very  Breath  fulliesits  Luftre,  and  a 
Touch  daflies  it  in  Pieces.  Wounds  made  by  the  Tongue, 
(like  the  biting  of  Crocodiles)  are  above  the  healing  Vir- 
tue of  Balfam,  and  the  Skill  of  Surgery.  Quod dentibus 
iaceravit^  nunquam  fanatur.  An  indilcreet  Word  bolt- 
ed out  at  random,  without  Deiign,  without  Adalice,  of- 
tentimes ftabs  the  Fame  of  the  Female  Sex,  and  every 
Wound  is  mortal. 

My  Blood  has  often  curdled  in  my  Veins,  when  I  heard 
Gentlemen  rriagnify  their  infamous  Gonquefts^  and  raife 
cruel  Trophies  on  the  Ruins  of  Women's  Honour :  I  had 
not  Patience  to  hear  the  Bravades,  nor  Power  to  hinder 
'em.  What  will  thefe  People  blufh  at,  thought  I,  who' 
proclaim  their  Infamy,  and  promulge  their  Shame  ?  Cer- 
tainly they  muft  think  it  a  fine  thing  to  bea  Monfter,  why 
elfe  do  they  triumph  in  Lewdnefs,  and  fport  with  De- 
bauchery ? 

Thefe  mighty  Vidories  are  either  real  or  pretended ;  if 
real,  can  Fancy  frame  any  thing  more  difingenuous,  more 
diabolical,  than  firft  to  wheedle  a  Lady  out  of  her  In- 
nocence, and  then  to  proflituteher  Honour  to  the  wan- 
ton Caprice  of  a  Club  of  Reprobates,  who  will  not  fail 
to  difcover  her  Shame  at  the  next  Rendezvous,  and  to 
multiply  their  own  Crimes  by  lampooning  hers  ?  Here  is 
a  Brace  of  Sins,  both  fmell  ftrong  of  JMalice,  both  fore- 
bode Damnation. 

If  pretended  only,  the  Crime  is  yet  of  a  deeper  Dye ; 
'tis  of  a  more  formidable  Afpedl:,  of  a  more  gigantick 
Size:  Here  is  Innocence  at  the  Block,  and  Guilt  com- 
mits the  Murder. 

I  know  in  the  next  World  God  will  call  to  a  mofl: 
Jevere  Account  thefe  Ghriftian  Canlbals  that  welter  in 
Blood,  and^  like  famiih'd  Wolves,  worry  their  own  Spe- 
cies. But  I  would  have  the  Wifdom  of  the  Nation  make 
fome  Provifion  againlt  luch  brutal,  fuch  inhuman  At- 
tempts. Why  (hall  a  Highwaymm  hang  for  taking 
my  Purfe,  and  a  Rake  go  unpunifh'd,  who  invades  my 
Honour?  Why  (hall  a  Rape  upon  a  Woman's  Body  be 
revenged  with  a  Halter,  and  Violence  upon  her  Fame 
be  rewarded  with  Applaule?  If  the  Faults  be  greater, 
why  are  not  the  Punifhments  at  lealt  equal?  Why  is 
there  hot  a  Reltraint  on  the  Fongue  as  well  as  on 
the  Hands?  Is  it  becaufe  it's  lefs  capable  of  Dileioline? 
F  What, 


6(>        The  Gentle  A-r AN  Injrufied. 

What,  muft  the  Greatnefs  of  the  Mifchief  be  a  Plea  for 
Impunity  ?  Becaufe  \\\\spuMy petuluKt  Member  commits 
more  difmal  Crimes  than  our  whole  Body,  mud  it  en- 
joy a  more  uncontroll'd  Liberty  ?  I  would  have  thefe 
Beafts  of  Prey  forc'd  out  of  Savagenefs  and  Cruelty  by 
Law  and  Difcipline  ;  they  (hould  be  clapt  in  the  Pound, 
©r  cooled  with  a  hot  Iron :  Or  at  lead  we  fhould  keep  in 
Pay  a  Brigade  of  Hunters  to  ferret  our  Defamators,  and 
to  clear  the  Nation  of  this  noxious  Vermin,  as  once  we 
did  of  Wolves :  But  I  fear  the  Diftemper  is  paft  Cure; 
thofe  who  are  infeded  carry  the  Contagion  to  the  Grave. 
Not  one  in  a  thcufand  repents. 

Nean.  Why  fo?  Is  Detraction  one  of  thofe  Sins  that 
are  neither  pardoned  in  this  Life  nor  the  other?  True 
Sorrow  is  a  Catholicon,  an  univerfal  Slave  for  all  the 
Wounds  of  Confcience.   / 

Eujeb.  Right,  true  Repentance  has  a  kind  of  Omnipo- 
tence ;  it  difarms  divine  Juftice,  and  turns  God  into  Mer- 
cy, but  then  it  muft  be  true,  real,  fincere.  Now,  do  ye 
think,  thefe  Men  of  Honour,  as  they  are  pleas'd  to  ftile 
themfelves,  will  ever  refolve  to  repair  a  ruin'd  Reputa- 
tion at  the  Expence  of  their  own?  Will  they  fet  a  dif- 
jointed  Fame  at  their  own  Charge?  No,  no! 

Nean.  Can't  I  re-inftate  a  Man  in  the  juft  Pofleflion  of 
his  Honour,  without  forfeiting  my  own?  Exprefs  your 
Mind  clearer,  I  conceive  not  what  you  would  be  at. 

Eufc'b.  Detraction  is  a  Sin  againft  Juftice,  and  therefore 
by  the  Laws  of  God  and  Nature  the  Offender  lies  under 
an  indifpenlible  Obligation  of  indemnifying  the  injur'd 
Perfon.  Non  remittitur  peccatum^  donee  reflituatur  ab- 
latum.  Now  the  Detradlor  rifles  his  Neighbour's  Ho- 
nour, he  blafts  his  Reputation,  he  muft  therefore  make 
good  the  Lofs;  and  as  the  Tongue  is  guilty  of  the  Theft, 
fo  it  muft  make  Satisfaction.  For  the  Wounds  of  Ho- 
nour are  only  heal'd  by  the  Inftrument  that  made 'em. 
The  Crijninal  muft  acknowledge  his  Fault,  he  muft  con- 
fefs  that  Paffion  run  away  with  his  Reafon  j  that  Malice 
carried  him  beyond  his  Duty,  and  Truth  alfo;  that  what 
he  laid  to  his  Neighbour's  Charge,  was  hatch'd  in  his  own 
Brain,  or  taken  upon  Credit ,  and  if  a  bare  Afleveration 
will  not  do  the  Work,  he  muft  back  his  Confellion  with 
an  Oath. 

Nean» 


7'he  Gentleman  InJlruBed,        6y 

Nean.  This  is  fevere :  What,  muft  a  Gentleman  give 
himlelf  the  Lye  ?  Flefh  and  Blood  cannot  pradtife  fuch 
rigorous  Morals;  the  Remedy  is  worfe  than  the  Difeafe; 
and  if  your  Cafuiftry  be  orthodox,  it's  eafier  for  a  Camel 
to  pafs  through  the  Eye  of  a  Needle,  than  for  a  Detradlor 
to  enter  into  Heaven. 

Eiifeb.  Under  Favour,  Neander^  the  lead  Sin  is  a 
greater  Evil  than  the  greateft  Infamy ;  and  I  hold  it 
much  more  eafy  to  blufh  for  an  Afperfion,  than  to  burn 
for  it  eternally. 

Nea>t.  Don't  Men  charge  up  to  the  Cannon's  Mouth 
to  gain  Honour,  and  leave  their  Bodies  in  the  Breach  to 
be  carried  oft"  with  Applaufe?  Nay,  do  they  not  often- 
times march  up  to  the  Out-works  of  Hell,  to  maintain 
their  purchafed  Reputation  ?  Can  you  therefore  think, 
that  thofe  Bravoes,  who  tremble  more  at  the  Shadow  of 
a  Difgrace,  than  at  all  the  Terrors  of  Damnation,  will 
buy  Pardon  at  the  Expence  of  their  Honour? 

Eufcb.  The  Queftion,  dear  Neander,  is  not  what  Men 
do,  nor  what  Aden  will  do,  but  what  they  fhould  do. 
Were  PratSlice  the  Standard  of  Duty,  we  might  reform 
the  Gofpel  as  well  as  the  Kalendar ;  we  might  turn  thofe 
Woes  God  has  pronounced  againfb  Injuftice,  Drunken- 
nefs  and  Whoredom,  upon  Juftice,  Sobriety  and  Challi- 
ty  :  For  it's  certain  thefe  Vertues  are  invifible  in  Practice, 
and  thofe  Vices  are  too  too  fafliionable.  But,  Ncander, 
though  Guftom  and  Practice  may  enhance  Guilt,  they 
cannot  Men  it. 

Men  are  fond  of  Honour  to  Madnefs  and  Frenzy.  It's 
a  mli  me  tangere ;  the  leaft  Attempt  upon  this  darling 
Folly  is  often  revenged  with  Murder.  But  then,  me- 
thinks,  the  Inclination  we  have  to  conferve  our  own 
Fame,  fhould  infpire  fome  Tendernefs  for  that  of  our 
Nsighbour.  For  have  we  not  Reafon  to  fuppofe,  he  is 
no  lefs  acquainted  with  the  Value  of  this  ineftimable 
Treafure  than  our  felves,  and  that  he  would  be  as  un- 
willing to  expofe  it  to  the  Mercy  of  petulant  Tongues? 
Perchance,  Meander^  I  rate  it  to  the  height  of  its 
Worth,  yet  I  give  God's  Favour  the  Preference :  One 
Grain  of  his  Divine  Grace  out-weighs  a  Tun  of  a  Heftor's 
Reputation.  In  a  Word,  I  would  live  an  Age  under  the 
Stroaks  of  the  mod  picquant  Difgrace,  I  would  fheath 
in  my  Breaft  all  the  Darts  of  Malice,  Envy  and  Poverty, 

F  2i  either 


68        fhs  Gentleman  Injrtitfed. 

either  to  die  Innocent,  or  repentant ;  for  all  thefe  Mife-* 
ries  are  lleeting  and  tranlitory  ;  but  the  Reward  ofVer- 
tue  and  the  Punifhment  of  Vice  are  both  eternal.  If 
therefore  your  Men  of  Honour  will  rather  Hand  by  their 
dimes,  than  recant,  I  would  have  'em  train'd  up  in  the 
DiiC.pline  of  Bedlam  j  a  Switch  is  the  belt  Remedy  a- 
gainll  Madnel's. 

Belides,  why  is  an  humble  Confeflion  a  degrading  Sa- 
tisfacfhion?  The  Name  of  a  Chriftian  is  glorious ;  how 
then  can  the  Duty  lie  under  Reproach  ?  If  the  Profeffion 
be  honourable,  the  Practice  of  it  cannot  be  fhameful. 
Why  then  do  we  tremble  at  Shadows,  and  run  from 
Monllers  that  take  their  Deformity  from  Imagination? 

I  did  not  blufli  to  wound  my  Neighbour's  good  Name ; 
why  fhould  I  be  afhamed  to  heal  it  ?  Sin  (hould  be  wait- 
ed on  by  Infamy,  as  it  is  by  Remorfe  ;  and  Repentance 
fhould  be  accompanied  by  Glory;  but  by  a  ftrange  Le- 
gerdemain the  Devil  has  turn'd  the  Tables,  and  tack'd 
Shame  to  this,  and  Impudence  to  that :  But  however. 
Repentance  is  an  honeft  A6t ;  it's  worthy  of  a  Man,  and 
the  indifpenfible  Duty  of  a  Chriftian;  why  then  fhould 
it  fear  a  Witnefs?  The  Difference  between  good  and  ill 
Men  lies  not  in  the  Efteem  of  Vertue,  but  in  the  Pra- 
ctice i  for  both  equally  value  it.  But  the  firlt  only  pofl'efs 
it,  becaufe  the  others  will  not  go  to  the  Charge  of  pro- 
curing it. 

Nean.  Pray,  is  not  Fear  a  clownifli  Vice  ;  a  Female 
Weaknefs  ?  Does  it  not  fit  ungenteelly  on  Quality  ? 
Now  what  can  bring  a  Gentleman  to  the  Bar,  and  clap 
him  on  his  Knees,  with  a  Pray  forgive  me  in  his  Mouth, 
but  this  mean  Palfion  ? 

Eufeb.  You  are  miilakcn  ;  Cowardice  and  Fear  are 
neither  fynonymous  in  Philofophy,  nor  Morals :  That 
is  always  a  Vice,  this  is  often  a  Vertue.  When  Prudence 
commands  Fear,  Boldnels  is  Temerity  and  Folly :  It's 
Cowardice  to  defpond  and  fmk  under  a  Danger,  that 
Valour  can  fubdue  ;  but  it's  Rafhnefs  to  engage  with 
one  above  the  Strength  of  human  Force.  Has  then  a 
Gentleman  lefs  Courage,  becyufe  he  trembles  at  the  im- 
partial Juilice  of  an  enraged  Deity  ?  Becaufe  he  dares 
not  wreftle  with  the  Omnipotent,  or  Hand  the  fhock  of 
his  Fury  ?  Becaufe  he'll  rather  repent  than  die  in  Obfli- 
nacy,  and  rather  return  to  his  Duty,  than  fufFer  eternal- 
ly 


^he  Gentleman  Injfru^ed.        6p 

ly  for  tranfgrefling  it?  Neander,  l:t  not  the  wild  Noti- 
ons of  our  pretended  Gentle-men  be  your  Guides :  Their 
Principles  are  as  corrupt  as  their  Practice,  and  their 
Reafon  is  as  bad  as  their  Confcience. 

Nean.   Are  you   not  a  Member  of  the  Port-Royal 
Club? 

Eufeb.  Why  do  you  ask  this  Queftion  ? 

Nean.  I  am  told  they  are  mighty  Patrons  de  la  morale 
fevere  ;  they  preach  up  Rigour  to  fuch  an  exorbitant 
Height,  that  one  would  think  God's  great  Prerogative, 
Mercy,  was  either  wore  out,  or  extindt.  Your  Morals 
'have  a  Flavour  of  Rigorifm  ;  they  are  four,  morofe,  ill- 
natur'd,  and  call  for  a  Dram  of  Charity.  For  look  ye. 
Sir,  Detraftion,  as  the  World  goes,  s  no  Phantafm,  it's 
a  very  real  thing,  and  keeps  good  Company :  This  alone, 
pours  Life  into  Converfation ;  it  quickens  Difcourfe  ; 
■Without  it  Mirth  would  languiHi,  and  good  Humour 
ileep.  I  have  feen  your  Seventh-form  Wits,  as  mute, 
as  if  their  Mouths  were  pad  lock'd,  when  any  ferious 
and  innocent  Subjcdt  came  in  their  Way ;  but  when 
their  Neighbour's  Condudt  was  brought  before  'em,  their 
Tongues  run  before  their  Conlcience ;  they  would  take 
his  Life  in  Pieces,  they  would  rip  up  his  Breaft,  diffeft 
his  Thoughts,  and  then  draw  Demonftrations  from  meer 
Conjectures  ;  they  would  hand  his  Reputation  about 
the  Table,  till  it  fell  to  the  Ground,  and  blow  over  it, 
till  it  fmell  as  rank  as  the  Breath  that  caufeth  the  Stench, 
and  difgorged  the  Infedlion.  Notwithftanding  thefe  Peo- 
ple hoped  to  be  faved,  without  Hooping  to  the  Satisfacti- 
on you  fpeak  of  In  fhort,  every  Man  endeavours  by 
Detraction  and  Out-rage  to  undermine  his  Brother's 
Fame,  and  no  Man  fo  much  as  thinks  of  repairing  it. 
Nay,  I  never  heard  the  Clergy  recommend  it  to  dying 
Perfons  as  a  Duty  j  but  either  as  an  ACt  of  Decency, 
or  of  Edification.  Can  I  fuppofc  you  are  better  in- 
formed of  a  ftriCt  Obligation  than  the  Miniftry  ?  Or  bet- 
ter vers'd  in  Cafuiftry  than  Divines  ?  Eujehius,  let  us 
damn  no  Body. 

Eufeb.  I  remember  when  ftigmatized  Villians  with  Nar- 
ratives and  Difcoveries  libelled  honeft  Patriots  into 
Newgate^  and  cut  off'  their  Honours  and  Lives  with  Fears 
and  Jealoufies;  when  they  fowed  the  Innocent  in  Bear- 
Skins,  and  then  fet  all  the  Beagles  of  the  FaCtion  about 
F  3  their 


70        ^he  Gentleman  Inftru^ed. 

their  Ears ;  when  they  profaned  Bailies  with  Perjuries, 
and  butchered  their  Fellow-Subjed's  Fame  at  the  Bar,  to 
quarter  their  Bodies  at  Tyburn.  Thefe  Knights  of  the 
Poft  flung  not  up,  I  fuppofe,  their  Pretenfions  tc  Heaven: 
Tho'  I  have  not  feen  any  Recantation;  yet  I  am  fure, 
unlefs  God  nulls  all  the  Laws  of  Nature,  and  calls  in  the 
Gofpel,  or  illues  out  under  his  great  Seal  an  Amnefty, 
they'll  fall  fhort  of  their  Expeftation. 

1  confefs,  this  Difeafe  of  the  Tongue  is  epidemical ; 
the  ufe  of  Speech  has  fo  fwerved  from  its  original  Infti- 
tution,  that  it's  become  an  Incumbrance  and  a  Snare  to 
Mankind.  I  look  upon  the  Faculty  rather  as  a  Penalty 
than  a  Prerogative  ;  and  were  we  divefted  of  it,  though 
we  fhould  be  unfit  for  Converfation,  we  might  hope  to 
be  more  innocent.  Now,  whether  our  Calumniators 
hope  to  be  faved,  is  a  Queftion.  I  am  apt  to  believe 
their  Religion  and  Confcience  are  of  a  Piece,  and  t?Mt 
they  confine  their  Fears,  Hopes  and  Defires  within  the 
Compafs  of  this  World :  For  certainly,  the  Dread  of  eter- 
nal Fire  might  cool  their  Paffions,  and  check  their  Ma- 
lice. Were  they  perfuaded  of  another  World,  would 
they  not  fall  with  more  Scruple,  and  rife  with  more  Vi- 
gour ?  But  if  they  hope  for  Salvation  without  Satisfadi- 
on,  they  build  on  a  deceitful  Bottom. 

Neander^  Once  more  let  meadvifeyou  to  be  tender  of 
your  Neighbour's  Honour.  Give  Ear  to  the  Voice  of 
Nature,  that  commands  you  to  do  as  youixiould he-done 
by :  You  can't  chufe  but  hear  this  jiift,  this  equitable 
Admonition,  unlefs  we  Hop  our  Ears,  and  caft  Reafon 
into  a  mortal  Lethargy  -,  nay,  we  muft  approve  the 
Counfel,  fo  that  we  can  neither  plead  Ignorance  nor 
Impotence.  And  certainly,  a  fick  Man  deferves  rather 
Laughter  than  Pity,  that  will  rather  ftruggle  with  a  Dif- 
eafe, and  groan  under  the  Pangs  of  a  burning  Fever, 
than  apply  a  Remedy. 

Yet  after  all,  I  grant  a  disjointed  Reputation  is  not 
cafily  fet  ;  and  therefore  I  befeech  you,  to  avoid  a  Mif- 
chief,  that  draws  after  it  fuch  a  difmal  Confequence. 
If  other  Men  have  a  mind  to  be  eternally  miferable,  let 
'em  have  that  Satisfaftion  ;  but  he  not  fo  ill  advifed, 
as  to  wait  on  'em.  Should  a  Man  put  Fire  to  his  Houfe, 
or  leap  into  a  boiling  Cauldron,  the  Frolick  would  fcarce 
go  round.  Yet  certainly,  thofe  that  break  in  upon  ano- 
ther 


T'ke  Gentleman  Injlru^ed,       yi 

ther  Man's  good  Name,  and  never  refolve  to  repair  the 
Injury,  hazard  a  thing  more  precious  than  a  Houfe  or 
Life.  Why  therefore  fhall  we  refufe  to  comply  in  one 
Cafe,  and  not  in  the  other  ? 

I  have  made  a  fliort  Survey  of  Detra6li'6n,  and  laid  be- 
fore you  a  faint  Profpefi;  of  its  dangerous  Confequences  : 
But  it  avails  not  the  Patient  to  know  the  Nature  of  his 
Diitemper,  unlefs  he  be  told  the  Remedy.  I  will  there- 
fore prefcribea  Recipe.  Certainly  the  Phyfician's  Method 
is  applicable  to  Difeafesof  the  Soul,  no  lefs  than  to  thofe 
of  the  Body.  We  mufl  llrike  at  the  Caufe,  before  we 
can  hope  to  mafter  the  EfFe6l.  Now  if  we  trace  Detrac- 
tion up  to  its  Origin,  we  fliali  find  it  fpring  from  Pride 
and  Envy :  For  it's  a  kind  of  Apofteme  that  lies  at  the 
Heart,  and  breaks  out  at  the  Mouth. 

Though  all  Sins  have  a  Flavour  of  Pride,  yet  Detrac- 
tion has  a  greater  Dofe  of  this  bad  Humour  than  ordi- 
nary. It's  thechief  Ingredient  of  this  outragious  Crime  ; 
it  difcompofes  the  Stomach,  and  then  immediately  gives 
the  Heart-burning ;  and  then  the  Tongue,  which  is  its 
Index,  falls  into  Diforders.  A  Man  fmitten,  like  young 
Narcijfus^  with  his  own  Excellencies,  looks  down 
from  the  Pinnacle  of  his  foaring  Conceit  on  other  Mortals 
as  Vaflals;  he  fancies  Praifeis  an  Inheritance  entailed  on 
his  Merit ;  that  either  to  refpeil  or  honour  another,  is 
to  invade  his  Property,  and  to  fet  againft  him  an  ufurp- 
ing.  Competitor.  Hence  he  runs  in'Queft  of  a  Foil,  to 
make  his  own  Perfe6lions  appear  more  gaudy,  and 
fparkle  with  more  Eclat.  Now  what  can  give  a  more 
charming  Turn  to  his  fuppofed  Talent,  than  his  Rival's 
Folly  ?  Hence  he  rallies  up  in  a  Body  all  the  auxiliary 
Forces  of  Anger  and  Revenge;  he  takes  the  Field,  and 
maraudes  upon  his  Fame  ;  he  difle6ts  the  poor  Creature's 
A6lions,  and  expofes  the  whole  Anatomy  of  his  pri- 
vate TranfgreiTions  to  the  View  and  Cenfure  of  the  Pub- 
lick.  For  he  wifely  fancies,  that  the  Fabrick  of  his  Va- 
nity will  Hand  unmoveable  on  the  Ruins  of  a  Rival's  Re- 
putation. Did  the  Breafts  of  the  proud  and  haughty- 
minded  Men  lie  open  to  Sight ;  could  we  rifle  all  the 
abftrufe  and  dark  Recefles  of  their  Hearts,  what  Sallies 
of  Joy  fliould  we  difcover  at  the  moft  innocent  Over- 
lights  of  a  Competitor  ?  And  then,  whoever  crows  with- 
in at  the  Misfortune,  will  proclaim  it  at  the  firft  Occa- 
F  4  fion : 


71         ^e  Gentleman  Infru^ed. 

lion:  For  Joy,  like  Grief,  is  a  ftifling  Humour,  unlefs 
it  ihrows  off  the  Oppreflion. 

If  therefore  you  defire  to  fpealc  ill  of  no  Body,  think 
not  too  well  ofyourfelf;  fet  not  too  exorbitant  a  Price 
upon  your  Merits  ;  remember  you  are  no  Phcenix,  the 
only  mdividual  of  your  Species  ;  thofe  Qi^ialities  you 
poliefs  are  mere  Gratuities,  the  Effedsof  God's  Libera- 
lity, not  of  your  Deferts ;  you  had  no  right  to  be  much 
lels  to  be  great,  beautiful,  or  rich.  Is  it  not  Madnefs 
therefore  for  you  who  can  lay  claim  to  nothing,  to  en- 
grofs  all  the  Gifts  of  Nature  and  Fortune  ?  Think  not, 
God  has  exhaufted  his  Treafury  on  you  alone  ;  he  fcat- 
ters  his  Favours  where  he  pleafes ;  and  if  he  provides 
more  plentifully  for  your  Neighbour  than  for  you,  why 
do  you  complain?  Mud  you  be  evil,  becaufe  God  is 
good  ?  Muft  you  caft  a  malicious  Glance  at  another,  be- 
caufe he  has  received  fome  Marks  of  his  great  Maker's 
Kindnefs  ?  Difcompofe  not  your  Thoughts  for  other 
Peoples  Advantages,  but  enjoy  your  own  with  Thank- 
fulnefs.  Fix  juft  Bounds  to  your  Defires,  as  well  as  to 
your  Undertakings,  otherwife  you'll  rear  up  imaginary 
Caftles  of  Greatncfs,  to  create  to  your  felf  a  real  Tor- 
ment. 

But  if  you  will  contend  for  an  honourable  Poft,  ma- 
nage the  Conteft  fairly  ;  pufli  on  your  Pretenlions  with 
Vertue  and  Generofity.  Let  Merit  bear  away  the  Prize, 
not  Outr^.ge,  and  if  your  Rival  carry  off  the  Advantage, 
rather  applaud  the  Conqueft,  than  revile  him.  By  lef- 
fcnmg  his  Parts  or  Conduct  you  burlefque  your  own  ;  but 
then  if  you  complain,  and  curfe  in  a  Corner,  you  only 
betray  your  Impotence,  Ill-nature,  and  Impiety  :  In 
fine,  look  at  your  Failings  and  his  through  the  fame 
Glafs,  and  you'll  fee  an  humbling  Speftacle  ;  you'll  be- 
hold fo  many  Objeds  worthy  of  Blame,  that  you'll  have 
■no  great  Stomach  to  cenfure  others. 

Envy  is  the  fecond  Source  of  Detra£lion.  This  is  an 
ill-natur'd  Vice,  it  loves  ill  for  ill's  fake,  and  takes  Plea- 
fure  in  Torment ;  it's  a  kind  of  Turnkey  by  Birth,  and  an 
Executioner  by  Profeffion  ;  it  feeds  on  Stench,  and  fucks 
Rats-bane  from  Balms,  and  Infection  from  Perfumes;  ir 
never  does  a  good  Turn,  but  when  it  defigns  an  ill  one  ; 
and  fddom  takes  things  by  the  right  Handle;  Mifchief 
makes  up  its  Employment,  Plagues  and  Famines  are  its 

DiverfioHi 


The  Gentleman  InJiruBed,       73 

Diverfion,  its  Smiles  are  liice  blazing  Comets,  which 
cither  hatch  Treafon,  or  portend  it.  What  Wonder,  if 
a  Man  poffefs'd  by  this  Fiend  plays  the  Devil,  who  is 
furnamed  Accufator  Fratrum ! 

But  though  any  Mifchief  lies  within  the  Reach  of  an 
envious  Man's  Wifli,  many  are  removed  out  of  the  Verge 
of  his  Power  :  Some  move  too  high  to  be  (hot  at,  others 
too  low ;  but  neither  Place  nor  Station  is  a  fufficient  Fence 
againft  the  Tongue.  A  Dwarf  may  engage  with  a  Giant 
'  at  this  Weapcn,  or  a  Clown  with  a  Lord.  And  for  this 
Reafon,  when  the  envious  Man  can't  come  at  his  Antago- 
nift's  Perfon,  he  fets  upon  his  good  Name,  and  falls  foul 
upon  his  Honour ;  and  when  by  the  help  of  keen  Satyr 
and  falfe  Glofles,  he  has  beat  down  the  Out-works  that 
fenc'd  his  Fortune  from  Infult  and  Ruin,  he  draws  his 
Cannon  nearer,  and  raifes  Batteries  againft  his  Grandeur 
and  Eftate  that  fupport  it :  For  he  knows  that  the  beft 
built  Fortune  can't  be  ftable,  when  Reputation,  that 
propt  it,  is  removed.  Thus  we  fee  Socrates  kept  his 
Ground,  and  even  triumphed  over  the  Calumnies  of  his 
Accufers,  whilft  his  Reputation  interpofed.  But  when 
a  buffooning  Comedian  droU'd  him  into  Contempt,  he 
appear'd  no  lefs  guilty  before  the  Judges,  than  defpica- 
ble  on  the  Stage.  So  that  in  Conclulion,  Envy  found 
him  guilty,  and  theSenatepronounced  the  Sentence. 

Methinks  it's  fuperfluous  to  dilluade  a  Man  from  this 
Vice.  Intereft  is  more  powerful  than  Reafon.  We  dote 
on  Pleafure,  and  run  from  Pain  by  the  Inftinft  of  Nature. 
Who  will  not  rather  chufe  aPrifonwith  Satisfaftion,  than 
a  Palace  with  Torment  ?  But  an  envious  Man,  inftead 
of  following  the  Current  of  Nature,  bears  up  againft  it. 
He  labours  for  labour's  fake,  and  drudges  for  the  meer 
Expectation  of  Mifery.  He  leads  the  Life  of  Cain,  haunt- 
ed with  the  Spedres  of  his  own  Crimes  from  within, 
and  with  a  thoufand  Jealoufies  from  abroad  ;  other  Peo- 
ples Happinefs  creates  his  Torments ;  their  Profperity 
gnaws  his  Entrails,  and  his  Impotence,  to  over-caft  the 
Sun-{hine  of  their  Fortune,  claps  him  on  the  Wheel. 
Now  a  Man  that  can  fall  in  Love  with  Pain,  and  court 
Difquiet,  muft  not  be  caft  in  the  fame  Mould  that  o- 
ther  Mortals  are :  And  therefore  I  fhould  think  it  as 
eafy  to  difluade  People  from  Envy,  as  from'  vaulting 
down  a  Precipice. 

But 


74.        ^f^^  Gentleman  InflniBed. 

But  befides,  a  Man  that  envies  others,  is  always  paid 
in  the  fame  Coin  ;  his  Honour  will  be  as  roughly  handled  j 
when  one  contefls  with  Multitudes,  he  Hands  on  the  low- 
er Ground,  and  fights  at  a  Difadvantage.  This  is  the 
envious  Man's  Cafe.  For  he  can't  but  know  the  difinge- 
nuous  Defcants  on  other's  Aitions  will  reach  the  Ears  of 
the  o'fended  Perlons.  Defaming  Reports  have  a  mira- 
culous Sympathy  with  thofe  that  Diftance  of  Place  is  not 
able  to  dead  the  Echo ;  they  rebound  from  Tongue  to 
Tongue,  are  toiled  from  Hand  to  Hand,  till  they  come 
to  the  Knowledge  of  the  injured  ;  and  generally,  like 
Snow-Bdlls,  they  encreafe  in  the  Journey.  What  a  gra- 
ting Nolle  then  will  they  make  in  the  Ears  of  the  defa- 
med Perfon  I  Will  not  he  think  of  Reprifals  ?  Will  he 
not  treat  your  Honour  with  as  little  Regard  as  you  have 
his?  And  God  fend  fuch  an  eafy  Satisfadlion  may  af- 
fwage  his  Refentment.  When  Men  lit  Judges  in  their 
own  Caufe,  they  make  the  Bills  of  Lofles  and  Damages 
rife  high  ;  who  knows  but  they  may  demand  Blood, 
and  facrifice  your  Life  to  the  Manes  of  their  murder'd 
Reputation  ? 

In  fine,  Neander^  remember  you  muft  die.  When  Death 
hath  fealed  your  Eyes,  you'll  find  all  the  Darts  of  the 
Tongue,  fhot  at  your  Neighbour,  ftick  in  your  own  Soul ; 
you'll  feel  the  Smart,  but  will  find  no  Lenitive,  no  Cure  : 
Why  then  {hall  we  run  headlong  into  thofe  Crimes  we 
muft  either  deplore  here,  or  burn"  for  hereafter  ?  Let  us 
look  before  us,  and  not,  like  Beafts,  follow  the  meer  Im- 
preffions  of  Paffion.  Let  us  fhew  we  are  Men,  not  by 
our  Vices,  but  by  our  Vertues.  To  have  Reafon,  and 
to  a6l  againft  it,  is  to  debafe  our  Species. 

IV. 

As  God  has  fenced  our  Neighbour's  Fame,  fo  he  has 
been  careful  to  guard  his  Poflelfions  againft  all  the  At- 
tempts of  Avarice  and  Injuftice.  Non  furaberis,  fays  he 
in  the  Decalogue,  Thou  Jh alt  not  Jleal ;  and  then  he  threa- 
tens the  Criminal  with  the  Sentence  of  his  high  Difplea- 
fure,  unlefs  he  cancels  the  TranfgrelTion  with  a  fincere 
Repentance.  I  apprehend,  Neander,  fome  Gentlemen 
miftake  this  Command  :  They  fancy  it  reaches  only  Pads, 
Cut-purfes  or  Highwaymen  :  But  this  is  a  Miftake  ;  it 
takes  in  all  who  ad  againft  the  Laws  of  Juftice  j  and  for 

this 


-7%ff  Gentleman  InJiruBed.       75 

this  Reafon,  I  fear,  that  many  who  hang  at  Tyburn,  are 
often  lefs  criminal,  than  fomeofthofe  whoftand  Spe6ta- 
tors  of  the  Tragedy,  or  perchance  who  fat  on  the  Bench. 
For  in  all  Kingdoms,  Laws  are,  as  Solon  faid,  like  Cob- 
webs, that  hamper  fmall  Flies  whilll  the  greater  break 
through  'em.  Poor  People  bear  the  Punifhment  of  In- 
juftice,  and  great  ones  carry  off  in  Triumph  both  Plea- 
fure  and  Profit.  Thefe  are  too  big  for  Execution,  though 
not  for  Guilt.  They  can  fue  for  an  indigent  Neighbour's 
Field,  becaufe  it  lies  conveniently,  and  perfuade  the  Judges 
they  have  more  Right,  becaufe  they  have  more  Money 
and  Credit.  The  Luftreof  Gold  often  dazzles  Lawyers 
out  of  Confcience,  and  juft  Pofl'eflbrs  out  of  Lordfhips. 
Right  ebbs  and  flows  by  the  fecret  Influence  of  Guineas. 
For  let  me  tell  you,  Neander,  the  Juftice  of  a  Caufe 
fprouts  up,  and  thrives  miraculoufly  under  a  Fee. 

But  though  thefe  Men  carry  the  Suit  in  the  Eyes  of  the 
World,  they  lofe  it  at  God's  high  Court  of  Juftice,  and 
their  Souls  alfo  ;  nor  is  there  any  Difference  between 
thefe  Over-reachers  and  Cut-purfes;  but  that  they  are 
ten  times  more  criminal.  Among  the  Lacedemonians,  a 
clear  Theft  pafs'd  for  a  Vertue.  Are  not  fome  Chriftians 
of  the  fame  Perfuafion  ?  But  for  all  that,  though  a  Spar- 
tan  Jury  might  poffibly  find  'em  not  guilty,  they'd  find  no 
fuch  Indulgence  in  the  Vale  of  'Jehojhaphat. 

I  never  yet  underftood,  how  Solicitations,  and  Recom- 
mendations of  Caufes  to  the  Judges,  how  double  and  tri- 
ple Fees  could  be  well  reconciled  with  this  Law,  Thou 
pah  not  (leal :  For  either  you  doubt  of  the  Integrity  of 
the  Bench,  or  you  do  not.  If  the  firft,  you  caft  a  Scan- 
dal on  the  Face  of  the  Government;  you  arraign  either 
the  Capacity  or  the  Integrity  of  the  Prince  ;  /.  c.  you 
fufped  he  wants  Judgment  in  the  Choice  of  Magiftrates, 
or  has  advanced  on  purpofe  thofe  who  would  betray  the 
iProperty  of  the  Subjeft.  Now  fuch  an  Innuendo  is  dif- 
refpe6fu],  rafli,  and  highly  unchriftian. 

But  befides,  if  really  you  doubt  of  the  Judge's  Integri- 
ty, your  Condudl  is  foolifh.  For  if  a  Judge  will  fell  a 
favourable  Sentence  to  the  Plaintiff,  he'll  be  no  lefs  kind 
to  the  Defendant,  if  he  out-bids  him.  A  Manthenfhould 
be  firft  fure  of  Succefs,  before  he  parts  with  his  Money, 
otherwife  he  will  be  gulled  out  of  his  Pretenfions,  and 
pay  for  his  Difappointment, 

Again, 


7^      ^he  Gentleman  InJiruBed, 

Again,  this  Pradtice  runs  quite  counter  to  all  the  Di- 
lates of  Confcience  and  Jultice.  For  if  Gain  and  Inte- 
reft  be  a  Magiftrate's  weak  fide,  if  I  know  he  meafures 
Right  by  the  Weight  of  Silver,  and  barters  Law  for  Mo- 
ney, can  I  pamper  his  Inclination,  or  feed  h"s  corrupt 
Appetite;  or  ftrike  in  with  his  linful  Diftemper  ?  No 
more,  certainly,  than  I  can  with  a  fafe  Confcience  pufli 
him  down  a  Precipice;  for  if  it  be  a  Sin  to  permit  one, 
when  I  can  hinder  it,  is  it  not  a  Sin  to  perfuade  a  Crime  ; 
nay,  to  buy  onei* 

If  the  fecond  ;  /.  e.  If  you  fuppofe  your  Bufinefs  lies 
in  the  Hands  of  upright  Men,  that  fquare  their  Verdidls 
by  the  Laws,  not  by  Partiality  and  Favour,  why  are  you 
eternally  upon  the  Hoof?  Why  do  you  tire  them  and 
your  felf  too  with  tedious  Applications?  Why  do  you 
drain  your  Pockets  to  enrich  Pettifoggers  and  Attorniei  ? 
This  Trouble  is  fuperfluous,  and  the  Expence  unneedful. 
In  a  Word,  Sir,  the  ConduS  is  either  unprofitable  or 
unjuft. 

But  if  you  doubt  in  your  Caufe,  let  it  fall,  at  leaft  pufli 
it  on  no  further  with  your  Credit  or  Purfe  ;  for  all  you 
can  expedl,  is  to  gain  a  Suit,  and  lofe  your  Soul. 

Nean.  If  I  can  juggle  a  Neighbour  out  of  an  Eftate  by 
Quirks  of  Law,  and  by  a  genteel  Turn  of  the  Hand, 
bubble  him  out  of  a  confiderable  Sum,  may  I  not  put 
him  to  graze  upon  the  Common,  without  any  Obliga- 
tion to  reftore  ? 

Eufeb.  The  very  Queftion  is  a  Scandal,  not  only  to 
Chriftianity,  but  to  human  Nature;  you  are  obliged  not 
only  to  return  the  Capital,  but  to  indemnify  him  for  all 
the  Lofles  confequenl  thereto. 

Nean.  Nay,  Sir,  I  am  of  your  Opinion ;  for  why 
fhould  a  Man  gain  by  his  Crimes  ?  Yet  once  I  fell  into 
the  Company  of  a  Man  of  Parts,  of  Character  and  Re- 
pute in  his  Country,  who  thought  otherwife  of  the  Mat- 
ter: We  difcour.'d  the  Point,  yet  I  could  never  get  him 
over  to  my  Opinion :  He  held  fo  fail  to  Non-reftitution, 
that  there  was  no-moving  him.  A  hearty  Repentance, 
faid  he,  without  Reititution,  makes  a  fufficient  A- 
tonement  for  the  Or^ence.  He  told  me  I  was  unskill'd 
in  Cafuiftry.  I  confefs'd  I  had  read  no  Cafuift  but  the 
Bible  and  Nature. 

Eufeb. 


'The  Gentleman  Infru^ed.        yy 

Eufeb.  With  Submiflion  to  the  Gentleman's  Charader, 
Parts  and  Station  ;  he  was  either  a  great  Fool,  or  a  fuper- 
lative  Knave,  fit  for  Bedlam  or  Newgate,  Was  he  not 
a  Lawyer  ? 

Nea»,  He  had  ftudied  in  the  Inns  of  Court. 

Eufeb.  I  thought  fo.  It's  a  heaHng  Dodtrine  for  a 
wounded  Confcience,  a  palatable  and  eafy  Remedy,  a 
Catholicon  for  all  the  Aches  of  the  Mind,  and  the  Gripes 
of  an  over-charg'd  Stoirach  ;  and  perchance  the  Ufe  is 
univerfal,  otherways  once  at  leaft  in  a  Twelvemonth  we 
might  fee  a  Dives  transform'd  into  a  Lazarus^  a  Lord  into 
a  Laquey,  and  a  Lady  into  a  Chamber-maid  ;  we  might 
fee  thofe  who  fit  mcjellically  in  Coaches  with  a  long 
Wig,  and  a  Snuff- Box  alamode,  fit  behind  'em.  Good 
God !  how  many  gawdy  Birds  would  make  as  naked  a  Fi- 
gure as  the  Daw  in  the  Fable,  if  their  Peacock  Plumes 
were  return'd  to  their  Owners?  Neander^  pray  tell  that 
Gentleman  I  am  neither  fatislied  with  his  Conlcience  nor 
his  Skill  J  he  that  will  not  reftore  Itolen  Goods,  is  more 
criminal  than  he  that  conceals 'em;  and  he  that  will  keep 
an  ill-purchafed  Eltate  in  Spight  of  Juftice,  will  feize  on 
the  next  that  lies  in  his  way  ;  and  then  how  can  he  un- 
derltand  Couk  ?nd  Littleton,  v;ho  can't  read  the  very  Al- 
phabet of  Nature?  A  hearty  Repentance  without Reili- 
tution  is  a  Dream. 

De9,r  Neaftder,  never  raife  the  Pile  of  a  great  Fortune 
on  a  Bottom  of  Fr^*ud  and  Injuflice;  it's  an  unliable 
Foundation,  and  unable  to  bear  the  monllrous  Weight  of 
Crimes,  they  crufli  in  a  Moment  the  beft  built  Stru^^ture, 
and  entomb  the  Criminal,  together  wiih  all  his  Grandeur, 
under  the  R.uins  of  his  towring  Babel.  The  Triumphs  of 
unjuft  Men  are  always  fliort-lived.  God  takes  Pleafure 
in  ftrangling  em  in  the  very  Cradle ;  they  pafslike  Light- 
ning, and  leave  nothing  behind  but  Smoak  and  Vapour; 
Their  Fall  is  no  lefe  amazing  than  their  Rile ;  they  pais 
oft'  like  Phanralms,  or  elfe  hve  in  Penury  and  Contasmpt, 
or  die  like  Reprobates ;  they  c:'rry  the  moll  legible  Marks 
of  God's  Malediction  ftampt  on  their  Foreheads,  and 
tear  almofl  all  Men  without  being  pitied  by  any ;  fo  that 
Divine  Vengeance  begins  their  Torments  in  this  World, 
'  to  continue  'em  eternally  in  the  other. 

rU  not  follow  this  crying  Vice  thro'  its  Branches,  nor 
make  an  entire  Dilledtion  of  all  its  Parts ;  it  runs  through 

all 


jr8        'fhe  Gentleman  InftruBed. 

all  the  Veins  of  Commerce,  and  almoll  Converfation ; 
it's  found  in  Play,  as  well  as  in  Contradts,  and  is  no 
more  innocent  under  one  Shape,  than  under  another; 
you  may  call  it  Over-reaching  or  Out-witting,  if  you 
pleafe,  but  the  change  of  Names  makes  no  Alteration  of 
the  Thing :  Nature  depends  not  on  Fancy  or  Caprice, 
•they  are  the  fame  in  fpight  of  Cuftom  and  Difguife. 

V. 

I  muft  now  caution  you  againft  Lewdnefs.  It's  a  noi- 
fome  Employment  to  grope  in  Puddles,  and  to  dig  in 
Muck.  And  therefore  I'll  only  flcim  the  Surface,  and  let 
the  ofFenfive  Dregs  lie  at  the  Bottom.  You  know  God 
has  enafted  this  Law  in  the  Decalogue,  Thou  palt  not 
commit  Adultery:  This  Precept  does  not  only  reftrain 
Adts  of  Lewdnefs,  but  even  Thoughts  and  Delires :  For 
Impurity  in  Idea  draws  after  it  a  real  Hell ;  the  Smoak 
that  vanifhes  in  a  Moment,  kindles  an  eternal  Fire. 

Nean.  I  fuppofe  neither  Gentlemen  of  the  Court,  nor 
Officers  of  the  Army,  come  within  the  Compafs  of  this 
Prohibition.  God  furely  and  Nature  have  illued  out  in 
their  Favour  a  Patent  of  Exemption. 

Eufeb.  Truly,  Neander,  I  never  read  that  either  God 
or  Nature  had  fuch  a  Deference  for  the  Court  and  Ar- 
my, or  fo  great  a  Refpedt  for  Quality.  Why,  Man,  let 
our  Courtiers  be  as  great  as  Alexander^  and  our  Soldiers 
as  valiant  ;  there  fits  a  more  auguft,  and  a  more  power- 
ful Mailer  above,  whofe  Comm.ands  they  muft  obey,  or 
fmart  for  the  Tranfgrellion.  The  Sword  has  no  Privi- 
lege above  the  Plow,  nor  has  Quality  any  Right  above 
Peafantry,  but  iogxt^icxl^oxmtnls:  Pttentcs  patenter  tor^ 
menta  fatientur. 

Nean.  If  it  be  fo,  our  Gentlemen  and  Soldiers  are  all 
llruck  with  a  Lunacy.  They  feem  to  have  entred  into 
an  Aflbciation  againft  Divine  Authority,  and  endeavour 
by  Practice  to  repeal  the  Statute;  as  if  God's  Laws 
could  ceafe  per  defuetudinemy  as  well  as  human.  When 
St.  P^«/ bids  every  Man  take  uxorem^  if  he  meant  a  Mifs, 
the  Counfel  is  followed  even  to  a  Scruple  ;  but  if  he 
did  not,  our  Gonduft  is  fcandalous  to  Impudence,  and 
God's  Authority  is  flighted  beyond  Contempt  and  .Info- 
lence. 

Eufeb. 


The  Gentleman  Injiru^fed,       y^ 

,  Eufgb.  The  Evil  lies  deep,  and  the  Difeafe  reaches  to 
the  Land's  End  ;  few  are  clear  of  the  Infedtion  ;  Lewd- 
nefs  is  no  more  a  Diverlion  ;  no,  it's  become  the  grand 
Bufinefs,  the  Employment  of  Mankind  ;  nay,  it's  impro- 
ved to  Science  alio ;  Love- Intrigues  turn  on  Method,  and 
are  carried  on  by  Demonftration:  So  that  Attempts  upon 
Chaftity  come  oft"  generally  with  Succefs.  For  Women, 
in  our  Age,  are  as  ill  furniih'd  for  Refiftance,  as  an  old 
Spanijh  Town  for  a  Siege.  But  then  the  Dons,  when 
foic'd  to  furrender,  article  for  their  Honour:  This 
they'll  bring  off,  though  the  Town  ftay  behind  in  the 
Hands  of  the  Conquerors.  But  our  Female  Defendants 
Hand  not  upon  fuch  Niceties :  They  deliver  up  their  Mo- 
defty,  and  go  oiF  with  Ignominy  :  Gonfufion  I  will  not 
fay  ;  for  Blulhes  are  out  of  Fafhion,  unlefs  when  it's  a 
Queftion  to  pradlife  the  Chrillian  Vertues  of  Sobriety, 
Temperance  and  Chaftity. 

I  have  more  than  once  taken  a  Survey  of  our  Gentry, 
and  I  find  nine  in  ten  ruin'd  by  this  unlucky  Vice  ;  to  all 
Intents  and  Purpofes,  they  have  forfeited  their  Honour, 
mortgaged  their  Eftates,  impaired  their  Health,  their  Bo- 
dies fall  under  the  Weight  of  Lewdnefs,  their  Purfes  are 
fcarce  able  to  lupport  it.  So  that  if  thefe  young  Sparks 
would  take  the  Pains  to  caft  up  their  Accounts,  they 
would  find  their  Pleafure  have  brought  them  in  no  o- 
ther  Profit  but  Poverty,  Difeafes,  and  more  than  one 
Caufe  of  Repentance.  Good  God !  Why  muft  Appetite 
have  fuch  a  ftrange  Afcendant  over  P^eafon  ?  Why  muft 
Man  thus  tranfgrefs  the  End  of  Creation  ?  Appetite  was 
made  to  obey,  Reafon  to  command.  To  change  their 
Office  is  to  throw  down  the  Enclofure  between  Man  and 
Beaft.  Is  it  not  a  Madnefs  to  fell  this  Prerogative  for  a 
petty  Satisfa61:ion';*that  like  the  Book  of  the  Apocalypfes^ 
leave  a  fweet  Flavour  in  the  Mouth,  and  Bitternefs  in 
the  Heart  ?  But  fuppofe  a  Man  will  enjoy  Pleafure,  is 
nothing  palatable  but  Dirt  and  Mire  ?  Muft  he  turn 
Goat  or  Baboon  before  he  can  be  pleafed  ?  Certainly  he 
is  enamour'd  of  their  Nature,  he  dotes  lb  much  on  their 
Paftimes ;  and  I  am  apt  to  believe  he  would  range  on 
their  Hills,  or  fport  on  their  Trees  among  a  Herd  of 
Females. 

But  take  all  together,  I  fear  the  Pleafure  does  not 
come  up  to  Expefcation.  The  Gall  out-weighs  the  Honey. 

For 


8o        ^he  Gentleman  Inprti^ed, 

For  let  us  fuppofe  a  Man  poflefs'd  by  the  unclean  De- 
vil of  brutifh  Love,  he  lodges  all  the  Torments  of  the 
Damned  in  his  Heart,  and,  what  is  worfe,  their  Guilt  ; 
he  fhiversand  burns,  he  hopes  and  defpairs,  he  dreams  in 
Company,  and  talks  in  Solitude;  all  the  Features  of  his 
beloved  Objedl  meet  in  his  Imagination  to  wound  his 
Heart,  and  turn  the  Idol  he  adores  into  a  Devil  to  lafh 
him;  his  Fears  keep  pace  with  his  Fondnefs,  and  Jea- 
loufy  treads  on  the  Heels  of  both,  and  all  confpire  to 
make  him  wretched.  For  though  Love  looks  pleafing 
and  pretty  in  Romance,  in  Life  it's  Monfter,  Tyrant  and 
Fury. 

A  Lover  knows,  that  a  Woman,  who  has  withdrawn 
her  Fidelity  from  God,  will  forfake  a  Gallant  at  the  leaft 
Profpe6t  of  Advantage.  Hence  Difquiet  feizes  on  the 
Brain,  and  Jealoufy  rifes  from  Hell,  to  clap  him  on  the 
Torture;  like  the  Devil  in  the  Gofpel,  it  foraetimes 
flings  him  into  the  Water,  fometimes  into  the  Fire  ;  he 
watches  his  Treafure  with  the  Eyes  of  an  Argus,  and 
lays  an  hundred  Ambufcades  to  find  his  Mifery,  and  her 
Infidelity;  fo  that,  though  Mifs  be  faithful,  Monfieuris 
fure  to  be  miferable. 

1  fay  nothing  here  of  Averfion,  Hatred,  Envy,  and  a 
thoufand  other  V  ipers  that  worry  his  Heart,  and  prey 
upon  his  Vitals.  In  fhort,  in  a  befotted  Lover  alone  are 
centred  all  the  Frenzies  and  Follies  of  Bedlam^  but  that 
of  Mirth.  So  that  Envy  can  fcarce  wifh  him  more  un- 
happy, nor  Malice  render  him  more  unfortunate:  But  if 
the  Intrigue  be  carried  with  a  Perfon  of  an  unfpotted  Re- 
putation, and  who  Hands  fair  in  the  Opinion  of  the  World, 
nay,  and  who  perchance  fets  up  for  Lucretia  and  Ve- 
Jlal;  what  Endeavours  are  made  to  court  incognito,  and 
to  play  out  of  Sight  ?  But  if  after  all,  the  Sin  quickens 
in  her  Womb,  and  that  within  nine  Months  Ihe  be  in 
Danger  to  fall  into  Fits  of  the  Mother ;  what  Pangs,  what 
Throws,  what  Convulfions  tear  this  poor  Creature's 
Breaft,  and  her  Gallants  too?  In  how  lively  Shapes  does 
Imagination  paint  her  Folly  I  She  fuffers  all  the  Torments 
of  Child-birth  at  the  very  inftant  of  Conception  ;  befides 
thofe  of  Rage,  of  Defpair  and  Confufion  ;  and  in  the 
end  perchance  refolves  to  conceal  one  Sin  by  the  help  of 
another;  *.  e.  Lewdnefs  by  Murder;  and  thus  a  poor 
Innocent,  who  came  into  the  World  by  alefs  Sin,  is  fent 

out 


ftheG ENTLEMAN  JnJiruBel       % i 

out  of  it  by  a  greater ;  and  then  in  all  Probability  the 
Tragedy  that  begun  at  Midnight  in  Darkneis  and  Priva- 
cy, often  ends  at  Mid-day  on  a'Scaifold.  _Muft  not  there- 
fore one  be  void  of  Reafon  to  take  a  petty  Pleafure  in 
Hand,  with  fuch  a  Crowd  of  Troubles  in  Reverfion? 
Ought  we  not  to  fence  againft  a  Vice,  fo  charming  oa 
the  one  Hand,  and  fo  uneafy  on  the  other  ? 

Nean.  What  are  the  belt  Prefervatives  againft  this  epi- 
demical Diftemper? 

Eufeb.  Take  this  as  a  Principle,  that  Chaftity  is  a 
Gift  of  God ;  and  therefore  implore  continually  his  Di- 
vine Afliftance ;  rely  on  his  Grace,  not  on  your  Force  ; 
and  if  you  be  fo  happy  as  not  to  fall,  give  him  the  Glo- 
ry of  the  Triumph,  and  believe  that  whofoever  prefumes 
on  his  ov/n  Valour,  has  already  meafured  half  the  Pre- 
cipice: God  protects  the  Humble,  and  humbles  the 
Proud. 

Secondly^  Keep  Love  at  a  Diftance,  or  it  will  furprize 
you ;  when  once  it  has  uormed  the  Heart,  it  forces  Rea- 
fon to  fu. Tender;  and  when  Appetite  commands,  v.hen 
Paflion  domineers,  what  can  be  expected  but  Brutality  ? 
Lock  up  the  Gates  of  your  Senfes,  and,  as  in  Frontier- 
Towns,  examine  the  PuTengers.  Love,  XikQ-^  Proteus^ 
borrows  all  Shapes,  and  n>akes  its  Approaches  at  all  Sea- 
fons ;  fo  that  you  muft  ftand  upon  your  Guard,  if  you 
intend  to  avoid  a  Surprize;  and  if  you  can  keep  this 
Traitor  at  Arms-length,  Lewdnefs  will  neither  Jiave  the 
Face,  nor  find 'the  Opportunity  to  afiail  you.  But  if  you 
admit  this  Tyrant,  if  you  lodge  him  in  your  Ereaft,  you 
will  have  Caufe  to  deplore  your  Slavery,  and  perchance 
eternally.  For  in  a  Word,  Love,  like  a  Viper,  cats  in- 
to the  Heari  that  warms  it,  and  returns  Dca:h  for  the 
Favour. 

T'hirdly^  Flight  is  the  befl  Defence,the  moft  fecureRam- 
partaguinfl  the  Darts  of  Lafcivioumefs ;  you  may  as  well 
hope  to  free/.e  in  Fire,  as  to  converfe  innocently  in  ths 
midit  of  Occafions.  I  am  of  TcrtulUanh  Opinion,  that 
it  is  eafier  to  die  for  ChalUry,  as  tlicWorld  goes,  than  to 
live  with  it  in  Balls,  Vijits  and  Entertainments.  And  I 
Iookujx>n  it  as  a, certain  Truth,  that  many  of  the  Sex, 
who  have  furrender'd  their  Honour  to  the  Flatteries,  Im- 
portuniiics  and  Dalliances  of  Gallants,  would  have  re- 
fufcd  it  to  the  Cruelty  of  Hangmen. 

Q  ■  Enter 


Enter  not  therefore  into  the  Play-houle ;  it's  the  Palace- 
of  ^ijWiod.nits,  the  Seat  of  Levvdnels,  the  Nurfery  of  De- 
bauchery. It's  with  us  ?s  ForMtces  were  at  liome^  only 
w  i'-h  this  Difference,  that  thole  Crimes  are  learn'd,  con- 
trivM,  and  refolv'd  on  here,  the  Romam  adlually  commit- 
ted them  under  the  black  Shade  of  thofe  infernal  Vaults. 
For  my  part  I  am  of  Opinion,  that  a  Chriftian  cannot  with 
a  fafcr  Confcience  enter  into  the  Play-houfe,  than  into  a 
Brotliel ;  as  things  are  managed  there,  Temptation  13 
ftroDger  on  the  Stage,  and  more  inviting.  The  Blacknefs 
of  the  Vice  lies  under  a  Difguifc ;  it's  blanch'dover  with  all 
the  Art  of  Vv  it  and  Gawdry  j  fo  that  nothing  appears  but 
the  charming  Part,  which  fafcinates  the  Eyes,  captivates 
the  Ears,  dozes  the  Intelleil,  and  fires  the  Paflions,  and 
then  to  phiin  the  Way  for  Adtion,  the  Poet  burlefqlies  the 
Terrors  of  the  other  Vv^orld;  he  paints  the  Devils  rather 
like  Scaramouches  to  divert,  than  like  Executioners  to 
torment:  He  blafphemes  the  Majefty  of  God  to  bring  him 
under  Contempt,  and  fo  blunts  all  the  Darts  of  Fear  and 
Apprehenfionj  and  then,  when  Objcfts  draw,  when  Paf- 
fions  Aand  prepared,  and  Rellraint  is  removed,  what  can 
be  reafonably  expeftcd,  but  Prollitution? 

But  befidcs",  the  Stage  not  only  removes  Fear  of  Punlfii- 
ment,  but  even  rewards  Di?bauchery;  for  who  are  they 
that  carry  ofFApplaufe  and  Fortunes,  but  Rakes  and  Pro- 
ftitutes?  The  Poet  puts  all  his  Wit  in  the  Mouths  of 
Rooks  and  Bullies ;  and  if  an  hoiieft  Man  appear,  he  is 
fure  to  be  hooted^  at,  and  generally  goes  off  both  Fool  and 
Cuckold.  Is  not  this  to  condemn  Vertue,  to  execute  it 
in  Effigy,-  aiid  to  canonize  V^ice  by  Deputy  ?  Is  not  this 
to  fay,  Gentlemen  and  Ladies,  beware  of  Chaftity  and 
Verixie,  they  are  out  of  Date  in  our  Age;  you'll  forfeit 
your  Honour  by  maintaining  it,  and  grow  ridiculous,  if 
you  continue  innocent.  The  fhorteft  Way  to  Repute,  is 
to  drive  over  Confcience,  to  blufh  at  Honefty,  and 
praftife  Incontinence.  What  Vertue  is  Proof  againft 
fuch  murdering  Engines  ?  If  Hell  be  a  Place  of  Diverlion, 
as  the  Poets  endeavour  to  perfuade  the  Audience,  if  God 
be  a  Scare-crow,  if  Chaftity  be  infamous,  and  Impuri- 
ty creditable,  who  will  not  rather  be  lewd  wdth  Credit, 
than  chafte  with  Pvcproach  ?  I  would  have  both  Poets 
and  Players  enter  a  little  into  themfelves ;  they  have  all 
contril^uted  to  run  down  Vertue  and  Religion,  and  to 

bring. 


The  Gentleman  Infiru^kd,       %'^ 

ling  Libertinifm  and  Atheifm  into  Fafhion,  Thofc  prc- 
iiiire  the  Poifon^  thele  prclent  the  l\ition,  dafli'd  v/iih  iill 
the  palatable  ln;^,redient3  of  Pomp  and  Mr.gciijicence,  th.it 
it  may  [fo  down  with  Pleaftire,  and  work  with  Efficacy. 
1  am  afraid  in  the  next  World  th.cy'il  be  forc'd  to  anlvycr 
for  tljc  .Sins  of  ihe>  Poet  and  Aclois,  as  v\ell  as  for  ihofe 
of  tlie  Chriftinn,  unkii;  hy  a  timely  Repentance,  and  pub- 
lick  Recantation,  they  able  Pardon  of  God,andForgive- 
nefs  of  the  Nation,  winch  they  have  rhimed  aimoil  out 
of  Religion,  and  played  out  of  Confcience. 

Fuurthly^  Whciil  emptation  invites,  draw  up  all  the 
dlfmal  Confcquencesof  this  wretched  Sin,  and  iix  your 
Thoughts  upon  'em.  Other  Crimes,  like  ihc  Adder,  car- 
ry their  Poifon  in  their  Head;  this  is  a  Scorpion  that  licks 
up  ita  Venom  in  its  Tail.  For  though  the  Sin  be  charm- 
ing, its  Sequels  are  dreadful.  The  Infe(^lion  flies  up  to 
the  Rrain,  like  the  Sting  of  the  7ar««^«/tf;  andtho'thofe 
who  are  bit  by  this  poifonous  Infedt,  can  dance  out  the 
ftupifying  Humour,  and  may  be  fiddled  into  their  Wits^ 
the  others  are  pall  Cure ;  they  remain  in  Spight  of  Ho- 
mily and  Exhortation,  fiupid,  brutal,  without  Judgment, 
without  Honour,  without  Senfe,  and  oftentimes  without 
Money ;  but  never  without  Folly,  Sighs,  Jealoufies, 
Rage  and  Delpair. 

Fifthly^  That  your  Afteftions  may  jiot  ileal  abroad,  nor 
like  Butter-flies, flutter  from  one  Obje6l  to  another,  chain 
'em  by  lawful  Wedlock  to  a  Wife.  I  know  at  prcfcnt, 
Aiatrimony,  that  in  St.  P^/7//'s  Days  was  honourable,  lies 
tmder  no  creditable  Circumftances;  and  we  are  in  part  ' 
obliged  to  the  Stage- Poet>;  for  the  Afpcrflon.  Tliey  reprc- 
fent  this  Divine  Inllitution  under  all  the  Repro.iches  of 
Slavery  and  Folly,  and  paint  both  Sexes  fo  fcai  dalouJly 
lafcivious,  thnt  ilie  Character  is  enough  to  deter  Chrifci- 
ans  from  the  Engagement.  Ifuppole  thefe  Gentlemen  are 
fee'dby  the  Stews,  to  Itand  up  for  the  Improvement  of 
their  IVadc;  and  for, this  reafon  they  labour  fo  heartily, 
to  perfuade  People,  lawful  Fleafures  tade  flat  and  iniipid, 
as  if  the  only  charming  Circumdnnce  of  Plealure  were 
the  Unla wlulneib  of  the  Attii )n.  This  Dcdlrine  is  ailca- 
lated  exadlly  for  the  Practice  of  Lucifer  and  his  AlToci- 
ates,  but  not  for  Chriilians ;  it  fmells  of  Snioa!:,  and 
may  in  good  time  heat  the  Preachers. 

G  i  Bsvrare 


84        'The  Gentleman  injiruBed^ 

Beware  of  Jealoufy.  A  Wife  is  often  made  faithful 
by  not  fiifpedting  her  of  Infidelity,  but  when  without 
Reafon,  you  qucflion  herLoyjuty,  you  only  tempt  her 
to  betray  it.  I  have  heard  of  a  Lady,  that  kept  her  Con- 
jugal Vow,  whilft  her  Husband  thought  (lie  did  ;  but  when 
he  accufed  her  falHy,  and  blalled  her  Reputation,  flie  mur- 
dered her  Innocence  to  revenge  the  Injury.  Some  Wo- 
men are -of  Opinion,  there  is  little  Difference  between 
being  unchafte,  and  being  thought  foj  and  therefore  go 
oft  with  the  Sarisfaftion  of  Infidelity,  as  well  as  with  the 
Infamy.  A  thoufand,  thoufand  limes  happy  is  that  Cou- 
ple, that  by  a  wife  Forcfight  prevents  thofe  Misfortunes,, 
thatfpring  from  Diverlily  of  Ccnftitutions  and  Hu- 
mours, or  at  leafb  fupport  vv^ith  Patience  what  Prudence 
ean't  avert,  and  fo  improve  Neceflity  into  a  Vertue. 

VI. 

If  God  has  blefs'd  you  with  Children,  fays  the  Scrip-' 
ture,  Prov.  vii.  inftrudl  'em.  God  has  engrav'd  thi& 
Law  in  the  very  Heart  of  Nature,  and  more  than  once 
promulg'd  it  in  the  Bible,  that  Parents  might  be  well  con- 
vinc'd  of  this  grand  Duty,  and  be  perfuaded  to  comply 
with  it ;  and  yet  it  feems,  that  no  Law  is  lefsunderftood, 
and  more  univerfiilly  negledted  in  Practice  than  this. 
Some  Parents,  more  cruel  than  the  ORrich,  bring  pooi: 
Creatures  into  the  World,  and  then  abandon  'era.  O- 
thers,  like  Apes,  are  fo  fond  of  their  Brood,  they  kill 
'em  with  Kindnefs :  Thofe  are  guilty  of  Neghgcnce,. 
thefe  of  Indulgence  j  and  all  betray  their  Duty,  and  by' 
confequence  their  Confcience. 

I  have  been  often  fcandaliz'd  at  the  infupportableNeg- 
left  of  fome  Parents ;  they  made  no  Difference  between 
their  Lackeys  and  their  Children,  but  that  they  carefs'd 
thofe,  and  eternally  tormented  thefe ;  they  herded  with 
the  Grooms  and  Carters,  and  owed  all  their  Education 
to  the  Stable  and  Kitchen  ;  and  if  they  fent  'em  fome- 
times  to  School,  'twas  only  to  rid  the  Houfe,  not  for  their 
Inftrudion.  They  never  took  the  Pains  to  inform  them- 
felves,  whether  the  Mailer  was  black  or  white;  whe- 
ther religious  or  impious ;  a  Ttrk  or  a  Chrillian.  Good 
God  !  faid  I  to  Sir  N.  N.  what  do  you  mean  ?  You  will 
not  hire  a  Cook  without  examining  his  Talent,  nor  take  a 
Groom  without  good  Security  of  his  Skill  j  yet  the  one 

i^ 


The  Gentleman  Jnftni^ed.       Sj 

iS  only  to  ferve  the  Belly,  the  other  to  curry  Horfes,  and 
M'ill  you  trull  a  Child  to  the  Care  of  a  Man,  who  for 
ought  you  know,  has  neither  Science  nor  Religion? 

Nor  have  I  beheld  with  Patience  the  doating  Fondnefs 
of  others.     I  have  feen  my  young  Mailer  often  play  the 
Lion  in  theP^amily,  and  my  tender  Lady,  the  Mother, 
applauded  hislnfolence,  like  the  Romam  in  Se^ecdiTj^)^^. 
Slie  would  embrace  the  Spai  k,  when  The  fl:!ouId  have  chid 
■  him  j  r.ay,  and  kifs  him  for  thofe  very  things  fiie  flionld 
have  whipthim.  To  crofs  the  Child,  is  to  iiab  the  Mo- 
ther ;  and  if  he  Whiinners,  fhe  cries  in  good  Earneft  ;  his 
Paffions  grow  upon  him  with  Age,    and  a  foolifli  Indul- 
gence emboldens  'em  ;  he  asks  what  he  pleafes,  and  ob- 
tains what  he  demands;  a  Refufal  iti^  him  on  fire,  and 
then  my  young  'Jupiter  begins  to  thunder:    My  Lady 
trembles  at  the  I'emped  flie  has  raifed  ;  and  inftead  of 
laying  it  by  a  fober  Correction,  Cht  foolifhly  augments  it 
by  a  thouCand  Carelics;  He  is  coach'd  to  Company,  to 
Balls,  and   the   Play-Houfe,  and  mud  be  Spedator  of 
Mamma's  Vanity  and  Follies  to  learn  'em.  Poor  Sir  T.H. 
faw  this  fine  Menage,  but  was  too  dotingly  fond  of  his 
Wife  to  fave  his  Child.     Pie  complain'd  one  Day  to  me, 
that  his  Son  was  fit  for  nothing,  but  either  to  dance  or  to 
quarrel.     You  are  millaken,  lliid  I,  have  a  litUe  Pati- 
ence, and  he'll  retaliate  his  Breeding  upon  you,  with  In- 
folence  and  Outrage  ;    he  is  as  handfomely  equipt  for  a 
Rake,  as  can  be  ;  nor  was  I  deceived,  for  fince  that  he 
flung  himfelf  away  upon  a  Chamber-maid,  dipt  his  E- 
llate,  perfecuted  his  Mother,  ^nd  brought  his  Father  wit|i 
Grief  and  Chagrin  to  his  Grave. 

You  mull  know,   Neander^  that  Man  by  Nature  is 
half  Beaft;   he  has  all  the  Inclinations,  all  the  Paffions 
of  the  moll  falvage  Animal ;  and,  what  is  worfe,  he  has 
Reafon  to  Iharpen  'em,  and  Malice  to  abufe  'em      But 
as  the  moll  fierce  Lion  is  tam'd  and  render'd  tractable 
by  Education  and  Difcipline,   fo  Man  may  be  taught 
Sweetnefs,  Moderation  and  Vertuc,  if  he  be  taken  in 
Hand  betimes,   if  his  Paffions  are  check'd,  and  forc'd  to 
obey  the  Commands  of  Reafon,  from  the  Cradle.     But 
when  once  Senfe  has  got  the  upper  Hand,  when  Paffio'i 
has  tailed  the  Sweetnefs  of  Superiority,  and  Pveafon    • 
accullomed  to  Slavery,   you  may  as  foon  fubdue  i: 
Fiercenefs  of  a  full  grown  Tyger,  as  perfuade  Seiife  a.".' 
G  3  App*:- 


^6      .  ^he  Gentleman  hifirufkd. 

Appetite  to  relign  theufurp'd  Government,  orReafon  to 
take  it,  /idolcfceMs  juxta  vitam  fuam^^  cumfc-^nerit  nujt 
recedet  ab  ea  :  A  young  Man  goes  on  as  he  began,  and 
carries  the  firft  InipreiTion  to  the  Grave.  That  you  may 
rot  iheretbre  cry  one  Day  with  the  poor  Eagle  in  the  Fa- 
ble, who  being  mortally  woundea  by  an  Arrow  trimmed 
with  her  own  Featiiers,  fighcd  out  this  melancholy  Com- 
plaint, Miferable  Bird  that  I  nm  !  If^hat  afool  was  I  to 
bring  forth  Feathers  to  my  oxvn  Dcftruciion  I  I  lay,  that 
you  may  not  complain,  thoCe  Children  you  gave  Life  to, 
are  tlie  Caufe  of  yourDeaih,  obfervc  three  things,  tirji^ 
So  foon  as  they  are  capable  to  know  God,  te;ith  'cm  to 
fear  his  Jufticc,  and  to  lovchis  Goodnels;  inllrucl  thcni 
in  Religion,  and  take  Care  they  prartife  all  the  Duties  of 
a  Chriftian.  A  Child  that  fears  God,  will,  love  his  Pa- 
rents ;  he  can't  be  religious  without  being  dutiful.  Incul- 
cate a  thoufand  times,  that  he  is  made  for  Heaven,  and 
that  he  mufl  live  vertuoufly  in  this  World,  to  be  happy 
in  the  next:  Precaution  him  againft  the  Vanity  of  tile 
World,  and  all  its  fpecious  Scenes  of  Deceits  and  Pa- 
geantry, that  delude  the  Eye  to  feduce  the  Heart:  Difco- 
ver  the  Danger  before  you  expofe  him,  and  '^.ell  him  with 
that  admirable  Qiicen  Blanca,  you  had  rather  fee  him  in 
the  Grave,  tlianin  Sin  :  Infpire  not  into  his  tender  Breait 
Dciires  of  Grandeur ;  this  is  a  Seed  that  fprouts  up  without 
fowing:  Choak  all  tendency  of  fo  early  a  Pride,  or  elfe 
it  will  grow  to  his  Ruin.  I  blufli  at  tliC  unchtiftian  Con- 
du6t  of  thofe  Pfirents,  who  teach  little  Creatures,  before 
^hey  can:  walk,  to  climb  up  to  the  very  Pinnacle  of  Ho- 
nour; who  would  make  'em  Pages  to  Anti-Chrift  to 
be  great,  and  would  counfel 'em  to  be  JMakometans  for 
the  vain  Satisfadion  of  leeing  'em  Balla's:  VVlien  you 
have  furnifti'd  *em  with  Vertue,  and  provided  for  their 
Soul,  let  'em  think  of  a  Settlement,  and  aim  rather  at 
a  Polt  that  isgente'el,  than  great :  An  elevated  Foitune 
is  feldorn  obtained  without-  vaft  Crimes,  and  always  fup- 
ported  b.y  greater. 

;  Sefoniily^  Olsltivate  them  with  thofe  Arts  and  Sciences 
that  fuit  wilh  their  Capacity  and  Condition.  For  thofe 
that  have  nothing  to  do,  do  always  more  than  they 
ought ;  and  though  they  are  unfit  for  a  handfoine  Occu-^ 
pation,  they  are  capable  of  a  vicious  onc- 

ThirMy, 


I'he  Gent  L.E  MAN  Injiru^ed.       S  7 

'Thirdly^  Give  not  all  your  Means  to  the  Eldeft ;  leave 
a  Provifion  for  all :  A  young  Cjentlem^in  th:\t  begins  the 
World  w^ithout  Money,  ends  it  -without  Confcience: 
When  I  muft  r.ick  my  Brain  to  live,  I  have  neither  time 
norleilure  to  think  of  living;  well.  Neqellity  is  the  Mo- 
tlier  of  Vice,  no  lefs  than  Abundance  ;  and  Want  is  both 
more  trouhlefomctiian  AlHuence,  and  equally  dangeious: 
Beiides,  how  will  you  have  a  Gentleman  puPa  forward, 
who  has  nothing  to  improve?  (.>an  he  raife  a. Fortune 
without  Tools  to  work  with,  without  a  Fund  to  lay  the 
Foundation  ?  Poverty  palls  the  moft  generous  Spirits  ;  it 
cows  Indultry,  and  calls  Rcfolution  itielf  into  Defpair. 
When  you  have  acquitted  yourfelf  ot'thefe  three  Points, 
you  have  done  the  part  of  a  Father ;  the  relt  you  mult 
leave  to  Providence,  who  watches  over  its  Creatures,  and 
never  abandons  thofe,  who  comply  with  their  Duly. 

VII. 
Your  Care  muft  not  ftop  at  your  Children,  let  it  reach 
your  menial  Servants  ;  though  you  are  their  Mailer, 
you  are  alfo  their  Father.  And'for  this  Reafon  the  Ro- 
mans cail'd  Houfe-kcepers  P aires  FamHias^  Fathers  of  the 
Houfe-hold.  Belidcs,  as  a  Chtiftianyou  are  their  Brother, 
and  have  the  Church  of  Chriit  for  your  common  Mother ; 
all  thefe  Relations  deferve  a  Tendernefs  on  the  one  fide, 
and  on  the  other  impofe  an  Obligation  on  you  to  enquire 
into  their  Behaviour,  and  to  provide  for  their  Inftrudion  ; 
don't  fo  overcharge 'cm  with  Labour,  that  they  can  find 
no  time  for  God.  You  can't  exa6t  fo  continual  a  Ser- 
vice, nor  is  it  in  their  Power  to  comply  with  you.  They  • 
owe  mote  Obedi'nice  to  God  'than  to  you;  and  you 
tranfgrefs  your  Duty,  when  your  Commands  crofs 
upon  his.  Nor  is  it  fufficient  to  allow  'em  time  to  look 
into  the  Concerns  of  their  Souls,  you  muft  fee  they  em- 
ploy it  well :  Let  'em  meet  at  Prayers  .nleaft  once  a  Day, 
and  punifli  thofe  that  negledt  this  Duty.  Suffer  not  in 
your  Houfe  a  Debauchee,  though  never  fo  ufeful.  Who 
is  a  Traitor  to  his  A/[aker,  will  betray  a  Mafter  at  the 
firft  Occafion.  A  Man  without  Confcience  is  always 
without  Honefty.  Befides,  Lewdnefs  and  Knavery  are 
catching,  and  one  infeded  Perfon  fuffices  to  Vcatr 
ter  the  Contagion.  Take  this  for  a  Principle.  The 
more  you  take  to  Heart  God's  Intereft,  the  more  '  ., :' 

G  4  lU:.-. 


S8        'fhe  Gentleman  InflrtUfed. 

take  care  of  yours  ;  he'll  crov/n  your  Enterprizes  with 
Succef?,  or  raife  your  Soul  above  the  Siroak  of  A-lisfor- 
tune.  In  fine,  you'll  either  enjoy  Profperity  with  a  Chri- 
llian  Moderation,  or  bear  Adverfity  with  Pleafiare. 

VIII. 

Confine  not  Chanty  within  the  Walls  of  your  own 
Houfe,  nor  employ  it  wholly  about  the  fpiritual  Good 
of  your  Neighbour ;  Jet  the  Body  feel  the  Effeds  of  his 
Tendernefs,  as  n'ell  as  thcSoul.  When  he  groans  under 
the  Pangs  of  Poverty,  ai^i  ftruggles  with  Neceflity,  re- 
lieve his  Indigence  out  of  your  own  Store- Houfe;  let 
the  Meafure  of  your  Charity  be  the  Extent  of  your  Abi- 
lity ;  and  ot  his  Want :  What  you  lay  out  on  the  Poor, 
is  not  fpent,  but  put  to  Intereft ;  God  is  Security  for  the 
Reimburfement,  fo  that  the  Payment  is  infallible.  I 
have  feen  fome  Gentlemen  open-handed  enough,  but 
jhen  they  difperfed  their  Charities  with  fo  unhandfome  a 
Grace,  that,  methought,  they  did  111,  in  doing  Good,  and 
refufed  an  Alms  v.'hillt  thev  gave  one  ;  they  feeraed  to 
infulr  over  a  poor  Creature's  Mifery,  and  feldom  open'd 
their  Purfe,  till  they  had  vented  their  GalL  This  is  not 
to  relieve  the  Indigent,  but  to  throw  Shame  upon  Want, 
and  Confuiion  upon  Neceffity  ;  it's  to  hang  Weight  to 
their  Burthen,  and  to  fret  Poverty  with  Contempt:  Be- 
f\6es^  it  lofes  the  very  Nature  of  Almsj  for  that  is  not 
received  gratis^  that  is  purchafed  v/ith  Bluflies,  and  at 
the  Expence  of  Patience.  '  A  companionate  Look  often- 
times refrcfhes  more,  than  a  Crown  with  a  fevere  one. 
And  (methinks)  I  had  rather  be  fent  away  with  a  civil 
God  be  With  you,  than  be'  entertained  with  Peevifnnefs 
and  ill  Nature,  A  fmall  Favour  well  timed,  becomes 
conficlerable :  The  very  manner  of  giving  adds  to  the^ 
Gift.  Keep  not  therefore  the  Poor  at  a  Bay,  nor  rack 
'em  with  Qvieftions;  to  what  purpoip  do  thefe  Prelimi- 
naries ferve,  but  either  to  feed  your  Curiofity,  or  to 
fpead  a  fretting  Humour  i*  We  are  of  the  fame  Nature  ; 
our  Bodies  are  made  of  the  fame  Clay,  and  our  Souls 
by  the  fame  Hand.  The  difference  between  the  RicJi 
and  Poor  comes  not  from  Nature  or  Merit,  but  from  the 
Ordination  of  Providence.  Some  are  born  to  no  other 
Eftate  than  that  of  their  Brethren's  Charity,  that  they 
may  pradife  Patience  j  and  others- to  Abundance,  that 
••    .    .  they- 


fhe  Gentleman  Infiruchd,       85? 

they  may  exercife  Charity  ;  fo  that  the  Vertue  of  thele 
ftand  indebted  to  the  Mifery  of  thofe  ;  and  the  Giver  is 
ho  lefsoblig'd  than  the  R.cceivcr. 

IX. 

Begin  to  pradifc  the  Vertues  of  a  Chrillian  betimes ; 
accuftom  your  Palate  to 'em  before  you  have  tailed  Vice, 
they'll  rehlh  better;  a  fmall  Refolution  plains  the  Way 
to  Heaven  in  the  Beginning,  and  turns  (Jodlincfs.into 
Pleafure  ;  but  if  you  ftay  till  Sins  have  flulh'd  the  Pafli- 
ons,  and  fharpen'd  Appetite,  nothing  but  Violence  can 
fecure  you  ;  you  will  not  be  able  to  advance  one  Step 
without  a  Combat;  you  muft  fight  your  way  through 
all  the  Squadrons,  the  Flefh,  the  World,  and  the  Devil 
will  draw  up  to  oppofe  you  ;  and  when  thefe  Enemies  are 
headed  by  vicious  Habits,  God  knows,  v/hether  you 
will  ever  be  fo  hardy,  as  even  to  attempt  a  Conquefl  lo 
hazardous  on  the  one  fide,  and  fo  laborious  on  the  other, 

X. 

Indeed  a  Chriftian  Behaviour  among  Gentlemen  is 
fo  unufual,  tliat  you  muft  venture  to  beout  of  Fafliion, 
you  muft  ftand  the  Shock  of  Raillery,  and  perchance  the 
Stroak  of  a  Lampoon  ;  but  thefe  Weapons  ftick  in  the 
Skin,  and  although  they  are  pufh'd  on  with  all  the  Vio- 
lence of  Malice  and  Profanenefs,  are  not  able  to  draw 
Blood,  or  to  touch  your  Reputation.  I  have  often  been 
aftonifh'd  at  fome  Gentlemen,  who  pra6lifed  Vertue  at 
Home,  and  Vice  in  Company  ;  who  betray'd  their  Con- 
fcience  to  avoid  a  Blufh.  This  is,  faid  I,  to  fall  into  the 
wretched  Blindnefs  of  fome  favage  Indians^  v.'ho  adore 
the  Devil,  that  he  may  do  'em  no  Harm.  If  Rakes  glory 
in  Evil,  why  fliould  you  be  afhamed  at  Good  ?  That 
carries  along  its  Condemnation,  and  this  its  Juftificati- 
on.  Surely  Shame  fits  more  naturally  on  Guilt  than  In- 
nocence. 

But  could  we  dive  into  a  wicked  Man's  Heart,  could  we 
pierce  into  his  Soul,  we  fliould  read  moft  vifible  Traces  of 
Shame  and  Confufion,  every  Moment  he  cafts  an  Eye 
on  his  Vices,  and  his  Neighbour's  Vertues.  For  let  me 
tell  you^Neancier^i^my  has  an  amiable  Afpe6l,  it  charms 
its  very  Perfecutors,  and  even  thofe  who  ftigmatize  it  in 
Pradtice,  admire  its  Beauty.     So  that  though  fometimes 

•  they 


po        I'he  Gentleman  Injiru^ed. 

they  let  fly  a  Raillery,  and  flioot  a  Joke,  thefe  petty 
Arrows  fly  at  Random,  and  never  come  near  your  Ho- 
nour: Nay,  take  it  for  a  general  Rule,  that  thofe Rakes, 
who  flirt  at  a  Chriftian  Demeanour,  have  a  Tecret  Efteem 
for  it. 

Oh,  iaid  one,  I  muil  draw  in  my  Piety,  and  mew  it 
within  my'own  Walls ;  Ihave  almoll  loft  my  Chriftian 
Name,  and  am  fcarce  known,  but  by  that  of  BiL^ot. 
Pray,  Sir,  faid  I,  let  us'  not  ftartle  at  Sounds,  nor  run 
away  from  Buffoons  j  let  us  conftrue  the  Word,  and 
frame  ri^^ht  Notions,  and  then  we  fhall  find,  that  Bigot 
in  the  Jargon  of  Reprobates  is  nothing  elfe  but  a  Man 
that  believes  Religion,  and  dares  profefsit;  that  boggles 
at  Oaths,  and  blufhes  at  Perjuries ;  that  will  elevate  his 
Spirits  with  old  Hock^ox  new  Champaign^  but  not  drown 
liis  Reafon ;  that  has  not  Courage  to  laugh  at  Hell,  nor 
the  Impudence  to  play  upon  Heaven  ;  that  fometimes 
does  good  Actions,  and  always  fears  bad  ones.  This  is 
the  Height  of  a  Bigot's  Devotion,  according  to  the  mo- 
dem Ule  of  the  Word  ;  fo  that  it  imports  nothing  hurt- 
ful, nothing  infamous,  unlefs  it  be  a  Difgrace  to  profefs 
Honefty  upon  Occaiions,  to  pradife  Morality,  and  to 
have  a  good  Confcience. 

But  let  Debauchees  burlefque  your  Piety,  muft  yom 
abandon  it  ?  Will  you  abjure  Chriftjanity,  becaule  fome 
Libertines  fport  with  Religion  ;  or  commence  Atheift,  to 
humour  Fools?  Why  then  will  you  be  feared  out  of  Pie- 
ty, or  teazed  out  of  Morality  ?  Is  it  honourable  in  Spight 
of  Raillery  to  acknowledge  a  God,  and  a  Difgrace  to 
ferve  him?  Is  it  a  Credit  to  be  a  Chriftian,  and  a  Shame 
to  be  a  good  one  ?  No  certainly  ;  let  us  put  things  toge- 
ther, and  adt  confequently  j  let  us  call  in  Reafon  to  go- 
vern Fancy. 

Befldes,  who  are  thofe  Men  that  awe  us  ?  A  Club  of 
Animals,  that  have  more  Money  than  Wit,  and  more 
Quality  than  Confcience  ;  a  Pack  of  Heftors,  that  live 
ill,  and  judge  worfe  ;  thai  are  pitied  by  fome,  and 
fcorned  by  others;  the  very  Panegyricks  of  thefe  Men 
ure  Satyrs,  Praife  out  of  their  Mouths  is  fcandalous,  and 
Blame  is  glorious.  Neander^  fuffer  not  your  felf  to  be 
laugh'd  out  of  Heaven,  nor  rallied  into  Hell ;  if  you 
can't  bear  the  reproaching  Frowns  and  Smiles  of  a  Man, 
how  will  ye  endure  the  Frowns  of  an  angry  Deity  ?  If 

"         tlie 


The  Gentleman  hjj^rufkd,        p r 

the  Lafli  of  a  petulant  Tongue  be  fo  fcnfible,  allure  your 
ielf  the  Pains  of  Vire  and  Brimftone  will  be  more  infup- 
portable.  Vertue  in  a  Dungeon  is  preferable  to  Sin  on 
rhe  Throne,  and  Innocence  in  the  Pillory  is  more  ho- 
nourable than  Guilt  on  the  Bench. 

XI. 

If  you  love  your  Soul,  and  refolve  to  fave  it,  avoid 
the  Converfation  of  Libertines  and  Athciits  j  like  the  Ba- 
lilisk,  their  Eyes  dart  Poiion,  and   their  I'ongues  fpeak 
Death :  They  are  Satan's  Deputies,  and  Devils  by  Proxy. 
A  Libertine  is   half  Fiend,  half  Beaft;   Pleafure  is  his 
Summum  Bonum  ;  this  he  places  in  Sin  like  the  Devil, 
and  in  Mire  like  the  Swine ;  he  circles  from  the  Tavern 
to  the  Play-houle,  from  hence  to  the  Stews,  and  returns 
to  his  Lodging  the  fame  way;  fo  that  his  whole  Study  is 
to  learn  Wicked ncfs, .  and  his  whole  Bufinefs  to  pradlife 
it ;  his  Difcourfe  is  a  Compound  of  Smut  and  Blafphe- 
my;  his.  Entertainment  unchriftian,  and  his  Diulett  dia- 
bolical ;  he  would  feign  monopolize  the  Wit  of  the  Na- 
tion, but  wants  both  Fund  and  Patent;  his  Knowledge 
reaches  ho  further  than  the  Gazette  or  the  Courant^  and 
on  Occafions  he  ventures  to  vent  Nonfenfe  in  Metre ; 
his  Religion  is  univerfal,  calculated  for  all  Meridians  ; 
he  has  one  for  a  Calm,  another   for  a  Storm;    one  for 
Europe,  another  for  America  ;  fo  that  it's  as  difficult  to 
be  defined  as  a  Disjundive  ;  in  ii>/^/fl»<afheftickles  for  his 
Biiliops;  in  Scotland  againfl  'em  ;  he  is  a  'Jevj  at  Amjier- 
dam^  a  Mujfulman.  at  Cotijlant'wople ;  a  Papiji  at  Rome, 
2ind  a.  CahiKtfi  at  Geneva:  In  a  Word,  he  is  any  thing 
without,  and  nothing  within  ;  fo  that  his  whole  Religion 
turns  upon  Convenience  and  Intereft,  and  is  comprized 
in  theiis  Verfes. 

Queft.  IVbat^s  Orthodox  and  true  Believing 
Againjl  a  Confcicfice"^.   Anfw,  A  good  Living. 
Queft.  What  makes  Rebelling  againfl  Kings 
A  good  old  Can  fe"^  Anfw.  A  dmini firings. 
Queft.  14  hat  makes  all  Doclrine  plain  and  clear"^. 
Anfw.  About  tvjo  hundred  Pounds  a  Tear. 
Queft.  And  that  which  vjas  proved  true  before 
Prove  j. life  again '^.  Anhw.  7 wo  hundred  more. 

XII.  An 


9 1        7%e  Gentleman  Inftnt^ed, 
xn. 

An  Atheifl  is  an  overgrowji  Libertine ;  and  if  we  be- 
jicv^e  his  own  Genealogy,  he  is  a  By-bloW  begot  by  Fla- 
zard,  and  flung  into  tine  World  by  NecefTiiy  i  he  moves 
by  Wheels,  and  has  no  more  Soul  than  a  Wind-mill  ;  he 
is  thruft  on  by  Fate,  and  adls  by  mecr  Compullion  ;  he 
is  no  more  Mafter  of  his  Deeds  than  of  his  Being  j  and 
therefore  is  as  conftant  to  liis  Word  as  the  Wind  to  the 
fame  Corner;  fo  that  an  Atheift  by  his  own  Principles  is 
a  Knave  fer  /?,  and  an  honelt  Man  only  fer  accidens. 
In  fine,  he  Harts  out  of  Dull,  and  vanifhes  into  nothing. 

Nean.  All  my  Concerns  are  in  the  Hand  of  a  Man 
who  will  not  be  very  fond  of  this  Character,  y£t  he  fets 
up  for  an  Atheift,  and  fupports  the  Fraternity  with  Ar- 
guments and  Authority. 

Eufeb,  Neander,  difcharge  him  out  of  Hand,  he'll  cer- 
tainly ruin  your  Soul,  and  may  poffibly  embezzle  your 
Eftate,  A  round  Hurricane  of  Atoms  may  drive  him  in- 
to the  PoJieiTion  of  your  Lands,  and  you  out  of 'em.  A 
brisk  Pull"  may  conveigh  out  of  fight  a  necefiary  Inden- 
ture, or  raife  high  the  Bill  of  Reparations ;  there  is  nq 
coming  near  a  Man  with  Safety,  that's  void  of  Confci- 
ence ;  no  trufting  Iiim  that  acts  by  Fates,  or  moves  by 
Deftiny  ;  if  he  be  .i  Slave  to  impulfe,  he  is  not  Mafter  of 
his  Honefty. 

Nean.  Tho' he  abjures  God,  he  upholds  Reafon,  and 
keeps  touch  with  Probity;  he  values  Honour,  and  would 
forfeit  Life  to  maintain  it. 

Eufeh.  Then  he  is  made  up  of  CcntradLffions,  and  one 
part  of  his  Creed  ftabs  the  other ;  if  there  be  no  God, 
your  Friend  is  the  Spawn  of  Cafualty ;  the  Child  of  Mat- 
ter and  Motion,  a  heapof  Duft  with  a  Complex  of  Ubi- 
cations,a  Figure  without  SquI,  a  Statue  without  Life ;  he 
is  all  Matter  like  Beafts,  no  more  capable  of  Reafon  than 
an  Ape,  of  Vertue  than  Balaam's  Afs,  or  of  Honour 
than  Caligula's  Conful.  In  fine,  withdraw  your  Con- 
cerns, or  you  may  one  Day  repent  your  Confidence:  For 
i  muft  once  for  ,11  tell  you.  Honour  v/ithoutConfcience, 
without  Religion,  will  yield  to  Intereft. 

NeaK.  This  cannot  be  done  fo  foon ;  endeavour,  I  be- 
feech  you,  to  gain  him ;  overturn  his  Principles,  and  the 
Conqueft  will  beeafy  j  you  can't  oblige  him  more  than 

■  by 


^he  Gentleman  InfrtSed,       ^3 

by  entering  into  a  Difpute;  and  the  (hortellvvay  to  win 
his  Favour,  is  to  quarrel  with  his  Tenets. 

Eufcb.  Difputes  indeed  are  natural  to  Atheifts;  for  no 
Men  maintain  r>  ith  greaterEagernels  they  are  in  the  Right, 
than  thofe  that  fulpe6t  they  are  in  the  Wrong;  like  Men 
in  a  dangerous  Road,  they  love  to  travel  in  Company, 
and  fo  draw  in  Profelytes  to  march  to  Hell  with  a  Ca- 
ravan. 

But,  Nemder^  this  Itch  of  arguing  is  a  terrible  Argu- 
ment, they  are  feared  with  Doubts,  and  haunted  with 
Sufpicions  that  God  is  no  Ghimaera,  it's  a  Sign  that  Con-^ 
fcience  is  uneafy,  and  makes  fbme  Attempts  to  break  all 
thp  Barriers  of  Ignorance,  Pride  and  t^lafphemy. 

Hov^-ever,  I'ifcomply  with  your  Defires,  and  wait  up- 
on the  Gentleman  vvhen  you  command  me :  Although  I 
muft  tell  you,  a  converted  A theift  is  a  Phcenixfcarcefecn 
in  an  Age ;  for  he  is  a  Mixture  of  Pride  and  Ignorance, 
of  much  Senfe  and  little  Resfon  ;  he  confutes  Arguments 
with  Laughter,  and  pretends  to  frown  Demonft.ration 
it  felf  into  Sophiilry.  Kow  can  Truth  (I  do  not  fay 
fubdue)  but  even  reach  fuch  a  Man  I  You  may  as  foou 
fetch  down  t.he~Moon  with  a  Cannon-Bali,  as  convince 
him.  V^* 

Nean.  It's  true,  but  Charity  armed  with  folid  Reafong 
may  perchance  foften  his  Obllinacy ;  and  although  you 
lofe  your  Labour,  you'll  meet  at  leaft  in  the  next  World 
the  Reward  of  your  Zeal.  I'll  tell  him  you  intend  to 
make  him  a  Viht. 

Eufeb.  I  am  content,  Neander,  I  have  drawn  a  iliort 
Scheme  of  your  Duty,  and  wifh  you  fo  happy  as  to  com- 
ply with  it ;  it  will  prove  the  bell  Support  of  this  Life, 
and  the  greateft  Comfort  in  the  other.  God  has  interwo- 
ven Man's  Felicity  with  his  Duty,  and  twilled  his  Inte- 
reft  wifh  Pleafure.  A  good  Man  is  feldom  uneafy,  and. 
an  ill  one  is  always  unquiet ;  one  muft  be  blind  not  to 
difcovcr  the  Canker  at  his  Heart  through  all  the  glitter- 
ing Pageantry  of  Greatnefs  and  Power:  he  may  rant 
and  laugh,  but  can't  be  merry :  for  certainly  there  is  a 
great  Difference  between  Noife  and  Mirth  ;  their  Lives 
are  as  unlike  as  their  Ends;  and  thofe  are  as  different  as 
the  Pains  of  the  Damned  are  from  the  Joys  of  the 
Blefl'ed. 

*'  Neander 


_5)4        ^^  Gentleman  Injlru^ed, 

*'  Neander  took  leave  of  Eufeifius,  with  a  Promife  to 
tail  upon  jhiin  the  next  Morning.  He  went  immedi- 
ately XoTheomachus\  Lodgings  ;  (this  was  the  Arhcift's 
Name)  he  opcn'd  freely  his  Defign,  aifd  ask'd  him,  If 
Bufinefs  would  permit  him  to  enter  upon  a  Conference 
with  EttjchiMs. 

*'  Theamachui  received  the  Propoilil  with  a  Tranfport 
of  Joy,  and  told  Ncander  he  was  infinitely  oblig'd  to 
him,  for  offering  fo  fair  an  Occaiion  of  making  Ac- 
quaintance with  a  Man  fo  much  talk'dof:'  For  (con- 
tinued ht)  I  have  often  heard  great  Commendations 
both  of  his  Vertue  and  Learning,  and  fliall  by  this  In- 
terview be  able  to  judge,  whether  his  Merits  equaUhis 
Fame.  Befides,  the  Greatnefs  of  my  Adveri'ary  will 
fecure  my  Credit,  though  Fortune  declare  againll  me. 
Neander,  after  fome  mutual  Compliments,  returned 
to  his  Lodgings,  with  a  Refolution  to  mind  Theoma* 
f^»j  of  his  Promife  the  next  Morning. 


The  End  of  the  Ftrft  Fart, 


A  SUP- 


SUPPLEMENT 

T  O    T  H  E 

FIRSTPART 

<)  F    THE 

Gentleman  Injiru^ed ; 

With  a  Word  to  the 

LADIES. 

Written  for  the 

Instruction  of  the  Young  Nobilitt 
^    of  both  SEXES. 

LONDON: 
Printed  in  the  Year  1732. 


(  97) 

THE 

PUBLISHER 

T  O    T  H  E 

Ladies  and  Gentlement. 

Ladies  and  Gentlemen, 

ALT  HO'  it  be  not  ivhhin  the  Power  of  Man  to 
write  fo  nicely^  as  to  leave  the  Criticks  nothing  to 
refine  upon  ;  yet  there  are  fome^  whofe  Perfor- 
mances come  nigher  up  to  it,  and  hit  much  better  with. the 
Gou  of  the  Times,  than  others.  Among  thefe  we  may  pre- 
fume  to  reckon  The  lirft  Part  of  the  Gentleman  Inllru- 
6led  ;  which  was  fcarce  well  fet  out,  before  it  was  at  the 
End  of  its  firfi  Edition ;  and  having  run  the  fecond  with 
the  fame  Snccefs,  in  the  third,  it  was  defervediy  took  up 
into  a  Dedication  ;  in  which,  as  it  gain'' d  not  Utile  on  Ac- 
count of  the  honourable  Perfon  it  was  prcfenled  to,  fo  it 
received  no  fmall  Advantage  from  the  ingenious  Remarks  of 
the  Dedicator ;  whofe  E/ogiums  are  f  well  thought,  his 
Thoughts  fo  well  cxprefs''d,  and  his  Exprejfions  fo  well  put 
together,  that  tho'  the  Work  itfelf  were  of  no  j/'alue,  yet 
one  woidd  buy  the  Book  for  the  Dedication. 

It  was  the  Author's  Defire  of  being  unknown,  which 
made  him  willing  to  pafs  for  being  Dead;  but  this  Supple- 
ment, which  is  the  genuine  Off-fpring  of  ihe  fame  Pen^ 
has  too  much  of  him  in  it,  not  to  convince  the  World  he  is 
Jiill  alive  j  and  whoever  reads  the  fecond  Part,  will  find 
there,  fuch  a  Harmony  of  Thought  and  Expreffiun  with 

H  the 


5>8     The  Publisher  to  the,  &c\ 

the  firji,  that  if  the  Author  had  been  dead^  one  would  aU 
mojl  coy/elude  him  rifen  cgain  to  write  it.  In  a  Word^  he; 
ii  certainly  alive  ;  and  his  hop' d  his  growing  Ejieem  will 
encourage  him  to  oblige  the  Publick  with  many  juch  defer- 
ving  Pieces, 

His  Dcfign  in  this  is  to  inftruSt  the  Nobility  of  both 
Sexes  in  their  Duty\  and  to  chalk  out  the  furefl  and  fhort- 
efl  IVay  to  Content  in  thiiWorld,,and  the  Glory  hi  the  next. 
"This  is  without  doubt  an  advantageous  Difcovery,^  which 
fo  nearly  concerns  you,,  that  I  hope  you  will  take  the  Pro- 
pofals  into  Conji deration.  And  methinks  the  Author  fo 
handfor/iely  reconciles  Greatncf  to  Goodnefs^  and  all  the 
prerogatives  of  Quality  to  the  Precepts  of  the  Gojpel;  that 
*^ou  wuft  either  have  forfeited  Reafon,,  or  have  bid  adieu  to 
Religion,^  if  you  refufe  to  praSiJe  the  Method  he  prefcribes  : 
For  who  but  Fools  and  Atheijls  will  rejign  all  Pretenfions 
to  a  future  Blifs,  for  any  temporal  Enjoyment,,  when  he 
Kay  live  great  here,,  and  happv  hereafter^. 

Ladies^  Soldiers,,  and  Courtiers  will  find  here  the  Caufet 
of  their  Mifcarriages,,  and  the  Remedies :  And  if  a  hare 
expofing  of  your  Failures  over- heat  the  Spleen,,  and  awaken 
indignation  ;  furcly  the  Gentleman's  Antidote  will  lay  theft 
unjujl  Refentnients  ;  and perfuade  you  to  acknowledge^  that 
he  had  been  lefs  charitable,,  if  he  had  been  more  indulgent. 


A   SUP-' 


(99) 

A 

SUPPLEMENT 

To  the  First  Part 

O  F    T  H  E 

Gentleman  Injtru^ed,  &e. 

DIALOGUE    L 

7'he  Caufe  of  the  follovjing  Dialogues. 

EU S  EB  lU S  prepar'd  for  the  Rendezvous,  and 
refolv'd  to  attack  the  Atheift  next  Day :  But  an 
unforefeen  Accident  deferr'd  the  Meeting. 
A  Club  of  young  Blades  that  Evening  filed  off  from 
the  Play-houfe  to  ftorm  fome  Bottles  of  Champaign. 
Eleutheriu!  led  on  the  Brigade,  and  march'd  at  the 
Head  of  the  Battalion.  And  indeed,  he  was  compleatly 
equipt  for  the  Adventure.  His  Pm-fe  was  arm'd  with 
Silver,  and  his  Confcience  with  Steel.  They  attack'd  the 
Enemy  with  Courage,  and  bore  on  with  Refolution.  All 
protefted  againft  Quarter,  (as  brave  Friburgen  did  at  Cre- 
mona)  and  io  refolv'd  to  ftand  till  they  fell  in  the  Enter- 
prizei 

H  2  Bu^> 


100    A  Supplement  to  the  firft  Van 

But  if  the  Aflailants  did  Execution,  Champaign  did 
more  :  It  tilted  at  the  Head,  and  made  diredily  at  the 
Brain.  One  dropp'd  under  the  Table,  an  Huzza  waited- 
upon  him  to  the  Ground  ;  and  Morpheus  fiept  in  to  play 
the  Surgeon. 

The  Misfortune  of  one  breathes  Vigour  into  the  other; 
they  carry  on  manfully  the  Attack :  Their  Heads  run 
round  with  the  Glafles ;  their  Tongues  ride  Poft  ;  their 
Wits  are  jaded  ;  and  Reafon  is  diftanc'd.  Brutes  could 
not  talk  better,  nor  Men  worfe:  Like  Skippers  in  a  Storm, 
they  rather  hollow'd  than  fpoke;  fcarce  one  heard  his 
Neighbour,  and  not  one  underftood  him:  So  that  Noife 
ftood  for  Senfe,  and  every  one  pafs'd  for  a  Virtuofo,  be- 
caufe  all  play'd  the  Fool  to  Extravagance. 

The  Subje6t  of  their  Heat  was  no  lefs  furprizing  than 
the  Management  of  it ;  and  both  ridiculous  to  Amaze- 
ment. Sorrel  (cries  one  with  an  Oath)  is  the  mofl  com- 
plcat  Nag  in  Englaysd;  and  theii  he  threw  among  the 
Company  fuch  a  Bedroll  of  Jockey-Jargon,  that  one 
Would  think  he  had  fwept  the  Stable  feven  Years,  or  fervM 
an  Apprenticefhip  to  a  Farrier.  From  Terms  of  Arts  he 
goei  on  to  a  Lefl'on  of  Proportion.  He  dilleils  the  Ani- 
mal ;  and  flings  the  Anatomy  on  the  Table  ;  then  he 
fl©urifhes  on  his  Feats,  and  fv/ears  he  is  famous  in  the 
Journal  of  Neiv-Market.  Nay,  I  am  told,  the  Gentle- 
m:in  protefted,  Surrcl  was  as  \tc11  born  as  himfelf  j  that  in 
a  collateral  Line  he  touch'd  the  greater  Beucephalns^  and 
was  a  Couiin.  once  remov'd,  to  Cnii^ula's  Conful. 

Wine  hAQ  heated  the  Company's  Blood ;  but  this  lliort 
Panegyrick  inflam'd  it.  They  could  n'ot  agree  to  Sorrel's 
Atchievements,  nor  fufFer  him  to  monopolize  the  Per- 
fcftions  of  his  Species ;  every  Man  ilood  up  in  Defence 
of  his  own  Rozi»ante^  and  maintain'd  his  juft  Preroga- 
tives with  Heat  and  Clamour.  But  whilft  the  Difpute 
run  high,  their  Wits  funk  lov/  with  the  Bottles ;  Senfe 
flumber'd,  and  Reafon  almoft  fell  into  a  Lethargy. 

From  the  Stable  they,  trip  over  to  the  Kennel,  and  leave 
Horfes,  to  philofophize  on  Hounds.  They  follow  the 
Chace  with  Tumult ;  one  would  have  taken  'em  for  a 
Pack  of  Beagles  on  the  Scent,  but  that  they  open'd  louder. 
All  this  while  the  Glafles  circle,  Reafon  ebbs,  Extrava- 
gance flows,  and  Mirth  flies  out  into  Madnefs. 

And 


of  the  Gentleman   Inftrti^fed.     loi 

And  now  our  Gallants  were  handfomely  equipp'd  for 
■any  Villany.  Champaign  had  fir'd  their  Blood,  intoxi- 
cated Realbn,  and  drowned  Sh:ime.  They  fell  upon  their 
Maker  without  Fear,  without  Scruple.  Some  worry  his 
Juftice,  whillt  others  buffoon  his  Mercy.  The  Juice  of 
the  Grape  had  fwell'd  thefe  petty  Pigmies  into  daring  Gi- 
ants, v.'ho  canonaded  Heaven,  and  defied  the  Omnipotent. 
Indeed  their  Drunkennefs  made  fome  Atonement  for 
their  Blafphemies:  But  after  all,  it's  a  fad  Cafe,  when  a 
Man  is  better  for  heing  transform'd  into  a  Beaft,  and  lefs 
foolifh  for  having  loft  his  Wits. 

One  protefted  againft  all  Religions  but  that  of  Epicure  : 
Againft  all  Heavens  but  that  of  Mahomet :  And  againft 
all  Hells,  but  Want  of  Champaign  or  Canary.  Another 
would  not  receive  the  Lord's  Prayer  without  an  Amend- 
ment. To  petition  for  Bread  (faid  he)  has  more  of  the 
Beggar,  than  of  the  Gentleman.  And  futes  better  with 
the  Poor  of  the  Parifh,  than  with  the  Lord  of  the  Manor. 
Let  us  at  leaft  (faid  hej  tack  to  daily  Bread,  one  Bot- 
tle of  Burgundy.  The  Motion  met  with  Applaufe  : 
Every  one  follow'd  the  Propofal  with  a  Comment  ten 
times  more  outragious  than  the  Text.  They  rioted  on : 
Impiety  and  the  moft  rampant  Infolence  pafs'd  for  the 
moft  refined  Wit.  Nay,  to  fcrew  Outrage  to  the  high- 
eft  Point,  Oh !  fays  one,  give  me  Religio  Medici^  this 
Religion  at  large  is  a  healing  Profeflion  :  It  reconciles  the 
Crofs  with  the  Crefcent,  and  ftrikes  an  Alliance  be- 
tween the  Son  of  Mary^  and  the  Son  of  Abdcdc.  Thus 
is  the  Gofpel  deliver'd  up  to  the  Rabble,  and  a  petty  A- 
theiftical  Pamphlet  lock'd  up  in  the  Ark.  Our  Saviour's 
Doctrine  muft  give  Place  to  the  Vifions  of  an  irreligious 
Quack,  more  fit  to  gaze  upon  Urinals,  than  to  talk  of 
Religion. 

Had  their  Difcourfe  been  innocent,  their  Madnefs  had 
been  diverting:  But  to  hear  Chriftians  turn  God  into 
Farce,  and  Religion  into  Romance  ;  revile  Sandlity,  and 
play  with  Juftice,  is  monftrous  and  provoking.  For  what 
can  be  more  amazingly  flagitious,  than  to  make  God  the 
Subje6l  of  our  Sport,  and  the  Gofpel  of  our  Diverfion? 
Than  to  throw  the  moft  auguft  and  the  m.oft  trifling  things 
into  the  fame  Compofition  ?  And  to  blend  Majefty  and 
Omnipotence  with  Laughter  and  Frenzy  ? 

H  3  The 


.102    A  Supplement  %o  the  frjl  Tart 

The  Proverb  fays,^i6o  murthers  when  he  is  drunk,  muji^ 
han^^  for  it  when  he  is  fober ,  I  would  have  it  pafs  into  a 
Jlanding  Law,  and  take  in  Blafphemers.  The  Fear  of. 
a  red  hot  Iron  might  pofljbly  put  'em  in  Mind  of  Fire  and 
Brimllone,  and  the  Dread  of  paffing  for  ftigmatiz'd  Vil- 
lains in  this  World,  miglit  fcare  them  into  an  Apprehen- 
sion of  living  eternally  Reprobates  in  the  next. 

By  this  time  Eleutherius  had  feiz'd  on  the  Chair,  and 
began  to  hold  forth  on  the  Text  of  ede,  bibe.  He  was  i. 
Libertine  at  full  Growth,  a  Latitudinarian  in  Principk, 
and  by  Confequence  an  Atheift  in  Pradice.  Epicure  was 
his  Gafuift,  and  Hobbs  his  Divine. 

To  your  Arms,  Gentlemen  (bawls  he)  the  Enemy  has 
taken  the  Field,  and  advances  to  beat  up  our  Quarters. 
Our  Privileges  galp,  and  our  great  Prerogative  lies  bleed- 
ing.    Nothing  but  Refolution  can  retrieve  'em. 

The  Company  gaz'd  at  this  unexpe6led  Exordium. 
Some  cry'd  out  Thieves,  others  a  French  Invafion;  but 
moft  concluded,  the  Monfieurs  could  fcarce  land  without 
Veilels  i  unlefs  they  follow'd  the  Road  of  the  Compojlella 
Pilgrims,  or  preft  lome  Teams  o^  Domingo's  Ganzes.  But 
the  Orator  perceiving  the  Surprize,  foonlaid  their  Fright", 
and  calm'd  their  Fear.  Gentlemen  (continued  he)  our 
Enemies  are  domeftick,  not  foreign ;  and  they  prepare 
Chains  for  our  Confciences,  not  for  our  Bodies.  In  a 
Word,  they  preach  up  Vertue,  and  cant  down  Pleafure  j 
entail  Heaven  on  the  one,  and  Hell  on  the  other. 

Yet,  did  they  confine  this  Obligation  of  Self-denial  to 
the  Clergy,  or  the  Sex,  I  would  fit  down,  and  only  fmile 
at  the  Impofture.  But  alas!  they  even  llrike  at  our  un- 
queftionable  Prerogative,  and  bring  Gentlemen  within 
the  Lafh  of  the  Statute.  We  mull  forfooth  fling  up  our 
Claim  to  Heaven,  unlefs  we  ftarve  in  the  Face  of  Plenty. 
We  fhall  cry  out  in  the  next  World  for  Wate*"  to  cool  our 
parch'd  Tongues,  if  we  bathe  'em  with  Burgundy  in  this. 
Thefe  new-coin'd  Tenets  are  fet  on  Foot,  and  abetted 
in  London,  nay,  in  the  very  Sight  of  the  Play-houfe  and 
T-ivern. 

I  met  this  Morning  one  Eufebius,  the  grand  Patriarch 
of  thefe  dangerous  Morals:  His  Perfon  feems  as  out- 
landifli  as  his  Dodrine,  and  his  Mind  no  lefs  heterodox 
than  his  Principles:  He  is  a  Compound  of  Jew  and  In- 
fidel, Pharifee  on  the  one  Side,  and  Stoick  on  the  other: 

His 


of  the  Gentleman   Inftru&e^.     103 

His  Gate  is  as  grave  as  the  old  Duke  of  Alvah,  and  as 
ftarch'd  as  that  of  his  Majefty  of  Pegu :  But  his  Tongue 
rides  Poft,  and  is  a  kind  of  Motus  perpetuus ;  and  like 
old  Diogenes^  or  Timon^  is  always  upon  the  Satyr.  In 
fine,  I  took  the  Man  for  Penanc*in  Perfon,  and  Mor- 
tification in  Qijerpo  ;  for  a  meer  Mummy  pickled  in 
Myrrh,  and  bak'd  in  Bitumen.  Gentlemen,  cries  h.e, 
mull  low  Appetite,  baulk  Senfe,  and  curb  Nature:  They 
mull  war  upon  the  Flelh,  reprefs  its  Saliies,  and  diet  it 
into  Obedience  :  They  mull  be  humble  in  Grandeur,  poor 
in  Wealth,  and  meek  in  Spight  of  Provocation;  They 
mull  melt  down  their  Sv/ords  into  Crolles,  and  turn  their 
fine  Holland  Shirts  into  Sackcloth.  Is  not  this  to  lay  lis 
on  our  Backs?  To  break  down  the  Enclofure  between 
Quality  and  Peafantry,  and  to  call  in  our  Patents?  Drud- 
gery is  the  Portion  of  Clowns,  Pleafure  the  Inheritance 
of  Gentlemen:  I  could  not  indeed  confute  his  Sophifms 
with  Reafon,  but  will  by  Pradice.  And  if  I  am  not 
millaken,  one  Fadl  weighs  more  than  a  thoufand  Spe- 
culations. Let  us  llrangle  this  new-born  Brat  in  the  Cra- 
dle. Principiii  objia  is  a  nice  Maxim:  A  Spark  contemn'd 
breaks  often  into  a  Flame.  New  Errors  are  as  highly  re- 
ceiv'd  into  our  Ifland  as  new  Falhions,  and  we  are  juft  as 
conllant  to  our  Principles  as  to  our  Amours. 

The  Harangue  v/as  receiv'd  with  Applaufe,  and  all  vo- 
ted a  Remedy.  Some  would  filence  Eufebms  with  a  Ba- 
ftinado,  and  others  with  Reafon.  They  pitch'd  upon  the 
lall  Opinion  as  more  civil,  and  lefs  dangerous. 

An  Interview  is  refolv'd.  But  who  will  take  up  the 
Cudgels,  and  clofe  with  the  Enemy  ?  Eleutherius  found 
no  Inclination  to  mcafure  Weapons  with  a  vidorious  Foe. 
The  firft  Engagement  had  cool'd  his  Appetite.  He  had 
fhot  all  his  Ammunition,  and  like  our  German  Allies,  ex- 
pedled  a  Bill  of  Exchange  to  furnilh  his  Magazine  with 
new  Provifion. 

The  Expedition,  fays  one  of  the  Company,  is  of  too 
great  Confequence  to  be  committed  to  Eleutherius's  Con- 
dudl ;  he  has  been  once  fool'd,  and  a  fecond  Attempt,  ill 
manag'd,  may  give  an  entire  Overthrow  to  our  Caufe. 
To  be  foil'd  and  foil'd,  fays  another  with  a  Smile,  may 
pafs  for  fynonymous  in  his  Cafe ;  the  Senfe  comes  as  near 
as  the  Letters,  and  the  Signification  of  either  may  equally 
bsapply'dtohim. 

H  4  Eleft' 


104     A  Suvvtiumr  to  the  firft  Part 

Eleutherius  was  furpriz'd  at  the  Glance,  and  the  Sar- 
cafm  caird  for  a  Blufli ;  but  Wine  prevented  the  Con- 
fufion  ;  for  it  having  taken  Pofleffion  of  his  Cheeks,  they 
could  admit  no  other  Colour  ;  tho'  to  fpeak  Truth,  £- 
Jeutherius  had  a  great  Command  over  his  Blood,  and  was 
within  an  Ace,  as  much  Mafterof  his  Face  as  of  his  Con^ 
fcience. 

However,  he  protefted  againft  the  Calumny,  yet  with 
too  much  Heat  to  be  innocent;  the  Wine  had  warm'd 
his  Coiirage,  but  this  fet  it  on  Fire.  The  Confult  had 
ended  in  a  civil  War,  had  not  one  of  the  Company  inter- 
pos'd,  and  kept  the  Peace  between  her  Majefty'sSubjeds. 
Nay,  he  undertook  the  Command  of  the  Expedition  :  So 
that  having  provided  for  the  Encounter,  they  reel'd  to 
their  Lodgings,  tho*  fome  took  up  in  the  Ivennel. 


DIALOGUE    n. 

A  Profecution  of  the  fame  Subje^, 

WHILST  Eleutherius  prepar'd  againft  Eufebius  on 
the  one  Side,his  Lady  (whom  I  call  Emilia)  mufter'd 
Troops  on  the  other.  Yefterday's  Difcourfe  lay  hard  on 
her  Ladyfhip's  Stomach.  The  Gentlewoman  was  down- 
right Crop-fick,  and  nothing  but  Revenge  was  able  to 
carry  off  the  Humour.  She  had  been  fo  inur'd  to  Com- 
pliments, that  fhe  could  not  digeft  Eufehiui's  Freedom. 
Flattery  had  plac'd  her  among  the  Beauties,  and  Favour 
voted  her  a  Wit.  She  was  fond  of  the  Promotion,  and 
by  an  innate  Pride,  common  to  the  Sex,  afcribed  the 
■whole  Preferment  to  Merit,  and  nothing  to  Courtefy. 
Now,  this  Lady,  fo  gaudy  in  Conceit,  could  not  endure 
to  receive  Reproof  for  Incenfe,  nor  unpalatable  Truths 
for  fawning  Courtfliip.  She  dreaded  a  fincere  Tongue 
no  lefs  than  a  true  Glafs,.  and  would  no  more  fuffer  her 
Conduct  to  be  queftioned  than  her  Complexion.  Eufe- 
hius  indeed  had  handled  her  Ladyfliip  without  Ceremo- 
ny, but  her  DIfeafe  was  mortal :  Like  an  honeft  Sur- 
geon, he  would  not  fpare  the  Saw  to  flatter  the  Patient. 
However,  he  ftept  not  over  the  Rules  of  Breeding,  but 
I  '  .  -  .     .  kept 


of  the  Gentleman  Inftru^ed.      105 

kept  within  the  Bounds  of  Decency:  But  he  could  not 
applaud  her  Follies,  nor  canonize  her  Irregukrities.     She 
was  wedded  to  the  World.     He  told  her  (lie  embrac'd  a 
Shadow,  that  once  would  betray  her  Hopes,  and  thwart 
her  Expedation  with  Diliippointment:  That  flie  might 
retrieve  her  Folly  by  a  timely  Divorce ;  but  that  dilatory 
Put-offs  are  generally  follovv'd  by  an  untimely  Repent- 
ance.    Eufebius  might  have  expedled  from  her  Court- 
Breeding,  a  civil  Return  for  fo  charitable  a  Caveat.     E- 
milia  was  in  the  wrong,  but  fhe  would  not  be  kl  right. 
She  pofted  to  Hell,  yet  would  needs  be  told  Ihe  took  the 
high  Way  to  Heaven :  And  becaule  the  good  old  Gen- 
tleman pollponed  her  Favour  to  her  Happinefs,  and  re- 
fufed  to  purchafe  her  bonnes  Graces  at  the  Expence  of  her 
Soul,  fhe  flew  into  a  Fury,  and  repaid  his  Charity  with 
Satyr  and  Declamation.     Nay,  fome  affirm  Paffion  had 
almoft  ftopp'd  Refpiration,  and  that  fhe  had  certainly  ex- 
pir'd  of  a  Syncop,  had  flie  not  taken  Coach,  and  thrown 
off  the  ftifling  Humour  in  theBofoms  ofaFemale3^^»<5(?, 
with  whom  (he  pah'd  the  Evening. 

'Emilia  found  the  Ladies  in  a  Commotion,  their  Con- 
verfation  was  clamorous,  and  too  earnell  to  be  indiffe- 
rent. Indeed  a  kin4  of  South-Eaft  Wind  had  ruffled  their 
Temper,  and  blown  their  Tongues  into  Diforder.    The 
French  Packet-Boat  brought  over  the  Alarm,  and  Lucia 
(fo  I  call  the  Lady)  paid  the  Poft  a  Shilling  for  the  Mor- 
tification.    To  be  (hort,  this  Gentlewoman  entertained 
an  Envoy  at  the  French  Court  to  give  Intelligence  how 
Modes  ebb'd  and  flow'd ;  when  they  firft  appear'd;  when 
like  to  expire;  which  were  more  proper  for  forty,  which 
for  fixteen ;  which  for  a  rifing,  which  for  a  fetting  Beau- 
ty.    She  received  frefh  Advice,  that  the  French  King  had 
forbid  the  wearing  of  Gold  Lace,  and  that  all  below  a 
Countefs  lay  under  the  Prohibition ;  that  he  had  clipp'd 
Commodes,  and  taken  the  Sex  a  Story  lower;    that  the 
Duchefs  of   Burgundy  immediately  undrefs'd,  and  ap- 
pear'd in  a  Fontagne  of  the  new  Standard;  that  his  Ma- 
jefty  had  a  Defign  againft  Top-knots  ;  and  had  pafs'd  in 
Council  an  MX  againft  theTranfportatign  of  Wafhes  and 
Pomatums. 

This  unexpedled  Intelligence  wrought  like  diaturhith 
cum  Rhea,  Paffioh  flufh'd  in  their  Faces,  and  burftoutof 
their  Mouths.  I'he  Grand  Lewis  was  commanded  to  the 

Bar, 


ro6    A  Supplement  to  the  firft  Fart 

Bar,  and  pronounced  guilty  of  a  high  Mifdemeanour ;  he 
was  handled  by  this  Female  Bench  as  Cavalierly,  as  the 
Salamanca  Doctor  by  Sir  George  "jejferies ;  and  his  exor- 
bitant Power  receiv'd  more  Lafhes  in  an  Hour,  than  at 
the  Hague ^  ox  Vienna^  in  a  Twelve- month. 

The  Sun,  fays  one,  in  all  his  Voyages  never  faw  a  more 
imperious  Prince ;  he  drives  at  univerfal  Monarchy,  his 
Delires  out-llretch  his  Dominions,  nothing  is  able  to 
glut  his  Ambition  but  the  Slavery  of  Europe  ;  he  has  be- 
lieged  Towns  thefe  threefcore  Years,  now  he  falls  foul 
upon  Fafhions,  and  hectors  at  the  Toilet  as  he  huffs  in 
the  Field. 

This  is,  continued  another,  an  Inroad  upon  our  Privi- 
lege, and  a  manifefr  Invaiion  of  our  Right ;  to  model 
DrelTes,  is  the  chief  Branch  of  our  Prerogative ;  nay,  it's 
our  proper  Chattel ;  in  a  Word,  it's  an  Employment  en- 
tailed on  our  Sex. 

Indeed,  I  am  told,  fays  a  third,  French  Laws  reach 
not  our  Ifland  ;  they  are  contraband  here  no  lefs  than 
their  Wines  :  But  tho'  there  be  no  Commerce  of  Trade, 
there  is  of  Modes :  We  are  always  French  without,  tho* 
feldom  within  ;  and  though  we  hate  their  Soldiers,  w© 
dote  on  their  Taylors  and  Sempftrefles.  We  (liould  there- 
fore fee  the  Waiters,  and  feize  on  the  reform'd  Ware  at 
the  landing;  nay,  and  indidl  the  Seamen  upon  the  Sta- 
tute of  no  Commerce  with  France, 

Emilia  expedted  a  Qiteve  with  Impatience,  and  now 
flic  thought  to  cafe  her  Mind,  and  to  lay  open  the  Caufe 
of  her  Chagrin  to  the  Company.  Alas !  faid  fhe,  our 
Privileges  are  not  only  rifled  at  Paris,  they  areclipp'd  at 
Londm  :  The  diftinguifliing  Marks  of  Birth  and  Title  are 
defaced;  and  the  Maid  Hands  on  the  fame  Level  with  my 
Lady:  Then  fhe  entertain'd  the  Club  with  the  Dialogue 
between  herfelf  and  Eufebhis^  and  follow'd  the  Text 
with  an  exafperating  Comment :  Nay,  fhe  mifrepre- 
fented  the  Difcourfe  to  fit  it  for  Satyr,  and  foifted  in  fome 
grating  Expreffions  to  provoke  Refehtment :  The  Ha- 
rangue tired  the  Audience,  and  almoll  threw  a  Leafh  of 
Ladies  into  Fits.  They  toft  Patience,  and  even  Breeding : 
Paffion  feiz'd  on  Reafon,  and  Revenge  gave  Liberty  to 
the  Tongue.  When  Spite  and  Impotence  meet,  no- 
thing is  more  clamorous  and  extravagant. 

But 


of  the  Gentleman   J?iftni5ied.      107 

But  above  all  Emilia  was  remarkable:  Nature  had  fa- 
vour'd  her  with  a  voluble  Tongue;  and  her  mercurial 
Temper,  heated  with  Revenge,  irnprov'd  its  Motion  to 
Admiration  :  So  that  it  run  at  the  Rate  often  Miles  an 
Hour,  and  lafli'd  Eufebius  without  Mercy  or  Interrupti- 
on. They  leave  Monfieur  at  I'^erfailles  to  chaftife  Eufe- 
ifius  zl  London:  He  was  to  be  brought  upon  his  Knees 
firft,  and  tiien  to  do  Penance  before  the  Congregation: 
But  thefe  levere  Refolutions  ^yere  the  EfFed  of  the  firil 
Heat,  Timecool'd  their  Fury.,  and  wrought  them  into 
Terms  of  a  more  reafonable  Satisfaction.  They  thought 
therefore  fit  to  compound  with  the  Gentleman  upon  thefe 
Articles,  i .  That  he  crav'd  Pardon  of  the  Ladies  for  af- 
fronting their  Charafter  in  the  Perfcn  of  Emilia.  2.  That 
he  acknowledged  theDoftrine  he  had  advanc'd  was  hete- 
rodox ;  rather  fpoken  out  of  Inadvertence  than  Malice, 
and  more  to  carry  on  Difcourfe,  than  to  impofe  an  Ob- 
ligation. 3.  That  thefe  Words  of  our  Saviour,  be  perfe^^ 
rather  intimate  a  Counfel  than  a  Command  :  And  that 
they  concern  neither  the  Dutchefs,  Countefs,  nor  Gen- 
tlewoman. 4.  That  the  forefaid  Perfons  are  exempt  from 
the  Cumbrances  of  the  Gofpel,  and  lie  under  no  Law  but 
of  their  Pleafure.  Emilia  and  Lucia  drew  up  thefe  Con- 
ditions, and  were  deputed  by  the  Junilo  to  prefent  them 
to  Eufebius.  In  the  mean  Time  the  good  Man  went  to 
Bed,  never  dreaming  pf  their  Defigns ;  and  ignorant  of 
the  Work  thefe  two  Cabals  had  cut  him  out  for  the  next 
Day's  Employment. 


DIALOGUE    III. 

Eufebius  lays  open  the  irregular  Conduit  of  Ladies. 

EMilia  and  Lucia  drove  away  betimes  the  next  Mor- 
ning ioEufebius^s  Lodging.They  generouily  for  once 
broke  their  Sleep  to  execute  their  Commiffion ;  and  ex- 
pos'd  their  Health  to  the  Morning  Vapours  for  the  com- 
mon Concern  of  the  Sex.  Eufebius  ftarted  at  the  Earli- 
iiefs  of  the  Vilit,  and  began  to  fufped  this  unufual  Ap- 
pearance, like  monftrous  Births,  portended  a  Turn  of 
State j    or  threatning  Inundation,    or  Earthquakes:  To 

rife 


io8     A  Supplement  to  the  Jirji  Viitt 

rife  by  Candle-light,  and  to  fet  out  before  the  Sun,  is  not 
only  a  Breach  of  Cuflom,  but  a  Violation  of  the  Cere- 
monial of  Ladies  •,  univerfaily  they  mull  not  begin  their 
Journies  till  Phcehus  has  almofl  ended  his,  nor  lay  down 
to  iieep  till  he  prepares  to  rife.  However,  Eufebius  re- 
membred  his  Duty  in  theHeight  of  his  Surprize,  and  re- 
ceived the  Deputies  with  a  Refpefl.  He  would  fain  have 
regaled  them  with  'a  Difli  of  Chocolate,  but  they  refu- 
fed  the  Offer:  For  indeed,  they  had  already,  by  Way  of 
Precaution,  armed  themfelves  againft  the  Serena  with  a 
Caudle. 

Emilia  open'd  her  Commiflion,  and  read  her  Creden- 
tials; then,  I  am  fent,  faid  fhe,  by  a  fele6t  Committee 
of  Ladies  to  require  Salisfadion.  You  are,  Sir,  I  pre- 
fume,  continued  ilie,  too  guilty  to  deny  the  Charge,  and 
too  much  a  Gentleman  not  to  ask  our  Pardon. 

Eufebius  could  fcarce  keep  Countenance  at  this  uncx- 
pedted  Harangue  ;  and  indeed,  had  not  her  Ladyfliip  wept 
like  April y  he  might  have  turn'd  the  Scene  into  Farce  and 
Comedy.  Indeed  {he  wept  fo  heartily,  one  would  jiave 
thought  her  favourite  Lap-dog  lay  gaiping,  or  that  fome 
American  Planter  had  kidnapp'd  the  little  Animal,  to 
tranfplant  the  Species  into  Virginia.  It  was  not  Repen- 
tance for  her  Sins  melted  her  Heart,  axid  drew  down  thele 
plentiful  Showers:  No,  no.  Vexation  alone  open'd  the 
Flood-gates  of  her  Eyes,  and  call  her  into  this  whimper- 
ing Diftemper.  Euj'ebim^  as  I  faid,  had  catechifed  her 
Ladyfhip,  and  (he  took  his  Freedom  in  Dudgeon :  She 
miftook  his  Charity  for  Difrefpedt,  and  thought  herfelr 
affronted,  becaufe  he  paid  lefs  Refpedt  to  her  Follies,  than 
to  her  Perfon;  for  great  Ladies  expedt  Flattery  even  for 
thofe  Extravagancies  for  which  they  are  in  Danger  of  fuf- 
fering  Fire  and  Brimftone  hereafter.  Now  the  very  Sight 
of  Eufebius  boird  up  her  Refeptment  to  tlie  Brim,  and 
becaufe  it  found  not  an  eafy  Ifluc  through  the  I'ongue,  it 
broke  a  Paflage  through  the  Eyes. 

Eufebius  feeing  Emilia  in  this  Situation,  thought  open 
Raillery  unfeafonable,  and  yet  he  could  not  refolve  to  be 
ferious.  He  took  therefore  a  Mean,  and  between  Ear- 
neft  and  Jeft ;  you  are,  Madam,  I  perceive,  faid  he,  a 
publick  Minifter,  and  this  Lady  is  your  Adjoint.  Why 
was  not  I  advertis'd  of  your  coming;  I  might  have  pre- 
par'd  the  Sopha^  or  boiTow'd  her  Majefty's  Coaches  to 

con- 


of  the  Gentleman  JnJIru6led.      lop 

condu£l  you  to  Audience.  But  feeing  you  are  plcas'd  to 
appear  Incognito^  let  my  Ignorance  apologize  for  this  poor 
Reception. 

You  tell  me,  I  am  guilty  of  Leze  Majefty  againft  La- 
dlgs ;  certainly  a  crime  of  fo  monftrous  a  Size  would  fly 
in  my  Face,  unlefsmy  Memory  were  fhort,  ormy  Con- 
fcience  harden'd.  Yet  though  Age  hath  not  wore  out 
the  one,  nor  my  Morals  feered  the  other,  I  arn  not  con- 
fcious  of  the  Trefpafs.  No,  I  refpe(5l  their  Quality,  and 
have  a  regard  for  their  Perfons,  when  attended  by  Merit, 
and  waited  on  by  Vertue ;  but  when  1  find  no  Fund  of 
Excellency,  but  the  Feminine  Gender;  a  dignified  Hus- 
band, or  a  gaudy  Manteau,  I  referve  my  Efteem  for 
more  deferving  Objects. 

Luc.  How,  Sir !  Have  you  the  Confidence  to  plead  not 
guilty  before  Emilia  ?  Refrefli  your  Memory,  call  a  Re- 
liedion  upon  Yefterday's  Converfation !  Was  it  genteel  ? 
Was  it  managed  by  the  ftrift  Rules  oi  Decorum}  You 
forgot  her  Station  and  your  own. 

Eufeb,  You  muil  not  wonder,  Madam,  if  I  deny  the 
Tndidment;  the  Law  allows  it  to  Criminals,  it's  the  Style 
of  the  Court.  Now,  I  fuppofe,  you  will  not  refufe  me  the 
Privilege  of  the  Bar.  But  however,  I  had  I  confefs  the 
Honour  to  argue  a  Point  with  Emilia.,  and  the  Misfor- 
tune to  difpleafe  her.  Yet  the  Offence  was  meerly  per- 
fonal,  itreach'd  not  the  Court,  muchlefs  the  whole  Sex. 
I  prefume  every  Woman  is  not  Legion.  And  that  Affronts, 
like  Difeafes,  are  not  propagated  by  Sympathy. 

Luc.  You  ftruck  and  wounded  the  whole  Sex  through 
Emilia's  Side.  Did  you  not  preach  up  Vertue,  not  only 
as  an  Ornament  to  Quality,  but  as  a  fcri6l  Obligation  i* 
Did  you  not  lampoon  our  ConducS,  and  expofe  our  Be- 
haviour ? 

Eufeb.  I  told  jE»i(;7/^  Vertue  ■was  her  Duty,  and  I  have 
Scripture  for  my  Wsrrant.  Pray  fly  in  the  Face  of  the 
Holy  Ghofl,  and  bring  in  an  Adlion  of  Scanddlimi  wag- 
natum  againft  our  blefled  Saviour,  He  pinches,  I  aflure 
you,  upon  Grandeur  and  Title,  and  values  more  a  Dairy- 
Maid  with  Vertue,  than  a  Princefs  without  it.  I  ventu- 
red alfo  to  compare  the  Pradice  of  Ladies  with  their 
Duty  ;  and  after  a  ferious  Application,  I  found  the  one 
bore  no  Proportion  with  the  other.  They  jar  like  Con- 
traries, and  can  no  more  be  rcconcil'd  than  Contradido- 

ries. 


no     A  Supplement  to  the  firjl  Part 

ries.  If  I  arraign  the  Exprefles  of  fome,  'twas  only  to' 
reform  them.  Charity  guided  my  Tongue,  not  Satyr.  In 
line,  lendeavour'd  to  correct  their  Failings,  without  out- 
raging their  Perfons,  or  infulting  their  Quality.  Now, 
pray  Ladies,  Where  is  the  Harm  ?  Is  it  not  true,  That 
God  created  the  World  for  Man,  and  Man  for  himfelf  ? 
And  are  not  Ladies  comprehended  in  this  general  End  of 
the  Creation  ?  Will  they  refign  all  Claim  to  Heaven  ? 
Or  fliake  off  the  Yoke  of  Depehdance  ?  Are  they  not 
therefore  oblig'd  to  ferve  God,  both  dut  of  Intereft  and 
Duty  ?  Is  not  this  the  fundamental  Stone  of  our  Religi- 
on ?  The  capital  Maxim  of  the  Gofpel?  The  whole  Load 
of  Chriflian  Promifes  and  Precepts  lean  on  this  Bafis.  And 
as  God  has  obferved  no  Mean  in  his  Favours  to  us,  fo  he 
has  put  no  Bounds  to  our  Obligation.  Love  the  Lord  thy 
God  with  all  thy  Heart.  This  is  Scripture,  Ladies:  It's 
not  only  God's  Word,  but  his  Command ;  and  I  find  no 
where  that  the  topping  Females  lie  without  the  Pale  of 
the  Precept :  But  perhaps  you  are  better  read  in  Shakeffear 
than  Revelation. 

Luc.  God  be  thank'd.  Sir,  we  know  the  Catechifm, 
Do  you  fuppofe  v/e  receiv'd  our  Education  in  the  Wilds 
of  America  ? 

Eufeb.  I  qucftion  not  your  Knowledge:  It's  hard  to 
overlook  a  Truth  God  has  ftamp'd  within  us.  That  we; 
were  made  to 'ferve  God  is  the  firll  Leflbn  we  learn :  But 
by  Misfortune,  wc  feldom  look  behind  the  Principle:  We 
never  take  into  Gonfideration  the  Confequences :  For  if  it 
be  true  you  were  meerly  created  for  his  Service  and  Glo- 
ry, every  A<5lion  that  warps  from  this  Point  is  excentrical 
and'irregular:  It's  a  Violation  of  your  Duty,  and  carries 
you  from  the  End  of  your  Creation.  Be  pleas'd  to  furvey 
your  Thoughts  and  Defires ;  calculate  your  Words  and 
Adlions ;  and  then  tell  me.  Whether  they  hanker'd  not 
more  after  your  Sajisfaftion  than  God's  Service?  Whe- 
ther they  aim'd  not  more  at  the  obliging  of  Senfe,  than 
at  the  Difcharge  of  your  Duty  ?  And  yet  you  believe  you 
were  placed  in  this  World  to  fave  your  Soul  :  That  your 
only  Bufinefs  is  to  iave  it :  That  though  you  gain  theU- 
niverfe,  you  lofe  all  unlels  you  fave  it :  Permit  me  to  dis- 
believe you  in  this  Particular,  or  to  conclude  your  Rea- 
fontobedifordcr'd. 


V 


of  the  Gentleman  Injiru^ied.      iii 

Efttil.  Take  your  Choice,  Judgments  work  no  Altera- 
tion in  this:  You  will  fcarce  think  us  out  of  Chriftianity, 
nor  judge  us  into  Bethlem:  But  pray.  What  unfortunate 
Conllellation  reign'd  at  our  Births  ?  What  fatal  Influ- 
ence dubb'd  ur-  Fools  oi  Infidels  ?  The  Dilemma  is  un- 
kind: I  might  add,  ungenteel.  Infidelity  in  a  reform'd 
Nation  has  fomething  of  the  Monfter :  And  Folly  every 
where  much  of  the  Beaft.  Does  our  Difcourfe  betray 
any  Diftemper  of  the  Head  ?  Or  our  Praftice  any  Symp- 
toms of  a  depraved  Will  ? 

Eufeh.  Should  you  fee  a  Man,  whilft  his  Eftate  lay 
gafping,  faunter  from  the  Play-houfe  to  the  Tavern ; 
fleep  till  Ten  in  the  Morning,  and  revel  till  Twelve  at 
Night ;  baftinado  his  Lawyers,  and  challenge  his  Judge 
to  a  Duel ;  would  you  not  conclude  this  Gentleman  va- 
lued Indigence  above  an  Eftate?  That  he  was  fond  of 
Poverty  ?  Or  compleatly  rigged  out  l^r  a  Journey  to 
Morefidds  ? 

Emit.  We  fhould  queftionlefs  infer,  he  had  a  Mind  to 
disburthen  himfelf  of  the  Incumbrance  of  Lands ;  and 
to  try  the  Charity  of  the  Congregation.  But  pray  parallel 
tiot  our  Behaviour  to  this  Coxcomb's  Extravagance. 

Eufeb.  By  no  means ;  for  how  can  I  compare  Things 
that  have  no  Proportion,  or  Analogy  ?  This  Coxcomb's 
Folly  can  only  throw  him  into  Poverty,  and  thofe  trou- 
blefome  Sequels  that  wait  on  Indigence,  light  Dinners, 
and  foul  Linen  :  And  yet,  this  Misfortune  may  by  Care 
and  Induftry  be  retrieved,  and  muft  end.  But  Ladies 
mull  expert  more  difmal  Confequences  of  their  Negli- 
gence ;  But  Heaven  loft  is  never  found,  and  Hell  Flames 
once  lighted,  are  never  extinguifhed. 

Luc.  Nay,  now  we  are  fallen  on  the  Topickof  Eter- 
nity, we  fhall  never  end.  You  arechopp'd  upon  the  Text 
of  Pedants,  upon  the  common  Theme  of  Cant.  You 
intend  to  fright  us  into  Bigotry,  and  to  fcare  us  into  Sla- 
very. We  know  God  has  prepar'd  a  Heaven  for  his  f>iends, 
and  a  Hell  for  his  Enemies,  and  that  both  are  everlafting  ; 
but  we  know  alfo  whilft  we  do  no  Harm,  we  incur  no 
Guilt,  and  by  Confequence  no  Punifhment. 

Eufeh.  Hell  indeed  is  a  very  common  Place,  the  Road 
to  it  is  plain,  and  always  crouded,  fo  that  it's  well  Peo- 
pled :  Nay,  and  the  Citizens,  like  thofe  of  o\iiRome,  are 
in  great  part  Lords,   Knights  and,  Ladies;  and  the  Pri- 

vilegjs 


i  1 2      A  Supplement  to  the  firft  Part 

vilege  of  the  Corporation  runs  for  Eternity.  You  arc 
acquainted,  you  tell  me,  with  this  Truth:  However,  I 
take  the  Freedom  to  rub  up  your  Memory,  and  I  think 
a  Touch  of  it  lometimes,  tho'  it  be  only  in  Glance  and 
Cypher,  is  feafonable :  For,  I  confefs,  a  Doubt  has  hung 
cruelly  in  my  Head,  whether  the  Knowledge  of  ourFirft- 
rate  Mortals,  of  both  Sexes,  reach'd  the  Centre  ?  I  have 
fpent  fome  Reflexions  upon  their  Conduct,  and  find  Hell 
in  their  Pradtice,  but  not  in  their  Belief.  I  have  compa- 
red with  Grief,  Pagan  Rome  with  Chriftian  London,  and 
read  in  the  Pra6tice  of  this,  the  Infidelity  of  the  other. 
T^ieir  Aftions  are  fo  uniform,  one  muft  conclude  their 
Expeftations  are  the  fame ;,  and  that  our  EngUJh  Hopes 
and  Fears  are  confined  wholly  to  the  prefeht,  as  well  as 
the  liomans.  For,  in  fine,  thefe  Pagan  Ladies  were  litter'd 
XoCampus  Martlus^  ours  are  coach'd  to  Hyde-Park  ;  if 
they  fheer'd  ofF  to  the  Theatre,  ours  drive  home  by  the 
Play-hofife  i  they  had  their  Balls,  we  are  not  behind- 
hand in  this  Diverfion.  The  Roman  Ladres  hung. Pro- 
vinces in  their  Ears,  and  carry'd  the  Price  of  Kingdoms  on 
their  Backs,  and  their  Vanity  fwell'd  to  that  Excefs,  that 
nothing  but  a  Decree  of  the  Senate,  was  able  to  put 
Bounds  to  its  Extravagance.  Indeed  our  Banks  are  lefs 
furnifh'd  than  thofe  of  Rome  ;  and  fo  our  Englip  Vices 
muft  be  content  with  lefs  Equipage  :  We  are  not  attend- 
ed bv  a  Train  of  Slaves,  nor  carried  on  the  Shoulders  of 
Gatils,  or  Germans ,  our  Pendants  and  Necklaces  rpay 
want  fome  Carats  of  the  antient  Bravery,  but  generally 
they  weigh  more  than  our  Lands,  and  Lordfhips  ;  they 
eat  up  our  Glebe,  and  prey  upon  our  very  Titles.  So  that 
tho'  our  Vanity  has  lefs  Pomp  and  State,  it's  attended  by 
more  Folly. 

I  confefs  l^enus  and  Cupid  have  no  Altars  in  our  Chur- 
ches, yet,  tho'  they  are  clear  of  Idols,  Idolatry  goes  on : 
Like  Mfchas  we  worfliip  thefe  little  Proftitutes  at  Home 
with  Epods  and  Theraphim^  and  turn  the  v/hole  Year  into 
a  Lupercalia  :  Vv^e  build.,  I  mean,  to  this  Procurefs  and 
Pandar,  Altars  in  our  Hearts,  out  of  the  Reach  of  Parli- 
ament or  Church-wardens ;  and  facrifice,  not  Doves,  but 
all  our  Thoughts,  Delires,  and  Adlions,  to  thofe  lewd 
Divinities.  For  pray  confider,  do  not  Love  Intrigues  take 
up  the  Time  of  Chrillians,  as  well  as  of  the  old  Pagans  ? 
And  are  they  not  carried  on  whh  as  much  Heat  and  Ce- 
remony 


of  the  Gentleman  Jnftru^ied.      113 

femony  at  London  as  at  Rome  ?  Can  Hiftory  inftance  one 
Fadl  of  Incontinence  that  we  have  not  adopted  by  Pra- 
dlice  ?  Nay,  the  Copies  we  draw  out-do  the  Originals  j 
and  we  blufli  as  little  at  thofe  Crimes  our  Religion  con- 
demns to  Fire  and  Brimftone,  as  the  Pagans  at  thofe  I- 
dolatry  placed  in  Heaven. 

Now,  who  can  draw  any  other  Conclufion  from  fuch 
a  Refemblance  of  Practice,  but  a  Refemblance  of  Be- 
lief? And  that  En^land^  tho'  Chriltian  Vv'ithout,  is  no 
lefs  Pagan  within  than  America  ?   For  what  is  the  Diffe- 
rence, but  that  our  Name  is  better,  and  our  Vices  worfe. 
I  have  heard  that  a  Japonefe^  by  the  Inftrudion  of  a 
Divine,  conceived  a  high  Idea  of  the  Chriftian  Religion  ; 
but  all  the  Rhetorick  of  the  Preacher  was  unable  to  bring 
him  over  till  he  had  taken  a  Journey  into  Europe.  With 
the  firft  fair  Wind  he  fet  Sail  for  Goa.^  he  doubles  the 
Cape  of  Good  Hope.,  and  lands    at  Lisbon  ;    he  travels 
over  Europe  ;  he  examines  the  Behaviour  and  Employ- 
ments of  Chriftians,  he  compares  their  Lives  with  their 
Belief;  the  Loofenefs  of  their  Aftions  with  the  Severity 
of  their   Precepts  j   and  finding  no  Proportion  between 
the  Doftrineand  the  Pradice,  he  concluded  Chriflianity 
was  Mummery  and  Romance:  That  we  did  not  believe 
in  Europe.,  what  wepreach'd  m  India  ;  and,  in  fine,  that 
Chriflianity  was  rather  a  Myftery  of  Iniquity  than  of 
Godlinefs.     For  he  could  not  conceive  it  poffible  for  fo 
many  Millions  to  run  counter  to  the  Laws  of  their  Pro- 
feflion,  and  to  combine  to  confute  by  an  univerfal  Pra- 
ctice all  the  Articles  of  their  Creed.     Can  Men,  faid 
he,  who  profefs  a  Gofpel  of  Love  and  Amity,   outrage 
their  Brethren,  and  welter  in  the  Blood  of  their  neareft 
Relations  ?    Can  Men  who  are  bid  to  lay  up  all  their 
Treafure  in  Heaven,  place  their  whole  Concerts  upon 
Earth?  Can  they  take  up  here,  as  if  they  wcvq  never  to 
remove,  and  fettle  with  Satisfodion  in  the  very  Place  of 
their  Exile  ?  Can  A/Icn  believe  Chrift  fullered  for  their 
Sins,  and  yet  crucify  him  in  their  Oaths  ?    Or  that  God 
will  avenge  Crimes,  and  yet  commit  the  blackeft  without 
Horror,  or  even  Scruple  ?   Can  they  believe  Lull  is  for- 
bid, and  at  the  fame  time  make  it  their  Bufinefs  to  ex- 
cite Flefli,  and  vihip  on  the  Paflions  to  Excefies  even  be- 
yond their  natural  Ir.clination  ?  To  plunge  inlo  Debau- 
ches lefs  upon  Appetite,  than  by  wav   of   Exploit  and 
I  *  Qallanu-y  ? 


1 14     A  Supplement  to  the  firft  Fart 

Gallantry?.  This  poor  Idolater  could  not  conceive  how 
the  Condu61:  of  Chriftians  could  vary  fo  prodigioufly  from 
their  Judgments :  How  their  Law  could  teach  Morality, 
and  their  Adions  breathe  Impiety.  And  fo  return'd  into 
his  Country  with  this  Perfualion,  that  our  Religion  was 
all  Artifice,  all  criminal,  or  all  Chriftians  Infidels. 

Er/2il.  Well,  fcolding  is  a  Song  of  two  Parts;  if  you 
take  one,  I  may  be  temped  to  take  the  other.  Provi- 
dence fpoil'd  a  good  Surgeon  to  make  an  ill  Gentleman. 
Your  Genius  lies  fo  to  Difl'eftion,  I  believe  you  take  as 
much  Pleafurein  the  cuttir.gup  of  a  Fault,  or  in  reading 
upon  the  Sores  of  your  Neighbour,  as  a  Doctor  of  the 
College  in  the  anatomizing  of  a  Malefactor  taken  Irom 
the  Gibbet.  Take  your  way,  lampoon  the  whole  Race 
of  Chrifii  ms,  and  make  a  Satyr  upon  the  Nation.  You 
have  aflumed  the  Office  of  Cenibr- General,  and  what 
will  you  gain  but  Enemies  and  Reproof? 

Lmc.  His  Invedive,  Madam,  reaches  not  us,  we  do 
no  Harm  ;  our  Condud  is  innocent,  and  our  Behaviour 
belies  not  our  Profeflion. 

Eufcb.  I  ■^m  not  difpofed  to  libel  Ladies,  ncr  to  bur- 
lefque  Mankind.  But  I  am  concern'd  in  earneft,  to  fee 
People  in  fpight  of  all  Sollicitation  to  be  happy,  run  head- 
long, like  crown'd  Vidims,  to  their  Ruin,  To  fee  Chri- 
ftians claim  a  Right  to  the  vaft  Promifes  of  our  Redeem- 
er, and  at  the  lame  time  to  break  thro'  all  the  Princi- 
ples that  fupport  the  Title.  You  fix  your  Security  upon 
this  wretched  Maxim,  I  d:j  mo  Harm.  Suppofe  it  true; 
Will  thisenfure  your  Hapninefs? 

You  have  certainly  coniidcr'd.  Matt.  xxv.  You  have 
read  the  Parable  of  a  Mafter,  who  call'd  his  Servant  to 
Account  for  a  Talent.  Be  pleafed  upon  my  Recommen- 
dation to  turn  once  more  to  the  Place :  It  feemsdefign'd 
for  your  Inftrudion  ;  weigh  the  Drift,  and  ftop  at  every 
Circumftance.  This  Man  deliver'd  his  Servant  a  Talent 
with  a  Command  to  lay  it  out  at  Intereft  :  Butrefleding 
on  the  one  fide  perchance  that  the#Bank  was  funk,  and 
the  Security  queftionable;  and  on  the  other  that  his  Ma- 
fter was  fevere  and  exading,  he  thought  it  a  piece  of  Po- 
licy to  fecure  the  Capital  ;  and  reftor'd  it  imm.ediately  at 
his  Return.  But  the  Mafter  treats  the  Man  with  Heat 
and  Out!  !'^-e.  ///  a^i^  idle  Servant.  He  receives  the 
Talent  with  ladignation,  he  coof  s  him  up  in  Jayl ;  and 

then 


of  the  Gentleman  Inflru6fed.      115 

then  condemns  him  to  weeping  and  gnafhing  of  Teeth. 
Now  This  poor  Wretch  was  neither  Thief  nor  Murder- 
er; he  neither  wafted  his  Lord's  Goods,  nor  alienated 
'em.  It's  true,  he  laid  not  out  the  Money  to  Intereft  j 
but  he  fecur'd  the  Principal:  And  if  he  did  no  Good,  he 
was  cliarg'd  with  no  Harm.  Notwithftanding  this  Plea 
brought  him  not  off;  he  was  found  guilty  of  Negli- 
gence and  Idlenefs,  and  received  both  Sentence  and  Pu- 
nifliment. 

So  that,  Ladies,  the  very  Ground  of  your  Security  was 
the  Caufe  of  his  Damnation.  He  was  unprofitable,  but 
not  wicked ;  he  encreas'd  not  his  Mafter's  Stock,  nor  did 
he  embezzle  it.  You  pretend  you  do  no  Harm,  but 
confefs  you  do  no  Good  ;  you  do  not  ferve  God,  and  will 
not  offend  him.  If  this  Pretence  did  not  proteft  the  Stew- 
ard, nor  ftave  oft'  the  Sentence,  why  {hall  it  plead  harder 
for  you  ;  unlefs  perchance  the  Female  Sex  has  Right 
to  more  Indulgence  than  the  Male ;  or  that  God  will 
have  regard  to  Qiiality ;  or  that  the  Court  lies  out  of  the 
Verge  of  his  Jurifdidlion?' 

But  in  good  earneft.  Ladies,  Do  you  no  Harm"^.  Is  it 
not  Harm  to  wander  from  the  Cradle  to  the  Coffin  in  a 
Labyrinth  of  Amufements,  either  vain  or  childifh  ?  Is  it 
no  Harm  to  tire  your  felf  upon  the  Concerns  of  this  World, 
without  fpending  one  Thought  upon  the  Affairs  of  the 
other?  Is  it  not  Harm  to  play  the  Prodigals,  to  lavifh 
thofe  precious  Moments  of  Time  thatcompofe  your  Lives 
upon  Balls,  Masks,  and  Drefling  ?  Perchance  Education 
has  given  you  falfe  Notions  of  Time;  you  are  ignorant 
of  its  Value  ;  you  are  perchance  npter  to  look  upon  it  as 
a  Burthen,  than  a  Favour,  as  a  Drug  that  lies  upon  your 
Hands,  than  aTreafure.     Suffer  me  to  difabufe  you. 

Nothing  is  more  valuable,  nothing  more  precious  than 
Time,  every  Moment  is  worth  an  Eternity ;  the  Blifs  of 
the  Saints  is  but  the  Reward  of  Time  well  husbanded  ; 
and  the  Torments  of  the  Damned  are  the  difmal  Effeds 
of  Time  mifufed.  Dd"  you  compreh.end  the  value  of 
Grace,  or  of  the  beatifical  Vifion  ?  This  Grace,  this  bea- 
tifical Vifion  are  the  Price  of  Time.  The  danmed  Souls 
can  never  foften  God's  Juftice;  tho'  they  weep  eternally  ; 
tho'  they  groan  eternally  under  the  Weight  of  his  Seve- 
rity ;  and  yet  in  one  Moment  of  Time  afliftcd  by  his 
Grace  we  may  cancel  the  moft  flaming  Sins,  we  may  re- 
I  i  new 


ii6    A  Supplement  to  thejirji Part 

new  our  Claim  to  Heaven,  and  return  to  his  Favour; 
Happinefs  thereibre  and  Mifery,  and  both  eternal,  de- 
pend on  Time.  Yet  you  do  no  Harm  v^'hen  you  mifpend 
it,  nay,  when  you  labour  more  to  milapply  it,  than  God 
requires  to  manage  it  to  Advantage. 

How  many  Wretches  fulter  in  Flames  without  Pity, or 
Interruption?  And  yet  they  burn  for  the  very  Principle 
you  maintain,  that  it's  no  Harm  to  trifle  away  Time. 
But,  Ladies,  Flames  have  reftored 'em  to  their  Wits,  and 
brought  them  to  ajuft  Acknowledgment  of  their  Error  : 
They  deplore  their  Miftake  with  fruitlefs  Tears,  and 
draw  from  their  late  Repentance  no  lenitive  but  Defpair, 
They  cry  louder  for  Time,  than  the  unhappy  Dives  for 
Water,  and  prize  a  Moment  above  the  Waves  of  the 
Ocean.  Would  God  expofe  Time  to  fale,the  Number 
of  Chapmen  would  equal  that  of  the  Reprobates.  How 
many  Empires  would  Alexander^  Ccefar,  and  Mejfaline 
give  up  for  one  Hour?  But,  alas,  ten  thoufand  Worlds 
will  not  purchafe  a  iingle  Moment.  Is  it  then  no  Harm 
to  faunter  away  our  Lives,  and  like  Children,  duck  and 
drake  away  a  Treafure  able  to  buy  Paradife  ?  In  fine,  La- 
dies, our  Death-bed  Wifhes  that  fue  with  fuch  an  Energy 
for  a  Moment's  Reprieve  demonilrate  Time  has  a  real 
Value:  For  why  fhould  it  appear  fo  defirable,  when  the 
moll  gaudy  Vanities  of  the  World  raife  Contempt. 

Emil.  So,  Eufeb'tHs  has  pronounced  our  Dooms ;  we 
are  already  damned  in  Effigy,  nay,  and  all  Mankind  in 
Emblem  and  Hieroglyphick.  Are  you  not  afraid,  Sir,  of 
being  torn  to  Pieces  by  the  Street  Infantry?  Do  you  feel 
no  Pangs  of  Compundlion  for  fuch  Anti-chriftian  Afler- 
tions  ?  I  could  no  more  fleep  with  fuch  a  weighty  Sin  up- 
on my  Confcience,  than  I  could  breathe  fifty  Fathom 
under  Water.  What,  nothing  but  Hell  and  Damnation 
for  poor  Mortals  after  a  plentiful  Redemption  ?  But  I 
fuppofe  you  ftand  off  in  Generals,  and  comprehend  us 
not  in  your  Sentence  ;  for,  I  thank  God,  I  always  have 
an  Eye  on  the  main  Chance  j  I  am  at  Peace  within,  and 
take  Account  of  my  Time. 

Etijeb.  Miftake  me  not,  Judicature  is  the  Flower  of 
God's  Prerogative,  he  alone  crowns  the  Vertue  of  the 
Righteous,  and  punifhes  the  Crimes  of  the  Ungodly.  I 
have  not  furvey'd  the  Region  of  Darknefs,  nor  perus'd 
the  ^egifter  of  Lucifer^  fo  that  I  am  ignorant  of  the 

Number 


of  the  Gentleman  hflru&ed.      1 1 7 

Number  of  the  unfortunate,  and  unacquainted  with  their 
Perfons;  yet  certainly  if  Scripture  be  the  Rule  of  Good 
and  Evil,  if  it  points  at  the  Road  that  leads  to  Death, 
without  ftraining  the  Law  of  Charity,  I  may  pronounce 
the  greateft  part  of  our  Beans  and  Bells  are  in  a  fair  way 
to  Damnation.     For  who  fteers  by  that  Compafs  ?  Who 
follows  that  Guide  ?  Nay,  in  Defiance  of  Self-Intereft, 
Revelation  andReafon  too,  we  cut  upon  all  the  Maxims 
oftheGofpel,  as  if  it  were  to  be  underftood  backwards, 
and  that  Vice  ftood  for  Vertue,  Vertue  for  Vice,   and 
Hell  for  Heaven.     But  it  feems  your  Club  is  not  like  o- 
ther  People;  your  Confciences  are  ferene  without  Storm 
or  Cloud,   you  enjoy  within  a  fweet  Spring,  a  gentle 
Calm,  as  if  the  Halcyons  had  built  their  Nefts  in  your 
very  Souls.     You  make  not  a  falfe  Step  from  January  to 
December^  every   Thought  is  feraphick,  every  Motion 
more  than  Chriftian,  every  Moment  of  time  is  managed 
with  Thought  and  Confideration.    It's  pity  Canonizations 
are  out  of  Fafhion  in  England^  you  might  elfe  ftand  fair 
for  a  place  in  the  -Calendar.     But  in  good  earnefl:  is  your 
Conduit  fo  irreproachable?    Do  you   allow  fo    much 
Time  to  God  ?  So  little  to  Vanity  ?  Let  us  try,  if  you 
pleafe,  this  Point  by  plain  Fa6l :  It  deferves  Attention. 

Pray  then,  Ladies,  what  is  the  grand  Occupation  of  the 
Day  ?  Between  eight  and  nine  in  comes  my  Lady's  Wo- 
man, to  range  in  Order  and  Method  all  the  little  Trinkets 
of  the  Toilet.  She  chuckles  together  a  whole  Covy  of 
Eflences  and  Perfumes,  fhe  commands  Combs  to  their 
Pofts,  Pomatums  to  theirs,  Waflies  alamode  to  theirs. 
Here  is  Contrivance  in  Folly,  and  Con fufion  in* Order. 
One  would  take  a  Drefling-room  for  a  Toy-fhop,  or  a 
Mercery  of  fmall  Ware.  Nay,  I  have  heard  it  comparM 
to  an  Army  in  Array^  for  the  little  Knicknacks  ftand  in  a 
military  Pofture  ;  fome  are  divided  into  Battalions ;  o- 
thersinto  Squadrons;  fome  make  up  the  left,  fome  the 
right  Wing  •,  and  I  have  feen  a  Corps  de  reserve  upon 
a  Side-board  ready  for  fudden  Occafions.  A  French 
Glafs  alamode  commands  in  the  Corps  de  bataille ;  at 
his  Beck  the  Patch-boxes  march,  Powders  and  Eflences 
advance,  Combs  enter  upon  Duty  ;  and  then  on  a  fud- 
den, halt,  and  now  my  Lady  makes  her  intrado^  and 
begins  the  great  Work  of  the  Day.  She  confults  her  O- 
racle,  the  Glafs,  upon  the  State  of  the  Health  and  Beauty ; 
I  3  What 


ii8      A  Supplement  to  the  firjl  Part 

What  Change  fince  laft  Night,  Time  has  wrought  in 
her  Complexion,  whether  it  carries  on  its  Approaches 
with  Speed ;  or  whether  it  draws  near  the  Glacis,  and 
when  probably  it  may  mafter  the  Out-workt  ? 

And  now  her  Ladyfhip  brandiflies  the  Combs,  and  the 
Powders  raife  Clouds  in  the  Apartment.  She  trims  up 
the  Commode,  {he  places  it  ten  times,  unplaces  it  as  often 
without  being  fo  fortunate  as  to  hit  upon  the  critical 
Point.  She  models  it  to  all  Syftems,  but  is  pleas'd  with 
none.  For  you  muft  know,  fome  Ladies  fancy  a  vertical, 
others  an  horizontal  Situation  j  others  Drefs  l^y  the  Nor- 
thern Latitude,  and  others  lower  its  Point  to  forty-five 
Degrees.  At  length  fhe  comes  to  the  Patches:  Here  is 
plea  for  Fancy,  and  room  for  Invention,  no  wonder 
then  if  the  Operation  takes  up  Time,  and  calls  for  Study 
and  Refle6tion ;  it's  hard  to  refolve  upon  the  Number, 
harder  upon  the  Size,  and  much  more  eafy  to  billet  an 
Army,  than  to  affign  each  Patch  its  proper  Station. 
Twelve  ftrikes  before  her  Cheeks  are  inlaid,  and  her  Face 
be  checker'd  alamnde.  And  when  fhe  has  baited  the 
Chambermaid,  and  ftroaked  her  Lap-dog,  in  comes  Din- 
ner ;  down  file  fits,  not  to  eat,  but  to  fret ;  one  Difh  is  too 
high-feafon'd,  another  too  low;  this  is  too  fvveet,  that 
too  four ;  the  Pigeons  are  too  lean,  the  Pullets  too  fat ; 
fince  her  Levee ^  fhe  only  named  God,  when  fhe  told  the 
Cook,  God  fends  Meat,  and  the  Dei'tl  fends  Cooks.  Here 
is  the  great  Concern  of  the  Morning,  this  takes  Madam's 
Thoughts,  this  runs  away  with  her  Care,  and  fweeps  a- 
way  with  one  half  of  the  Day.  Yet  fhe  does  fio  Harm^ 
fhe  is  thrifty  of  Time,  fhe  puts  it  to  Account,  thefe 
Hours,  no  doubt,  are  v/ifely  em  ploy 'd  ;  they  are  laid  out 
to  Advantage,  and  will  fruftify  to  a  Aiiracle. 

But  now  the  Evening  Employment  calls  upon  her.She 
ileps  into  the  Coach,  drives  to  the  Exchange  in  the 
Strand  \  from  thence  to  Chenffide,  and  at  her  Return 
ftrikes  in  at  Pater-nofterRow.  -In  one  Place  fhe  learns  new 
Fafhions,  here  fhe  cheapens  Silks,  there  China  Difhes, 
here  Perfumes,  there  Pomatums.  She  coaches  the  Ware, 
and  leaves  a  Billet  for  the  Reck'ning.  Being  cleared  of 
Bufinefs,  fhe's  fit  for  Diverfion.  She  polls  therefore  to  the 
Park,  where  flie  fuppofes  every  one  admires  her.  Some 
indeed  are  fmitten  with  her  Drapery,  whilft  others  pity 
her  Folly  ;  but  all  agree,  her  Vanity  outweighs  her  Judg- 

mcjit, 


of  the  Gentleman   hftru^fed.     up 

ment,  that  fhe  is  richer  without  than  within,  and  that  her 
Wit  fparkles  lels  than  her  glorious  Equ;page.  She  makes 
the  Round,  enquires  who  is  come  to  Town  ;  who  has 
ilipp'd  aiide  into  the  Country  ;  who  is  lately  married ; 
who  lies  in  ,  and  having  diichargcd  her  CommifTion, 
and  delivered  her  Errand,  flie  rowls  Heme  by  the  P!ay- 
houl'ej  unlefs  a  Ball  or  a  iecret  AflignationdelJre  herPre- 
lence.  This  is  a  Lady's  Life  in  Epiioine,  her  Employ- 
ment m  Short-hand.  One  Day's  Work  is  the  Copy  of  an- 
other, and  one  Year  fliews  the  Praftice  of  forty. 

And  now.  Ladies,  which  A(ll:ion  of  the  Day  bids  fair  for 
Heaven?  which  calms  your  Conicience,  and  puts  you  out 
of  Apprehenfion  of  a  final  JViifcarriage  ?  which  diflin- 
guifhes  the  Chriftian  from  the  Pagan  ?  The  Heirof  Para- 
dife  from  the  Child  of  Lucifer  ?  I  fancy  the  Chinefe 
Dames,  who  are  Strangers  to  the  Joys  and  Terrors  of 
the  other  World,  take  the  Schem.e  of  their  Lives  from 
the  Plan  of  yours.  They  work  by  your  Sample,  and 
copy  the  European  Original.  They  while  away  their 
time  upon  Trifles ;  they  drefs  and  undrefsas  you  do;  they 
idolize  a  little  Body,  that  once  muft  fall  in  the  Grave, 
and  repair  with  Artifice  the  Ravage  of  the  Age  ;  they 
fteer  by  the  Impulfe  of  Senfe,  and  follow  the  Current  of 
Inclination.  Eafe  is  the  Objedl:  of  their  Wiflies,  and 
Vertue  of  their  Averfion.  If  the  Lives  of  Infidels  and 
Chriilians  carry  fuch  a  Refemblance,  I  fear  their  Ends 
will  bear  the  fame  Proportion ;  for  how  can  they  march 
on  the  fame  Road,  and  not  arrive  at  thefome  Term  ? 

Luc.  Here  is  a  Libel  upon  the  Sex,  and  theCharafler 
is  obliging;  but  the  Picture  is  taken  from  Imagination, 
not  from  Life.  It's  a  Dafli  at  Random  ;  an  Efiay  of  Wit 
to  fport  the  Faculty,  and  to  breathe  the  Spleen.  I  per- 
ceive you  feldom  frequent  the  Church  j  for  did  you 
vouch iafe  to  make  an  Appearance  there  on  the  Lord's 
Day,  you  would  fee  the  Ladies  in  the  Pews,  as  well  as 
in  the  Park,  or  in  the  Boxes. 

Eiifeb.  I  beg  your  Pardon,  I  had  almoll  forgot  the 
Sabbath  Occupation.  Sunday  is  a  Day  of  Reft,  and  fo 
Ladies  ftiand  religioufly  to  its  Primitive  Inftltution,  /'.  e. 
they  confecrate  it  to  Sleep  and  Repofe  ;  it's  a  Day  of 
Vacation  too,  and  by  Confequence  the  moft  proper  Sea- 
fon  for  Phyfick.  I  knew  a  Lady  fick  of  a  chronical  Di- 
ftemper,  that  puzzled  the  Dodlor,  and  threw  the  Apothe- 
I  4  ca;:v 


'i2o    A  Supplement  to  the  firfl  Vart 

cary  into  Fits  of  Amazement,  Its  Symptoms  were  extra- 
ordinary, and  its  Accidents  without  Prefident ;  flie  was 
in  a  perfed  State  of  Health  and  Vigour  all  the  Week, 
and  always  diicompos'd  on  the  Lord's  Day  ;  nay,  I  was 
inform'd  fhe  difcern'd  by  the  Beat  of  the  Pulfe,  a  Feaft 
from  a  Feria,  without  the  Help  o[ poor  Robin.  But  pray, 
Madam,  what  Motive  leads  you  to  Church?  Sometimes 
you  appear  to  teach,  fometimes  to  learn  new  Fafliions ; 
perchance  alfo  you  have  fail'd  in  the  return  of  a  Vifit, 
and  nothing  but  an  Apology  in  a  holy  Place  can  atone 
for  the  Breach  of  a  Ceremony  fo  facred.  I  take  it  for 
granted  you  difclaim  the  Quality  of  a  Suppliant  ;  why 
elfe  do  you  difdain  the  Pofture  ?  Kneeling  is  indeed  im- 
proper, I  mean  impertinent,  for  thofe  who  have  no  In- 
clination to  pray  :  Nay,  I  fufpe6l,  without  the  Confent 
of  Queen  and  Parliament,  you  have  enaded  to  your 
felves  the  prophane  Part  of  Z)<?r/Kj's  Law,  of  making  no 
petition  to  God. 

Tell  mc  ingenuoufly,  do  you  not  enter  into  the  Church 
as  Caligula  did  into  the  Temple,  not  to  pray,  but  to  re- 
ceive Homage  ?  Do  you  not  fancy  a  Place  on  the  Altar 
becomes  your  Ladyfhips  better  than  Silver  Candleflicks 
or  Bafons  ?  I  grant  upon  Occalions  the  Fame  of  a  cele- 
brated Preacher  may  decoy  you  into  the  Sanduary,  and 
fo  Curiofity  fubdues  Sloth,  and  one  Vice  makes  room 
for  another ;  but  then  his  Rhetorick  runs  away  with 
your  Attention,  not  his  Morality ;  you  hearken  to  criti- 
cife  or  applaud,  not  to  learn.  In  fine,  you  flock  to  the 
Pulpit  as  the  Romans  did  to  their  Roftra^  to  hear  Ora- 
tory, and  to  fee  Declamation,  and  thus  you  coach  back 
to  ycur  Lodgings.  All  thefe  Sins  you  carry'd  to  the  Ser- 
mon, belides  a  fufficient  Cargo  you  overtook  in  the 
Streets,  or  pick'd  up  in  the  Congregation. 

And  as  in  the  Morning  you  fat  down  to  laugh  and  chat 
with  your  Pew-fellow.T;  fo  after  Dinner  with  the  Hea- 
thenifli  Jews,  you  rife  to  Flay.,  the  Table-cloth  is  removed 
to  make  Place  for  the  Cards.  Did  Gaming  keep  within 
the  Pale  of  a  meer  Recreation,  perchance  a  Set  after  the 
Evening  Service  might  be  tolerated.  But,  alas!  Liberti- 
nifm  and  Avarice  have  given  it  the  Freedom  of  theCity  ; 
it'sereded  into  a  Company  as  well  as  the  Society  of  Tay- 
lors and  Haberdafhers.  In  a  Word, .'tis  become  a  Calling; 
nay,  a  laborious  and  fervile  one  too.     Ladies  toil   and 

druda;e 


of  the  Gentlemak  hftru^fed.      121 

drudge  at  it  Day  and  Night,  they  give  up  their  Privilege 
TO  that  Remiflion.    Lav/s,  Ipoth  human  and  divine,  have 
provided  for  the  bafeft  Mechanicks :  The  very  Sabbath 
is  no  Day  of  Reft  and  Relaxation  to  them  ;  this  Trade 
goes  on,  when  all  other  Shops  arc  (hut,  and,  to  confute 
the  common  Excufe,  wedo  »o Harm^  fometimesatone 
fitting  a    Child's  Portion  is  truck'd  for  a  fwing  on  the 
Rack,  which  Lunaticks  are  pleas'd  to  call  Diverfion. 
Lac.  Well,  and  where  is  the  Harm  in  all  this? 
Eufeb.  Nay,  Madam,  if  this  Failure  be  little  in  your 
Opinion,  I  fear  your  Gonfcience  will  appear  lefs.     What 
Harm  to  prophane  the  Church  and  the  Sabbath  too  ? 
Why,  it's  a  Complication  of  Sacrilege  and  Infult  ;  and 
do  thefe  Crimes  ftand  for  Cyphers  in  your  Cafuiftry  ?  They 
ilrike  direftly  at  your  Maker,  and  almoft  imply  Atheifrn 
by  Illation ;  they  wound  your  Neighbour  allb  by  Re- 
flexion, and  clafh  with  Jultice  and  Nature.     For  is  not 
Juftice  violated,  and  Nature  outraged,  when  you  card 
or  dice  away  a  Labourer's  Salary,  or  a  Child's  Portion  ? 
tinlefs  perchance  our  £»i^///^  Proverb,  the  better  Day  the 
better  Deed,  fandifies  the  Adlion.     Well,  I  perceive  the 
Sex  is  impeccable,  unlefs  it  vaults  over  the  two  Tables 
of  the  Decalogue  together,  or  fwallows  Sins  like  Car- 
ro way- Comfits,  by  the  Dozen. 

The  Ladies  fate  all  this  while  upon  the  Tenters,  and 
receiv'd  the  Mercurial,  as  they  fwallow  Pills,  with  wry 
Faces  in  Abundance ;  they  broke  off  the  Homily  a  hun- 
dred times,  and  as  often  fprinkled  the  DifcourfewithEx- 
poftulation,  their  Paffion  flow'd  too  faft  to  be  pent  in  ; 
they  were  neither  able  to  keep  Silence,  nor  to  fpeak  to  the 
Purpofe  ;  and  Anger  that  loos'd  their  Tongue,  fettered 
their  Reafon.  But  Etifebius  endeavoured  to  footh  'em 
into  fome  Terms  of  Moderation  ;  hedefir'd  their  Atten- 
tion for  a  Moment,  with  Aflurance  they  fhould  have  time 
to  interpofe :  He  protefted  that  he  intended  Inftrudlion, 
not  Satyr,  that  he  honoured  the  Sex,  but  fawn'd  not  on 
its  Vices.  But  the  Comment  upon  their  .?/<w^^y  Behavi- 
our fpoil'd  all,  he  might  as  well  have  reafon'd  down  a 
Hurricane,  or  argued  the  cholerick  Ocean  into  a  Calm, 
^s  complement  thefe  Females  into  Silence.  Their  Re- 
fentment  had  taken  Fiie,  and  all  their  Paffion  boil'd  over 
with  Noife  and  Tumult.  In  fine.  Impatience  ftept  into 
the  Coach-box,  and  drove  their  Ladyfhips  beyond  the 

Bounda 


122     A  Supplement  to  the  Jirfl  Fart 

Bounds  of  Decency.  Eufebius  had  read  that  Non-refift- 
ance  tames  Fury,  whilft  Oppofition  made  it  ;  that,  hke 
capricious  Horfes,  it  runs  fafter  when  you  draw  in,  than 
when  you  loofe  the  Reins :  He  therefore  gave  Way  to 
their  Sallies,  and  receiv'd  fome  Dilcharges  of  Chafe- 
Shot.  At  length  the  Humour  was  drain'd,  and  the  Tem- 
pelt  ended  in  Serenity.  And,  as  Topers  drink  themlelves 
Ibber,  fo  thefe  Ladies  talked  away  Impatience,  andvex'd 
themfelves  into  a  good  Humourl 

The  Storm  being  over.  Ladies,  continued  Eufebius, 
Can  fuch  a  Conduct  ftand  with  the  tielicf  of  an  Eterni- 
ty ?  Can  Women  throw  Time  away  with  fo  little  Cau- 
tion, who  are  perfuaded  their  All  depends  upon  the  Ma- 
nagement of  it?  Can  they  put  any  Strefs  upon  the  Ex- 
pectation of  future  Happineis,  who  perch  with  fo  much 
Eagernefs  upon  prefent  Satisfailions?  You  would  do 
well,  to  face  your  Prailice  with  your  Profeffion;  to  ba- 
lance what  you  receive  in  Hand,  with  what  you  expedt 
inReverfion;  to  run  up  to  your  Baptifm,  and  recoiled: 
your  firft  Engagement;  for  the  World  is  a  bewitching 
Thing,  and  without  Care  it  will  bubble  us,  and  put  upon 
us  with  Trifles,  and  when  once  it  has  got  the  Afcendant, 
'twill  foment  Ignorance  for  an  Excufe  of  Liberty  ;  'twill 
bribe  a  Man's  Confcience,  and  Subpcsna  Reaion  againft 
himfelf :  For  certainly  its  Promifes  charm  Senfe,  and  a 
prefent  Poil'effion  tranfports  Nature  ;  but  you  fhoulJ  re- 
member that  Ratsbane  is  made  with  Sugar,  and  that  the 
moft  fvveet  Poiibn  is  generally  the  moft  fwift  and  mortal. 
Let  therefore  Health  take  Place  of  Pleafure,  and  fcorn  to 
die  of  the  childifh  Difeale  of  Liquoriflinefs. 

£2(/I4/?a  had  continued,  but  Ne(wde>''s  Arrival  put  a 
Stop  to  his  Difcourfe.  He  came  to  lead  him  to  Theoma- 
chus^  the  Athcift,  and  was  furprized  to  fee  his  Friend  in 
fo  extraordinary  an  Engagement.  I  am  forry,  faid  he, 
to  interrupt  your  Converl'ation,  and  muft  make  a  fmall 
Apology  for  my  Incivility.  But  indeed  I  had  rather  be 
guilty  of  the  Breach  of  Behaviour,  than  of  my  Word.  I 
promis'd  hift  Night  to  condud  you  to  your  Adverfary ; 
the  Time  draws  near,  and  he  expeds  your  Appearance. 

Eufeb.  We  Men  of  Arms  are  expos'd  to  Surprizes.  I 
fell  this  Morning  into  an  unexpected  Ambufcade,  and 
found  my  Quarters  ftorm'd,  before  I  received  any  Intel- 
ligence of  an  Enemy.     In  a  fhort  time  I  hope  to  difen- 

gage 


of  the 


Gentleman   Injlnt^ied.     1 1 3 


::»-age  my  felf,  and  to  compofe  the  Buiinefs  a  /'  amiable^ 
we  muit  fue  Tkeomachus  Ibr  a  Ceflation  of  Arms  till  to 
Morrow  ;  and  then  we'll  open  the  Campaign.  Neander 
lent  his  Man  with  a  Letter  to  Theomachus^  who  acqui- 
eiced  to  the  Propolal. 

In  the  mean  Time,  Emilia  turning  herfelf  to  Neander ^ 
fpoke  thus.  Though  J  have  not  had  the  Honour  of  your 
Acquaintance,  I  am  glad  of  your  Arrival.  Your  Mein 
tells  your  Birth,  and  methinks  I  read  good  Nature  in 
your  Forehead.  Kufehim  has  trefpafs'd  upon  our  Patience, 
he  has  handled  Quality  with  the  Rudenels  of  a  Carman, 
and  flouriflied  upon  the  Condud  of  the  Sex  with  Inde- 
cency of  Application,  and  the  utmoft  Strains  of  Clowne- 
ry. Nay,  he  throws  us  out  of  Senfe,  and  will  not  allow 
us  any  Tindure  of  Morality.  Indeed  his  Civility  and 
Judgment  are  both  of  a  Size  :  Providence  feems  to  have 
lent  you  to  our  Refcue. 

Nean.  Madam,  Her  Majefty  has  not  honoured  me 
with  the  Dignity  of  Knighthood,  and  fo  I  lie  under  no 
particular  Obligation  to  defend  diftrefs'd  Damfels.  How- 
ever your  Quality  commands  my  Aflillance,  and  your 
Beauty  my  Efteem. 

The  Compliment  took  to  Admiration  ;  Joy  poded 
through  every  Joint,  and  charmed  the  Lady  into  a  plea- 
fing  Humour,  She  who  before  fpilt  Gall  and  Vinegar, 
by  a  ftrange  Metamorphofis  became  all  Honey,  all  Su- 
gar. She  had  feen  Forty,  fo  that  her  Complexion  was 
in  its  Wain,  her  Charms  had  ftepp'd  over  the  Meridian, 
and  touch'd  Ibme  Points  of  the  iVeft :  Yet  fhe  buoy'd 
up  the  Decays  of  Nature  by  the  Support  of  Art,  and 
flung  fuch  a  comely  Varnifli  on  thefe  Breaches  time  had 
made,  that  like  Zeuxis  (he  miflook  Life  for  Impollure, 
the  Effedls  of  her  Vanity  for  the  Work  of  her  Creator, 
and  the  Relicts  of  Age  for  Beauty.  Nay,  fhe  ventur'd 
once  to  confefs  in  good  Company,  fifty  If  ears  weigh'd 
lefs  on  her  Shoulders,  than  thirty  on  her  Face.  Yes,  faid 
fhe,  whilft  my  Cheeks  wear  June,  let  my  Hair  put  on 
Dtcemi^er. 

A  Compliment  therefore  fo  apropos,  fo  agreeable  to  her 
Inclination,  call  the  Lady  in  a  Trance,  and  laid  all  Re- 
fentment  allcep.  She  became  lefs  untradlable  and  more 
docile,  fhe  delired  to  learn  not  to  difpute,  but  rather  to 
amend  her  paft  Condud:  than  to  defend  it:  In  EfFeft  fhe 
heard  Eufebins  with  Attention.  This 


124    -^  Supplement  to  the  Jirfl  Fart 

This  fudden  Change  hath  often  made  me  conclude, 
that  Lenitives  are  more  proper  for  Women's  Conftitutions 
than  Corrofives.  They  may  be  footh'd  into  their  Duty, 
but  not  he6tored.  A  kind  Word  is  more  perfuafive  with 
them,  than  a  llrong  Reafon. 

After  fome  Recollection  Emilia  return'd  Neavider  a 
Complement  for  his ;  and  forgot  not  to  infinuate  the  Va- 
lue ihe  put  upon  hi^  Efteem.  Then  turning  loEujebiusy 
Sir,  faid  flie,  I  undertake  not  the  Defence  of  Ladies: 
None  are  without  their  Failings,  and  fome  not  without 
Crimes :  And  I  confefs  that  the  Number  of  thofe  is  lefs 
who  live  up  to  their  Profeffion,  than  of  thofe  who  difho- 
nour  it.  Some  fquare  their  Condu6l  rather  by  the  Gof- 
pelof  Senfe,  than  of  St.  Matthew  :  And  others  are  better 
vers'd  in  the  Art  of  drefling  than  of  living  well.  But  why 
muft  the  General  be  lafli'd  for  the  Faults  of  Particulars  ? 
""Let  the  Corredfion  and  the  Diforder  go  together,  and 
let  thole  who  carry  off  the  Pleafure  of  a  bad  A6lion  feel 
the  Punifhment.  Mufl:  Lucretm  be  hooted  at  for  a  Pro- 
ftitute.  becdufe  MeJJ'alme  call:  off  Shame?  Muft  Sufanna 
beat  Hemp  in  the  antient  Palace  of  Bridewell^  becaufe 
Hellen  left  Menelaus  for  a  Gallant?  Or  Judtth  ftand  for 
a  Fury,  becaufe  yrz'^f^el  deferved  the  Title  ?  I  hope  Wefl- 
mififter-Hall  Jul;  ice  is  lel's  partial  than  yours,  and  the  Ar- 
refts  of  our  Judges  better  complexioned.  We  are  all, 
as  I  have  lai  i,  liable  to  Mifcarriage;  the  belt  Princi- 
pled trip  fometimes:  For  Nature  provoked  by  Senfe,  and 
rouzed  up  by  Temptation,  is  apt  to  rebel  againft  Princi- 
ple. And  then  the  odds  are  vail  on  Nature's  Side. 
What  Wonder  if  Ladies  train'd  up  in  the  Art  of  Beha- 
viour overlook  the  Precep's  of  Morality,  and  perluade 
People  by  their  Pra<Stice  they  are  better  acquamted  with 
the  Civil  Virtues  of  the  Court,  than  the  theological  of 
the  Gofpel. 

Lzic.  Madam,  thefe  Satyrs  rather  flow  from  Paflion 
than  Judgment;  and  I  always  revenge  my  felfon  fuch 
Toys  with  Silence;  Contempt  blunts  the  Edge  of  a  keen 
Lampoon  better  thrm  Reafon,  and  no  Reply  difappoints 
the  Author,  and  throws  him  off  the  Hinges.  In  a  Word, 
Etifebius^s  Railing  is  no  credible  Qualification,  it's  a  cer- 
tain Symptom  of  adefperatc  C^ufe-  For  who  flings  Dirt 
that  has  another  Weapon  at  Command  ? 

Eufek. 


of  the  Gentlemak  Inflru6fed.      125 

Enfeb.  God  forbid  I  fhould  follow  thofe  Sparks,  who' 
having  been  the  Dupes  of  one  Woman,  impeach  the  whole 
Sex  as  Complices  of  their  Difappointment.  No,  no;  if 
fome  Women  deferve  Blame,  others  cannot  be  prais'd  too' 
much:  Their  Vertues  are  above  Panegyrick,  and  their 
Merits  above  the  Flight  of  Eloquence  or  Hyperbole. 

Who  can  read  the  Book  of  j^^^/?/;^  without  Admiration 
and  Tranfport  ?  This  great  Lady  feem'd  to  be  fram'd  a- 
bov4  the  Spheres  by  the  Hands  of  Angels.  Valour  e- 
quallcd  her  Beauty,  and  Vertue  topp'd  both.  She  had 
nothing  feminine  but  the  Sex  :  Never  was  Grace  better 
plac'd  than  on  her  Brow;  it  flafh'd  a  Aiixture  of  Charms 
and  Terror;  (he  darted  Love,  and  commanded  Re- 
fpeft:  She  attack'd  a  proud  Conqueror  at  the  Head  of  a 
vidorious  Army,  and  fubdu'd  his  Heart  with  her  Face, 
to  take  off  his  Head  with  his  own  Sword.  In  fine,  this 
brave  Amazon  fiU'd  the  Ajfyrian  Camp  with  Confufion, 
and  Bethnlia  with  Triumph.  She  ftopt  the  Conquefts  of 
an  ambitious  Prince,  and  the  ruin  of  an  innocent  City. 

What  fliall  I  fay  of  the  great  St.  Catkarwe,  Wealth, 
Touih^  and  Be  mty  enter'd  into  a  triple  Alliance  againlt 
her  Vertue.  Hell  join'd  Force,  and  Idolatry  Cruelty  to 
the  Confederates  Yet  fhe  defeated  their  Defigns,  and 
rais'd  a  Trophy  to  her  Sex,  and  an  eternal  Monument  to 
her  Vertue  upon  their  Ruin,  for  fhe  overcame  the  Vani- 
ty of  Philolophers  with  her  Learning,  the  brutifh  Pallion 
of  an  amorous  Emperour  with  her  Chaility,  and  the 
Rage  of  Hangmen  with  her  Conftancy.  Flattery  could 
not  bend  her  Courage,  nor  W^heels  break  it :  She  liv'd  a 
Chriftian,  and  died  a  Martyr. 

St.  Ambrofe  feems  to  have  fpent  all  his  Rhetorick  upon 
St.  Agnc  ;  yet  his  Words  fall  fhort  of  her  Adions;  and 
this  Child  did  more  than  Eloquence  can  exprefs.  Her 
Piety  was  above  her  Age,  and  her  Vertue  above  Nature. 
The  Courage  of  this  young  Lady  over-matched  the  Forti- 
tude o\  Alexander^  and  few  Men  at  Threefcore  arriv'd 
at  that  Love  of  God  fhe  breath'd  at  Thirteen.  Ker  Bo- 
dy was  too  litrie  to  receive  the  Sword,  though  not  to 
overcome  it,  and  altno'  fhe  v/as  too  young  for  Torments, 
fhe  was  ripe  for  Vidtory.  The  Spectators  trembled  whilft 
fhe  flood  unconcern'd,  and  the  Executioner  that  gave  the 
Blow  fhew'd  more  Symptoms  of  r  ear,  than  f})e  that  re- 
ceiv'dit;  In  fine,  fhe  fell  in  the  Ccnibat,  and  v*'eni  off 

wiih 


126    A  Supplement  to  the  firft  Fart 

with  Vidtory :  For  as  St.  CyprlaK  notes,  tho'  Martyrs 
die,  tiiey  are  not  overcome,  and  they  are  invincible  be- 
caufe  they  brave  Death.  Vinci  mn pojfunt^  C5'  mori  pof- 
funt^  l^  koc  ipfo   ifivicli  fiiKt^  quia  mori  non  timent. 

The  v^^ife  Condudl  of  Clotilda  drove  Paganifm  out  of 
France^  and  rais'd  Churches  to  the  true  God  on  the  Ruinsf 
of  Polytheifm.  She  foftened  the  Obftinacy  of  her  Hus- 
band by  Inftru6lions,  and  polifhed  theRuffnefs  of  hiswar- 
hke  Vertues,  with  the  Pradtice  of  Morahty ;  and  at  laft 
brought  this  great  Prince  from  Paganifm,  and  the  whole 
Kingdom  to  Chriftianity.  Her menegi Ides  owes  his  Faith 
to  the  Piety  of  his  dear  Ingundes^  for  he  had  died  Arian, 
if  this  orthodox  Princefs  had  not  made  him  Cathohck. 
In  a  Word,  God  feems  to  have  train'd  up  Ladies  for  the 
Propagation  of  the  Gofpel.  A  Martha  and  a  Magdalen 
receiv'd  our  Saviour  into  their  Houfe,  before  they  let  him 
into  their  Hearts;  they  refreih'd  in  Bethany  his  tired 
Limbs  after  the  Fatigues  of  his  Fundlion  ;  and  when  one 
Apoftle  betray'd  him,  and  the  others  abandon'd  hira, 
Mary  foUow'd  our  Lord  to  Calvary ;  and  there  durft  min- 
gle her  innocent  Tears  with  the  facrilegious  Crucifige^s  of 
the  Rabble.  When  the  Apoftles  doubted  of  Chrift's  Re- 
furredion,  flie  proclaim'd  it  without  Hefitation;  and  in 
Recompence  of  her  Faith  Chrift  commiflion'd  her  to  af- 
fume  the  Office  of  Apoftle  to  the  very  Apoftles.  Where- 
ever  God  fpread  the  Gofpel,  he  provided  a  Lady  to  fur- 
ther it.  Helena  planted  the  Faith  in  the  Roman  Empire, 
Cccfarea  in  Perfia^  Gezela  in  Hungary,  Ogla  in  Rujjia^ 
Dambrtua  in  Polony^  and  Ethelhurga  m  Germany.  In  all 
thefe  glorious  Enterprizes  Ladies  led  the  Fan,  whilft  Men 
only  brought  up  the  Rear.  They  marched  only  upon  the 
Traces  of  thefe  great  Heroines ;  and  brought  through  the 
Barriers  of  Flefh  and  Blood,  when  they  had  paved  the 
Way  by  their  Example. 

Lideed  fuch  noble  Inftances  of  Vertue  are  lefs  nume- 
rous in  our  deprav'd  Age,  than  in  the  Days  of  our  Fore- 
fathers. Yet  many  Ladies  draw  their  Lives  by  their  an- 
tient  and  moft  admir'd  Originals ;  I  could  name  fome 
of  Figure  and  Title,  v/lio  live  in  this  World  like  People 
who  knew  they  muft  live  eternally  in  the  next.  They 
are  meek  without  Sheepidinefs,  affable  without  Afredta- 
tion,  referv'd  without  Diffimulation,  and  great  without 
Pride.     They  reconcile  the  Highnefs  of  their  Rank  with 

the 


of  the  Gentleman  InJiniSicd.      127 

the  humble  Principles  of  their  Profeflion,  they  difpute 
the  firft  Place  without  Vanity,  and  ftoop  to  the  loweft 
without  ttepping  an  Inch  below  their  Station.  Here  is 
Scripture  in  Pradice,  and  Perfedion  in  Life  and  A- 
(ftion. 

Nean.  Pray,  Ladies,  let  this  Panegyrick  atone  for  the 
Satyr ;  if  Eujebius  has  ftruck  the  Sex  with  one  Hand,  I 
allure  you,  he  ftroaks  with  the  other;  he  dafhes  the 
aigre  with  the  doux,  and  handfomely  mingles  Reproof 
with  Inftrudion  :  He  has  Balms  to  heal,  as  well  as  Gau- 
fticks  to  blifter ;  and  when  he  has  breath'd  a  Vein,  he 
clofes  the  Orifice  with  a  Swathing-band.  In  a  Word,  he 
has  knocked  his  own  Libel  on  the  Head,  and,  like  the 
Scorpion,  is  both  Pbifon  and  Antidote. 

Emtl.  Good  Nature  is  come  upon  him,  and  his  Breed- 
ing is  return'd  to  the  Cure  ;  he  fpeaks  now  like  a  Gen- 
tleman as  well  as  an  Orator,  and  I  promife  him  a  fine 
Audience,  if  he'll  preach  in  the  Pulpit  upon  the  fame 
Subject. 

Pray,  faid  Neander^  turning  himfelf  to  Eufehiui^  fa- 
vour us  with  the  Caufe  of  our  Ladies  Misfortune  ;  for 
I  call  it  a  Misfortune  to  deviate  from  the  Rule  of  their 
Profeflion,  and  to  fruftrate  the  very  End  of  their  Crea- 
tion. 

Eufeb.  It's  indeed  a  Misfortune,  but  almoft  univerfal  j 
it's  fpread  over  the  whole  World,  and  afteds  the  whole 
Species.  £/«/7/«  has  touched  the.  Caufe,  ill  Education: 
This  is  the  fatal  Source  of  their  Mifery,  the  true  Origin 
of  all  their  Failings.  Young  Ladies  are  brought  up  as 
if  God  created  'em  meerly  for  a  Seraglio,  and  that  their 
only  Bulinefs  was  to  charm  a  brutifh  -uliaK  :  One  would 
think  they  had  no  Souls,  there  is  fuch  a  Care  taken  of 
their  Bodies:  That  God  had  enafted  a  Salique  Law  as 
well  as  the  Fretjch,  and  excluded  the  Sex  from  the  Inhe- 
ritance of  Heaven. 

The  feven  Years  of  Inflmcy  are  fpent  meerly  in  the 
Entertainments  of  Senfe  ;  they  are  yet  fuppos'd  unfit  for 
Inftrudtion,  and  fo  their  little  Paflions  fprout  up  without 
Check,  and  increafe  without  Controul.  But,  under  Fa- 
vour, though  in  an  Age  lo  tender.  Children  cannot  be  dif- 
ciplineJ  by  Reafon,  they  may  by  Senfe:  For  I  cannot 
fee  why  their  Pafnons  are  not  \a  a  Capacity  of  being 
mpderated,  fo  foon  as  they  are  in  a  Condition  of  being 

excited, 


1^8     A  Supplement  to  the  firft  Part ' 

excited,  for  though  they  are  not  ripe  for  Precept,  the^ 
are  for  Fear,  Menace,  and  Garelies ;  and  thus  we  fee 
the  Nurfe  oftentimes  frowns  and  fawns  the  moft  fro- 
ward  Infants  into  a  gopd  Humour.  Some  Reftraint 
therefore  fhould  be  put  upon  their  diforderly  Propenfions 
even  in  this  Non-age  ;  for  if  you  fuppoie  a  Child  to  be 
a  Brute  at  Seven,  and  treat  him  meerly  as  fuch,  in  all 
Probabihty  you  will  make  him  continue  fo  till  Ten. 
But  alas!  this  timely  Care  is  quite  forgot;  little  Mifs, 
like  Mamma's  Lap-dog,  is  carefs'd  till  flie  is  fit  for  no- 
thing but  to  play  or  fleep.  The  little  Creature  muft 
fleep  on  Silk,  and  feed  on  potable  Gold.  Like  a  Bartho- 
lomew Poppet  fhe  is  wrapt  in  Gold  and  Silver,  and  pra- 
d:ices  Vanity  before  fhe  knows  the  Sin. 

So  foon  as  Reafon  begins  to  fparkle,  Mifs  is  led  into 
the  Dreffing-room ;  fhe  is  taught  the  great  Myftery  of 
the  Glafs,  and  all  the  important  Secrets  of  the  Toilet. 
Which  Wafli  clears  the  Complexion,  which  conferves, 
and  which  repairs  it.  Thefeare  heceflary  Prolegomena's, 
or  Prcecognita  to  the  Science.  A  Man  may  as  well  be  a 
perfeft  Mathematician  without  the  Knowledge  of  any^»- 
gle  or  Circle,  as  a  Lady  can  be  a  Graduate  in  the  Philo- 
fophy  of  the  Dreffing-room  without  thefe  Pojlulatums. 

For  Beauty  being  the  chief  Obje6l  of  a  Lady's  Care, 
fhe  muft  help  Nature  with  Art,  and  polifh  the  Work  of 
the  Omnipotent  with  a  French  Wafh;  fhe  muft  fence  it 
againft  the  Aflaults  of  Heats,  the  Excurfions  of  Pimples,! 
and  the  dangerous  Inroads  of  the  Small-Pox.  She  muft, 
in  fine,  expofe  her  Life  to  fave  her  Complexion.  And 
then  to  mould  her  Shape  to  the  Court-Standard,  what 
Pains  does  the  Mother  take  on  the  one  Side,  and  what 
a  Martyrdom  does  the  Child  undergo  on  the  other?  Her 
Feet  are  condemn'd  to  the  Scotch  Boot.,  and  her  Body 
to  the  Torment  of  the  Prefs.  She  is  pen'd  up  in  Iron, 
and  forc*d  to  trail  her  Perfon.  Befides,  the  poor  Crea- 
ture is  put  to  a  fliort  Allowance  of  cold  Water,  or  tied 
up  to  a  Pittance  of  Barley-broth,  and  muft  keep  a  con- 
tinual Lent  in  Spight  of  our  Statute-Book.  One  would 
think  Hunger  was  a  Propriety  of  the  Sex,  and  Fafting 
the  topping  Qualification  of  a  young  Lady  ;  her  Mother 
will  not  lufFer  her  to  grow  up  to  her  Joints,  nor  to  have 
all  the  Flefh  and  Bones  God  defign'd  her.  And  thus  (he 
is  rack'd  without  and  within  for  the  Satisfaction  oi  Ma- 
dam^ 


•df  the  Gentleman  Inftrucfed.      up 

tliim,  and  the  whole  Body  is  facrific'd  for  Shape  and  Co- 
lour 

And  now  Mils  leaves  the  Nurfery  to  ply  at  the  Dan- 
cing-School, and  to  finger  the  Guitarr,  or  the  Virginals; 
and  VI  hen  (lie  has  maftei'd  a  Minuet,  and  an  A\x  /i la- 
mode  ;  when  (he  can  pradlife  a  Brace  of  Grimaces,  and 
wave  the  Fan,  Good  God!  how  Mamma  Titters ;  (he 
is  now  fledg'd  for  the  World,  and  fets  out  for  Company. 
But  {he  mulL  beware  of  Refervednefs,  and  fence  againft 
a  Blufh  ;  for  thefe  are  Country  Vices,  Symptoms  of  Ru- 
flicity,  Ctimes  againll  Breeding,  and  the  Freedom  of 
the  Town.  She  is  :her-fore  taught  a  qualifying  Em- 
bcli.Oiment  in  the  Court  Dialed:,  call'd  /^Jfurance^  in  the 
Cl'inltian  Co>.pJeKce ;  and  thus  {he  mortgages  Modefty 
for  Behaviour,  and  alnioft  robs  the  Woman  to  equip  the 
Lady. 

In  the  mean  time.  Age  comes  upon  her,  Paffions  get 
a  Head,  Temptations  follow  without  Number,  Defires 
without  Bridle,  and  Vanity  without  Check.  She  is  a 
Stranger  to  the  Doftrine  of  Self-abnegation,  and  unpra- 
ftifed  in  the  A4ethods  of  Refiftance :  She  knows  not 
what  it  means  to  baulk  Appetite,  nor  to  fubdue  Senfe  to 
Reafon.  She  has  been  fet  up  by  the  Another  for  a  little 
Goddefs,  and  the  Family  adores  her  like  a  Houfhold  Di- 
vinity. The  Frowns  of  this  little  Creature  raifes  Storms, 
and  her  Smiles  fair  Weather;  you  mufl  no  more  crofs 
her,  than  offend  thofe  Stars,  that  in  the  Pagan  Theology 
rain'd  Tempefts  on  the  Heads  of  thoie  who  difdained  to 
falute  *em. 

What  a  Tragick- Comedy  did  I  behold  atmy  Lady  Z).*3 
I  thought  Folly  could  not  rife  to  fucli  a  Height  of  Extra- 
vagance. A'lifs  had  the  Misfortune  to  be  baulkt  in  a  chil- 
difn  Enterprize ;  the  Houf-)  rung  immediately  of  the  Dif- 
appointment,  all  was  in  an  Uproar,  all  in  a  Confulion: 
The  Violence  of  the  Paflion  calf  the  Child  into  a  Fever  : 
The  Mother's  Pulfe  beat  by  the  Daughter's,  and  becaufe 
Mifs  was  difcompos'd,  good  Mamma  took  Phyfick; 
and  to  carry  on  the  Farce,  the  Chambermaid  breath'd  a 
Vein.  I  fancy'd  my  felf  in  Z>af//?«'s  Ifland  of  Dreams,  and 
that  what  1  fa'v  was  Vilion  and  Revery.  For  how,  faid 
I,  can  Folly  fi-r.-nn  fo  far?  Bedlam  is  unacquainted  with 
fuch  Sc-enes  of  MaJnefs,  with  fuch  Flights  of  Farce  and 
Comedy:  Had  the  vixen  Humour  been  frighted  away 
-  K  with 


1 30    A  SuppLHMEKT  to  the  firft  Part 

with  a  little  Severity,  the  Fever  had  withdrawn,  and 
Birch  would  have  wrought  the  Cure  more  efficacioufly 
than  Phyfick,  or  Bleeding  by  Proxy.  Thus  Education 
adds  Biafs  to  Natyre,  and  makes  the  Temper  of  Chil- 
dren more  rugged,  inftead  of  polifhing  them. 

Belides,  Mifs  is  notonly  milled  by  the  Fawning  of  the 
Mother,  but  too  often  poifon'd  by  the  Example  of  her 
Maid.  If  Betty  hirs  a  Gallant,  fhe  is  the  Depofitary  of 
her  Secrets,  flie  enters  into  the  Intrigue,  and  is  inform'd 
of  the  Rife  and  Progrefs  of  the  Adventure.  Her  Apart- 
ment is  the  Place  of  Allignation  and  Rendevouz,  and  by 
Confequence'fhe  is  Witnefs  of  all  thofe  Follies  that  wait 
on  Love  between  Perfons,  whofe  Paflion  is  greater  than 
their  Conlcience.  Such  Spedlaclesftain  the  Imagination 
of  Children,  they  carve  Devils  in  the  Brains  of  thofe, 
yet  innocent  Angels ;  and  tho'  at  prefent  they  make  no 
great  Impreilion,  they  will  in  time  cut  out  Work  for  her 
young  Ladyfhip.  They  will  awake  the  Fury  of  Love, 
and  throw  Fuel  to  this  fiery  PalTion,  for  fuch  Sights,  like 
the  Italian  Poifons,  work  fome  Years  after  they  are  ta- 
ken. The  Memories  of  Youth  are  extreamly  tenacious, 
and  if  they  are  fuliiedwith  an  indecent  Objed:,  will  re- 
collecl  it  till  at  lafl  they  tranfcribe  it. 

Now  wbilft  the  young  Lady  makes  fo  fair  a  Progrefs  in 
the  Science  of  the  World,  fhe  is  a  meer  Ignoramus  in  the 
School  of  Heaven:  Qiieition  her  about  Religion,  flie  is  a 
Stranger  to  the  Language.  One  would  think  fhe  dropt 
from  the  Moon,  or  had  been  train'd  up  among  the  Ca- 
fres :  She  can  fcarce  diftinguifh  a  Church  from  a  Syna- 
gogue, and  knows  no  more  of  the  Gofpel,  than  of  the 
Talm:id  or  Alcoran.  And  indeed,  poor  Creature  !  How 
fhould  file  be  inftru(5ted,  but  by  immediate  Revelation  ? 
The  Credcncla  of  Chriflianity  are  not  infufed  by  Nature, 
and  the  Ji^enJ.i  too  are  in  great  Part  convey'J  to  us  by  the 
Senfes.  Now  who  takes  Care  to  inftill  thefe  Principles 
into  young  Ladies  ?  The  Mother  has  too  much  Work 
on  her  Hands  to  undertake  a  new  Employment,  the  Of- 
fice of  Catechill  is  below  her  Level,  it*s  too  pedantick 
and  ferJous  for  a  Perfon  who  afFefts  Ignorance,  and  dotes 
on  Mirth  and  Levity.  Befides,  fhe  fancies  her  Obliga- 
tion only  reaches  the  Body,  that  the  Soul  lies  out  of  her 
Jurifdidtion  ;  that  if  fhe  fits  the  Child  for  the  Court,  or 
the  Town,  Ihe  difcharges  the  Duty  of  a  Mother. 

Now 


of  the  Gentleman  Injiructed.      131 

Now  if  my  Lady  forgets  the  moft  important  Point  of 
Education,  will  Beny  remember  it  ?  If  the  Mother,  like 
the  OJlrich,  abandons  her  Young,  and  flies  into  the  Wil- 
dernefs,  will  the  Maid  be  more  careful?  Alas!  perchance 
ibe  is  as  little  vers'd  in  the  Catcchifm  as  Mifs,  and  knows 
no  more  from  whence  flie  came,  or  for  what  end  fhe  was 
placed  in  the  World,  than  a  Child  in  the  Cradle.  And 
altho'  fhe  were  able  to  inftru6l,  there  is  no  depending  on 
her  Will.  Servants  are  mercenary,  they  have  an  Eye 
on  their  own  Advantage,  they  drudge  for  their  own  In- 
tereft,  not  their  Miftrefs's ;  and  by  Confequence  to  wind 
themfelves  into  their  Favour,  they  entertain  'em  rather 
with  Things  that  pleafe,  than  with  thofe  that  profit. 
They  are,  in  fine,  a  Race  of  Infefts  that  bask  in  the 
Sun,  and  cannot  live  without  the  Heat  of  their  Ladies 
Favours. 

Now  what  can  be  expected  from  a  Woman  brought 
up  in  Eafe,  Luxury,  and  Vanity  on  the  one  Side,  and  in  a 
total  Ignorance  of  Religion  on  the  other?  From  a  Wo- 
man flufh'd  already  in  all  the  gaudy  Amufements  of  Va- 
nity and  Diverfion,  and  quite  a  Stranger  to  any  future 
Expedtation  ?  Whovvill  bridle  Paffion  without  Reafon? 
Or  forego  a  prefent  Satisfaftlon  without  fome  Profped: 
of  a  future?  To  fport  down  the  Stream  of  Inclination 
is  pleafing  ;  but  to  row  againft  the  Current  is  a  fatiguing 
Employment.  Now  no  Man  will  tug  at  the  Oar  with- 
out either  the  Hope  of  a  Salary,  or  the  Fear  of  a  greater 
Punifhment.  For  Pleafure  without  Torments  in  Re- 
mainder, is  in  moft  Men's  Opinion  preferable  to  Vertue 
without  the  Expe61ation  of  Reward.  Having  therefore 
fo  faint  Invitations  to  Good,  fo  powerful,  fo  bewitching 
Allurements  to  Evil,  we  muft  not  wonder  if  Ladies  fol- 
low thofe  Imprefiions,  if  Vanity  over-rules  Duty,  and 
criminal  Amufements  run  down  Morality.  Thus  cquipt 
young  Ladies  are  configned  to  Husbands:  They  change 
their  Subjedlion,  but  not  their  Principles.  With  their 
Portion  they  bring  all  the  Extravagancies  of  their  Child- 
hood, and  feldom  refign  'cm  but  with  their  laft  Breath. 
The  firll  Education  finks  deep,  and  in  time  tvv'ifts  its 
felf  wit  1  Nature  :  You  may  v;itli  as  much  Eafe  wafhan 
Ethiop:  L  white,  as  preach  an  ill-principled  Girl  into  a 
vertuous  Wom^an.  Here  is  the  Caufe,  Ladies,  of  your 
Misfortune,  the  Origin  of  your  Diftemper. 

K  2  Emil. 


132     A  Supplement  to  the  jirji  Fart 

Emil.  Well!  you  have  fearch'd  the  Wound,  I  hope 
you  will  apply  the  Remedy.  Who  knows  the  Caufe  of 
a  Difeafe,  cannot  be  ignorant  of  the  Cure. 

Eufeh.  My  Profeflion  makes  me  unfit  for  the  Employ- 
ment. However,  a  Lady's  Delire  is  a  Command,  and 
requires  Obedience. 


DIALOGUE    IV. 

Ladies  mujl  a-void  the  Objlacles  to  Vertue. 

£»/e^.  "Y"  O  U  R  Duty,  Madam,  branches  into  two 
-■-  Heads.  You  are  a  Chriftian,  anda  Mother. 
Thefe  Relations  call  upon  you  ;  God  has  placed  you  in  a 
Station  that  requires  a  double  Care,  and  you  muft  extend 
your  Endeavours  to  the  difcharging  of  both  ;  for  if  you 
fail  in  one,  you  betray  your  Duty,  and  your  eternal 
Happinefs  into  the  Bargain. 

I. 

That  you  may  adi  the  Part  of  a  Chriftian  with  a  Plau- 
dite^  let  your  Thoughts  dwell  continually  on  this  great 
Principle,  That  you  are  bom  for  Heaven^  a^d  that  this  Life 
is  but  a  jhort  P^^ff^igc  to  Eternity.  It^s  but  a  Flux  ofMo- 
Tiient  that  will  end.  It' s  a  Stream  that  difembogues  into 
an  Ocean.,  vjithout  Bottom,  vjithout  Limit.  It's  not  fuffi- 
cient  for  a  Pilot  to  know  for  what  Place  he  is  bound, 
when  he  firft  weighs  Anchor,  and  hoifts  up  the  Sails  j 
no,  he  muft  carry  it  continually  in  his  Thoughts,  and  in 
his  Eye:  This  Influences  every  Turn  of  the  Stern;  did 
he  once  fors^^et  the  Term  of  his  Voyage,  he  would  wan- 
der on  the  Ocean  at  Random,  and  never  reach  the  de- 
lired  Haven.  Paradife  is  our  Country,  the  World  a  Sea, 
and  our  Anions  mult  waft  us  over  to  that  fortunate  I- 
fland.  Now,  how  fliall  we  follov/  the  Rule,  and  touch 
the  Blefled  Point,  unlefs  we  daily  confider  under  what 
Degree  of  Latitude  it  lies?  The  Prophet  Jeremy  threw 
all  the  Mifcarriages  of  the  Jewifh  People  upon  their  In- 
confideration.  The  Earth  lies  defolate^h^shc^  becaufc  no 
Man  will  take  the  Pains  to  enter  upon  the  Confi deration  of 
his  Duty,  And  I  fear  the  Miferies  of  our  prefent  Nobi- 
lity 


of  the  Gentleman   Inftruifed.      i ^^ 

lity  fpring  from  the  fame  Fountain.  Our  Forefathers 
have  handed  down  to  us  this  unfortunate  Negligence, 
and  it  has  improved  in  the  Journey.  For  did  we  feri- 
oully  refledl,  that  we  are  born  in  this  World  to  live  eter- 
nally in  another,  and  that  our  Vertues  v^'ill  be  rewarded 
with  Glory,  and  o,ur  Vices  with  Fire;  fhould  we  tire 
our  felves  in  the  Purfuit  of  things  meerly  indifferent, 
and  criminal?  Should  we,  like  Children,  fet  our  Hearts 
uponObjeds,  not  only  trivial,  but  bafe  and  contempti- 
ble, and  truck  our  Souls  for  a  Rattle?  I  fay,  like  Chil- 
dren, for  what  is  the  difference  between  them,  and  our 
high-flown  Mortals ;  but  that  thefe  deal  in  Money,  Pa- 
laces, Plate,  and  Diamonds ;  and  thofe  in  Babies,  and 
Hobby-horfes :  So  that  at  beft,  if  the  Folly  of  thofe  is 
moreexpenfive,  the  Childifhnefs  of  thefe  is  more  inno- 
cent. 

II. 
The  Dodlrine  of  Chrift  muft  be  your  Guide,  you  mull 
follow  that  Road  he  has  plained  by  his  Example,  and 
Points  at  in  the  Gofpel.  As  he  has  promifed  the  Reward, 
fo  he  has  annex'd  the  Conditions,  and  we  mull  make 
good  thefe,  before  we  can  lay  any  Claim  to  that. 

Now  the  firft  is,  that  we  withdraw  our  Affedlions  from 
this  World.  Love  not  the  Worlds  fays  he,  its  Maxim.s 
are  dangerous,  its  Converfation  infedlious,  and  its  Em- 
bracements  m.ortal.  Under  the  Appearance  of  a  Friend, 
it  raasks  Treafon,  and  under  the  Diiguife  of  Pleafure, 
real  Torments;  it  dafhes  Honey  with  Gall,  and  throws 
over  Poifon  a  palatable  Relifli:  Its  Principles  clafh  with 
Chrifl's,  and  therefore  you  are  warned  to  break  off  all 
Correfpondence  on  pain  of  forfeiting  God's  Favour. 
Whoever  is  a  Friend  to  the  World  is  God'' s  lL*se,}iy.  In 
effect  Chrift  reads  Leffons  of  Humility  in  almoft  every 
Leaf  of  the  Gofpel;  the  World  preaches  up  Pride,  and 
magnifies  Vanity.  Chrift  commands  us  to  contend  for 
the  loweft  place,  the  World  for  the  higheft ;  to  pleafe  the 
one,  we  muft  feat  our  Neighbour  above  our  Heads,  and 
we  muft  throw  him  under  our  Feet  to  content  the  other. 
III. 
Now  there  being  no  Mean  between  thofe  two  Ex- 
treams  ;  no  Place  for  Neutrality  ;  will  a  reafonable 
Creature  paufe  one  Moment  to  what  Side  he  muft  go 
K  5  over  ? 


134    ^  Supplement  to  the  firft  Part 

over?  Whether  Intereft  lead  him  to  join  with  our  Savi- 
our, or  to  take  up  with  the  World  his  Enemy  ?  The  very 
Dehberation  is  no  lefs  fcandalous,  than  to  debate,  whe- 
ther youfhallapoftatize  from  God,  for  a  Correfpondence 
with  the  Devil  J  or  deprive  your  felf  of  a  real  Satisfac- 
tion in  this  World,  with  Heaven  in  Reverlion,  for  Mi- 
fsry  traveftied,  and  Hell  in  Remainder  ? 

For  think  not.  Madam,  that  the  Followers  of  Chrift 
muft  foi'fvvear  Pleafure,  and  give  up  their  Pretenfions  to 
prefent  Satisfaftions.  Though  their  Defires  lodge  in  Hea- 
ven, God  antedates  their  Blifs  on  Earth;  and  gives 'em 
in  Hand  an  Earnefl:  of  thofe  Joys,  they  will  poflefs  here- 
after. For  let  me  tell  you,  the  Friendfhip  of  Heaven, 
the  Senfe  of  our  Miftakes,  and  the  Pardon  of  our  Sins 
are  traniporting  Prerogatives.  Is  it  not  a  Pleafure  to 
contemn  the  Vv^orld  ?  To  be  above  all  fijblunary  Trifles? 
And  to  be  a  Slave  to  nothing?  Is  it  not  a  charming  Sa- 
tisfa(5tion  to  have  a  clear  Confcience  ?  To  neither  dote  on 
Life,  nor  to  fear  Death  ?  Thefe  are  Delights  above  all 
the  fmooth  Senfations  of  material  Organs :  And  befides, 
they  lie  out  of  the  reach  of  foreign  Accidents,  they  are 
always  at  Hand,  and  coft  us  nothing. 

IV. 

Now  what  are  thofe  fine  Things  the  World  offers,  and 
we  fo  eagerly  fly  at  ?  They  are  good  in  fhew,  and  evil 
at  the  bottom  ;  they  are  poireft  with  Fear,  and  loll  with 
Regret;  tj:ey  pamper  Senfe,  and  rack  Reafon:  For, 
in  fine,  the/  are  all  reduc'd  to  Concupifcence  of  the 
Flefh,  Concupifcence  of  the  Eyes,  and  Pride  of  Life,  i.  e. 
to  Ser.fuality  and  Honour:  Thefe  make  up  the  World's 
Riches,  and  our  Torment:  Thefe  are  the  Bleflings  fo 
much  talk'd  of,  fo  much  adored,  fo  dearly  bought,  and 
loft  fo  eafily :  And  yet  they  are  a  meer  Sound,  a  Name, 
and  nothing.     Let  us  defcend  to  Particulars. 

V. 

• 

The  Concupifcence  of  the  Flefli  takes  in  all  thofe  Plea- 
fures  that  cajole  Senfe,  and  end  in  Brutality  ;  and  what 
Effedl  do  they  v/ork  upon  us?  Why  they  glide  upon 
the  Organ,  they  print  a  fmooth  Impreflion,  and  lay  us 
upon  the  level  with  Animals.  So  that  all  we  dare  ex- 
peft  from  fenfual  Satisfadfions  is,  to  be  made  miferable 
■  Men, 


of  the  Gentleman  hfint^ied,       135 

Men,  and  happy  Beads.  Now,  methinks,  a  Man's  Brains 
muft  be  ill  placed,  who  pawns  Confcience  and  Keaven 
for  a  Prerogative,  lb  ill-favoured  and  abafing. 

VI. 

Let  us  fuppofe  the  moft  exquifite  Fowl  of  the  Air  fly 
to  your  Table:  That  France,  Italy ^  and  Spain  furnifh 
you  the  moft  excellent  Wines:  What  can  Tafte  delire 
more?  Yet  when  once  Nature  is  fatisfied,  the  eating  is 
no  more  a  Pleafure  but  a  Torment,  p'or  to  feel  the  Sto- 
mach overcharged,  the  Body  difabled,  and  the  Fumes  of 
Ragoos  in  the  Head  is  no  great  Satisfadlion,  unlefs 
Excefs  changes  our  Conllitution,  and  turns  Pain  into 
Pleafure,  and  Health  into  a  Burthen.  In  fine,  the  De- 
light flafhes  away  in  a  Moment,  and  the  Surfeit  fticks 
by  us  a  Fortnight:  It  preys  upon  our  Vitals,  and  if  it 
does  not  choak  'em,  it's  fure  to  diforder  'em  j  and  after 
ends  in  a  Winding-fheet. 

Indeed,  Hearing  is  not  fo  pleafant  a  Senfe,  it  rather 
Courts  the  Soul  than  Storms,  and  if  the  Pleafure  it  con- 
veys be  lefs  boifterous,  it's  generally  more  innocent:  But 
however,  it's  too  airy  to  be  durable,  and  too  fleeting 
to  be  relied  on.  For,  what  is  it  but  a  Perception  of 
mov'd  Air,  that  beats  upon  the  Tympanum-,  and  gently 
drums  upon  accuftick  Fibres?  And  can  any  thing  be 
more  unmanly  than  to  build  our  Happinefs  on  fo  weak  a 
Foundation  ?  Belides,  this  Pleafure  is  fhorter  lived,  than 
thofe  Animals  that  cannot  out-live  one  Day.  I  have 
feen  the  fame  Hand  that  charm'd  the  Company  the  firft 
Hour,  tire  it  the  fecond,  and  thofe  very  Stroaks  that  at 
firft  railed  Tranfports,  in  the  end  grated  upon  the  Ear, 
and  became  troublefome.  Indeed  this  Pleafure  is  lufci- 
ous,  but  it  gluts  in  a  Moment,  and,  like  Sweet-meats, 
breeds  a  Surfeit.  Now,  methinks,  a  Man  muft  put  a 
mean  Valuation  upon  Chrift  to  leave  him  for  a  Touch 
upon  an  Inftrument,  and  a  faint  Idea  of  future  Tor- 
ments to  be  fiddled  and  mufick'3  into  Hell. 

Do  not  miftake  me  ;  I  am  not  for  tying  Damnation 
to  an  airy  Sonnet.  I  know  we  may  regale  our  Ears  with 
a  Ragoo  of  Italian  Symphonies,  without  tlie  Penalty  of 
eternal  Weeping;  for  I  have  told  you,  the  obliging  of 
this  Senfe  is  more  foolifli  than  criminal.  But  however 
the  Effeds  are  dangerous,  for  Mufick  has  a  ftrange  Af- 
K  A  cendant 


I $6    A  Supplement  to  ihefrji  Fart 

cendant  over  our  Paflions ;  it  heats  and  cools  'em,  it  ruf- 
fles and  tranfports'em,  it  moulds  and  faPnioriS  'tm  to  any 
Figure;  it  awakes  the  Fury  of  Anger,  and  conjures  up 
the  Devil  of  Love  :  And  thefe  two  Fiends  drive  full  fpeed 
to  Hell  and  Damnation.  Caution  alone  fa\'ed  Ul\Jfes. 
He  would  not  truft  his  Vertue  with  a  fine  Voice  ;  nor  his 
Philofophy  with  a  warbling  Donna  Margarita  ;  he  rather 
chofe  to  refign  the  Pleafure  of  a  Sola,  than  to  fufFer  the 
Misfortune  of  a  Shipwreck ;  and  would  not  barter  his 
dear  purchafed  Herofhip  for  a  Song. 

It  were  to  be  wifh'd  our  Gentry  of  both  Sexes  carried 
Wax  in  their  Ears  as  well  as  this  Heathen  General ;  their 
Occafions  often  exaft  the  Precaution  They  fteer  be- 
tween the  Rocks,  and  Syrens  lie  in  Ambufcade  to  infnare 
'em.  In  thefe  Circumftances  the  leaft  Overfight  is  mortal; 
if  we  don't  keep  at  a  Diftance  from  the  Whirlpool,  we 
ftiall  be  fuck'd  in  by  the  Eddy.  How  many,  for  want 
of  Care,  have  fplit  upon  the  Quickfands?  Was  not  Ma- 
dam l-F.  plaid  out  of  her  Reputation,  and  violin'd  into  a 
Match  below  her  Quality  ?  And  how  many  Gentlemen 
have  been  fung  out  of  their  Innocence  at  the  Play-houfe, 
and  Mufick-Meetings  ? 

Tho'  therefore  Mulick  in  its  felf  be  innocent,  it's  often 
fatal  in  the  Confequence,  and  ftrikes  us  at  Rebound.  And 
this  is  enough  to  roufe  up  a  Chriftian's  Care;  where 
Duty  obliges  him  not  only  to  avoid  downright  Sin,  but 
the  very  Tendency  to  it. 

But  alas !  the  Poifon  lies  not  only  in  the  Notes,  the 
very  Words  carry  Infedlion :  They  are  foft  and  amorous, 
and  either  blame  Honefty,  or  provoke  to  Debauchery  ; 
they  either  perfonate  the  Defpair  of  an  abandon'd,  or  the 
Triumphs  of  a  luccefsful  Lover.  Now  what  is  this  but 
Stratagem  to  fet  ill  Humours  at  Work,  and  to  make  foft 
Rhime  a  Conveyance  to  Deftru6tion?  And  indeed  fome 
Songs  exprefs  fo  lively  ill  Practice,  that  it's  not  eafy  to 
dillinguifh  the  very  YzGt  from  the  Reprefentation.  And 
fo  the  Minftril  inftills  all  the  Difeafes  of  Rage  and  Love 
he  counterfeits.  It's  true,  the  Tongue  prefents  the  Poi- 
fon, but  the  Ear  drinks  it,  and  both  are  guilty;  for  the 
difterence  of  the  Organ  makes  a  fmall  Alteration  in  the 
Adion^  In  fine,  Ladies,  fuch  Madrigals  are  only  fit  to 
be  fung  by  the  Devils,  and  to  be  heard  by  the  damned. 

VII.  The 


of  the  Gentleman  Jnflruded.      137 
VII. 

The  other  Obflacles  that  Hand  between  us,  and  the 
Compliance  with  our  Duty  are  the  deluding  Pageants  of 
worldly  Felicity ;  fine  Sights,  a  glorious  Retinue,  and 
fwelling  Titles.  Now  what  is  all  this  Appearance  but  a 
Scene  of  Vanity  ?  That  Philofopher  was  not  miftaken, 
who  faid.  That  the  juft  Value  of  Things  are  known  by 
their  End,  as  Men  by  their  Faces,  And  if  we  take  the 
Dimenfions  of  all  human  Happinefs  by  this  unerring 
Scale,  how  thin,  how  little,  how  contemptible  will  it 
appear  even  to  purblind  Reafon  ? 

Tho'  we  fuppofe  it  conftant  to  our  Intereft,  that  it 
waits  upon  us  to  the  Grave,  we  then  muft  take  leave  of 
it,  and  bid  adieu  to  all  thofe  Objeds  that  dazzled  our 
Eyes,  and  led  our  Hearts  captive.  Nothing  will  be  per- 
mitted to  pafs  with  us  into  Eternity,  but  our  Vertues 
and  our  Vices:  Thofe  to  refrefh,  thefe  to  torment  us. 
God  pronounc'd  the  Sentence  of  Death  againft  the  whole 
Race  of  yldar/i ;  and  tho'  upon  Occafions  he  has  difpenfed 
with  other  Laws,  this  has  and  will  remain  inviolable. 
The  moll  evident  Principles  have  been  queftion'd  by 
fome,  and  deny'd  by  others ;  all  Errors  have  found  Abet- 
tors, but  I  never  read  of  any  Man  fo  extravagantly 
foolifh  as  to  doubt  of  Mortality.  The  Church-yards 
proclaim  this  Truth,  the  mavhle  Maufolea's  of  Princes  di- 
vulge it,  and  our  dead  Parents  in  a  Mute,  but  emphatick 
Language,  tell  us,  we  muft  follow.  In  fine,  it^s  decreed 
that  all  Men  miiji  die.  Seeing  therefore  all  worldly  Hap- 
pinefs will  once  expire,  and  perchance,  even  when  we 
expe£l  no  Alteration  ;  what  can  it  deferve  but  Scorn  and 
Contempt  ?  How  can  that  be  called  a  Happinefs,  that 
ends  in  Mifery,  and  will  be  follov/'d  by  Repentance? 

Nay,  the  Manner  of  leaving  it  is  oftentimes  far 
more  miferable  than  the  End  it  felf  The  great  Antio- 
chus.^  when  Profperity  ran  high,  forgot  he  was  a  Man  : 
'Vidlory  waited  on  his  Standards,  and  Succefs  crown'd 
his  Enterprizes:  But  if  his  Felicity  was  ftupendious,  the 
End  of  it  was  no  lefs  amazing.  This  glorious  Prince  fell 
firft  into  a  mortal  Adelancholy ;  thena  loathfome  Difeafe ; 
his  Bowels  glow'd  with  a  raging  Fire;  and  every  Mem- 
ber that  had  contributed  to  his  Pleafure,  increas'd  his 
Torment.    He  call'd  upon  Death  as  the  fole  Remedy  of 

his 


138      A  Supplement  to  the  firfl  Part 

his  Difafter,  and  doted  on  that  fatal  Moment  he  once 
trembled  at.  All  the  Treafures  heap'd  up  by  Rapine, 
were  unable  to  purchafe  the  Cumber  of  an  Hour.  His 
corrupted  Carcafs  exhaled  fo  infupportable  an  Infedtion, 
that  he  was  a  Burthen  to  his  Friends,  and  a  Hell  to  him- 
felf.  Thus  he  breath 'd  out  his  wretched  Soul  in  a  Tem- 
peft  of  Rage  and  Defpair,  and  died  rather  the  Objed  of 
Companion  than  Envy. 

What  fhall  I  fay  of  Nero,  Vitellius,  and  Andromcus  ? 
They  faw  the  World  at  their  Feet,  and  fparkling  Diadems 
on  their  Heads;  they  v/ere  rather  worOiip'd  as  Gods,  than 
ferv'd  as  Men ;  yet  all  this  Glory  ended  in  Outrage  and 
Infamy:  Thefirll  fell  by  his  own  Hand  ;  the  others  by 
the  Cruelty  of  the  enrag'd  Mob,  that  rather  ftudied  to 
torment  thofe  unfortunate  Princes,  than  to  butcher 'em. 
Could  Women  mount  higher  than  Jezahel^  or  Cleopa^ 
tra  ?  The  one  gave  Laws  to  an  opulent  Kingdom,  the 
other  to  an  Empire ;  both  fwum  in  Pleafure,  and  were 
almoft  over- fet with  Profperity.  But  alas!  their   Gran- 
deur, like  the  Ice  of  one  Night,  melted  away  in  a  Mo- 
ment: The  Babel  of  their  Greatnefs  funk  under  its  own 
Weight,  and  buried  'em  under  the  Ruins.     The  firft  was 
prey'd  upon  by  Dogs,  and  the  fecond  fell  by  the  Sting 
of  a  Viper.     What  reafonable  Creature  would  take  thefe 
Peoples  Felicity  together  v/ith  their  Mifery  ?  Who  would 
lead  their  Lives,  and  undergo  the  Cruelty  of  their  Deaths? 
Can  any   thing  more  clearly  evidence  the  Bafenefs  of 
human  Greatnefs,    than  thefe   fudden  Turns  of  For- 
tune.    So  that  the  Carthaginian  Captain  nov/  mortally 
wounded,  when  he  faw   the  World    behind   him,   and 
Death  before  him,  had  Reafon  to  read  his  furviving  Bro- 
ther this  feafonable  Lellbn.     To  Pride,  dear  Brother,  in 
Greatnefs,  is  a  pompous  Folly;  high  Commands  Hand 
expos'd  to  mighty  Chances.  Thebeft  built  Fortune  muft 
yield  to  Hazard,  or  fubmit  to  Time:  Nothing  is  certain 
in  this  Life,  but  Death.  What  am  I  the  better  for  having 
fubdued  Provinces  by  my  Valour,  and  butcher'd  Armies 
in  my  Fury?  I  feel  at-prefcnt  that  Violence  others  have 
felt  from  me.     What  vaft  Defigns  you  rowl  in  your 
Brains?  What  Sieges?  What  Victories?    But  alas/  all 
this  is  glorious  only  in  Idea,  great  in  Fancy,  and  nothing 
in  it  felf  but  Vanity:  Read  your  Deftiny  in  mine;  and 
remember,  that  tho' you  efcape  theStroakof  Violence, 

Nature 


of  the  G^^^tLiMkn  lnflYu6ied.      13^ 

Nature  will  put  a  Stop  to  your  Atchievements.  Here  is 
Spirit  and  Heat,  Pathos^  and  Emphajis,  and,  what  is 
more.  Truth  upon  Experiment:  And  yet  this  Man  was 
no  St.  Paul  in  a  Pulpit,  but  a  Pagan-General  in  the 
Camp :  He  had  but  an  imperfedt  View  of  the  future  Pu- 
nifliments  that  treads  on  the  Heels  of  great  Felicity. 

VIII. 
If  you  will  not  ftand  to  the  Judgment  of  a  Pagan,  I 
will  put  the  Iflue  of  the  Caufe  upon  your  own.     But  I 
muft  firft  feat  you  in  a  Region  above  thofe  Mifts  that 
darken  Reafon,  and  biafs  the  Underftanding;  and  what 
Place  more  proper  than  the  Death-bed  ?  Let  us  there- 
fore contemplate  your  Ladyfhip  in  this  Pofture  ftrug- 
gling  with  a  burning  Fever,  without  Strength,  without 
Vigour,  ready  to  leave  all  Things,  and  to  be  abandon'd 
by   all.     Your   Head   burns,    your  Heart  pants,    and 
the  Violence  of  the  Diftemper  hurries  Pain  into  every 
Artery.     You  turn  your  felf  into  a  thoufand  Poftures ; 
but    though  you   change  Place,   your    Torment    fol- 
lows. Your  Bed  of  Down  gives  no  Eafe,  nor  can  your 
whole  Eftate  buy  it.     We  will  fuppofe.  Madam  Lucia 
•  runs  through  all  the  Arguments  of  the  Stoicks,  and  mar- 
fhals  up  all  her  Eloquence  to  raife  your  drooping  Spi- 
rits.    It's  in  vain,  dear  Emilia^  to  ftruggle  againft  Mor- 
tality, there  is  no  Recipe  in  the  Difpenfatory  of  Phyfici- 
ans  againft  Death  ;  it's  a  Debt  we  owe  to  Nature,  and 
it  mull  be  paid,     iiut  at  leaft  you  will  leave  behind  an 
honourable  Memory  ;   you  have  a£ted  a  topping  Part, 
and  you  go  off  the  Stage  with  Applaufe.     Every  one 
does  Juftice  to  your  Merit,  and  even  thofe  who  envy 
your  Fortune,  confefs  you  deferve  a  greater.     The  La- 
dies admire  your  Wit,  the  Gentlemen  your  Beauty,  and 
all,  your  Breeding.     Z>r)'if«  has  eternized  your  rare  Per- 
fection- in  Verfe,  and  your  Name  together  with  your 
Titles  ftand  at  the  Epytle  Dedicatory  in  Folio  ;  fo  thut 
when  you  die,  you  will  live  by  Proxy,  and  your  Fame 
will  furvive  the  Coffin.     Will  fuch  an  atheiftical  Homily 
put  an  irregular  Fulfein  Order?  Will  it  heal  a  wounded 
Confcience  ?  Alas !  Madam,  the  Elogiums  of  the  Living 
make  weak  Impreflions  on  the  Souls  of  the  Dead.  Tho' 
I  praife  Cleopatra's  Beauty  in  all  Company,  will  fhe  be 
lefs  miferable  ?  Becaufe  I  admire  the  Power  of  Semira- 

r/iis. 


'i4o     A  Supplement  to  the  firft  Part 

mis,  will  my  Wonder  extinguifli  the  Fire  and  Brimftone 
that  eternally  confumes  her  ?  Will  Cropfus  be  Rich,  be- 
caufe  I  magnify  his  paft  Treafures  ?  Will  /tlexander  be 
at  Eafe,  becaufe  I  commend  his  Courage?  Or  Sardana- 
palus  in  Pleafures,  becaufe  he  was  once  happy  ?  Poor 
Creatures!  They  underftand  themfelves  and  their  fad 
Condition  too  well  to  receive  Flattery,  and  are  too  em- 
phatically miferable  to  be  refrefh'd  with  the  Remem- 
brance of  paft  Follies.  Thofe  that  are  laugh'd  at  by  rlie 
Saints,  and  tormented  by  the  Omnipotent,  find  fmall 
Satisfaftion  in  the  vain  Huzza's  of  Fools  or  Sycophants. 
U^hey  are  praifed  where  they  are  not,  and  are  tortured 
vjhere  they  are. 

And  to  come  home  to  your  Ladyfhip,  give  me  the 
Freedom  to  put  you  this  Queftion.  When  you  find  your 
felf  upon  the  Brink  of  Eternity,  will  the  Remembrance 
of  your  quondam  Pleafures  open  a  Profpe61  of  Joy,  or  of 
Repentance.?  Will  you  ratify  your  pail  Conduit,  or  de- 
plore it  with  Tears,  or  perchance  with  all  the  Pangs  of 
Rage  and  Defpair?  Will  not  worldly  Happinefs,  you 
once  rated  fohigh,  fall  low  in  your  Opinion.''  And  will 
you  not  wifh  rather  to  have  contemned  the  glittering 
Vanities  of  the  World,  than  to  have  enjoy'd  'em  .''  For, 
in  fine,  Madam,  you  will  then  acknowledge  a  Truth 
you  have  now  no  Inclination  to  learn  ;  that  your  Bufi- 
nefs  is  not  to  be  great,  but  good;  not  to  make  a  Fi- 
gure here,  but  hereafter.  Let  me  therefore  conclude  with 
the  wifeftof  Men  ;  Beauty  and  Complexion  are  vain^  but 
a  Woman  that  fcareth  the  Lord  jJjall  be  praifed. 

And  now,  methinks,  I  have  faid  enough  to  pcrfuade  a 
reafonable  Creature,  that  the  dazzling  Prefents  of  the 
World  are  painted  Nothings,  varnifli'd  Impoftures,  and 
gilt  Illufions.  That  tho'  they  fmooth  the  Brow,  they 
are  too  fuperficial  to  fill  the  Heart,  and  rather  fafcinate 
than  delight  j  and  yet  thefe  Toys  are  the  only  Barriers 
that  ftand  between  us  and  Heaven.  Could  we  but  once 
heartily  fall  out  with  'em,  and  regard  'em  as  Snares  ra- 
ther than  Favours,  Virtue  would  be  planted  without 
Labour  in  our  Souls;  it  would  grow  up  almoft  without 
Pain.  But  whilft  our  Hearts  cling  to  Earth,  our  De- 
fires  cannot  fly  higher.  They  relifh  nothing  but  Co- 
lour and  Surface,  and  ftudy -to  oblige  Senfe,  and  to  gra- 
tify Paflion.     Hence  flow 'thofe  Sins  that  ftab  the  Soul, 

and 


of  the  Gentleman  hftruBed,        141, 

and  lead  it  to  Perdition ;  that  cut  off  our  Right  to 
Chrift's  Promifes,  and  give  us  over  to  his  Manaces.  If 
therefore  you  intend  to  hve  up  to  the  Gofpel,  you  muft 
break  off  with  the  World.  This  is  the  firll  Step  to  Ver- 
tue,  a  neceffary  Prerequifite  to  a  holy  Life ;  for  Sin  and 
Vertue  can't  lodge  together. 

Emil.  You  have  held  forth  upon  Love  mt  the  World 
to  the  Purpofe,  and  have  lafh'd  Grandeur,  Wealth,  and 
Pleafure,  likea  Galley-flave.  But,  methinks,  you  have  car- 
ry'd  Invedlive  too  far,  and  flourifh'd  upon  Vanitas  Vani- 
tatum  beyond  Meafure  and  Juftice.  For  if  what  you 
fay  be  true,  Chriftianity  pens  up  our  Liberty  in  a  nar- 
row Compafs,  and  our  Pleafure  in  lefs ;  and  then  how 
Ihall  we  reconcile  that  Freedom  Chrift  purchas'd  by  his 
Death,  to  that  Slavery  you  impofe?  Did  God  create  the 
World  to  tantalize  us  ?  And  {hew  the  Beauties  of  the 
Univerfe  merely  to  throw  us  into  a  Fit  of  Longing  ? 

Luc.  Let  him  tall:.  Madam,  Chrift's  Religion  is  Ca- 
tholick,  our  Creed  is  pofitive ;  it  is  not  cut  out  only  for 
'Job's  and  Lazarus's,  but  for  Kings  and  Empreffes.  Why 
therefore  muft  we  difmifs  our  Equipage,  or  commence 
Apoftates?  Will  you  have  Ladies  turn  off  their  Coaches 
to  walk  in  Pattins,  like  Milk-maids  and  Oyfter- women? 
Muft  they  melt  down  their  Plate,  and  make  over  their 
"Jointures  to  the  Blue- Boys  o^ Chrtjl- Church  ?  Under  fa- 
vour. Sir,  Chrift  is  neither  Leveller  nor  Tyrant.  Not 
one  Text  in  Scripture  ties  Sin  to  Silks,  nor  Damnation 
to  Sattin  ;  we  may  glitter  in  Silver  here,  and  fhine  in 
Glory  hereafter. 

Enfeb.  I  have  indeed  enlarg'd  upon  the  Text,  Love  not 
the  iVorld^  but  when  the  Enemy  is  upon  the  Coaft,  it's 
time  to  fire  the  Beacon.  Is  not  a  Caveat  feafonable, 
when  you  are  within  an  Inch  of  a  Precipice?  Our  Savi- 
our has  thunder'd  a  thoufond  Woes  againft  the  World 
and  its  befotted  Lovers;  he  cautions  us  againft  its  Charms, 
both  in  Parable  and  Precept ;  and  yet  in  Spight  of  his 
Command  we  run  into  its  Embracements,  and  pawn 
Heaven  for  Trifles.  Methinks  Warmth  and  Severity  too 
are  very  warrantable  on  an  Occalion  io  preffmg  and  ex- 
traordinary. If  a  Merchant  put  upon  your  Ladyfhip 
Brijfol-Stones  for  Emerauds,  or  ^^/?/Ve-Glafs  for  Dia- 
monds, would  you  frown  upon  a  Friend  for  difcovering  ■ 
the  Cheat  ?  The  World  impofes  upon  y9u  counterfeit 

Coin 


142     A  Supplement  to  the  firft  Fart 

Coin  for  Sterling,  Tinlelfor  Gold,  and  imaginary  Hap^ 
pincfs  for  real  Satisfadlion.  I  have  laid  openthelmpo- 
fture,  and  you  complain  I  am  too  hard  upon  the  Decei- 
ver. Is  it  fo  obliging  a  Civility  to  prote6l  your  Purfe, 
and  fo  clownifli  a  Service  to  fave  your  Soul?  Are  Guineas 
fo  precious,  and  Souls  fo  contemptible  ?  fo  cheap  ? 

You  Hand  upon  Chriftian  Freedom,  but  you  ftretch 
the  Prerogative  too  far.  For  tho'  Chrift  has  knockM  off 
your  Chains,  and  freed  you  from  the  Slavery  of  the  De- 
vil, he  has  not  exempted  you  from  the  Subjection  of  his 
Laws:  No,  Madam,  you  live  v^'ithin  his  Jurifdiftion, 
though  you  take  a  ramble  to  the  Indies ;  and  you  muft 
obey  his  Command,  or  pay  for  the  Tranfgreflion.  Your 
Liberty,  therefore,  though  great,  is  rellrain'd  by  Chrift's 
Grant,  and  your  Freedom  is  incumbred  vv^ith  Provi- 
foes. 

Nor  did  God  create  the  World  to  tempt  our  Vertue, 
but  to  polifli  it  for  our  Ufe,  not  for  our  Vanity  ;  and 
furnifh'd  this  noble  Apartment  for  our  Paflage,  not  for 
our  Dwelling.  Ufe  then  the  World,  and  love  it  alfo  ; 
but,  as  Men  do  Phyfick,  meerly  for  Health.  I  would  not 
counfel  Ladies  nor  Lords  to  eafe  themfelves  of  their  Mo- 
ney, as  old  Crates  did,  but  then  they  muft  not  over- 
look all  the  Laws  of  Nature  to  fwell  their  Stock  ;  they 
muft  not  circumvent  and  counterfeit,  nor  dafh  Things 
out  of  one  Nature,  and  brew  'em  in  another.  They 
muft  not  ufe  light  Weights,  and  falfe  Meafures,  and 
haggle  away  Confcience  for  a  Penny,  and  Heaven  for  Six 
Pence:  They  muft  not  rack  Tenants  to  feed  Luft;  nor 
pay  their  Lackey's  Service  with  Baftinado's,  nor  their 
Chamber- Maids  with  ill  Language. 

If  you  remember.  Madam,  I  told  you  at  our  laft  Inter- 
view, you  might  alfo  eat  wholfome  Food,  that  you  might 
fleep  on  an  eafy  Bed,  and  wear  good  Linen;  that  you 
might  fometimes  grace  the  Boxes  with  your  Prefence, 
and  air  your  Body  either  in  Coach,  or  on  Foot.  But 
then  Chrift  forbids  you  to  run  ftark  Mad  after  thefe  A- 
mufements,  to  devote  all  your  Time  to  Diverfion,  and 
not  a  Moment  to  your  Duty.  He  forbids  you  to  fleep 
cut  the  Day,  and  to  dance  out  the  Night,  to  lead  the 
Lives  of  Bats,  or  Screech  Owls.  In  fine,  Madam,  you 
may  allow  the  Tafte  fweet  Meats,  and  the  Eye  fine 
Sights,  provided  you  truck  not  your  Soul  for  the  Satif- 

fadtion. 


of  the  Gei^tleman  Jnjim^led.      143 

fa6lion.  Let  Senfe  fometimes  play  ;  but  then  be  fure 
Reafon  ftands  upon  the  Guard,  and  keeps  it  within  the 
Bounds  of  Moderation.  For  thefe  animal  Faculties  are 
wanton  and  craving,  and  if  left  to  tliemfelves,  they'll 
vault  over  the  Pale  of  Law  and  Duty,  and  wheedle  in  the 
Heart  to  follow  their  Ramble.  This  is  St.  P<2a/'s Caution 
in  2  Cor.  chap.  vii.  Let  thofe  who  have  l^'ives^  be  as  if 
they  had  none :  Thofe  thai  weep,  as  if  they  did  not  weep:  Thofe 
that  rejoice,  as  if  they  did  not  rejoice  :  Thofe  that  buy,  as  if 
they  pojfefs  nothing;  and  thofe  that  ufe  the  Goods  of  this 
World,  as  if  they  us'd  them  not.  That  is,  though  thefe 
•worldly  Objeds  afFeft  the  Senfes,  they  mult  not  touch 
the  Heart,  this  rnuft  ftand  above  their  Reach,  and  be 
Proof  to  all  their  Solicitation.  It  muft,  like  the  Sun, 
that  gilds  the  very  Mire  without  being  fullied,  pafs  thro' 
thefe  killing  Vanities  without  catching  the  Infedtion. 
Now  this  being  fo,  we  are  not  fo  confin'd  as  you  ima- 
gine; we  have  Liberty  to  be  merry,  tho'  not  to  be 
mad  ;  and  I  fuppofe  this  Abridgement  is  no  Breach  of 
our  Magna  Chart  a. 

Neand,  Methinks,  Ladies,  Eufebius  is  orthodox.  He 
feems  neither  to  tie  up  our  Senfes  too  fhort,  nor  to  give 
'em  too  much  Line.  He  keep  within  a  juft  Mein  be- 
twixt Severity  and  Indulgence,  and  neither  fets  Appetite 
at  large,  nor  the  Gofpel  upon  the  Rack.  It's  the  Abufe 
of  worldly  Pleafures  he  blames,  not  a  moderate  Ufe  : 
this  ftands  with  Chrift's  Law,  and  is  prafticable  too.  If 
we  keep  a  heavy  Hand  over  Senfe,  and  upon  Occafions 
refufe  it  thofe  Diverfions  that  are  lawful,  we  may  eafily 
withdraw  it  from  thofe  that  are  forbid:  But  if  we  leave 
it  to  its  felf,  and  lay  the  Reins  on  its  Neck,  we  fhall  find 
our  felves  in  a  Precipice.  For  whoever  turns  Nature 
loofe,  makes  the  pleafing  Senfations  of  Senfe  her  End, 
and  ib  becomes  a  Lady  of  Pleafure.  Now  this  Epithet 
in  the  Senfe  of  our  modifh  Dialect  founds  harfh  and  fcan- 
dalous,  and  indeed  in  the  more  vulgar  Acceptation  it 
grates  upon  the  Ear,  for  they  are  often  incident ;  for  that 
Lady  who  makes  Pleafure  her  Bufinefs,  will  catch  at  any; 
and  if  an  innocent  one  comes  not  in  her  way,  Paffion 
willfuggeft  thofe  that  are  innocent :  And  then  how  can 
we  perfuade  our  felves  that  flie  who  lives  for  Diverfion 
will  refufe  the  Occafion  ? 

EmiL 


,144      ^  SurPLBMENT  to  thefirft  Part 

Emil.  You  have  remov'd  the  Obftacles  to  a  Chriftian 
Life,  pray  inform  us  now  in  what  this  confifts,  for  I  per- 
ceive we  live  under  pofitive  Precepts  as  well  as  Nega- 
tive ;  and  as  Chrift  forbids  fome  things,  fo  he  com- 
mands others. 


DIALOGUE    V. 
They  mujl  praSice  Humility  and  Modejiy^ 

I. 

Eufeb.  ^^Termtati  Piff^o,  faid  once  a  famous  Painter. 
-^-^  Let  our  Defign  in  every  Adlion  look  as  far. 
Why  fhall  the  Expedlation  of  a  vain  Applaufe  work 
more  povi'erfully  on  a  deluded  Pagan,  than  the  glorious 
Promifes  of  our  Almighty  Saviour  upon  Chriftians  ?  E- 
very  vertuous  Aftion,  as  St.  Bernard  notes,  pafles,  but 
does  not  perifh  ;  it's  a  heavenly  Seed,  that  dies  for  a 
time  to  revive  in  Eternity. 

n. 

Regard  each  Day  as  the  laft,  and  behave  your  felf  rrs 
if  you  fliould  not  fee  to  Morrow.  The  Reafon  why  we 
manage  fo  much  Time  ill,  is,  becaufe  we  always  fuppofe 
we  have  too  much  on  our  Hands  to  husband  well.  We 
build  upon  the  Future  that  lies  out  of  our  Reach,  and 
by  Confequence  is  not  at  our  Difpofal ;  nay,  and  per- 
chance never  will ;  and  thus  we  leave  our  Souls  to 
Chance,  and  trull  Hazard  with  our  Salvation.  Whereas, 
did  we  perfuade  our  felves  we  were  upon  a  Removal, 
we  fliould  lay  up  fome  Treafure  for  our  Journey,  and  fend 
Vertue  before  to  prepare  our  Lodgings.  For  our  Recepti- 
on in  the  next  World  will  anfwer  our  Behaviour  in  this. 
IVhat  vjefovj  in  our  Lives,  uie  f}j all  reap  after  our  Deaths. 
If  Vice,  Torments;  if  Vertue,  Pleafure. 

in. 

The  Piety  of  a  Chriftian  confifts  in  V/crks,  not  Words : 
And  therefore  we   fall  fliort  of  our  Duty,  tho'  we  Ipeak 
well,  if  we  live  ill.     delta  was  continually  upon  the  To- 
pickof  Vertue  ;  flie  forced  its  Panegyrick  upon  all  Com- 
pany, 


of  the  Gentleman  hjiru^kd.      145 

pany,  and  pour'd  out  irs  Encomiums  at  Random  in  all 
Converfations.  One  would  have  thought  {he  had  Curam 
AnimarHm^  and  that  half  the  Ladies  of  the  Court  were 
her  Parifnioners  in  fpight  of  the  Curate  of  St.  Martin's 
or  St.  "J antes' i.  I  confefs  her  Devotion  appear'd  to  me 
more  alfeded  than  real.  I  thought  it  had  more  Flame 
than  Fire ;  and  that  fhe  harangued  in  Jeft,  becaufe  {he 
feem'd  fo  much  in  Earnell.  But  Authors  were  divided  up- 
on the  Queftion;  for  fome  without  Appeal  to  \h.Q  Rata 
were  for  canonizing  her,  and  a  pious  Sifter  would  needs 
remove  Si./lmbrofe^  to  find  her  a  Place  in  the  Calendar. 
What  a  precious  Soul  is  this,  cried  {he  ?  Good  God!  Her 
Tongue  trots  fo  fail  Heavenwards,  her  Heart  muft  needs 
gallop  after !  in  fine,  {he  fpeaks  the  Language  of  Siorsy 
and  therefore  mu{l  not  be  of  the  Seed  of  Canaan. 

But  after  all,  this  Lady's  Devotion  was  mere  Sound, 
with  a  Dafh  of  Mein  and  Grimace.  Her  Anger  was  vio- 
lent, and  her  Vanity  extream.  She  never  baulk'd  one 
Pa{rion,  without  gratifying  another;  and  if  fhe  praiftifed 
a  Vertue,  'twas  to  make  room  for  a  darling  Vice.  Had 
{he  fpoke  lefs,  and  done  more,  {he  had  come  nearer  the 
Mark  of  her  Profeffion.  Yox  ^s  Naz'tanzen  obferves,  A 
•vertuuzis  ABion.^  though  mute^  is  worth  a  Folio  of  Rhetorick 
without  Effed.  Run  not  into  this  Folly.  The  Tongue  of 
an  Angel,  without  the  Heart  of  a  Seraphin,  is  infignifi- 
cant ;  ir  may  indeed  procure  fome  Repute  in  a  Female 
Congregation,  but  will  not  gain  one  Grain  of  Glory  in 
Heaven. 

IV. 

In  all  your  Adlions  feek  God  alone,  and  never  make 
your  felf  a  Slave  to  the  Applaufe  of  Men,  Hypocrify  and 
Dillimulation  are  always  increditable,  but  in  Matters  of 
Religion  monftrous  to  a  Sacrilege:  To  fweat  in  this 
World,  and  be  tormented  in  the  next ;  to  labour  with  the 
Saints,  and  burn  with  the  Devil";,  is  frenzy.  Yet,  alas ! 
how  many  are  found  Saint  without,  and  Fiend  within  ? 
W^ho  cloath  Vice  with  the  Robes  of  Vertue,  and  io  walk 
in  a  Road  to  Hell,  whilil  they  pretend  to  march  for 
Heaven.  Cynthia  fet  up  for  a  Saint  of  the  firft  Magni- 
tude; but  fhe  built  all  her  Piety  upon  Hypocrify.  She 
Took  her  Plan  from  the  P bar i fees.,  and  modell'd  her  Con- 
duit by  their  Practice.  She  was  a  moft  rigid  Ge»evian  ; 
firft  fram'd  by  Baxter^  and  then  pohfh'd  on  Bridget'^ 

L  Anvil. 


ij^6     ^.Supplement  to  the  firft  Part 

Anvil.     She  had  the  turn  of  the  Eye  in  Perfedion,  and 
topp'd  the  Twang  of  the  Piedeltinate.  Nay,  lome  fay  (he 
coiiJd  wind  a  Church  o^  Engl  at:  d  Lady  fevenfcore,  and  a 
Papiit  a  Mile  at  lead.     She  pray'd  in  de  la  Sol  Re,  and 
groan'd  the  Family  into  a  Quartan  Ague:  And  what  is 
ftrange,  this  holy   impulfe  feldorn  came  upon  "her  but  in 
Company.     She  conihmtly  read  Scriptuie  at  ihe  Win- 
dow, and  at  lall  became  a    Nuifance  to  the  Neighbour- 
hood.   1  never  heard  her,  but  1  fancy'd  my  felf  in  Betb- 
lem,  at  a  Lecture  of  Oliver's  Porter.     She  continually 
harp'd  upon  the  Baptill's  Exhortation  to  the  Jews,  and 
iigh'd  out.  Repeal !  Repent !  with  an  Emphjjis.  Good  God ! 
faid  I  to   my  felf,  what  Farce,  what   lllufion   is  here  ? 
to  corrtcl  .Sin  with   Pride,  and  preach  Repentance  with 
Hypocriiy  is  amazing.     Now  all  this  Grimace  run  upon 
Interclt.     The  Lady  bad  a  Month's  Mind  to  hear  Mr.  B. 
prone   upon   her   heavenly    Gifts  in    the  Congregation. 
And  indeed  he  fpent  his  Lungs,  and  laid  out  a  world  of 
Ccu/[,  and  myllical  Jargon  upon  the  Subjedl.     But  this 
was  not  all,  aVeli-meaning  Brother  of  the  Godly  Party, 
had  an  Impulfe  to  pair  only  in  tke  Lord.     He  was  brim- 
ful of  the  Spirit,  and  well  ftock'd  with  a  Creature  Men 
call  Gold.     He  was  more  inquifitive  for  a  godly  Yoak- 
fcllow,  than  a  beautiful  one;  and  priz'd  the  Wealth  of 
the  Soul  above  all  the  vile  Trinkets  of  Fortune.    Cynthia 
put  in  foi  tb.e  Bigot.     The  good  Man  bit  at  the  Hook, 
and  her  Grimaces  gain'd  her  twenty  thoufand  Pounds, 
and  in   time  cofi:  him  as  many  Curfes.    T-Ier  Voice  was 
y  icob's,  but  (he  had  the  Hands  o(  Efau.     Her  Piety  car- 
ry'd  a  fair  Appearance,  but  under  the  Mask  lurk'd  Dif- 
fimulation    and    Intercil.     Though  flie    ftole   the  "good 
Min's  Purfo,  flic  pawn'd  Confciences ;  and  confequently, 
the  Gain  did  not  balance  the  Lois;  and  what  is  w^on- 
dcilul,  ihc  pretended  by  the  fame  Legerdemain  to  lay  in 
as  good  a  Stock  for  Heaven,  as  Ihe  had  for  the  World,  and 
to  over-reach  Ciod,  as  fhe  haij  wheedled  the  good  Man. 
Wtll,  faid  I,    Confcience,    I  fee,  is   pliable,    and  Inte- 
reft  can  force   it,  like  Proteus,  into  all  Shapes.     Thus 
we  make   Partiality    the    Scale  of  Virtue,    and  every 
interelled  Sifter  has  Midas's  P'aculty  of  touching  every 
thing  into  Gold.     Pray,  Madam,  elpoufenot  this  Lady's 
Morals,  her  Cafuiftry  is  too  indulging,  and  obliges  our 
viciou?  Inclinations  too, much  to  come  up  to  the  Stan- 
dard 


of  the  Gentleman  lnflrit6ied,       147 

dardof  Chrift's.  He  will  have  the  Heart  as  well  as  the 
A(5tion,  and  will  not  go  halves  with  Intereft;  if  you 
drudge  for  temporal  Profit,  you  defeat  all  Pretenfions  to 
eternal.  Nay,  if  you  obferve  Chrift's  Law  upon  fuch 
bale  Views,  you  will  be  call  out  of  Heaven  with  Hypo- 
crites that  !ranfgrefs  it.  Our  Saviour  commands  us  to 
keep  our  Piety  to  ourfelves,  and  to  confine  it  to  Darknefs 
and  Secrecy.  Nay,  when  we  fall  we  mull  perfume  our 
Head,  powder  our  Hair,  vamp  up  our  Complexion,  and 
upon  lo  extraordinary  Occafions,  Ladies  may  be  per- 
mitted perchance  the  ufe  of  Waihes,  to  conceal  from 
the  Eyes  or'  Iviea  liiis  Mortification.  Vertue,  like  Glafs, 
is  eafily  fullied  i  a  Word  oftentimes  tarnilhes  its  Lultre, 
and  a  Look,  like  the  Eye  of  a  Bafilisk,  murders  it. 

However,  omit  not  a  good  Deed  out  of  an  Apprehen- 
iion  of  being  difcovered.  This  would  be  to  Itretch  Cau- 
tion too  far,  and  to  keep  up  to  one  Precept  by  the  Breach 
of  anothei.  For  though  our  Saviour  in  one  Place  recom- 
mends Privacy,  in  anofher  he  orders  us  to  be  vertuous  in 
Publick  for  £.dification.  Let ''em  fee  your  good  l^'^urks^ 
and  let  ^em  glorify  your  Father  which  is  i»  Heaven.  Gre^ 
gory  the  Great,  in  Matth.  xiii.  handfomely  ^reconciles 
thefe  Texts,  that  feem  to  jarr;  let  our  Actions  be  pub- 
lick,  but  let  our  Intention  be  iecret ;  that  at  once  we  may 
edify  our  Neighbour  by  our  Example,  and  by  our  Inten- 
tion to  pleafe  God  alone,  wilh  it  were  private. 

Let  therefore  your  Devotion  have  no  Tin61;ure  of 
earthly  Views ;  let  it  aim  at  God's  Honour,  and  your 
Soul's  Salvation  -,  and  if  you  purchafe  Heaven,  you  have 
crown'd  your  Labour.  But  in  the  mean  time,  fear  not 
to  ftand  up  for  Virtue,  and  (hew  you  are  in  earnelt  by 
your  Pradlice :  So  many  go  over  to  Vice,  and  fo  hearti- 
ly carry  on  its  Interell,  it's  nectilary  for  the  Friends  of 
Godlinefs  to  make  fome  Provilion  againft  the  Allaults  of 
fo  prevailine^  a  Party,  and  lo  convince  the  Wojld,  Virtue 
is  not  quite  forfaken.  Now  who  are  more  proper  to  raifs 
Virtue,  and  humble  Vice,  than  Ladies  of  Quality  ? 
They  are  expos'd  to  the  View  of  the  Vulgar,  and  re- 
ceive Homage  and  Inccnfe,  like  the  old  Female  Deities, 
from  their  Inferiors;  they  aie  aped  by  the  Sex  of  a 
lower  Rate  ;  their  Fafhions,  Mien,  Gefture,  and  Car- 
riage are  copied  by  Citizens  Wives  and  Daughters,  and 
thefe  Pretenders  to  Politenels,  glory  in  the  very  Follies  of 
Li  a  I,yady. 


148     A  Supplement  to  thefrji  Part 

a  Lady.  Now  feeing  you  have  fuch  an  Afcendant  over 
them,  vi^hy  may  you  not  lure  'em  to  Godlinefs  as  v\'ell  as 
to  Vice?  Why  may  they  not  fall  in  Love  with  your 
ch*  ill'::n,  as  well  as  your  worldly  Deportment,  and  fafhion 
their  Conduit  by  yours,  as  well  as  their  Commodes  ? 
Virtue  in  Embroidery  is  more  amiable  than  Vanity  in 
its  moll  dazling  Equipage ;  its  Charms  are  attractive  ; 
and  when  once  People  are  convinc'd  they  may  be  fine 
without,  and  rich  within  ;  that  they  may  live  great  and 
innocent  too,  it's  odds^  they'll  rather  chufe  to  live  gen- 
teelly and  pleafantly  with  a  good  Confcience,  than  like 
Reprobates  with  a  bad  one.  And  if  once  Virtue  be  fa- 
Ihionable  among  the  Ladies,  it  may  in  time  be  alarmode 
among  the  Gentlemen  alfo.  For,  with  thefe,  their  Ap- 
probation is  a  kind  of  Law  almoft  as  inviolable  as  thofe 
of  the  Medes  und  Perjia-/is :  And  Men  will  rather  fuffer 
a  Reltraint,  and  clap  Nature  under  Hatches,  than  pur- 
chafe  a  petty  Satisfaction  at  the  Rate  of  a  Lady's  Dif- 
pleafure.  I'hus,  becaufe  Women  have  an  Aver/ion  to 
a  tempeftuous  Converfation,  and  Itart  almoft  as  much  at 
a  Hector's  Oath,  as  at  the  Report  of  his  Piftol ;  no  Man 
ef  Breeding  will  any  more  fwear,  than  duel  in  their  Pre- 
feiice.  Now  if  a  Principle  of  Civility  can  bridle  one 
Vice,,  why  can't  it  filence  another  ?  And  thus.  Madam, 
you  may  become  an  Apoftle  without  the  Labour  of 
preaching  ;  for  Example  moves  more  than  Homily, 
*  Though  it  be  lefs  clamorous. 

V. 
Humility  is  the  Foundation  of  all  Virtues,  It's  the 
Gate  of  Religion,  primus  RcUgionis  introitus^  fays  Cy- 
pria»  ;  and  he  deferves  the  Name  of  Infidel,  who  is  un- 
faithful to  this  favourite  Virtue  of  (lod  made  Man.  To 
lay  that  Ladies  have  no  need  of  Humility,  is  to  fay  the 
Sick  have  no  need  of  Health,  nor  the  Indigent  of  Sup- 
port. It's  neceOary  for  all,  but  Ladies  cannot  be  faved 
without  it.  For  befides  the  common  Infection  of  Pride 
they  inherit  from  their  firft  Parent,  what  additional  In- 
creafe  do  they  receive  from  other  Quarters?  Quality  and 
Equipage  warm  the  Paffion;  Flattery  and  Courtfhip 
quicken  it;  and  the  innate  Propcnfion  of  the  Sex  it  felf 
lets  it  afloat.  And  when  fuch  a  multitude  of  Channels 
feed  the  Humour,  what  wonder  if  it  fwells  over  the 
Hanks,  and  bears  down  Virtue  together  with  Reafon  ? 

Indeed 


of  the  Gentleman  Inflru&ed.      14^ 

Indeed  to  Hand  on  Tiptoe  upon  fuch  trifling  AdvaMa- 
ges,  is  an  evident  Mark  of  a  ftrong  PafTion,  or  a  v^eak 
Judgment ;  and  I  eafily  perfuade  my  felf,  that  Ladies 
would  ftoop  lower,  did  they  but  take  the  Pains  to  conii- 
der  upon  how  groundlefs  Pretenfions  they  fly  fo  high. 

Your  Father  bore  Title  and  Efcutcheon,  but  was  not 
your  Mother  a  Chamber-maid  ?  If  lb,  I  would  defireyou 
not  to  fcrew  up  your  Quality  too  high  ;  for,  like  the 
Dutch  Coin,  it's  only  half  Sterling.  You  are  a  kind  of 
Mulattoe^  European  on  the  one  lide,  and  Savage  on  the 
other;  /'.  e.  a  Compound  of  Gentleman  and  Spinflrefs. 
What  is  here  that  deferves  an  over- weaning  Conceit? 

But  though  your  Blood  has  run  from  Hedor  and  Ak- 
dromacbe^  thro'  an  undefiled  Channel  into  your  Veins, 
manage  the  Advantage  with  Modefty,  and  do  not  mag- 
nify it  beyond  Proportion.  For  after  all,  this  refined 
Blood,  if  tried  in  the  Laboratory,  will  prove  tainted  up- 
on Experiment;  and  an  Alchymift  will  draw  as  fine  Spi- 
rits from  that  of  a  Dairy-Maid,  as  from  that  of  a 
Duchefs.  Could  our  Anceflors  make  over  their  Virtues 
by  Will;  could  they  fettle  upon  their  Defcendants  Senfe 
and  Merit,  together  with  their  Titles  and  Lordfhips ; 
brave  Progenitors  would  be  a  great  Privilege.  But  alas  ! 
'  Thefe  towering,  thefe  ennobling  Prerogatives  are  meerly 
perfonal ;  they  are  incommunicable  Perfections,  and  nei- 
ther defcend  to  Heirs  Male  or  Female  by  Right  of  Gift. 
Believe  me.  Madam,  noble  Minds,  and  mighty  Digni- 
ties, go  not  always  together.  I  have  often  feen  Wit  in 
the  Coach-box,  and  Folly  in  the  Coach ;  Beauty  in 
Linfey-woolfey,  and  Deformity  in  Sattin;  Merit  in  the 
Maid,  and  none  in  my  Lady.  Now,  methinks,  Quality 
waited  on  by  the  whole  Retinue  of  Title  and  Equipage, 
being  neither  the  Purchafe  of  our  Induftry,  nor  the  Re- 
ward of  our  Merit,  (hould  not  work  upon  our  Vanity, 
nor  fwell  our  Prefumption.  We  {hould  rather  thank  Pro- 
vidence for  the  Favour,  than  Pride  in  the  Gift ;  for,  in 
fine,  we  have  no  more  Reafon  to  look  big  upon  the  Mat- 
ter, that  a  Genet  in  embroidered  Harnefs. 

But  if  your  Parts  and  Quality  are  not  of  a  Piece,  if 
this  raifes  you  above  the  common  Level,  and  thofe  throw 
you  below  it,  you  are  only  indebted  to  Nobility  for  the 
Poft  of  a  Scaramouch^  to  divert  your  Inferiors,  and  to 
be  Ico.m'd  by  your  Equals. 

L  3  And 


ijo      A  Supplement  to  the  fir  ft  Part 

And  as  for  Equipage  and  Attendance,  tho'  it  makes  a  . 
g:;udy  Shew,  at  Bottom  it's  rather  trivial  than  lignifi- 
cant,  and  has  more  of  Appearance  than  Reality.  For 
it  only  argues  either  fome  Credit,  much  Money,  or  more 
Vanity.  Now  thei'e  Advantages  are  of  a  bafe  Alloy, 
and  they  muft  be  gazed  on  through  ftrange  Glafles  to 
appear  confiderable.  Madam  P's  Credit  run  her  in  every 
Merchant's  Book,  from  the  Exchange  in  the  Strand^  to 
that  in  the  City.  She  waded  Chin-deep,  but  by  Mif- 
fortur>e,  tho'  Credit  enter'd  her  Name  in  fo  many,  it 
•was unable  to  crofs  it  out  of  one;  fo  that  it  had  been 
greater,  had  it  been  lefs.  For,  in  fine,  flie  run  on  Tick, 
till  fhe  funk  her  Purfe  with  her  Credit,  and  then  fhe 
curfed  her  Merchant's  Credulity,  and  her  own  Folly. 

Money  indeed  has  fome  Charms,  it  feeds  Vanity,  and 
cafls  a  fparkling  Varnifli  over  Peafantry  and  Meannefs ; 
but  alas!  this  Lui^re  is  borrow'd,  it's  a  meer  Glow- 
worm Light,  that  dazzles  more  than  it  warms ;  it  comes 
from  Fortune,  not  from  Nature  or  Complexion ;  it  gilds 
the  Outfide,  and  fports  upon  the  Superficies,  but  leaves 
the  Infide  as  naked  as  it  found  it.  In  fine,  it  makes  Peo- 
ple often  worfe,  but  feldom  better,  and  gives  'em  the 
Opportunity  of  playing  the  Prodigal  or  the  Mifer. 

But  nothing  enlivens  Womens  Pride  more  than  Flat- 
tery and  Courtfhip  ;  and  yet  what  can  be  imagined  more 
filly  ?  They  are  fo  over-charged  with  Prefumption  and 
Self-love,  that  they  believe  themfelves  Miftrelles  of  all 
thofe  Perfections,  Brain-fick  Lovers^  or  fawning  Syco- 
phants are  pleafed  to  aflign  'em  ;  and  fometimes  miliake 
a  plain  Satyr  for  a  Panegyrick,  and  grow  big  of  Con- 
ceit for  being  lampoon'd.  The  Queen  Straiomca  had 
not  one  Hair  on  her  Head,  and  yet  flie  gave  a  Poet  fix 
hundred  Crowns  for  comparing  it  to  a  Violet,  The  Com- 
parifon  was  new  indeed,  and  the  Analogy  fo  far  fetch'd, 
that  it  comes  not  within  fight  of  Senfe.  But  liowever,  the 
Lady  -admired  the  Difcovery,  and  became  fo  exceffive 
proud  upon  the  Compliment,  that  her  Violet  Hair  ren- 
dred  her  more  ridiculous,  than  none  at  all.  P'or  by  a 
Vanity  fo  ill-grounded,  and  fo  unreafonable,  fhe  gave 
the  World  a  Demonftration  her  Scull  was  as  bare  with- 
in as  without,  and  that  her  Brains  did  not  out-weigh 
her  Locks  one  Grain.  But  tho'  a  Lady  fliould  be  gra- 
ced with  the  Hair  of  Aurora^  wiih  the  Eyes  of  Venus ^ 

the 


of  the  Gfntleman   hijlrntfed.      iji 

the  Majefty  of  Jufjo,  and  the  Feet  of  Tketls^  (to  fpeak 
in  the  Foeiick  Jargon)  alas!  what  is  ali  this  but  Vanity 
and  Impofture,  but'  Mire  gla?:'d  ovtr  wiih  Snow,  but  an 
Idol  of  Fools,  or  a  Flower  that  opens  and  fades,  that 
exhales  Perfumes  and  Stench  the  iameDay?  What  Lan- 
guage can  reach  the  Extravagance  of  thole  who  rate 
themfelves  upon  fo  inconfiderable  Advantages  ?  They 
are  diilemper'd  beyond  all  Lunacy  of  the  Mad-houfe, 
and  fhould  be  tied  up  to  Diet,  and  confin'd  to  Darknefs 
and  Difcipline. 

But  to  take  down  thefe  Ladies  Stomachs,  and  to  bring 
their  foaring  Thoughts  a  Point  lowsr.  I  would  defire  'em 
to  take  a  Turn  in  the  Church-yard,  and  to  try  whether 
they  can  diftinguifli  the  Soul  of  a  Princefs  from  that  of  a 
Kitchen-wench ;  whether  the  Afhes  of  Dives  are  better 
qualified  than  thofe  of  Lazarus ;  or  tiie  Bones  o(  Cxfar's 
are  made  of  more  noble  Ingredients  than  thofe  of  Pea- 
fants  ?  or  (left  fuch  a  melancholy  Sight  {hould  work  too 
much  upon  your  Complexion,  and  fright  you  into  Con- 
vulfions)  fling  av^ay  a  Vifit  upon  Madam  S.  (he  was 
once  the  Town  Beauty,  the  Life  of  Meetings,  and  the 
Lady. of  Ma)'.  She  rated  her  felf,  not  by  the  Pound,  but, 
like  Diamonds  by  the  Caract,  and  was  fo  extravagantly 
fond  of  her  little  Self,  that  flie  fancied  her  Body  a  Com- 
pound of  the  fifth  Element,  all  Celeftial,  without  Drofs 
or  Matter.  But  a  Confumption  has  tam'd  her  Pride, 
and  fetch'd  down  her  towering  Conceit.  She  is  in  Ex- 
tremity; fhe  runs,  poor  Creature!  through  a  Courfe 
of  Fain  ;  flie  confumes  "by  Inches,  and  lofes  her  Blood  by 
Drops,  She  read  me,  1  allure  you,  a  more  emphatical 
Leflbn  of  Vanity  than  Solumon^  and  convinc'd  me, 
Women  muft  be  mad  to  be  proud.  This  Death-bed 
Figure  is  certainly  an  humbling,  tho'  a  moft  inftruftive 
Sight,  and  would  Curiofity  lead  Ladies  fometimes  with- 
in Profpe(ft  of  fuch  Scenes,  I  conceive,  the  Price  of  Fe- 
male Perfections  might  fall.  For,  in  fine,  to  fet  in  fo 
black  a  Cloud,  to  withdraw  with  Convullions,  to  gooff 
with  Deformity,  and,  like  a  Candle,  to  vanifh  in  Stench, 
is  a  mortifying  Rebuke  to  the  Dignity  of  human  Nature. 
Look  therefore  upon  all  the  Goods  of  Fortune  and  Na- 
ture, as  the  meer  EfFe(fls  of  God's  Liberality,  not  of 
Merit.  That  they  are  only  lent,  not  given  ;  and  by 
Confequencc  call  rather  for  Gratitude  than  Pride. 

L  4  Keep 


152     A  Supplement  to  the  firjl  Fart 

Keep  your  Rank  among  the  great  Ones,  and  difdain 
not  to  ftoop  to  the  Peafant,  when  Charity  commands. 
Hate  Flattery  as  a  Plague,  Hypocrify  as  Poifon,  and  a 
bafe  Complaifance  as  meer  Apery.  Speak  ill  of  no  Bo- 
dy, praife  feldom  ;  but  never  your  felf. 

Lofenot  Sight  of  your  Faults,  nor  depend  upon  your 
Virtue.  This  is  God's  Work,  thofe  folely  your  own.  En- 
deavour to  be  pious,  but  never  think  you  are  fo.  And 
tho'  you  hve  up  to  the  Height  of  Chriftian  Perfedion, 
fuppofe  you  are  only  at  the  Bottom.  We  may  fin  by 
efteeming  our  felves  too  much,  but  cannot  by  valuing 
our  felves  too  little.  And  to  put  Nature  to  the  Blufli, 
pradife  upon  Occafion  fome  publick  Adlonsof  Hurhili- 
ty.  For  Example  ;  you  may  feed  the  Poor  with  your 
Alms,  and  ferve  'em  with  your  own  Hands.  Tho'  fuch 
Adlsarelow,  they  are  not  mean:  And  they  rather  enno- 
ble Dignity  than  degrade  it.  The  great  Emprefs  Helen 
appear'd  taller  on  her  Knees,  when  fhe  wafh'd  the  Feet 
of  poor  Women,  than  when  fhe  fat  in  her  Throne  ; 
more  glorious  when  fhe  xviped  them  with  a  Towel,  than 
when  file  rode  in  a  triumphant  Chariot;  and  more  great 
when  fhe  ferved  at  Table  the  devout  Virgins  at  Jerufalem^ 
than  when  (he  commanded  in  Rome  or  Conjlaminople. 

Why  may  not  Ladies  alfo  fometimes  favour  an  Hofpital 
■with  a  Vilit,  aswell  as  the  Play-houfe?  An  Hour  would 
be  better  fpent  in  this  Theatre  of  Mifery,  than  in  that 
of  Dlverfion.  Here  you  learn  Humility,  and  pracftife  it ; 
and  although  you  leave  an  Alms  behind,  you  carry  away 
the  iVIerit.  At  Paris  I  have  feen  the  topping  Ladies  of 
the  Court,  in  l"  Hotel  Dieu,  help  and  comfort  the  Sick 
with  great  Charity.  They  refrelli'd  thofe  poor  Creatures 
not  only  with  Words,  but  with  Cordials  and  Juleps.  I 
could  wifh  the  Mode  would  fail  into  Kn^Lwd.  It  edifies 
I  am  fure,  and  would  become  Quality,  and  fit  as  genteel- 
ly on  Ladies,  as  French  Funtanges.  For,  in  fine,  a  Chri- 
ftian  Submillion  is  the  Top  of  Gallantry,  and  gives  a 
greater  Luftre  than  Equipage  or  Efculcheon.  To  fland 
above  the  Vulgar  in  Rank,  and  below  'em  in  AfFt(5b'on, 
to  be  efteem'd  by  others,  and  contemn'd  by  our  felves, 
is  to  abandon  the  Sentiments  of  Nature,  for  tbemofl  re- 
fined Morals  of  the  Gofpel. 

VL  As 


of  the  Gentleman  Jnjiru^ed.       153 
VI. 

As  Humility  regulates  the  Inteiior,  fo  Modefty  difci- 
plines  the  Exterior.  This  is  the  Index  that  marks  the 
Motion  of  our  Soul :  It  dilcovers  the  Situation  of  our 
Paffions,  and  tells  us  whether  they  obey  the  Empire  of 
Senfe,  or  of  Reafon.  For  Providence  ieems  to  have  de- 
figned  the  Face  not  only  for  Ornament,  but  for  Infor- 
mation. Nay,  the  Soul  flies  into  our  Behaviour,  and 
we  can  read  its  Inclination  and  Diiguft  as  legibly  in 
our  A<ftions,  as  Phyficians  the  State  of  the  Body  by  the 
beating  of  the  Pulfe. 

Thus  Gregory  of  Nazt^^zen  faw  the  Diforders  of  Ju- 
lianh  Soul  in  the  Irregularity  of  his  Carriage,  and  pro- 
nounced him  a  Runag&de  before  he  had  apollatiz'd  from 
Chriftianity. 

I  fliall  not  confider  Modefty  in  Oppofition  to  Wanton- 
nefs:  This  would  lead  me  too  far;  but  as  it's  defined  by 
Ze»o  the  Scienceof  decent  Motion,  i.  e.  as  it  polilhes  the 
Exterior  ;  and  cut  off  all  thofe  Exorbitances  that  render 
our  Converfuion  ofFenfive,  or  lels  chriflian.  I  know  in- 
deed St.  IPaul  commends  it  in  this  Acceptation  to  all;  but 
tho'  it  reaches  the  Mafculine  part  of  our  Species,  it  con- 
cerns more  properly  the  Feminine.  And  it's  no  more  e- 
ftcem'd  a  bare  Ornamenr,  but  a  Propriety  of  the  Sex.  So 
that  a  Woman  difcarded  of  Modefty,  ought  to  be  gaz'd 
upon  as  a  Monfter.  Let  her  be  fet  off  with  all  the  other 
Embellifhments  of  Art  and  Nature,  fo  long  as  Boldnefs  is 
read  in  her  Face,  this  Vice  alone  will  eclipfe  her  other 
Perfe<5lions,  and  like  a  Cloud  over-caft  all  the  glittering 
Beams  of  Beautv,  Wit,  and  Dignity. 

Nor  indeed  is  it  any  Wonder  that  Modefty  is  fo  much 
the  Right  and  Intereft  of  the  Sex.  For  this  is  the  Argus 
that  guards  their  Treafure  againll  all  the  Attacks  of  Sur- 
prife  or  Impudence.  When  Brennus  with  his  vidlorious 
Army  enter'd  Rome,  the  Gravity  and  Majefty  of  the  Se- 
nators aw'd  the  licentious  Soldiers  into  fuch  a  Refpeft 
and  Reverence,  that  not  one,  for  a  long  time,  durft  ap- 
proach 'em.  And  I  believe  a  Lady  well  ftock'd  with 
Modefty,  may  look  upon  the  loofe  Defires,  and  keep  at  a 
Diftance  the  Attempts  of  the  moft  impudent  Aflailant. 
For  certainly  true  Virtue  has  more  Authority  than  Affec- 
tation, and  a  Chriftian  Refervednefs,  than  a  Stoical  Se- 
verity.   When  a  Town  is  well  provided  within,  and 

ftronglv 


IJ4    ^  Supplement  to  the  fifl  Fart 

ftrongly  fenced  with  Out-works,  a  vidlorious  General 
has  Icldom  the  Courage  to  attempt  the  Siege.  The  Ex- 
pence,  the  length  of  Time,  the  Lofles,  and  in  fine,  the 
Uncert;iinty  of  Succefs,  fcare  him  from  the  Enterprise  j 
io  that  he  wheels  off  to  the  lefs  fortify'd,  as  of  more  eafy 
Conqucft.  Our  Gallants  feem  to  follow  the  fame  Me- 
thod ;  they  are  fo  far  from  tempting  a  modell  Woman, 
that  they  can  fcarce  dare  look  her  in  the  Face  ;  her 
Countenance  and  Air  rather  fright  Paflion  than  excite  it. 
They  conjure  down  impure  Love,  and  raife  Rcfpedt  and 
Eileem.  In  fine,  flie  is  fo  encompafled  with  Modefty, 
there  is  no  making  an  Approach,  and  by  confequence  no 
Profpedl  of  Succefs  ;  and  this  Diffi'^ulty  cools  the  molt 
fiery  Lull,  and  difcourages  the  moll  violent  Senfuality. 
No  Body  but  Afmodxus  himfclf  will  attempt  to  violate 
fuch  a  Saniluary. 

But  when  they  efpy  a  Lady  without  Refervednefs ; 
who  is  endued  with  many  attrailive  Qualities,  and  has 
nothing  that  awes,  no  Out- works  that  guard  her  Virtue, 
they  are  tempted  to  ftorm  her  Conllancy  ;  and  if  {he 
lends  a  patient  Ear  to  the  Encomiums  of  her  Wit  and 
Beauty,  if  fhe  ftays  to  receive  the  Attack,  fhe  is  in  Dan- 
ger of  being  at  Difcretion.  FO|r,  in  (liort,  this  Remiilhefs 
is  a  kind  of  Capitulation  ;  it's  a  Mark  the  Defendant  is 
prefs'd,  and  then  follows  a  Surrender :  So  that  the  Ne- 
eelTity  of  this  Virtue  ought  to  awake  the  Care  of  Ladies, 
and  quicken  their  Endeavours  to  purchafe  it. 

Now  if  you  ask  me  what  it  is,  1  have  anfwer'd  with 
Zeno^  it's  The  Science  of  A^'cent  Motion^  i.  e.  it's  a  Mix- 
ture of  Gravity  and  Sweetnefs,  that  ftamp  Piety  on  the 
Behaviour,  and  mike  the  divine  Tranfports  of  the  Soul 
fparkle  in  the  very  Eyes  ;  it  reaches  every  Part  of  the 
Exteriour,  and  guides  our  whole  Comportment  Abroad 
and  at  Home,  in  our  Clofet,  and  in  Converfition  ;  in 
fine,  it  plants  Virtue  upon  the  Forehead,  and  draws  De- 
corum upon  the  Exteriour. 

But  by  Gravity,  I  unJerftand  not  a  morofe  Sournefs, 
nor  a  ftarch'd  Behaviour.  The  firft  marks  ill  Nature, 
the  fecond  Pride  and  Aftedatlon.  I  would  neither  covmfel 
Ladies  to  make  wry  Faces  as  if  they  were  taking  a  Dofe 
of  Coloquintida^  nor  walk  as  if,  like  Baribnlnmew  Pop- 
pets, they  mov'd  by  Wire.  This  is  not  Modefty,  but 
downright  Grimace,  and  has  more,  of  the  Mimick  than 

Vinue. 


of  t^^  G ENTLEM A  N  hijiniHed,       155 

Virtue.  The  one  frights,  the  other  raifes  Laughter.  Keep 
within  a  Mean;  Extreams  are  vicious;  extraordinary 
Geftures  are  as  unbecoming,  as  antiquated  DreiTes. 

But  be  fare  to  take  care  of  the  Tongue.  This  is  an 
infolent  Member,  and  needs  all  the  Precepts  and  Intlruc- 
tions  of  Moderty,  to  be  kept  within  the  Compafs  of  De- 
cency. 

Pretend  not  in  Company  to  Wit;  you  will  certainly 
betray  your  Judgment  Women  feldom  appear  more 
foolifli,  than  when  they  afpire  to  the  Glory  of  being 
thoughtwife.  Good  God !  how  was  I  plagu'd  t'other 
Day  with  the  Impertinences  of  Madam//,  flie comment- 
ed upon  /Irijlutle^  and  ledlur'd  us  upon  the  Sumtm  of 
Thomas  Aqu'tnas.  She  fcorn'd  the  Female  Topick  of 
Modes  and  DreH'e?,  and  was  for  danciiig  on  the  high  Ropes 
oi Phyjicks  and  Divinity.  We  were  firft  regal'd  with  Ma- 
teria Prima  ;  then  came  up  a  Di(h  of  Occuh  Qualities  ; 
and  at  laft  a  whole  Plate  of  Theological  Terms  were 
flung  among  the  Company.  It  was  ab  impofPible  to  fton 
her  in  this  learned  Career,  as  a  Ship  under  full  Sail,  and 
you  might  have  fooner  filenc'd  a  Hurricane,  than  have  fet- 
ter'd  her  Ladyfhip's  Tongue.  The  Sex  admir'd  her  Wif- 
dom,  and  the  Men  fmil'd  at  her  Folly.  She  has  made 
a  Provifion  of  School  Jargon,  and  laid  it  out  with  much 
Prodigality,  and  more  AHlirance.  But  all  her  Knowledge 
ftuck  on  the  Superficies  of  Words,  flie  enter'd  not  into 
the  Senfe.  So  that  the  Fame  of  her  Parts  (hrunk  under 
Experience,  and  this  Phcenix  of  Women  prov'd  only  a 
well  taught  Parrot. 

Beware  of  too  great  Talkativenefs,  a  Fault  incident 
to  the  Sex,  and  extreamly  offenfive  in  Converfation.  It 
favours  of  BoMnefs,  and  is  a  great  Intrenchment  upon 
the  Liberty  of  Company.  She  who  monopolizes  the  Dif- 
courfe,filcnces  the  reft,  and  allumes  the  Qiiality  of  Mi- 
ftrefs;  and  fo  keeps  School,  without  Licence,  in  plain 
Contradi6tion  to  our  Statute  Book :  Nay,  and  what  is 
more,  a  Pythagorean  School,  in  which  other  Ladies,  like 
Pupils,  undergo  the  Penance  of  Silence,  whilft  fhe  enjoys 
the  Satisfadlion  of  Speaking.  This  is,  I  think,  a  little 
impohng,  and  flie  who  offers  her  Company  upon  fo  hard 
Conditions,  deferves  to  lead  the  Life  of  a  Reclufe;  for 
few  Ladies  will  go  to  the  Price  of  the  Purchafe.  Free- 
dom of  Speech  is  as  undoubted  a  Prerogative  of  a  Female 
lileeling,  as  of  the  Houfe  of  Commons.  In 


156      A  Svi^PtiuEi^r  to  the  firft  Pari 

In  Converfation  you  muft  fuppofe  all  are  not  of  the 
fame  Opinion ;  bear  therefore  a  Contradidlion  with  Calm- 
ncfs  and  Moderation;  and  be  not  too  kind  to  your  own 
Errors.  Infallibility  is  neither  an  Appendix  of  Nature, 
nor  of  Grace  :  Women  may  fall  into  thofe  Millakes  by 
Surprise  or  Ignorance,  without  any  Abatement  of  their 
Parts,  they  cannot  vindicate  without  Diftionour.  So  that 
it's  more  prudent,  as  well  as  more  modeft,  to  confefs  a 
Fault,  than  to  defend  it  with  Eagernefs  and  Paflion.  O- 
ver-rate  not  therefore  your  own  Sufficiency,  for  tho'  fome 
Diamonds  are  faid  to  be  above  Price,  Merits  are  not. 
Fancy  not  your  Underftanding  moves  in  a  higher  Region 
than  other  Peoples ;  or  that  you  muft  neceflarily  be  wifer, 
becaufe  more  beautiful  or  noble.  Believe  me,  Madam, 
thefe  Qualities  are  not  the  true  Standard  of  Know- 
ledge :  A  fair  Frontifpiece  is  no  infallible  Sign  of  well- 
furnifh'd  Rooms.  The  Infide  may  be  poor,  tho'  the  Out- 
fide  be  rich :  And  I  fuppofe  the  Walls  are  not  ftronger 
for  being  ancient. 

Little  Love-Intrigues  oftentimes  are  the  Subjefl  of  Wo- 
mens  Difcourfe  ;  and  generally  People  are  paired  by  jny 
Lady  before  they  are  join'd  by  the  Parfon.  It's  a  great 
Breach  of  Modefty  almoft  to  know  fuch  things,  and 
Boldnefs  to  throw  'em  into  Converfation.  For  the  Laws 
of  Decorum  are  fo  fevere  in  regard  of  Women,  that  it's 
almoft  a  Fault  to  pronounce  the  Word  Love.  They  can 
fcarce  difcover  a  Diflike  of  an  ill  thing  without  Blemifh, 
nor  even  blufli  without  difobliging  their  Modefty.  For, 
in  fine,  thofe  Difcourfes  argue  a  vicious  Inclination,  or  a 
Memory  ill  furnifh'd,  or  Curiofity  mifapplied  j  or  rather 
all  three.  For  certainly,  without  Pains,  it's  hard  to  glean 
fo  great  a  Provifion  oi  Amouretts  ;  and  without  fome  In- 
clination, as  hard  to  run  fuch  Lengths  in  the  Hiftory  of 
Intrigues. 

In  a  Word,  let  Modefty  not  only  chufe  the  Subjedt  of 
your  Converfation,  and  regulate  the  Management  of  it, 
but  tune  the  Voice,  and  order  the  Accent.  The  Tongue 
muft  not  break  out  into  Noife  and  Tumult;  like  the 
Platonick  Harmony  of  the  moving  Spheres ;  it  {hould 
charoi,  but  not  be  perceiv'd  at  a  Diftance.  Would  La- 
dies make  the  Purchafe  of  thofe  Virtues  their  Bufineis  as 
they  are  their  real  Concern,  they  M'ould  bid  fair  for  that 
Perfedion,  their  Profeftion,    Sex,   and  Station  require. 

There 


of  ?k  Gentleman  Inftrufied.      j^y 

There  are  others  indeed  neceflary,  but  becaufe  they  reach 
the  whole  Species,  and  concern  Men  no  lefs  than  Wo- 
men, I  (hall  refer  you  to  the  Catechifm  for  Inftrudlion. 
Befides,  too  many  Precepts  rather  fright  than  inftrudr, 
and  are  more  apt  to  call  us  into  Defpair,  than  to  raife  a 
Refolution  ofoblerving'em. 

Eynil.  I  thank  you  for  your  Charity,  Sir,  and  wifh  my 
felf  fo  happy  as  to  comply  with  your  Iniltrudion :  But 
they  feem  too  vague  ;  favour  me  therefore  with  a  Sum- 
mary of  thofe  A(5tions  I  muft  perform  each  Day.  Draw 
up  a  Scheme,  and  fet  me  a  Journal. 

Eufeh.  Alas!  Aladam,  you  may  as  well  ask  me  to  cut 
out  a  Manteau  for  the  Moon.  Circumftances  vary,  and 
cannot  be  brought  to  the  fame  Rule.  However,  I  will 
lay  a  Plan  before  you,  and  hope  your  Prudence  will  fit 
it  to  vour  Occaiions, 


D  I  A  L  O  G  U  E   VI. 

ji  Regulation   of  their  daily  /Idions, 

I. 

A  Neffeminate  Sabarlte  thank'd  the  Gods  that  he  had 
'*■*'  never  faen  the  Sun  rife  in  his  Life.  I  would  not 
have  Ladies  imitate  this  Pagan  Copy,  much  lefs,  mud 
they  value  themfelves  upon  fo  fuperlative  a  Lazinefs. 
Live  not  as  if  you  were  our  Antipodes.  Curiofity  is  fup- 
pos'd  to  bear  a  great  Sway  over  Female  Inclinations.  Let 
it  therefore  lead  you  to  this  great  Planet's  Levee  at 
leaft  in  December  and  ^January.  I  aflure  you,  Madam, 
it  rifes  with  more  Majefty  than  the  greateft  Monarch  ; 
and  this  Morning  Scene  out-fhines  the  Glow-worm 
Pageantry  of  the  Play-houfe.  It  gilds  the  Pleaven  with 
its  dazling  Beams.  It  turns  every  Drop  of  Dew  into 
fparkling  Diamonds,  and  commands  Nature  to  change 
her  Nightrail  into  Cloth  of  Gold  and  Embroidery.  Be- 
fides, it  wakes  almoft  every  Fart  of  thedrowfy  Creation- 
Birds  and  Beafts  begin  Mattim^  and  prockim  the  Glory 
of  their  omnipotent  Maker.  Why  fhould  Man  be  l«fs  ac- 
knowledging than  Btaft  ?  Or  Inftin<5t  work  more  forci- 
bly than  Reafon  ? 

!1   So 


ij8      A  Supplement  to  the  firft  Part 

11. 

So  foot!  as  you  are  up,  fall  upon  your  Knees,  and  a- 
dore  that  mighty  Being  that  made  you.  His  Greatnefs 
calls  for  Homage,  and  your  Dependance  ftands  oblig'd 
for  the  Payment.  Offer  up  every  Adion  of  the  D^y  to 
his  Glory  i  fuch  an  Intention  fantitifies  the  meaneil,  and 
ftampsa  new  Value  upon  the  molt  holy.  Ask  Pardon 
for  pail  Offences,  and  rather  refolve  to  die,  than  to  tranf- 
grefs  God's  C^ommands  for  the  future.  Sue  for  the  Sup- 
port of  his  Grace ;  without  this  you  are  impotent,  and 
with  it  invincible. 

III. 
Refle6l  what  Occafion  of  Sin  may  prefentit  felf,  and 
prevent  the  Danger  by  Prudence  and  Forecaft.  A  Temp- 
tation forcleen  is  almoil  overcome.  But  he  lies  at  the 
Mercy  of  an  Enemy,  who  is  alTaulted  by  Surprize  and 
Stratagem.  When  youdifcovcr  an  Ambufcade,  keep  at 
a  Diflancc  ;  to  tempt  Temptation  is  an  unfeafonable 
Bravery.  I  would  as  foon  roufe  a  lleeping  Lion  as  come 
within  its  Reach;  for,  in  fine,  the  Vidlory  is  not  fare, 
but  the  Peril  is  certain. 

IV. 
Stand  not  upon  meer  defenfive  War,  for  tho'  you  ftrug^- 
gle  handiomely  for  a  Time,  and  keep  your  Ground,  you 
will  at  length  be  over-power*d  with  Number  ;  if  you  in- 
tend to  come  off  with  ConquelV,  carry  War  into  the  E- 
nemy's  Dominions.  The  Advantage  for  the  moft  part 
lies  on  the  Aflailant's  Side.  Single  out  therefore  every 
Day  fome  Virtue,  and  make  fure  of  it  by  Praftice.  Tho 
Duty  of  a  Chriftian  is  not  only  to  fuller,  but  to  do;  by 
relifting  the  Allurement  of  Flefh  and  Blood  you  lofe  no 
Ground  ;  by  exerciiing  Virtue  you  gain  upon  the  Devil, 
and  fo  increafe  your  Forces,  and  weaken  his. 
V. 
When  you  have  difcharged  your  Duly  to  God,  fpend 
fome  time  upon  the  Government  of  your  Family  ;  the 
Bufmels  within  Doors  lies  upon  your  Hands,  and  is  part 
of  your  Province  ;  and  you  mult  not  do  all  by  Deputy. 
Indeed  I  would  not  ha\e  you  enter  upon  too  minute  a 
Detail,  nor  regiller  the  Hen-rood  in  your  Table  Book.  It's 
below  your  Station  to  hunt  every  Day  after  Hens  Nefls 
as  Madam  L.  did  j  or  to  calculate  the  Number  of  Duck- 


of  the  Gentleman  Injlru&ed.      i  j^ 

lings ;  nor  fhould  you  furvey  the  Hog-fty  to  mark  the 
worll  of  the  Litter  for  the  Tithe-Pig;  thefe  Anions  fa- 
vour of  Meannefs,  they  argue  Avarice  to  Excels,  and  fit 
unhandfomely  on  Quahty. 

When  you  fit  at  your  Toilet,  keep  Vanity  at  a  Di- 
ftance,  and  remember  you  trim  a  Body  that  once  will 
fmk  into  Corruption.  Look  upon  your  Robes  as  Badges 
of  Lifarny;  and  refleft.  Ladies  had  never  been  fine,  had 
they  remain'd  innocent.  I  know,  indeed,  as  the  World 
goes,  Nobility  muft  make  a  Figure  :  Quality  and  Title 
without  Appearance  will  never  draw  Refpett: ;  they  re- 
quire a  Support.  The  Senfes  of  the  Mob  muft  be  ftruck, 
and  their  Imagination  affefted  ;  for  they  feldom  dire  be- 
yond the  Surface,  and  meafure. Quahty  by  gaudy  Trap- 
pings and  Equipage.  However,  tho'  you  ufe  thefe  Toys, 
your  Aftedion  muft  foar  above  'em,  and  you  muft  never 
efteem  the  worft  Farts  of  Beafts  to  be  ihe  greateft  Fer- 
fedion  of  your  Sex. 

The  brave  EJiher  was  raifed  from  Subjedlion  to  Com- 
mand, and  from  Servitude  to  the  Throne.  '  She  walk'd 
on  Silks,  and  fpit  in  Silver  :  Nature  had  made  her  a  com.- 
pleat  Beauty,  arid  Providence  a  mighty  Emprefs;  and 
yet  fhe  protelted  in  the  Sight  of  God,  that  her  Greatnefs 
was  a  Burthen,  and  her  Finery  a  Torment.  Thou  know- 
eft,  my  God,  faid  fhe,  that  meet  Neceffity  obliges  me 
to  live  in  Pomp  and  Glory,  not  Choice;  and  that  I  fcorn 
this  glittering  Diadem,  the  Envy  of  a  thouland  Ladies, 
and  the  Defire  of  more.     I  wear  it  with  Regret,  and  on- 
ly when  I  muft  appear  in  Publick,  and  lay  it  down  when 
I  retire  to  my  Apartment.     The  Turn  of  Fortune  has 
wrought  no  Change  in  me  :  I  am  a  Slave  on  the  Throne, 
a  poor  Caitiff  in  Embroidery,  and  a  Beggar  in  the  Face 
of  Plenty.     Tho'  I  poflefs  the  Scepter,  toother  with  the 
Wealth  of  4//tf,  1  enjoy  nothing  but  the  Satisfadion  of 
proftrating  my  felf,  and  my  Grandeur  at  the  Fcjot  of  thy 
Altars.     For,  in  fine,  the  Contempt  of  my  Greatnefs  fJics 
higher  than  my  Fortune,  and  the  Excefs  of  Pleafures  is 
the  Objedl  of  my  Averfion.     Here  is  a  feraphick  Tranf- 
port  for  ye!  it's  all  Light,  all  Fire.     A  Heart  that  can 
thus  fcorn  an  Empire  is  larger  than  the  World,  and  moie 
capacious  than  the  Empyremn.     She  was  a  Queen  with- 
out, all  Angelj  and    all   Seraphin  within.     Did    Ladies 

brinz 


i5o     A  Supplement  to  the  frjl  Part 

bring  fuch  noble  Sentiments  to  the  Toilet,  they  would 
charm  Heaven ;  and  whilft  Men  admire  their  Bravery, 
the  very  Angels  vi^ould  fall  in  Love  v/iih  iheir  Virtue : 
for  then  they  would  meafure  the  Gaudry  of  their  Man- 
teaus  precifely  by  the  Length  of  Quality,  not  by  the  Ex- 
tent of  Pride  or  Vanity  ;  they  would  keep  up  to  the  Exi- 
gency of  their  Rank,  without  deviating  from  the  Duty 
of  their  Religion. 

VII. 

After  Dinner  you  may  employ  fome  time  at  your  Nee- 
dle, or  other  Works  luitable  to  your  Condition.  Augu- 
jlus  defar  thought  not  fuch  Occupations  below  the  Dig- 
nity of  his  Wife  and  Daughters :  Yet  he  was  a  great 
Man,  and  thofe  Ladies  mighty  Princefles:  And  I  fuppofe 
our  Lc\ds  would  not  difpute  the  Wall  with  him,  nor  the 
Wives  the  Precedence  with  his  Children.  The  Romans 
kept  the  DillafF  of  Queen  Tanaquii  W\ih  more  Care,  than 
the  Lance  of -^ow«/«j,  to  teach  Pofterity,  that  it  was  no 
!efs  neceflary  for  the  Good  of  the  State,  to  propofe  to  La- 
dies Examplesof  Labour,  than  to  Men  Patterns  of  Bravery. 
And  Solomon  in  the  Charaif  er  he  has  drawn  of  a  Heroine, 
flourifnes  upon  her  Oeconomy  and  Labour  She  puts,  fays 
he,  her  Hands  to  work,  and  then  opend  'em  to  the  Necef- 
fu'tes  of  the  Indigent ;  Jhe  fpun  both  Linen  and  I'VooUen  : 
Yet  fhe  is  not  reprefented  as  a  Country  Dame,  but  as  a 
Peerefs :  For  her  Husband  fat  cum  Senatorihus  terrtc,  i.  e. 
in  the  Houfe  of  Lords^  or  atleaftof  Commons.  Wheels 
indeed  are  at  prelent  more  out  of  Faftiion,  and  Ladies 
will  no  more  fpin,  than  make  Bone-Lace.  Seeing  Cu- 
ftom  has  degraded  the  Employment,  1  will  not  counfcl 
you  to  re-inftate  it  in  itspriftine  Dignity.  But  however. 
Needle  work  is  reputable,  and  the  molt  qualified  Ladies 
may  embroider  without  defcending  from  their  Station. 
Believe  me,  Mndam,  Idlenefs  is  an  ill  Employment;  and 
file  who  has  nothing  to  do,  will  be  tempted  to  do  more 
than  will  Hand  with  Confcience,  and  perchance  with  Ho- 
nour. For  when  we  have  no  good  Thoughts,  we  arc 
generally  pefter'a  with  bad  ones;  and  when  ill  is  in  our 
Fancy,  it  Aides  with  cafe  into  the  Will. 
VIIL 

You  may  feafon  Work  with  Reading,  for  though  Wo- 
men ftould  not  pretend  to  commence  Dodlors,  yet  I 
would  not  have  'em  forfwear  Knowledge,  nor  make  a  Vov7 

of 


of  the  Gentleman  Inftm&ed.       i6t 

of  Stupidity, God  hasfavour'd  you  witha  reafonable  Soul, 
enrich 'd  it  with  the  Science  of  thole  Things,that  give  Life 
to  a  civil  Converfation,  and  inftruft  you  in  the  Duty  of 
your  Profeflion.  For  your  Court  AlTurance,  your  Ad- 
dreiJes,  in  the  Modes,  and  Geilures  of  Salutation,  your 
graceful  Entrance  into  a  Room,  and  all  the  other  pretty 
Accomplifliments  of  the  Sex,  are  dead,  unlefs  enlivened 
by  a  handfome  Difcourfe.  Is  it  a  mute  Scene,  a  Barths- 
lomevj  Puppet-fhew,  that  furprizes  fome,  and  furnifhes 
Matter  of  Laughter  to  others  ?  Is  it  not  ridiculous  to  fee 
a  Lady  u'ith  a  great  deal  of  Formality  drive  to  a  Ren- 
dezvous^ and  at  the  End  of  a  fliort  Complement  fall  im- 
mediately upon  Fontanges  and  Foretops  ?  So  much  Pomp, 
ib  much  Ceremony,  out-do  the  Occafion ;  the  Enter- 
tainment is  too  trivial  for  the  Solemnity.  Thofe  that  will 
not  learn  to  fpeak  aproj?us,  fhould  learn  methinks  to  hold 
their  Peace  ;  for  it's  much  better  to  fpeak  nothing,  than 
to  bolt  out  Follies. 

Indeed,  it's  not  necellary  to  rival  the  Knowledge  of 
the  Sybils,  nor  the  Science  of  theMufes;  fhe  fhould  not 
wade  too  deep  into  Controverfy,  nor  foar  fo  high  as  Di- 
vinity. Thefe  Studies  lie  out  of  a  Lady's  Way:  They 
fly  up  to  the  Head,  and  not  only  intoxicate  weak  Brains, 
but  turn  them:  Trey  engender  Pride,  and  blow  us  up 
with  Self-conceitednels,  and  when  all  theie  meet,  we  (hail 
be  apt  to  meafure  Faith  by  our  private  Judgment,  and  to 
fet  up  our  ill-fliap'd  Notions  againil  the  receiv'd  Tenets 
of  our  Religion. 

Read  therefore  thofe  Books  that  lead  to  Piety:  They 
enlighten  the  Underllanding,  and  warm  the  Will  -,  they 
lay  open  the  Cauieof  our  Miicarriages,  and  at  the  fame 
Time  prefcribe  the  Remedy.  They  neither  flatter  Quali- 
ty, nor  infult  Peafantry,  but  like  Pictures  made  to  bight, 
they  look  equally  upon  all :  In  fine,  they  refrefh  the  Me- 
mory, enlarge  the  Underitanding,  and  inflame  the  Will, 
and  fo,  thro'  Pleafure,  inltil  both  Wifdom  and  Virtue. 

IX. 

You  may  afterwards  either  return  Vifits,  or  receive 
them  ;  but  perform  both  with  as  much  Expedition  as  Ci- 
vility and  Ceremony  will  permit.  Long  Converiiftions 
flag,  they  languifli  at  an  Hour's  End,  and  fill  into  meer 
Chat  or  Impertincncics.  For  Women  have  feldom  Mate- 
rials to  furuilh  a  long  Difcourle,  unlefs   they   comment 

M  upoa 


1^2     A  Supplement  to  thejirji  Part 

upon  their  Neighbour's  Failures,  and  turn  their  Misfor- 
tune into  [he  Subjedt  of  Divert'kjn.  Now  to  laugh  at  a- 
nother's  Expence,  i'«  not  only  difingcnuous,  but  unchrifti- 
an.  Rather  take  a  Turn  fometimes  lo  the  Play-houfe ;  but 
he  fure  firft  the  Piece  be  cleanly,  clear  complexion'd, 
n  ither  larded  with  Smut  nor  Blafphemy  ;  that  it  neither 
arraigns  Virtue,  nor  buffoons  Religion;  that  it  has  no- 
thhg  ofFenfive  to  the  Eye,  nothing  to  the  Ear.  In  fine, 
that  it  be  either  inlbudiveor  innocent.  For  if  it  makes 
bold  v/ith  God,  or  lafhes  his  Miniftersj  if  it  encourages 
Vice,  and  hoots  at  Virtue,  you  muft  no  more  appear 
there,  than  in  a  Peft-houfe.  Diverlions,  bought  at  the 
Expence  of  Confcience,  are  too  dearly  purchas'd. 

X. 

Before  you  go  to  Bed,  withdraw  into  your  Clofet,and 
take  an  impartial  View  of  your  Confcience :  If  it  up- 
braids you  with  no  crying  Sin,  give  Glory  to  God,  and 
with  bended  Knees,  and  an  humble  Heart,  thank  him  for 
the  Favour.  For  not  your  Virtue,  but  his  Grace,  has 
kept  you  upon  your  Legs,  and  either  remov'd  or  van- 
quilh'd  the  I'emptation.  But  if  you  have  ftray'd  from 
your  Duty,  fue  for  Pardon ;  and  lay  not  your  Body  to 
Reft,  till  you  have  obtain'd  Quiet  for  your  Soul.  When 
the  Confcience  is  diforder'd.  Sleep  can  fcarce  be  found  ; 
a  wounded  Soul  keeps  the  Body  awake  in  Spight  of  0- 
pium.  And  though  it  does  not,  you  fhall  no  more  (hut 
your  Eyes  in  a  State  of  Sin,  than  fleep  on  the  Brink  of  a 
Pret  i  lice.  For  alas !  How  many  does  Death  allail  in 
their  Beds,  at  uniware?  ?  And  what  is  worfe,  unprovi- 
ded? Poor  Creatures !  'Fhey  awake  in  Hell,  and  only  re- 
cover their  Senfes  to  feel  the  Extremity  of  Torments. 
But  when,  by  a  hearty  Repentance,  you  have  calm'd  Con- 
fcience, you  may  deep  fecurely.  Though  Death  fteal 
upon  you  by  Surprize,  it  will  not  find  you  unprepar'd  ; 
it  can  only  convey  you  from  a  tranfitory  Repofe  into 
eternal  Reft.  Here  is  a  fhort  Journal  of  a  Chriftian 
J.ife,  and  methinks  it  mayeaiily  be  brought  to  Pradlice. 
A  Lady,  that  can't  fuffer  fo  fmall  a  Conftraint,  muft  be 
ftrangely  fond  of  Liberty. 

£w/7.  Vv^ell,  the  Scheme  feems  pra6ticable,  and  if  no- 
thing elfe  be  requir'd  to  live  like  a  Lady,  and  a  Chriftian, 
Virtue  encroaches  not  fo  much  upon  Freedom  as  I  imagi- 
ned. Pray,  Sir,  go  on,  to  oblige  me  with  a  fliort  Comment 
upon  the  Duty  of  a  Mother.  D  I  A- 


of  the  Gentleman  Inftm&ed,      i6^ 

DIALOGUE    VII. 

The  Duty  of  a  Mother. 

£»/^^.T^HI  S  Command,  Honour  thy  Father  and  thy 
•*•  Mother,  is  reciprocal,  and  not  only  obliges 
Children  to  refpedland  revere  their  Parents,  but  alfo  en- 
joins Parents  to  love  their  Children;  and  this  Obligation 
comes  not  only  from  the  Decalogue,  but  immediately 
from  Nature.  Nor  does  fhe  dilcharge  the  Duty  of  a  Mo- 
ther, who  fawns  on,  and  carelles  her  OfF-fpring  ;  who 
pampers  their  Bodies,  and  wraps  them  up  in  Silk  and  Cot- 
ton. No,  no,  her  Care  muft  reach  their  mod  fublime 
Part,  the  Soul.  This  muft  be  cultivated  and  manur'dwirh 
Principles  and  Precepts,  that  it  may  anfwer  the  great  End 
of  its  Creation.  Now,  becaufe  the  Malesyfo  foon  as  they 
are  capable  of  Jnftrudtion,  are  taken  from  the  A4other,  I 
fliall  only  touch  upon  the  Education  that  fits  the  Females. 

Teach  them  betimes  the  End  of  their  Creation,  their 
Duty  towards  God,  and  the  Obligations  of  Religion.  Ex- 
plain the  Creed,  and  the  Decalogue ;  the  firlt  inltruifts  'em 
in  Faith,  the  fecond  in  Manners;  and  omit  not  the  Pains 
of  the  Wicked,  and  the  Joys  of  the  Juft :  The  one  will 
fright  from  Sin,  the  other  will  allure  'em  to  Virtue;  nor 
fufFer'em  only  to  reft  in  the  Knowledge,  but  inure  them 
to  the  Practice,  by  all  the  little  Arguments  of  Kindnefs 
and  Authority  ;  and  fecure  the  Obfervance  by  the  Tenures 
of  Love  and  Obedience.  "Seldom  apply  Severity  till  mild 
Methods  prove  inelteClual :  For  Children  muft  not  be 
taught  Piety  (like  Dogstofet)  v/ith  Stripesand  ill  Ufage; 
They  never  do  a  Thing  heartily,  when  compell'd  by 
Force,  and  oftentimes  hate  thole  Exercifes  at  Thirty, 
for  which  they  were  chaftifed  at  Ten.  Some  Years  ago,  I 
fell  into  the  Company  of  my  Lady  N.  She  ply'd  me 
with  fuch  a  long-winded  Panegyrick  of  her  little  Daugh- 
ter, that  I  began  to  wifh  the  Child  lefs  accomplifh'd,  or 
the  Mother  lefs  fond  :  She  was  Beauty  in  Life,  and  Wit 
in  Perfe6lion.  Nay,  and  fo  skilful  in  the  Ways  of  the 
Lord,  that  I  fufpected  fhe  had  made  at  ieaft  two  Voyauej 
to  Heaven,  or  had  hit  upon  an  Invention  to  travel  toFa- 
radife  by  Scale  and  Compals. 

M  2  Well, 


164     A  Supplement  to  the  firft  Pdrt 

Well,  Madam,  faidi,  fuch  a  Wir,  fuch  a  Divine  In- 
fant, I  pre  fume,  knows  the  Catechifm. 

The  Catechifm  !.  replied  fhe,  I  hope  fo:  And  the  firft 
Chapter  of  Gc»r/i;  alfo.  And  then  immediately  was  I 
regal'd  with  a  Scene  of  Qiieftion  and  Anfwer.  A/->/«.Who 
Was  the  firft  Mani'  Ch.  Adam.  Moth.  Who  was  the  old- 
eft  Man?  Ch.  M^thufalem.  Moth.  Who  was  the  wifeft 
Man?  Ch.  Solomon.  Nay,  cries  Mamma,  fhe  can  tell 
you  the  Wives  of  Abraham.,  Ifaac,  and  yacoh. 

You  have  led  her,  I  fuppofe,  faid  I,  to  JrfephBen' 
Ifrael  the  Jevuijb  Herald,  and  intend  to  enter  her  in  the 
Synaf^ogue.     Is  this  all! 

All  !  anfwered  the  Lady,  and  a  great  all  too.  Nay,  re- 
plied I,  it's  nothing  at  all  to  the  Purpofe:  Indeed  fhe  has 
learnt  theNurfe'sCatechifm^ut  not  the  Church's.  Why? 
The  Jews  know  this,  and  believe  it  too,  and  yet  are  not 
Chriftians.  Come,  Madam,  leave  thefe  odd  Methods  of 
Inftru6iion,  and  come  up  to  the  Grounds  of  Chriftianity. 
plant  the  Principles  of  Faith  and  Godlinefs  fo  deep,  that 
Eeithcr  the  Impaifeof  Flefh  can  fhake  them,  nor  the  bat- 
tering Engines  of  the  Devil  move  them.  A  Bead-roll  of 
cramp  Names  may  polifh  and  refine  the  Memory,  but 
what  is  this  to  the  capital  Point,  Salvation  ? 

II. 

Inftrut^ion,  unlefs  arm'd  with  Example,  will  prove  in- 
fignificant.  Young  Creatures  fooner  yield  to  that,  than 
Rlietorick,  and  give  more  Credit  to  the  Eyes  than  to  Rea- 
fon.  If  therefore  the  Mother's  Condudt  preaches  Vice, 
tho*  her  Mouth  dilates  upon  the  Necelfity  of  Virtue,  the 
Child  will  fuppofe  her  in  Jeft,  and  rather  fteer  by  her 
Pra6tice,  than  her  Precept.  Wo  be  to  thofe  Mothers, 
who  make  Daughters  Witnefles  of  their  iDiforders,  and 
thus  immortalize  their  Tranfgreflions  by  recommending 
them  to  their  Defcendants. 

III. 

Let  not  Romances  come  within  Reach  of  a  young  La- 
dy :  They  are  the  Poifon  of  Youth,  and  murther  Souls, 
as  fureas  Arfenick  or  Ratsbane  kills  Bodies.  Their  Style, 
JMatter,  Language,  and  Defign,  are  pointed  againft  the 
■Defence  of  Virtue.  They  fully  the  Fancy,  over-heat 
Paflion,  and  av/ake  Folly ;  and  like  lewd  Pidures,  are  the 
worfe  for  being  excellent.  They  kindle  thofe  Flames 
that  cannot  be  extinguifhed  without  Trouble,  nor  enter- 

tain'd 


of  the  Gentleman  JnjiYuEled.      1^5 

tain'd  without  a  Crime.  Nay,  like  the  Fire  of  Hell,  they 
are  almoft  eternal,  an  1  what  is  worle,  the  very  Torment 
pleafes:  And  fo,  2l%  Nero  d.\(\  Rome ^  we  behold  our  i'elves 
in  Flames,  with  Pleafure  and  Tranfport.  In  a  Word, 
Madam,  a  Romance  is  a  bewitching  Impofture,  it  fafci- 
nates  the  Imagination  with  a  Fool's  Paradife  ;  it  commu- 
nicates the  Charms  to  the  Intelleir,  and  then  hurries  the 
Will  God  knows  whither.  Like  fweet  Morfels,  it  fawns 
upon  the  Palate  to  captivate  the  Heart,  raid  plays  with 
the  Organ  to  cut  our  Throats :  In  fine,  they  give  the 
Paflion  they  reprelent,  and  fo,  by  an  unhappy  Inverlion, 
the  very  Copy  produces  an  Original. 

Alas!  when  a  young  Creature  reads  over  flourifli'd  De- 
fcriptions  of  enchanted  Caftles,  of  glorious  C>aroui"els,  of 
fumptuous  Banquets,  of  conquering  Beauties,  and  cap- 
tive Knights ;  what  a  fine  Landskip  will  they  draw  in 
her  Head  ?  How  powerfully  will  they  work  upon  her 
tender  Heart  ?  What  a  Tumult  Vv^ill  they  raife  in  her 
Bread  ?  Thofe  Scenes,  tho'  meerly  romantick,  follicit  in 
good  earneft;  they  reinforce  Paflion,  and  are  mighty  Re- 
cruits to  Folly  ;  they  fet  the  Sex  into  a  Fit  of  Longing  : 
(for  tho'  Women  were  made  of  Bone,  they  retain  all  the 
Pliablenefs  of  Flefh.)  How  often  will  (he  envy  a  Philoclea 
for  having  a  Pyrocles  at  her  Feet,  and  how  ferioufly  will 
fhe  wifh  herfelfin  the  Place  oi  Pamelia.  Nay,  it's  odds, 
when  the  Fancy  is  warm'd,  and  the  Imagination  charm'd 
with  the  advantageous  Chara6lers  of  thofe  Platonick 
Knights,  fhe  may  fall  in  Love  with  the  bare  Produdt  of 
Sidney^  Brain,  and  become  a  real  Slave  to  Fable  and  Fifti-  ■ 
on.  Or  tho' file  arrives  not  to  fuch  a  Pitch  of  Frenzy, 
it's  very  probable  fhe  will  attempt  fome  Conquefl,  and 
fpread  Nets  to  enfnare  a  Gallant,  that  will  as  fatally'en- 
tangle  her.  Nor  can  fhe  fail  of  Expedients  to  delude  her 
Guards :  The  Author  that  kindles  the  PafTion,  (hews  the 
Way  to  carry  on  the  Intrigue,  he  provides  her  the  Me- 
thods and  Stratagem,  and  warrants  Succefs,  and  foa  Fa- 
ble is  turn'd  into  a  real  Story  :  But  with  this  Difference, 
that  inflead  of  a  Prince,  Madamoifelle  goes  off  with  a 
V^alet  de  Chambre. 

IV. 

Lead 'em  not  into  Company,  till  a  ftrong  Virtue  arms 

'em  againfl  the  Danger  of  Temptation,  their  Senfes  mull 

be  guarded,  and  ill  Objects  be  kept  at  a  great  Diftance. 

M  ^  Fleih 


i^^      A  SuppiHMBNT  to  thefirft  Part 

Flefh  and  Blood  have  a  natural  Tendency  to  Extrava- 
g-ince,  and  will  fcarce  Hand  unconcern'd  under  the  Al- 
lurements of  Example  and  Invitation.  It's  dangerous, 
fays  St.  JuJliM,  for  a  Man  to  admire  the  very  Virtues  of 
a  Woman  ;  and,  I  believe,  it's  not  more  fecure  for  a 
Woman  to  ftand  the  Flattery  and  Courtfhip  of  Men. 
Now  when  both  Sexes  meet,  Gallantry  always  manages 
the  Converfation.  Would  you  thruft  a  Child  into  a  Pell- 
Houfe  without  Neceffity,  and  without  an  Amuletto  ? 
Why  then  will  y-ou  lead  her  to  confus'd  Meetings  ?  In 
thofe  Rendezvous^  as  well  as  at  C  on jl  amino  fie  ^  fomc 
Body  always  carries  the  Plague- Sores,  and  gives  the  In- 
fedion. 

Emil.  You  are,  I  perceive,  an  Enemy  to  Breeding, 
"will  you  have  Ladies  as  unpolifh'd  as  Shepherdefles  ? 
Where  can  they  learn  Behaviour  but  in  Converfation  and 
Company  ? 

Eufcb.  Madam,  you  miftake  me,  I  am  not  againft 
Breeding,  but  I  am  for  Virtue.  And,  I  muft  tell  you, 
this  will  turn  to  better  Account  than  that :  For  by  Breed- 
ing, I  fuppofe,  you  mean  a  Gracefulnefs  of  Conver- 
fation, a  decent  Aflurance,  together  with  fome  pretty 
Poftures  alamode.  Thefe  Qualifications,  I  confefs,  are 
commendable,  becaufe  they  introduce  us  into  Company 
with  Advantage  ;  but  then  they  muft  not  be  magnified 
beyond  Proportion.  I  would  not  have  Adothers  fo  fan- 
taftically  fond  of  them,  as  to  place  'em  among, the  top 
Perfections,  cf  the  Sex ;  nor  to  expofe  a  Child's  Inno- 
cence for  a  Brace  of  Grimaces.  For,  in  fine,  they  are 
ea.'ilv  gained,  and  Ladies,  by  the  Afliftance  of  Virtue, 
may  be  acceptable  without  them  And  I  am  apt  to  be- 
lieve that  a  native  Beauty,  without  thele  acquired  Em- 
bellifliments,  if  it  be  waited  on  by  Modefty,  Meeknefs, 
and  Devotion,  will  fooner  find  a  Match,  than  Beauty 
without  Piety,  though  fet  off  with  the  moft  ornamental 
Graces  of  Education.  But  why  muft  fhe  converie  with 
Men  for  Education  ?  Would  you  have  her  pafs  through  a 
Courfe  of  Debauchery  ?  Or  do  you  think  flie  cannot  be 
genteel,  unlefs  fhe  be  tainted  ?  Would  you  have  her  blaf- 
pheme  like  a  Sea  Captain,  orcurfe  like  a  Drayman  ?  I 
grant,  (he  may  learn  this  hellifli  Dialed:  of  Men,  and 
may  be  courted  out  of  all  Senfe  of  Honour  and  Probi- 
ty.    But  thcfc,  I  fuppofe,  are  no  Female  Qiialifications, 

and 


of  the  Gentleman  Inflru^ied.      i6y 

and  therefore,  till  they  receive  the  Stamp  of  publick  Ap- 
probation, pray  let  tender  Virgins  forbear  fuch  dangerous 
Haunts 

Luc.  Under  Favour,  this  Caution  goes  too  far,  you 
will  bar  hyiglijh  Ladies  the  Liberty  of  the  Church,  as 
the  Turks  do  the  Afiaticks  that  of  the  Mofques  ;  for  there 
is  a  mixt  Conflux,  and  I  have  feenas  fine  Gentlemen  at 
the  Sermon,  as  at  a  Ball. 

Eufeb.  Really,  Madam,  I  am  fo  far  from  debarring 
Ladies  the  Freedom  of  the  Church,  that  1  counfel  'em  to 
appear  oftner  there.  But  then  I  am  for  introducing  a 
Jewijh  Cuftom,  /'.  e.  for  feparating  the  Women  from  the 
Men,  and  for  drawing  a  Curtain  between  'em.  Thoughts, 
I  am  fure,  would  be  more  recolle6l:ed,  and  Piety  would 
go  on  more  evenly.  But  as  things  are  carried,  thefe  ve- 
ry Meetings  are  not  fecure,  and  Virtue  is  expos'd  to 
Temptations.  Bad  Defigns  are  often  laid  in  this  San6lua- 
ry,  and  the  Intrigue  is  compleated  in  more  lewd  Places. 
For  in  Truth,  People  appear  before  the  Lord, not  in  Sack- 
cloth, but  in  Gold  and  Silver  ;  and  one  would  think  they 
came  rather  to  commit  new  Sins,  than  to  cancel  the  paft. 
The  Ladies  fit  on  Cock-horfe  upon  Scaiiblds  in  open  View, 
as  if  they  were  at  the  Theatre,  and  perch  about  the 
Crowd  to  be  gaz'd  at.  And  as  they  are  feated  advan- 
tageoufly  to  be  feen,  fo  their  Elevation  gives  them  a  fair 
Opportunity  to  fee;  and  thus  the  Danger  is  reciprocal. 
Notvvithftanding  it's  a'Chriftian's  Duty  to  goto  Church, 
and  this  is  his  Warrant ;  and  if  we  take  a  litileCare,  God 
will  not  let  us  mifcarry  for  Obedience.  Befides,  though 
People  bring  ill  Defigns,  the  Majefty  of  the  Place,  the 
Solemnity  of  the  Adion,  or  at  leaft  the  Zeal  of  the 
Preacher  may  ftifle  'em,  and  keep  in  Awe  and  Refped: 
the  moil  wild  Nature,  and  (o  they  who  came  Sinners, 
may  return  Penitent. 

But  this  concerns  not  thofe  Meetings  where  hoih  Sexes 
convene  to  dance  and  fport.  Neither  carry  Modefty  or 
Reftraint  to  thofe  Rendezvous  I  Thefe  Virtues  are  too 
fupercilious  and  cenforious  for  the  Occafion  ;  Seriouf- 
ncfs  and  Thinking  are  left  at  home,  or  difmlll  at  tlie 
Door,  and  Piety  never  obtains  a  Ticket,  lo  that  People 
come  here  unguarded,  and  Virtue  witliout  Defence  : 
Befides,  the  Parade,  the  Gaudry,  and  Gaiety  of  the  Com- 
pany follicit  hard,  and  plead  for  Diforder.  The  one  be- 
M  4  witches 


i6%      A  Supplement  to  the  firft  Fart 

witches  the  Eye,  the  other  the  Heart:  And  then  Mirth 
emboldens  Paffion,  and  invites  it  to  Aftion.  Soft  Mufick 
doubles  the  Charm,  and  wanton  Airs  reinforce  it.  They 
difarm  (Jaution,  and  enei  vate  Courage  ;  and  then,  when 
the  Collation  has  boil'd  up  the  Blood,  and  put  the  Hu- 
mours in  a  Ferment,  without  Doubt,  Virtue  is  in  Dan- 
ger; the  Ground  is  ilippery,  the  Tide  runs  high  againft 
Flefh  and  Blood,  and  will  certainly  carry  down  a  tender 
Virgin,  with  a  young  Virtue,  into  Indecencies. 

Emil.  You  are,  1  perceive,  for  clapping  up  Ladies  into 
Convents  like  Veftals ;  or  at  lead  for  conlining  them  to 
back  Apartments,  as  in  Spain  and  Iraly.  But  Solitude 
will  not  agree  with  oxir  Complexion  ;  we  are  of  a  more 
fociable  Temper:  And  belides,  I  am  of  an  Opinion,  that 
Reftraint  is  no  fure  Guard  to  Virtue.  A  "Woman  of 
Piety  will  keep  up  to  the  Duties  of  Religion  in  Company, 
but  Retirement  will  fcarce  fecure  the  Honour  of  a  P>ro- 
llitute  The  Itnliatis  and  Spd/3ijh  Donna  s  are  not  more 
regular  than  our's  ;  tho'  there  is  much  Caution  in  thofe 
Kingdoms,  there  is  more  Mifcarriage:  Nay,  I  have  read 
in  Lery,  that  the  BrafiUaa  Ladies,  where  Manteaus  are 
out  of  Fafhion,  live  within  the  Bounds  of  Honour  and 
Decency. 

Enjl'/j.  God  forbid  Ifliould  think  ofcloyftering  up  La- 
dies •,  thole  Retreats  are  fafhionable  indeed  beyond  Seas, 
but  they  are  heterodox  and  illegal  in  England.  They 
have  been  voted  down  by  both  floufes  as  ufelefs  and  fu- 
perilitious,  and  who  dares  oppofe  his  fingle  Opinion  a- 
gainft  the  joint  Judgment  of  thofe  grave  Senators  ?  Li- 
berty is  the  darling  Privilege  of  £»^//y7:7Wf ^,and  theFond- 
nefs  reaches  the  Sex.  Keep  it  in  GoJ'sName,  but  ftrain 
not  the  i^rerogative,  for  Liberty  in  its  full  Latitude,  is  a 
greater  Nufance  than  Slavery  ;  and  to  be  at  Freedom  to 
do  any  thing,  is  no  lefs  prejudicial  to  Society  and  Man- 
ners, than  a  Power  to  do  nothing.  Virtue  confifts  in  a 
Mean,  Ladies  m/aft  not  be  mew'd  up  like  Nuns  on  the 
one  Side,  nor  muft  they  wander  about  like  Vagabonds 
on  the  other.  I  would  net  have  'em  kept  Prilbners  in 
their  Mother's  Houfe,  nor  yet  he  Strangers  to  it.  But 
then,  like  Prifoncrs  of  State,  they  fhould  not  walk  abroad 
without  a  Keeper,  and  fhould  be  debarr'd  thofe  Haunts 
that  may  furprize  their  Vigilance,  and  aHail  their  Virtue. 
Madam  Di?}ah  would  needs  give  the  Ladies  of  Salem  a 
■     -        ■  Vifir, 


of  the  Gentleman  InjiniEted.      16 p 

Vifit,  flie  had  a  Curiofity  to  view  their  Modes, and  to  try 
their  Breeding ;  but  alas !  fhe  loft  her  Honour  in  the 
Voyage,  and  return'd  with  lefs  Credit  than  flie  went. 
1  fear  our  Englip  Daml'els  meet  with  the  fame  Adven- 
ture, and  buy  their  Breeding  by  tlie  Forfeiture  of  their 
Innocence ;  For  alas !  wc  have  Sichems  as  well  as  Ca- 
naan, and  young  Gentlewomen,  perchance,  not  better 
prepar'd  for  Defence,  than  the  Daughter  oi  Jacob. 

I  have  no  Talent  at  Parallels,  nor  am  able  to  deter- 
mine whether  the  SpaMijh  Donna  s  Virtue  falls  fhort  of 
that  of  our  Engitjh  Ladies.  But  if  tliey  are  bad  under 
Reftraint,  Liberty  will  never  mend  them.  Opportunity 
makes  the  Thief,  Temptation  prefles  harder,  near,  than 
at  a  Diftance.  It  rifes  upon  Sight,  for  Senfe  is  ftronger 
than  Memory,  and  Life  than  Painting.  Now  thofe  who 
rack  their  Wits  to  find  a  Temptation,  will  fcarce  dif- 
pute  againft  it,  if  it  falls  in  their  Way  ;  befides,  free 
Commerce  meets  more  Occaiions  in  a  Week,  than  Itali- 
ans, or  Spanijh,  under  a  Confinement,  are  able  to  pro- 
cure in  a  Year. 

I  can  give  no  Account  of  the  Brajilian  Modefty,  nor 
intend  to  argue  Pro  or  Con,  whether  fine  Cloaths,  or 
none  at  all,  are  more  dangerous  j  however,  I  would  not 
have  young  Ladies  brought  up  by  the  Standard  of  the 
Line.  I  am  not  in  Love  with  your  Equino6fial  Cafui- 
ftry ;  nor  admire  the  T'ofinbeian  Modefty  half  fo  much 
as  old  Lery.  Your  Behaviour  del  Cabo  will  not  relifli  in 
Europe,  nor  your  Adamitical  Garments  fence  Virtue  in 
London.  Nothing  can  check  Nature  but  good  Principles, 
and  great  Caution.  Nay,  Virtue,  tho'  folid,  muft  not  be 
trufted  too  far  j  for  if  it  be  prefs'd  too  Home,  'twill 
march  off,  and  give  us  the  Slip. 

Wherefore,  to  conclude,  lead  not  your  Daughters  unto 
Balls,  without  Neceffity  or  Civility  require  their  Pre- 
lence,  and  even  feldom  in  thofe  Circumftances.  Such 
Nouriflmient  is  too  ftrong  for  weak  Stomachs,  and  I 
fhall  not  wonder  they  lofe  their  Health,  if  they  feed  io 
foul.  To  guard  Chaftity  without  Spot  or  Stain,  is  no 
ealy  Task  ;  it  moves  upon  a  fteep  Afcent.  Now  thofe 
who  talk  and  laugh  can  fcarce  ftrain  up  a  Hill.  If  Care 
and  Pains  will  hardly  do,  what  will  become  of  thofe 
that  are  rock'd  in  Pleafure,  and  lie  under  all  the  Inftrudli- 
pns  of  Debauchery  ?    But  I  forbear  to  enlarge  upon 

the 


170     A  Supplement  to  the  firfl  Fart 

the  Subjedl,  the  Pradice  won't  bear  a  Defence.  When 
the  Caufe  is  naught,  we  (hould  not  ftrain  for  Pretences  : 
In  a  Word,  it's  certain,  fuch  Converfations  are  dange- 
rous, they  roufe  bad  Humours,  they  vitiate  the  Fancy, 
and  prepare  the  Will  for  Rebellion. 

EmiL  Too  free  Converfation  is  not  without  fome  In- 
conveniencies ;  but  then  confider  that  Retirement  is  not 
exempt  ;  for  the  Fancy  will  break  Inclofure,  tho'  the  Bo- 
dy be  coop'd  up ;  nay,  and  bring  into  the  Chamber  all 
the  Species  of ' exterior  Objeds;  and,  it's  odds,  ill  Ob- 
je(fl;s  will  crowd  in  with  the  innocent,  and  may  proba- 
bly meet  with  a  kinder  Reception ;  for  they  glide  fmooth- 
ly  upon  the  Senfe,  and  then  a  Girl  not  much  employed, 
may  divert  Melancholy  with  the  Profpedl. 

Eufeb.  You  are  in  the  Right,  and  you  prove  that  the 
moft  ftri6l  Reclufe  is  always  within  the  Reach  of  Dan- 
ger, but  then  fhe  Hands  more  out  of  the  Way  ;  and  if 
the  Copy  of  unlawful  Things  make  fuch  a  deep  Imprefli- 
on,  the  Original  would  link  deeper. 

But  firft,  I  have  provided  againft  Idlenefs,  by  counfel- 
ing  you  to  bring  your  Daughters  up  in  the  Praftice  of 
thole  Works  that  become  their  Age  and  Quality  ;  by  inu- 
ring them  to  the  Ledlure  of  thofe  Books  that  feed  Devo- 
tion, and  delight  without  Danger. 

Secondly,  I  only  fpeak  againft  the  Company  of  Men; 
they  may  vifit  their  own  Sex,  and  pafs  away  the  Time  in 
thofe  Recreations,  that  neither  clafh  with  Decency,  nor 
endanger  Virtue;  and  if  they  grow  uneafy  upon  fo  fmall 
a  Reftraint,  and  fall  into  Fits  of  Melancholy,  you  may 
conclude,  the  Caufe  of  the  Diftemper  lurks  in  the  Soul, 
not  in  the  Body,  and  that  the  Heart  fhould  rather  be 
purg'd  than  the  Spleen.  Indeed,  you  fliould  not  truftyour 
Child,  without  good  Caution,evenwithher  own  Sex,  for 
all  are  not  ftaunch.  Some  are  unballaft,  and  too  light, 
and  if  they  are  infeded  by  Pride  or  Vanity,  if  they 
languifli  after  the  fading  Pleafures  of  the  World  with  Pre- 
judice to  Virtue,  they  may  fcatter  the  Contagion  both  by 
Words  and  Example. 

V. 

But  let  not  your  Care  out-run  Prudence.  Importune 
not<i  Daughter  at  Fifteen  with  Precepts  and  Inftrudion, 
you  may  exceed  by  Severity,  as  well  as  by  Indulgence  j 
and  by  forcing  her  to  be  too  Good,  tempt  her  to  do  Evil. 

Allow 


of  the  Gentleman   Inflru6fed.      171 

Allow  fome  Grains  to  Youth,  and  rather  wink  at  light 
Faults,  than  chaftize  'em.  You  cannot  expedl  at  Twelve 
the  Maturity  of  Forty  ;  nor  the  Stayednels  and  Prudence 
at  Fifteen,  as  of  a  Lady  of  Fifty.     Youth  is  unfurnifli'd 
with  Refledlion,  and  Ibmetimes  a6ls  rather  by  Impulfe 
than  Reafon.     Now  Time  will  fooner  heal  fuch  Failings 
than  Reproof,  and  Age  is  a  better  Do6lor  for  this  Di- 
llemper  than  Expollulation  ;  for  when  Corredion  comes 
often,  it  lofes  its  Force,  it  makes  no  Impreflion,  and  fome- 
timcs  works  the  wrong  way  ;  /'.  e.  it's  received  with  a 
Pet,  and  perchance  with  a  Raillery  too  ;  and  thus  what 
was  intended  for  a  Remedy  becomes  Poifon,  and  rather 
kills  than  cures.     You  forfeit  your  Authority  firft,  and 
then  the  Daughter  withdraws  her  Refpe6l  and  Kindnefs 
to  make  way  for  Averfion  ;  and  when  this  unlucky  Paf- 
fion  fteps  in,  what  can  be  expefled  but  Noife  and  Cla- 
mour ?  And  God  fend  it  ends  there.     Young  People  are 
headftrong,  and  oft'ner  follow  the  Advice  of  Refentment 
than  of  Prudence.  A  young  Lady  of  my  Acquaintance, 
a  great  Fortune,  and  handfomely  qualified  with  all  the 
Accomplifhments  of  Art  and  Nature,  flung  herfelf  away 
upon  a  Man  unworthy  to  be  her  Page.     I  expoftulated 
the  Matter  with  her,  and  fliew'd  her  theUnbefeemingnefs 
of  the  Fa6l:  She  ealily  condefcended  fo  far.  as  to  confefs 
{he  had  done  ill,  but  laid  the  Fault  at  her  Another's  Door. 
She  tired    my  Patience,  faid  fhe,  with  imperious  Repri- 
mands, as    if  fhe  intended  rather  to  torment  than  cor- 
re(5l  me.     I  was  either  too  gay,  or  too  referv'd,  and  no 
more  able  to  pleafe  her  in  Solitude  than  in  Company. 
When  I  pray'd,  Bigotry  was  coming  upon  me;  when  I 
read,  Madnefs;  a   Smile  was  conftituted   Lightnefs  ;  a 
Frown,  ill  Nature ;  fine  Cloaths,  Vanity  ;  and  a  common 
Drels,  Sluttiflinefs.  So,  that  my  Mother  play'd  either  the 
Momus,  or  the  Fury.  In  fine,  I  hung  continually  upon  the 
Rack,  and  the  Torment  was  too  fenfible  to  be  endur'd 
with  Patience.  I  found  no  Way  to  break  my  Chains,  but 
by  beating  out  new  ones ;  and  caft  my  felf  away,  not  to 
languifh  in  Slavery.  I  confefs  the  Speech  touch'd  me  no 
lefs  than  her  Misfortune;   and  if  I  compaffionated  the 
Daughter,  I  detefted  the  Conduft  of  the  Mother.  Take 
care,  left  you  pufh  Severity  too  far,  and  miftake  not  Fro- 
wardnefs  for  Corredlion.  I  have  feen  the  moft  cowardly 
preatures,  when  prefs'd,   turn  upon  thofe  that  chas'd 

them. 


172     A  Supplement  to  thejirfl  Part 

them,  and  fometimes  vault  from  a  Tower  to  fave  them^ 
felves.  Great  Preflures  caufe  defperate  Attempts,  when 
they  meet  with  a  violent  Paflion  ;  and  whofoever  fuppo- 
fes  a  Senfe  of  Duty  will  always  over-rule  a  ftrong  Refent- 
ment,  is  ill  acquainted  with  human  Nature.  Behave  your 
felf  to  your  Daughter,  not  like  a  Jaylor,  but  as  a  Com- 
panion: Lay  down  the  Authority  of  a  Miftrefs,  and  take 
up  all  the  Kindnefs  of  a  Mother.  When  you  have  a 
Child's  Heart,  you  may  mould  her  into  any  Shape ;  but 
when  you  have  her  Averlion,  you  may  undo  her  by  Re- 
proof, but  will  never  mend  her. 

VI. 

When  you  have  brought  up  a  Child  in  Piety  to  an  Age 
of  Maturity,  nothing  remains  for  the  Difcharge  of  your 
Duty,  but  a  Settlement  fuitable  to  her  Education  and 
Quality.  This  is  a  Matter  of  the  higheft  Concern,  and 
therefore  requires  much  Caution,  and  long  Deliberation  : 
For  what  can't  be  undone,  muft  not  be  done  without 
Thought  and  Refleftion.  Crofs  not  the  lawful  Inclina- 
tions of  a  Child,  out  of  a  View  of  Intereft,  nor  tie  her 
to  a  Man  for  whom  (he  has  no  other  Paflion  but  that  of 
Averfion.  When  Marriages  are  made  without  Love, 
Love  often  follows  without  Marriage  :  And  thus  you 
force  her  to  be  miferable,  and  tempt  her  to  reiign  her 
Virtue  and  Honour. 

Here  is  a  fhort  Sum  of  your  Duty,  and  I  could  wifli 
you  would  fpend  fome  cool  Thoughts  upon  the  Subje6l, 
it'sof  Importance,  and  defervesRefle6lion.  What  is  here 
laid  down,  has  nothing  hard,  nothing  of  Bigotry  ;  it  nei- 
ther encroaches  upon  Quality,  nor  entrenches  upon  a  de- 
cent Freedom  ;  and  tho'  it  did,  you  muft  remember  God 
will  not  give  Hezven gratis ;  it's  a  Reward,  not  a  free  Gift, 
and  fomething  muft  be  done  to  deferve  it.  Glory  is  not 
purchas'd  without  Labour,  nor  Wealth  without  Pains, 
and  yet  Death  cannot  with-hold  the  Soldier  from  ihePur- 
fuit  of  the  one,  nor  the  Death  of  Tempeft  and  Quick- 
fands  deter  the  Merchant  from  the  Chafe  of  the  other : 
And  yet,  what  are  thofe,  if  compared  to  the  Treafures 
God  has  prepared  for  the  godly  in  Heaven?  If  then  Men 
drudge  for  Things  fo  fadmg  and  tranfitory,  how  can  you 
refufe  to  labour  for  thofe  that  are  eternal?  And  if  a  bare 
Hope  of  Succefsperfuades  Men  to  run  upon  certain  Pe- 
rils, methinks  the  infallible  Promiles  of  our  Saviour  de- 
ferve 


of  the  Gentleman  Jnftrutted.      lyi 

ferve  as  great  a  Compliance.  Heaven,  Madam,  is  a  brave 
Purchafe.  What  a  charming  State  is  it,  that  places  us  a- 
bove  Pain,  and  feats  us  out  of  the  Reach  of  Death  ?  That 
iuppliesall  we  can  defire,  and  removes  all  we  can  fear? 
That  puts  an  End  to  Wifhes,  and  a  Beginning  to  the 
Enjoyment  of  God  ? 

Em'tl.  Sir,  I  thank  you  for  the  Pains  you  have  taken, 
and  doubt  not  but  God  will  reward  your  Charity.  I  (hall 
return  wiler,  and,  I  hope,  better.  But  to  complcat  the 
Favour,  be  pleas'd  to  oblige  me  with  your  Inftrudionsin 
writing.  Memory  is  treacherous,  and  we  often  forget 
thofe  Things  that  fhould  always  be  remembred  :  Belides, 
the  Benefit  is  too  important  to  be  confined  to  a  private 
Perfon.  My  Difeafe  is  epidemical,  and  you  will  find 
few  Ladies  in  Court  untainted  :  Fray  let  the  Remedy  be 
publick.  I  will  fend  it  to  the  Prefs  with  your  Leave,  and 
prefent  it  to  our  Sex,  with  a  Dedication. 

Eufeb.  You  may  command  me,  I  will  leave  the  Pa- 
pers at  your  Difpofal,  upon  Condition  you  conceal  my 
Name,  for  I  have  no  Inclination  to  new  Engagements. 
Some  may  complain  the  Phyfick  is  too  ftrong,  and  then 
the  Dodtor  is  in  Danger  to  be  greeted  with  the  Title  of 
Ignoramus^  or  Mountebank.  Now  fuch  a  Sentence  pro- 
nounc'd  by  one  Lady,  will  certainly  prejudice  my  Prac- 
tice, and  ruin  my  Fortune:  For  a  Phyfician's  Skill  rifes 
and  falls  by  the  Opinion  of  Ladies.  Emilia  and  Lucia 
after  fome  Compliments  took  leave  of  Eufehius,  and 
drove  home.  They  were  as  calm  as  a  Spring  Morning, 
and  of  Enemies  became  Eufcbiui^s  Admirers. 


DIALOGUE    VIIL 

Eufebius  inftmSis  Leander  in  the  Duty  of  a  Soldier. 

Tl^HEN  the  Ladies  were  gone,  Eufebius  fate  down  to 
Dinner  with  Neander,  and  invited  him  to  fpend 
fome  Part  of  the  Evening  in  the  Park.  We  have  been, 
faid  he,  with  a  Smile,  upon  hard  Service  this  Aborning, 
I  have  almoft  talk'd  my  felf  down  ;  let  us  breathe  a  littls 
frefh  Air  in  the  Par^,  and  reinforce  our  Spirits,  methinks 
mine  begin  to  droop,  and  call  fpr  R.elaxation. 

Nean. 


174    A  SuvvLiMii^r  to  the  ^rfl  Part 

Nean,  I'll  wait  upon  you.  Age  and  Labour  work  up- 
on the  Body  ;  I  wonder  not  your  Spirits  run  low,  Dif- 
courle,  with  Life  and  Vigour,  drains  the  Arteries :  How- 
ever, you  are  not  exhaulled,  and,  I  believe,  you  have 
I'ulficient  Fund  of  Vitals  behind,  to  furnifti  another  Con- 
veri'ation :  Zeal  buoys  up  Nature,  and  repairs  the  De- 
cays of  Age.  And  now  they  were  taking  Coach,  when 
in  comes  a  Gentleman  call'd  Leander.  This  was  he  who 
undertook  the  Combat  againft  Eufebius^  and  was  depu- 
ted by  the  Club  of  Debauchees  to  ask  Satisfadlion.  He 
v/as  a  Man  of  Quality  and  Title  ;  he  bore  a  confidera- 
ble  Command  in  the  Army,  and  made  no  contemptible 
Figure  at  Court.  He  had  a  Senfe  of  Religion,  but  his 
Morals  anfwered  not  the  Purity  of  his  Faith.  However, 
his  youthful  Sallies  fprung  rather  from  Frailty  than  Ma- 
lice, and  he  was  carried  down  the  Stream  of  Senfuality, 
rather  by  the  Ferfualion  of  ill  Company,  than  by  the  In- 
clination of  Nature.  When  he  had  rioted  away  his 
Innocence,  he  Hill  kept  good  Principles,  and  could  not 
applaud  thofe  Crimes  he  had  the  Weaknefs  to  commit. 
Nay,  his  Confcience  never  permitted  him  to  fm  with- 
out a  Reproach:  So,  that  he  was  fure  to  pay  dearly  in 
his  Chamber  for  the  Liberties  he  took  in  the  Tavern. 
He  always  linn'd  with  a  Check,  and  one  might  read 
Concern  in  his  Forehead,  and  Guilt  in  his  Face.  Eleu- 
therius  would  needs  play  the  Exorciit,  and  lay  the  Devil 
of  Confcience,  as  he  term'd  it.  Come  Leander,  faid 
he,  caji  off  thefe  Qualms,  and  leave  pziking,  we  live  by 
Meat  and  Drtnk,  as  they  fay,  and  Flejh  and  Blood  zuill 
y/ever  thrive  tipon  School  Subtleltes  and  Motions,  l^^'hcn 
thou  carifl  bring  all  Men  to  be  of  one  Mmd,  all  'Judgments 
to  meet  npon  the  fame  Point,  and  ail  Corjfciences  to  the 
fame  Gage,  then  thou  mayfi  begin  to  think  of  Futurities  : 
But  till  this  be  done,  Liy  h^jldofthe  frefent,  and  turn  Con- 
fcience upon  the  Common  ;  keep  li  low,  and  it  will  leave 
wincing.  This  Flight  of  Libcrtinifm  grated  upon  Le- 
anderh  Hearing,  he  could  not  bear  the  Impiety  without 
a  Blufli,  and  tho'  he  fmother'd  the  Rel'entnient,  his 
Concern  M'as  nolefs.  For  Shame  always  accompanied  his 
TranfgrefTions,  and  he  could  not  endure  to  hear  People 
defend  oiie  Crime  with  another,  or  auihorizeTranfgref- 
lions  by  ridiculing  Religion. 

But 


of  the  Gentleman  Injlm^ied,       lys 

But  the  laft  Night's  Expedition  quite  turn'd  his  Sto- 
mach ;  he  could  by  no  means  difgell  luch  a  Mefs  of  Cur- 
fes,  and  thofe  VolUes  of  Blafphemies  rung  fo  difmal  a 
Peal  in  his  Ears,  that  he  thought  himfelf  in  Hell  among 
the  wretched  Crew  of  the  damn'd,  and  from  this  Mo- 
ment he  refolv'd  to  take  up,  and  to  bid  farewel  to  thole 
unlawful  Pleafures,  that  firft  lead  to  Atheifm,  and  then 
plunge  the  Sinner  into  eternal  Torments.  He  had  heard 
of  Eufehius,  and  concluded  him  to  be  Man  of  Merit 
and  Piety,  becaufe  Eleutherius  lampoon'dhim.  For  what, 
faid  he,  can  fuch  finilVd  Rakes  applaud  but  Vice,  or 
buffoon  but  Virtue  ?  When  therefore  the  Cabal  deter- 
min'd  to  attack  Eufebim,  he  embraced  the  Occafion,  and 
offered  his  Perfon  for  the  Encounter  :  But  his  Intention 
was,  not  to  argue,  but  to  learn  ;  to  receive  Inftruftion, 
not  to  he6tor. 

At  his  Arrival,  he  inform'd  Eufebius  of  his  Errand,  he 
declar'd  his  Name,  Quality,  Circumftance,  and  Refolu- 
tion. 

Eufebius  declin'd  the  Task  as  much  as  Civility  would 
permit:  He  told  him  he  was  better  provided  to  receive, 
than  to  give  Inftrudlion  ;  but  Leander  prefs'd  upon  him 
too  hard  to  receive  a  Denial.  At  laft,  Importunity  over- 
came the  old  Gentleman,  and  he  began  thus.  You  are  a 
Soldier,  and  a  Courtier,  fo  that  your  Bufinefs  lies  in  the 
Field,  or  St.  Jameih :  In  Summer,  you  lodge  under  a 
Tent ;  in  Winter,  at  Court :  We  will  firft  cut  you  out 
Employment  for  the  Campaign. 

Eufeb.  Courage  is  the  Diana  of  Soldiers,  it's  a  Kind 
of  Camp  Divinity,  and  all,  from  the  General  to  the  pri- 
vate Centinel,  pay  it  Hpmage,  and  almoft  Adoration :  It's 
therefore  your  Intereft  not  to  be  led  away  by  Notions 
fiufh'd  by  Error,  and  fram'd  by  Caprice.  Remember 
one  Virtue  is  never  at  Variance  with  another,  they  live 
in  Amity,  and  entertain  a  good  Correfpondence :  But 
you  may  as  foon  ftrike  Fire  out  of  Ice,  as  Valour  out  of 
Crimes.  Sin  alone  arms  Death  with  Terror,  Innocence 
dares  provoke  it;  and  even  charge  thro'  Hell  :  For  Death 
can  only  take  from  pious  Chriftians  a  Life  they  muft 
furrender  to  Nature ;  its  Power  only  reaches  the  Body, 
and  its  Dominion  expires  with  our  laft  Breath.  If  you 
ambition  the  Repute  of  a  vahant  Man,  make   fure  of 

Virtue  ; 


\y6    A  Supplement  to  the  firft  Fart 

Virtue;  put  no  Strefs  on  a  fiery  Conflitution,  that  rife" 
and  falls  with  the  Barometer^  a  Courage  that  depends  on 
Seafons,  is  precarious,  and  can  be  no  more  trufted  than 
the  Winds ;  it  oft'ner  flows  in  the  Tavern  than  in  the 
Field,  and  looks  more  fternly  on  an  Enemy's  Back,  than 
on  his  Face. 

II. 

Provide,  Leander,  for  the  Chriftian ;  If  you  mifcarry 
under  this  Chara6ter,  that  of  the  Soldier  will  fcarce 
refcueyou:  The  Colonel  will  be  uneafy  if  the  Chriftian 
be  damn'd,  nor  will  all  the  Bravo's  of  his  Regiment  re- 
trieve his  Misfortune ;  ftand  therefore  on  your  own 
Guard,  and  be  as  ready  to  meet  Death,  as  to  encounter 
the  Enemy.  Death,  dear  Sir,  makes  its  Approaches  by 
Surprize,  and  attacks  by  Mine  and  Stratagem,  it  works 
out  of  Sight,  and  often  aflaults  without  Signal  :  I  muft 
tell  you  too,  it  hates  Capitulation,  it  takes  in  the  van- 
quifli'd  at  Difcretion,  and  will  not  hear  of  a  Cartel:^ 
Nay,  it  diftinguiflies  not  the  General  from  a  common 
Trooper,  and  has  no  Regard  to  Dignity  or  Com miflion. 
So  that  neither  the  Duke  nor  the  Marjhal  will  be  per- 
mitted to  trip  back  to  London,  or  Parts,  upon  their  Pa- 
role. When  once  Death  has  arrefted  you,  nothing  re- 
mains but  Hell  or  Heaven,  and  both  eternal.  This  Un- 
certainty of  Death,  made  our  Saviour  fo  often  preach 
Care  and  Caution.  He  bids  us  ftand  continually  upon 
our  Guard,  and  counfels  us  as  a  Friend,  to  prepare  a- 
gainft  an  Enemy,  fo  audacious,  and  at  the  fame  Time  fo 
undermining.  And  certainly,  if  this  Advice  be  feafona- 
ble  for  all  Mankind,  it  muft  be  very  proper  for  Soldi-. 
ers,  for  they  not  only  run  the  common  Hazards  of  Men, 
but  alfo  thofe  that  wait  upon  thgr  ProfelTion.  They  car- 
ry about  them  the  Principles  of  a  thouland  Diftempers, 
and  at  every  Step  ftumble  upon  foreign  Dangers,  never 
forefeen,  and  feldom  avoided.  Sometimes-  you  beat  up 
the  Enemy's  Quarters,  fometimes  he  returns  to  the 
Charge.  If  you  give  him  a  Camifade,  he  comes  upon 
you  with  a  Re-veil  Matin  :  Yet  whether  you  afi'ail,  or  are 
aflailed,  you  are  equally  within  the  Reach  of  Danger, 
and  nothing  but  Hazard  can  prote6t  you :  For  whoever 
comes  in  the  Way  of  jiombsand  Bullets  leaves  Security 
behind  him.  Keep  tiiereforc  your  felf  clear  of  Sin,  you 
will  fight  with  a  uood  Heart,  if  a  good  Coiifcience  fol- 
lows 


of  the  Gentleman  Inflni^ied.      lyy 

lows  you  to  the  Engagement,  and  will  either  come  oft"  a 
Conqueror,  or  fall  a  Hero.  But  if  Crimes  draw  upon  the 
Soul,  whilft  Muskets  and  Artillery  play  upon  the  body. 
Fortitude  will  not  long  Itand  by  you:  Courage  without* 
a  good  Confcience  trembles  at  Hell,  and  leaves  a  Man 
diTpirited  when  he  molt  needs  Support.  For  who  will 
charge  an  Enemy  through  Smoak  and  Fire,  that  fears  the 
next  Moment  to  plunge  into  everlafting  Sulphur  ?  If  there- 
fore you  have  a  mind  to  fight  well,  refolve  to  live  wel  1, 
and  whilft  you  have  Time,  think  of  a  Provifion  beyond 
the  Grave. 

III. 

Live  not  in  the  Camp  like  a  Spah't  or  Janifary  at  the  Ot- 
'to/nan^oxl^  mesriy  for  Intereft,  or  Glory.  Such  Pagan 
Motives  are  below  the  Dignity  of  a  Chriftian  Cavalier. 
Level  your  Pretenfions  above  fuch  bafe  Views,  and  make 
Advantage  of  Labour  and  Merit.  Can't  you  ferve  your 
Prince,  benefit  your  Country,  oblige  Poiterity,  deferve 
the  Appiaufe  of  Men,  and  a  Reward  in  Heaven  ?  Can 
you  not  be  ns  bnve  out  of  a  Senfe  of  Duty,  as  of  Vanity 
or  Intereft  ?  Will  your  foy  belefs,  becaufeyou  expert  a 
Gratification  hereafter  ?  Will  your  Adions  be  lefs  glori- 
ous, becaufe  they  receive  a  Luftre  from  Virtue  ?  Raife  up 
then  your  A.mbition  to  this  noble  Height ;  ftrike  at  this 
charming  Mark,  it's  worth  the  while,  and  fits  the  Cha- 
racter of  a  Chriftian.  But  it's  a  Madnefs  beyond  Fren- 
zy to  drudge  like  Slaves  in  the  Quarries,  or  Metal  Mines, 
or  efpoufe  continual  Dangers,  to  refign  the  Satisfac^tions 
of  Life,  for  Noife  and  Ceremony,  for  a  few  Crowns, 
or  a  Place  in  the  Gazette^  or  an  niry  Fluzza  of  infignifir 
cant  Mortals,  who  praife  by  Chance,  and  blame  at  Ran- 
dom ;  who  fide  with  Temerity  againft  true  Courage, 
and  always  pronounce  in  Favour  of  fuccefsful  Raflmefs 
againft  unfortunate  Prudence  and  Bravery. 

Notwithftanding  this  bewitching  P^ntom  fafcinates 
Soldiers,  it  heats  their  Brain,  and  anvils  out  a  thou- 
fand  Contrivances.  Neither  Rhetorick  is  able  to  ha- 
rangue 'em,  nor  Logick'to  reafon  'em  out  of  this  unchri- 
ftian  Humour:  It's  the  leaft  realbnablej  and  tnoft  child- 
ifliof  all  our  Follies.  To  court  Death  in  earneft,  for  a 
Life  purely  hi  fancy,  to  fling  up  all  the  Advantages  of 
this  World,  and  run  headlong  upon  all  the  Terrors  of 
the  other  for  a  Panegyrick,  is  to  bottom  om  SHmmum  Bo- 


178     A  Supplement  to  the  fir  ft  Part 

num  on  Opinion,  and  to  be  happy  at  oti-ier's  Courtefy. 
Applaufe  is  a  very  indigent,  or  a  very  ill-natur'd  thing  ; 
it  leaves  us  where  it  finds  us,  and  cannot,  or  will  not  re- 
trieve the  moll  infigViificant  Misfortune.  Pray  in  what 
King's  Reign  did  it  fill  an  empty  Pocket  ?  When  did  it 
fet  a  disjointed  Eftate?  When  did  it  command  a  difor- 
der'd  Pulie  to  beat  even?  Or  recal  a  Man  from  his 
Grave  ?  Alas !  the  Expedation  of  this  Life  at  fecond 
Hand  can  only  draw  fine  Landskips  in  the  Imagination, 
and  crown  the  Brain  with  diverting  Thoughts.  Now  a 
moderate  Dofe  of  Opium  will  do  the  Bufinefs  with  lefs 
Hazard  than  a  Siab,  and  at  lefs  Expence  than  the  For- 
feiture of  Life  and  Limb. 

You  intend  not,  I  fuppofe,  to  carry  Bravery  beyond 
that  of  the  Duke  of  Luxemburgh^  nor  difpute  Conduft 
with  m?.ich\Q\s  Ture»>ie :  No,  believe  me.  Sir,  you  will 
fall  (liort  a  Bar's  length  at  leaft  of  the  firft,  and  will 
fcarce  come  within  Cannon-fliot  of  the  fecond  ;  and  yet 
thefe  mighty  Heroes  fleep  in  their  Graves.  The  admir'd 
Panegyrick  of  ^/<.'  In  Rue  could  not  awake  the  Duke,  nor 
the  fwimming  Periods  of  Flechier  revive  the  Vifcount. 
Their  brave  Actions  that  fiU'd  the  Gazettes  of  the  laft 
Age,  may  perchance  appear  in  the  Theatre  towards  the 
end  of  this,  and  if  it  pleafe  the  Poet,  not  for  Triumph, 
but  Condemnation.  But  alas !  the  Dead  are  not  greater 
for  the  Efi-eem  of  the  Living,  nor  lefs  for  their  Cenfure. 
If  a  virtuous  Motive  aniniated  the  Enterprizes  of  thefe 
fOjinous  Generals,  they  h.ave  received  a  Reward  ;  if  a  vi- 
tious  one,  they  feel  the  Punifliment.  Fig!:it  therefore  in 
A  good  Caufe,  with  a  clear  Confcience,  and  a  holy  A4o- 
tlvc,  like  a  Chriftian,  not  like  a  Mamaluke^  or  Pagan: 
Provide  for  your  Soul,  and  God  will  provide  for  your 
Honour;  if  your  Name  be  forgot  in  the  Annals  of  Time, 
ii  will  make  a  noble  Figure  in  tiicfe  of  Eternity.  Thofe 
invincible  Squaddkns  of  Martyrs,  who  in  the  Eye  of  the 
World  lived  in  Contempt,  and  died  in  Difhonour,  who 
were  lafli'd  like  Slaves,  and  executed  as  Criminals,  are 
crown'd  with  immortal  Glory  in  Heaven,  and  their  very 
Memory  breathes  Perfumes  on  Earth,  whilft  their  Perfe- 
cutors  groan  in  Flame  ;  and  God  feems  to  have  convey'd 
down  their  Names  toPoilerity  only  for  their  Punilliment, 
raid  our  Imlrud^ion. 

Lean. 


of  the  Gentleman  Injirtdted.      175) 

Lean.  You  advife  me  to  ftand  for  a  good  Cau4e:  Is  it 
the  Subjedl's  Bufinefs  to  enter  into  the  Secrets  of  the  Ca- 
binet, to  examine  the  Refults  of  the  Privy-Counfel,  and 
to  fet  up  a  lingle  Opinion  againfl:  a  Royal  Declaration  ? 
With  SubmifTion,  I  always  thought  it  the  Duty  of  Sub- 
je6ls  to  obey,  not  to  dilpute  with  Superiors;  they  mult 
befuppos'd  to  command  what  is  juft,  till  their  Injundli- 
ons  appear  evidently  unjult.  For  in  doubtful  Cafes  Pre- 
fumption  ftands  for  the  Government;  and  this  Deference 
we  indifpenfably  owe  to  Authority,  otherwife  I  fee  not 
how  the  chief  Magiftrate  can  maintain  Peace  and  Tran- 
quilHty.  I  confels,  it's  my  Opinion,  and  has  always 
been  my  Practice. 

Eujeb.  Had  all  Men  kept  up  to  your  Principles,  lefs 
Blood  had  run  from  EngHjh  Veins  the  laft  Age,  and  lefs 
Coin  from  their  Purfes.  But  when  the  Prince's  Preroga- 
tives are  clip'd,  his  Orders  queftion'd  by  the  Multitude, 
when  Jack  and  Turn  ereft  Tribunals  of  Right  and  Wrong 
in  every  Tavern,  and  an  Amfierdam  Cofi'ee-houfe  Club 
ufurps  the  Power  of  reviewing  the  Proclamations  of /i^/6z>^- 
hdi^  what  can  be  expeded  but  Tumult  and  Deftru6lion  ? 
W^hen  therefore  the  Government  declares  War,  a  Sub- 
ject muft  fuppofe  it  lawful,  unlefs  he  can  oppofe  ftri(5l 
Evidence,  and  he  may  fight  with  a  fafe  Confcience  un- 
der his  lawful  Prince's  Standard  in  this  Conjuncture.  But 
this  is  not  the  prefent  Caie ;  I  hinted  at  a  Practice  unjuft 
in  my  Opinion,  though  ordinary.  Young  Gentlemen 
without  Employment  at  home,  try  Concluiions  abroad  : 
They  purfue  Comm.iffions  in  tiolLind^  France^  and  Ger- 
many^ and  fell  th^ir  Service,  as  Jockies  do  Horfes,  to 
him  that  bids  moft  ;  their  Swords  diilinguifh  not  Right 
from  Intereft,  they  ftand  not  upon  the  Niceties  of  Ca- 
fuiftry,  nor  trouble  themfelves  with  the  Notions  of  Ju- 
ftice  ;  their  Bufinefs  is  to  fccure  Money  without  forma- 
lizing upon  the  Means,  and  fuppofe  tljeir  Caufe  good,  if 
their  Commiflion  be  creditable,  and  lucrative. 

Lean.  Permit  me^,  Sir,  to  interpofe  ;  methinks  you 
bind  up  unprovided  Gentlemen  to'hard  Circumftances, 
and  fcrev/  up  the  Morals  of  the  Gofpel  fome  Points  too 
high.  Suppole  I  plead  hard  for  a  Regiment  under  Phi/ip 
the  Fifth,  but  faUing  fhort  of  my  Expectation,  I  addrefs 
my  k\f  to  Charles  the  Third,  and  obtain  a  Commiinoni 
is  this  Conduct  nnfui? 

N  2  Etifeh. 


i8o      A  Supplement  to  the  firft  Fart 

Eufeh.  Had  you  been  pleas'd  to  have  fufFered  me  to 
proceed,  you  had  receiv'd  an  Anfwer  to  this  Quctre.  I 
therefore  exphdn  my  Mind  thus.  An  Kngltjhman  has  no 
Dependance  on  foreign  States,  and  therefore  cannot  enter 
into  their  Quarrels  at  random,  he  muft  be  convinc'd, 
before  he  draws  his  Sword,  the  Party's  Right  ftands  up- 
on fiur  Reafons,  and  plaufible  Grounds ;  for  an  Officer 
thus  in  CommilHon  is  a  kind  of  Lawyer,  with  this  only 
Difference,  that  the  one  pleads  his  Client's  Caufe  at  the 
Bar,  the  other  in  the  Field  ;  the  one  with  his  Tongue,  the 
other  with  his  Sword ;  and  as  no  Lawyer  can  undertake 
the  Defence  of  a  Caufe  dellitute  of  Proofs,  that  found  a 
rational  Probability  ;  fo  no  Gentleman  can  enter  into  an 
extern  Service  without  a  previous  Information  of  the  Ju- 
fticeofthe  Qitarrel  he  engages  to  defend.  Now,  tno* 
it  be  certain,  that  \i Philip  has  Right  to  the  Spanifh  Mo- 
narchy, Charles  has  none ;  and  that  if  this  Prince  has, 
Philip  is  an  Ufurper,  (for  two  can  have  no  Right  at  the 
fame  Time  to  the  fame  Thing)  yet  becaufe  Jurifts  are  di- 
vided upon  the  Queftion,  and  both  fupport  their  Title  by 
probable  Arguments,  a  Stranger  may  fide  with  either, 
but  then  he  cannot  (lieer  off  from  one  to  the  other.  For 
then  he  is  fure  to  efpoufe  the  Wrong  againft  the  Right, 
becaufe  Juftice  ftands  not  for  both.  I  caution'd  you  a- 
gainft  this  Game  of  Faft  and  Loofe,  Under-Officers  of- 
ten play  at.  It's  neither  Genteel  nor  Chriftian,  choofe 
your  Side,  in  God's  Name,  but  then  let  not  a  fairer  Pro- 
Ipedl:  of  Advantage  draw  you  over  to  the  Enemy.  In- 
deed this  fliifting  of  Colours  is  rather  the  Practice  of  Sol- 
diers  tlian  Commanders.  But  thefe  lometimes  are  guil- 
ty, and  as  the  Confequences  in  thefe  are  more  dangerous, 
fo  their  Crime  is  lefs  pardonable. 

Lejn.  I  take  your  Meaning.  A  Subje6l  muft  ftand 
up  for  the  Defence  of  his  lawful  Prince  and  Country,  a- 
gainlt  the  Attempt  of  a  foreign  Enemy,  without  entring 
upon  a  Difquifition  of  tlie  Jufticeof  the  War.  But  who- 
ever enters  into  the  Service  of  a  foreign  State,  adlually 
engaged  in  War,  muft  be  perfuaded  upon  rational 
Grounds  the  War  is  juft.  And  vi^henhe  has  ftruck  in 
with  one  Side,  he  cannot  retreat  to  the  other  during  the 
fame  War,  unlefs  he  receives  new  Information. 

Enfeb.  You  comprehend  me. 

Lean, 


of  the  Gentleman  Jnfiru^ted,       i8i 

Lean.  I  am  of  your  Opinion,  and  fubfcribe  to  your 

Reafon  ;  for  by  fo  doing,  we  run  headlong  into  a  fatal 
Neceflity  of  upholding  Wrong  againft  Right.  For  tho' 
the  Titles  of  both  the  Pretendants  may  carry  a  fair 
Dutlide,  yet  it's  certain,  at  the  Bottom,  one  is  defec- 
tive.    Pray  now  go  on. 

IV. 

Eufe/7.  Wage  not  War  hke  Canibals  or  Tartars^  Com- 
rniffion  reaches  the  Guilty,  but  gives  no  Power  oyer  the 
Innocent ;  Soldiers  may  come  within  the  Statute  of  Mur- 
der, as  well  as  Pads  on  the  Highway,  and  may  be  as 
guilty  of  Thefts  as  Eve-droppers^  or  Cut-purfes.  Thou 
Jhah  not  murder^  thou  floalt  not  fleal^  are  compreheniive 
Precepts,  they  take  in  the  Camp  as  well  as  the  City,  and 
are  no  lefs  binding  in  the  Field,  than  in  Winter-Qiiar- 
ters.  Keep  therefore  your  M^n  up  to  Order  and  Dif- 
cipline,  and  as  you  reward  their  Valour,  fo  punifh  their 
Crimes.  Look  upon  Maradnres  as  a  Nufince  to  the 
Camp,  as  a  Shame  to  the  Profeflion,  and  a  Plague  to 
Mankind.  They  muft  not  be  countenanc'd  as  Soldiers, 
but  executed  as  Felons.  They  fhould  receive  no  better 
Quarter  from  their  Officers,  than  they  give  the  Peafants, 
nor  find  more  Mercy,  when  taken,  than  they  fliew  when 
they  rifle  Villages,  l^^ho  hinders  not  a  Crime,  fays  Sene- 
ca,  commits  it.  The  Rapes  and  Violences  of  a  Soldier 
rebound  on  the-indulgent  Commanders,  and  by  Conni- 
vance they  adopt  them. 

The  great  Belifarius  has  left  Generals  a  noble  Model, 
and  points  out  a  fhort,  but  fure  Way  to  Vidlory.  Knovj^ 
Compaf-^ions,  faid  he,  /  am  come  to  fight,  not  fo  much 
Vjith  H'^eapons  of  Steel.,  as  zvith  the  Arms  ofjujiice  and 
Religion :  li'^ithout  thefe,hou!  can  we  expeSi  J/iSiory^or  hope 
for  Snccefs  ?  My  Camp  Jh all  not  be  polluted  with  Rapine ^ 
Kur your  Swords  with  Cruelty.  l^Vithout  ^ufiice.,  Courage  is 
weak.,  and  a  wicked  Hero  will  turn  his  Back  to  an  innocent 
Coward.  This  fhort  Harangue  aw'd  the  Soldier,  and 
frighted  him  into  Refpect  and  Modefty.  Nay,  it  raifed 
the  General  fo  high  in  the  Efteem  of  all  the  Italians,  that 
it's  hard  to  determine,  whether  they  admired  more  his 
Condu6l  and  Bravery,  or  his  Discipline.  The  very 
Clowns  loved  the  Legionaries,  as  their  Brethren,  and  al- 
moft  ador'd  the  General  as  a  tutelar  Divinity.  Never 
Man  undertook  greater  Things  with  a  lefs  Army,  nor 

N  3  came 


1 82     1^  Supplement  to  the  firfl  Part 

came  off  with  more  Glory.  With  fcarce  twelve  thoufand 
Soldiers  he  clear'd  Afnca  of  Tyrants,  and  Italy  almoft 
of  the  Goths ;  he  not  only  retook  liome^  but  fubdued  i^i- 
tiges  at  the  Head  of  a  hundred  thoufand  Men,  and  led 
him  captive  to  Co»Jlantiaop!e.  Thus  we  fee  Succefs 
oft'ner  follows  OrJerand  Difcipline,  than  Numbers,  and 
that  Virtue,  with  a  fmall  Retinue,  over-matches  Vice 
with  a  greater. 

Lean.  I  confefs  it  were  to  be  wiffi'd  that  our  Generals 
had  more  Authority,  and  the  Soldiers  better  Difcipline.' 
But  alas!  thefe  Qualities  are  out  of  Fafhion,  and  Obe- 
dience that  once  made  the  Glory  of  Soldiers,  is  now  be- 
come their  Shame. 

Eitfeb,  If  you  are  unable  to  bridle  the  Militias  Info- 
lence,  quit  your  Poll,  it's  better  to  refign  your  Commifli- 
on  than  your  Innocence,  and  more  fafe  to  lay  down  your 
Command,  than  to  forfeit  your  Soul.  He  is  unfit  for 
Rule,  that  cannot  command  Obedience. 

I  have  feen  Armies  licentious  beyond  Meafure,  and  in- 
folent  to  Excefs ;  one  would  have  thought  /Ittila  with  his 
Huns  was  once  more  return'd  to  plague  Chnflendom  : 
Terror  march'd  before  the  Camp,  Delblation  accompa- 
ny'dit  and  a  thoufand  Imprecations  of  undone  Peafants 
follovvM  It.  Mahomet  could  not  have  a6ted  more  bloody 
Tragedies  in  Europe  :  Nor  the  moll  irritated  Chrilfian 
Prince  in  /f/z-?.  They  ftorm'd  more  Purfes  than  Towns, 
and  wheel'd  off  from  Counterfcarps,  to  aflault  Hen- 
Roofts  and  Sheep-cotes.  They  feem'd  to  take  the  Field, 
not  to  light,  but  to  plunder;  and  whilft  the  lawlcfs  Sol- 
dier: fcatter'd  Ruin  with  Fire  and  Sword,  the  Generals 
fpread  Defolation  with  Safeguards :  So  that  the  FrqtedU- 
on  of  ihefe,  was  more  expenfive  than  the  Avarice  of  thofe, 
and  Kindnels  was  no  lefs  cruel  than  Fury.  The  Dilbrder 
was  evident,  though  the  Caufe  of  it  was  difputed  ;  fome 
arraign'd  the  Weak,  .fs,  others  the  Avarice  of  the  Offi- 
cers, and  fome  the  Infolence  of  the  Soldiers.  But  whilfl: 
every  one  complain'd,  the  Mifchief  run  on  without  Li- 
mit, and  only  then  a  Remedy  was  applied,  when  the 
Difeafe  was  paft  Cure,  i.  e.  when  the  Country  could  lofc 
no  more,  nor  the  Army  gain  any  more :  And  yet  thefe 
fine  Pranks  were  play'd  among  Friends  and  Allies.  But 
if  Friendfhip  be  fo  chargeable,  it's  not  worth  the  Pur- 
chafe,  and  I  had  rather  l?y  my  all  at  the  Mercy  of  a  Foe, 

than 


of  the  Gentleman   Injlrutfed.      183 

than  to  give  it  to  the  Avarice  of  a  Friend  ;  for  I  behave 
he  is  no  richer  that  is  beggar'd  by  his  Protestor,  than  he 
that  is  ruin'd  by  his  Enemy.  And^  methinks,  to  be  hugg'd 
or  piftol'd  to  Death,  is  an  equal  Mi.-^fortune.  You  know, 
Sir,  how  many  Ifraelites  fell  for  the  Sacrilea;e  of  one  M.-.n, 
and  nothing  could  appeafc  God's  Anger,  but  the  Execu- 
tion of  the  Offender.  How  many  Armies  have  melted 
away  into  nothing  for  the  fam.e  Caufe  ?  Mortality  fwept 
'away  whole  Companies  without  Remedy,  and  buried 
Regiments  without  Honour.  Though  Soldiers  anJ  Offi- 
cers fmile  at  thefe  Exorbitances,  they  will  hereafter 
change  their  Mirth  into  a  more  doleful  Key,  unlels  they 
deleft  with  Horror  thofe  Injuftices,  they  now  applaud 
with  Infolence.  You  muft  never  draw  your  Sword  but 
to  defend  Juftice,  and  a  General's  commanding  Staff, 
like  the  Club  of  Hercules^  muft  always  be  heaved  up  to 
quell  Monfters. 

V. 
Tho'  a  Soldier's  Life  be  honourable,  yet  we  muft  grant, 
that  of  all  Profeflions  it's  the  moft  miferable.  The  Prero- 
gative of  a  private  Centinel  above  a  Slave  lies  only  in  the 
Name,and  the  Advantage,  if  any,ftands  for  the  GalUrian  : 
For  the  Soldier  is  tied  to  continual  Duty,  and,  like  a  Va- 
gabond, is  without  Houfe,  and  often  without  Cover.  He 
is  unprovided  of  Necellaries  to  fupply  his  Wants,  and  of 
Patience  to  fupport  'em  without  Murmur.  Yet  he  aban- 
dons his  Friends,  bids  his  Country  farewel,  to  range  a- 
bout  the  World  (like  the  wild  Tartars  in  Tents)  he 
throws  iiimfelf  upon  Poverty,  under  a  foreign  Climate, 
and  affronts  Death  for  a  Groat  a  Day.  What  an  incon- 
liderable  Salary  is  here  for  a  Toil  fo  flavifh,  crowded 
with  fuch  a  multitude  of  Dangers,  and  fo  far  removed 
from  the  very  Hope  of  Preferment  ?  Yet  fome  Officers, 
in  fpightof  Laws,both  Human  andDivine,divide  this  No- 
thing, and  fo  ftarve  the  Soldier  to  feed  their  Pride  and 
Debauchery.  They  live  high  at  others  Expence,  and 
carry  on  the  Camp  Diverhon  (Gaming)  by  Extortion. 
This  Pandora^ 5  Box  pours  out  a  hundred  Plagues  upon  the 
Army,  for  the  Soldier  muft  live ;  if  therefore  the  Cap- 
tain purloins  the  Pay,  and  fets  it  afide  to  retrieve  an  un- 
lucky Caft,  or  to  ftop  a  Camp-Lady's  Mouth,  muft  he 
not  draw  Bills  of  Exchange  upon  the  Country,  i.  e.  give 
the  Signal  to  plunder  at  Difcretion,  and  upon  his  Honour 
N  4  promife 


184    A  Supplement  to  thejtrji  Part 

promife  Impunity  ?  I  once  took  the  Liberty  to  check  4 
Captain  for  a  Condud:  fo  uncljriftian,  and  unnatural. 
Faith,  Sir,  faid  he,  the  Cards  run  unkindly  the  other 
Day,  my  Guineas  deferted  to  the  Enemy,  and  I  mull  re- 
cruit. This  is  the  only  Way,  and  Cuftom  has  prevailed. 
So  have,  anlwer'd  I,  a  great  many  ill  Things  befides. 
The  hi,2;heft  Extravagances  can  plead  a  Prefident,  and  if 
this  fufficed  to  authorize  an  Adlion,  Whores  and  Rogues 
would  have  a  line  Time,  and  thefe  fcandalous  Frofelli- 
ons  would  become  not  only  reputable,  but  innocent. 
But,  Sir,  Cuftom,  without  Realbn,  is  no  better  than 
Vice  triumphant. 

Be/ides,  it  cherifliesDeferiions,and  fo  injures  the  Prince 
as  well  as  the  Subjedt.  Who  will  drudge  meerly  for  Ba- 
llinado's  and  Beggary  ?  This  is  uneafy,  and  thofe  are  nei- 
ther creditable  nor  plealing.  Nay  Pain  and  Mifery  are 
infupportable,  unlefs  corredled  by  fome  fweet'ning  Ingre- 
dients; like  Pills,  they  muil  be  gilt  to  go  down:  For,  be- 
lieve me,  j'ain  with  Soldiers  over- rules  Duty,  and  Senfe 
of  Indigence  works  ftronger  than  that  of  Honour  j  their 
Reafon  is  in  the  Oar,  unpolifh'd,  and  almoll  unfit  for 
Service.  Difcourfe  and  Refledtion  run  very  low  with 
them,  and  Confcience  lower..  What  then  can  keep  thefe 
poor  Wretches  to  their  Colours,  if  their  Subfiftence' b? 
withdrawn .?  Nothing  in  Hand,  with  nothing  in  Reverfi- 
cn,  is  Beggary  for  Life.  Such  a  State  is  miferable  beyond 
Parallel,  it's  a  kind  of  Damnation  that  difcardsa  Man  not 
only  of  all  Comfort,  but  even  of  Hope  and  Expeftation, 
that  buoy  up  the  Spirits  of  Slave?.  Their  Fortune  being 
fo  low,  they  know  it  cannot  fink  lower,  and  then  it's  na- 
tural by  fliifting  Sides  to  endeavour  to  be  better,  and  thus 
we  fee  Regim.ents  grow  thin  without  Battle,  without 
Difeafes,  and  Companies  broken  by  meer  Defertion.  Se- 
verity will  never  heal  this  Evil.  Defpair  fcrccs  People 
upon  ftrange  Courfes.  He  who  receives  daily  Unkind- 
nefs  from  his  Officer,  and  Injuftice  too,  will  rather  for. 
once  venture  the  Gallows,  than  continually  groan  under 
the  Tyranjiy. 

Lea».  Why  don't  the  Soldiers  complain?  They  are 
free-born  Subje6ts,  and  under  the  Protedlion  of  the  Law. 

Etifib.  Complain  when  the  Plaintiff  ftands  at  the  Bar, 
and  the  Defendant  fits  on  the  Bench,  on  which  fide  will 
the  B;ilance  turn?  The  Informer  is  immediately  clapp'd 

up 


of  the  Gentleman  lnftYu6ied.      185 

up  for  Mutiny,  and  thus,  at  the  fame  Time,  he  forfeits  his 
Pay,  arid  lays  his  Life  at  the  Mercy  of  a  Conrt-Mi^Jhal. 
This  Camp-Juftice  is  ill-natur'd  and  quick  too ;  a  Man  is 
fentinto  the  other  World  in  a  Moment,  no.t  for  his  own, 
but  others  Crimes.  Good  God  !  to  take  a  Man's  Purfe, 
and  then  to  bar  him  the  Liberty  to  complain;  to  ftretch 
him  on  the  Rack,  and  then  to  torment  him  becaufe  he 
groans,  has  more  of  the  Tyrant  than  of  the  Judge,  and 
favours  more  of  the  Officer's  Prerogative,  than  of  the 
Liberty  and  Property  of  the  Soldiers.  It's  the  Duty 
of  the  high  Officers  to  look  into  the  Comportment  of 
the  lower  ;  to  ftop  thefe  Grievances  by  Punifliment  or 
Caflieering  ;  if  they  wink  at  fuch  Ofienders,  God  will 
not  connive  at  their  criminal  Indulgence.  Lewis  the 
Fourteenth,  in  my  Prefence,  did  an  Adlion  worthy  of  his 
Greatnefs :  Two  Soldiers  were  led  to  Execution,  as  he 
enter'd  into  the  Town ;  the  poor  Wretches  cry'd  out 
Mercy,  and  the  King  llopp'd  ;  he  enquir'd  the  Caufe  of 
their  Punifliment,  and  when  he  was  told  they  had  left 
their  Colours,  turning  to  the  Prifoners,  Friends,  faid 
he,  what  mov'd  you  to  leave  my  Service,  were  you  paid? 
They  replied,  no:  He  lent  for  the  Officers  upon  the  Spot, 
examin'd  the  Accufation,  and  finding  them  guilty,  he 
torfe  their  Commiffions,  broke  their  Sv^'ords,  and  pardon'd 
the  Prifoners.  This  Piece  of  Juitice  fhould  ftand  upon 
Record  for  a  Prefident,  for  an  Example  to  Generals,  and 
for  a  Terror  to  under  Officers  ;  and  were  it  Ibmetimes 
pradis'd,  I  believe  Defertion  mjght  be  lefs  frequent,  and 
by  confequence  Camp-Executions. 

VI. 
Treat  your  Soldiers  like  Men,  with  Civility,  not  like 
Afles,  with  Clubs;  Cruelty  miay  break  Bones,  but  will 
never  heal  Faults.  I  have  fee n  the  Cane  raife  Indignati- 
pn  often,  but  never  Sorrow  ;  it  fetches  out  thoughts  of 
Revenge,  but  inflils  no  purpofe  of  Amendment.  People 
may  be  perfuaded  by  Reafon,  not  beaten  by  Blows  out 
of  their  Errors.  I  was  acquainted  with  a  Captain;  he 
was  a  Man  of  Punftilio,  and  Ceremony,  better  at  his 
Tongue  than  at  his  Weapon  ;  he  fwore  better  than  he 
fought,  and  was  more  famous  for  caning  his  Company, 
than  for  ftorming  Half-moons.  This  young  Huff  com- 
manded a  Serjeant  to  pay  him  Refpe6f,  and  follow'd  the 
Command  with  thisquaipt  Rodomontade^  B.G.  if  you  doiit  - 

/'// 


i%6    A  Supplement  to  the  frfl  Tart 

ril  make  a  Devil  of  you.  But  under  his  Worfhip's  Favour, 
his  Power  anfvver'd  not  his  Will,  in  fpight  of  Menace, 
the  Serjeant  remain'd  a  Man,  and  a  Chriilian,  whilft 
my  young  Commander  put  on  the  Fiend  ;  he  was  in- 
deed unfurnifh'd  of  Horns  and  cloven  Feet,  but  under 
the  Shape  of  a  Man  he  poflefs'd  all  the  Malice  of  Satan. 
He  affected  Refpedl,  and  by  exading  it  with  Haughti- 
nefs,  and  Empire,  he  fell  into  Contempt;  for  the  Com- 
pany huzza'd  the  Expreffion,  and  burlefqu'd  my  Gentle- 
man by  turning  it  to  Ridicule,  Nay,  the  Drollery  went 
fo  far,  that  the  Spark  was  forc'd  to  throw  up  his  Com- 
mifTion:  And  thus,  inftead  of  metamorphofing  the  other 
into  a  Devil,  he  made  a  Fool  of  himfelf.  D^?;/*^,  with  his 
Harp,  cured  Saul,  and  play'd  down  the  evil  Genius  that 
haunted  him  ;  but  certainly  Curfes  and-  Imprecations 
have  not  that  healing  Quality.  A  Man  may  fwear  him- 
felf into  Hell,  but  he'll  Icarce  blafpheme  another  into  his 
Duty  ;  this  horrid  Cuftom  muft  be  banifh'd  without  Re- 
ferve,  without  Limitation  ;  it's  too  foul  to  be  fcreen'd  by 
any  Pretext  of  Affront  or  Infolence  ;  it  grates  upon  hear- 
ing ;  it's  difhonourable  to  our  Almighty  Creator,  and 
dangerous  in  Example.  Can't  an  Officer  right  himfelf 
without  affronting  God  ?  Can't  he  exa6t  Obedience, 
without  difobeying  the  Laws  of  Heaven  ?  Or  has  he  a 
Mind  to  correal  a  Soldier's  Offence  at  the  Expence  of  his 
own  Innocence,  and  to  purchafe  Refpedl  at  the^  Price  of 
Damnation  ? 

There  are  other  Means  to  let  People  know  their  Di- 
llance,  without  being  ill-natur'd,  or  impious:  Put  on  a 
handfome  Behaviour,  let  the  Soldier  have  his  Due.  hear 
his  Grievances  with  Patience,  and  redrefs  'cm  with  Expe- 
dition. When  he  offends, ufe  Reproof  ofr'ner  than  the  Cane, 
and  correct  not  one  Fault  by  committing  another.  Let 
not  dnmn'dDog,  Devil.,  or  So?2  ofalfhore^  pafs  your  Lips, 
the  Di.ile6l  is  unbefeeming  a  Gentleman,  and  below  a 
Chriflian.  Tho'  there  be  a  Difference  between  a  private 
Centinel  and  an  Officer,  yet  fuch  Language  magnifies  the 
Inequality  beyond  Proportion,  they  are  of  the  fame  Spe- 
cies, and  inherit  equally  the  common  Prerogatives  of  the 
Kind  ;  they  have  the  fame  Relation  to  God,  toReafon, 
and  Immortality.  The  Centinel  has  five  Senfes,  the  Ge- 
neral has  no  more ;  and  if  the  private  Soldier  be  vir- 
tuous, and  the  Officer  vicious,  the  whole  Advantage  lies 
"*  on 


of  the  Gentleman  Inftnt^ied.       187 

on  his  Side.  Indeed  one  has  a  Commiflion,  but  this  is 
often  the  EfFed  of  Chance  or  Money,  not  of  Merit  ; 
and  though  it  may  fet  you  upon  the  higher  Ground,  it 
adds  nothing  to  your  real  Worth.  The  Equahty  there- 
fore being  fo  even,  let  not  the  Treatment  be  diipropor- 
tion'd  ;  refletfl  you  fpeak  to  Men,  not  to  Bealb ;  to  free- 
born  Subjcds,  not  to  Slaves. 

Be  generous  and  free,  give  not  too  much  to  Familiarity, 
nor  Hand  off  in  Relerve.  Be  couragious  in  the  Field,  mo- 
derate in  Converiation  ;  and  if  you  model  your  Conduft 
by  thefe  Rules,  A4en  will  efteem  your  Farts,  and  reipeft 
your  Perfon  ;  but  if  you  intend  to  baftinado  Soldiers  in- 
to Refpedl,  ortohedor  'em  into  Love,  you  wall  mils  of 
your  Aim.  Thefe  are  the  ElTedts  of  Kindnefs,  not  of 
Violence ;  you  may,  perchance,  have  their  Hats,  bun 
not  their  Hearts ;  they  will  fear,  but  never  love  you. 
Now  Fear  is  commonly  the  Parent  of  Hatred,  and  when 
this  Paflion  has  once  feiz'd  on  the  Soldiers,  I  would  coun- 
fel  the  Offier  to  withdraw ;  he  is  lefs  fecure  among  his 
Guards,  than  in  the  Battalions  of  the  Enemy.  For  Ha- 
tred is  daring,  and  feldom  ftiils  of  doing  Mifchief  when 
it  has  the  Advantage. 

VII.  ^ 

heander^  punifh  Faults,  in  God's  Name,  but  with  the 
Mercy  of  a  Judge,  not  with  the  Cruelty  of  a  Tyrant. 
Convince  the  Regiment  of  your  Behaviour,  Juftice  pro- 
nounced the  Sentence,  not  Paflion,  and  remember  Com- 
paflion  in  the  heighth  of  Severity.  Leave  fome  Time 
between  the  Sentence  and  the  Execution  ;  Vv'ho  is  brought 
in  guilty  to  Day,  may  be  found  not  guilty  to  Morrow; 
it's  never  too  late  to  execute  a  Criminal,  but  always  too 
foon  to  murder  an  Innocent.  Befides,  Death  is  a  Mo- 
ment on  which  an  Eternity  depends.  Is  it  not  therefore 
a  Cruelty  beyond  the  Barbarity  of  Tyrants  to  throw  a 
poor  Creature  off  the  Ladder  in  a  Hurry,  before  he  re- 
fleds  where  he  is  going?  Did  not  Chriit  redeem  a  pri- 
vate Centinel,  as  well  as  a  General  ?  Becaufe  he  has  for- 
feited his  Claim  to  Life,  has  he  no  Pretenfion  to  Heaven? 
Give  him  therefore  Time  to  provide  for  the  Future,  that 
he  may  be  happy  in  the  next  World,  tho'  he  goes  out 
of  this  on  a  Scaffold.  Let  him  have  Leifure  to  furvey 
the  prefent  State  of  his  Soul,  to  prepare  for  a  Removal, 
and  to  arm  himfelf  with  Sorrow  for  the  fatal  Dlovv.  Fur- 
' \  nifli 


i88     A  Supplement  to  the  firft  Part 

nifh  him  a  Divine  for  Comfort  and  Inftrudion ;  a  Maa 
under  the  Apprehenfion  and  Terror  of  Death,  wants 
fome  Support;  Courage  alone  will  not  keep  him  in  an 
equal  Situation,  nothing  but  an  Atheiftical  Bravery  or 
Chriftian  Sandtity  can  fweeten  the  Paflage,  and  abate  its 
Horror ;  /.  e.  to  receive  the  Stroak  without  Concern, 
we  muft  have  led  fuch  virtuous  Lives  as  give  us  a  firm 
Hope  of  future  Blifs,  or  believe  we  end  in  nothing,  and 
fo  {hall  neither  be  capable  of  Happinefs  or  Mifery. 

I  believe  few  Soldiers,  at  this  Pinch,  receive  much  Re- 
lief from  the  Profpe<fl  of  their  paft  Lives :  For  tho'  Vir- 
tue be  their  Bufinefs,  it  feldom  finds  a  Place  in  their 
Thoughts,  much  lefs  in  their  Pradlice.  In  the  Summer 
their  Minds  run  upon  Sieges,  Battles,  or  Plunder,  and 
are  continually  on  the  catch  for  Booty  or  Slaughter.  In 
Winter  they  plunge  into  Debauchery,  and  try,  by  indulg- 
ing Senfe,  to  blot  out  the  A4emory  of  paft  Fatigues:  So 
that  their  Lives  are  a  Tilfue  of  Rabbery  or  Riot ;  they 
live  in  a  State  of  Sin,  and  by  confequence  march  on 
through  daily  Tranfgreflions  to  Damnation. 

A  poor  Creature,  who  has  not  finn'd  away  the  Belief  of 
another  World, nor  fteel'd  his  Conicience,  muft  be  ftunn'd 
when  he  fees  Death  before  him,  a  thoufand  unnatural 
Crimes  within  him,'  a  judge  upon  the  Bench  ready  to 
pronounce  the  Sentence,  and  Devils  to  execute  it;  this 
difmal  Profpe<!:l  will  pa^H  his  Spirits,  and  may  foonercaft 
him  into  Fits  of  Defpair,than  into  Tranfports  of  Sorrow. 
The  Devil  will  eafily  perfuade  him  God  is  as  inexorable 
as  the  Court-Marflial,  and  that  he  will  fall  from  the  Gib- 
bet into  unquenchable  Flames. 

Now  a  charitable  Divine  may  remove  thefe  Terrors, 
by  opening  tlie  Mercies  of  God,  and  the  boundlefs  Trea- 
fures  of  his  Goodnefs;  he  may  bring  him  to  Repentance 
by  an  exprelFive  Reprefentation  ©f  the  Torments  below, 
and  of  the  Joys  above ;  and  will  an  Officer  that  profefles 
Chriftianity,  that  knows  God  will  treat  him  in  the  next 
World,  as  he  deals  with  his  Brother  in  this,  refule  fo 
fmall  a  Condefcenfion  ? 

But  if  the  Criminal  be  tainted  with  Atheiftical  Princi- 
ples, he  may,  indeed,  die  without  Concern  or  Apprehen- 
fion of  the  Future;  but  alas!  will  the  Disbelief  of  God 
exempt  him  from  Judgment,  or  of  Hell,  from  Fire  and 
Brimftone .''  Tho'  an  Atheift  places  God  among  the  Chi- 
mera's, 


of  th'e  Gentleman  Jnftruded.      iSp 

mem's,  he  is  a  very  real  Thing,  and  tho'  he  rallies  upon 
Hell,  he  will  fcarce  laugh  out  his  Flames.  No,  he  will 
certainly  know  there  is  a  God  by  the  Sentence  of  Dam- 
nation, and  tho'  his  Reafon  dilbwn'd  a  Hell,  Senfe  will 
confute  the  Error.  Now  a  little  Time,  and  good  Coun- 
fel  may  reclaim  luch  a  Creature,  and  a  precipitated  Ex- 
ecution will  certainly  damn  him.  Is  it  not  worth  the 
while  to  make  a  Tentative  at  leaft  ?  If  he  refufe  Advice, 
his  Milcarriage  will  lie  at  his  own  Door;  if  you  deny  him 
Time  and  an  Inftrudlor,  God  vi'ill  call  it  at  yours. 

Let  him  alfo,  ifpoffible,  receive  the  Holy  Sacrament, 
the  Means  inllituted  by  our  Saviour  for  Salvation  are  his 
Right ;  and  whofoever  invades  this.  Hands  guilty  at  God's 
Tribunal  of  fomething  more  hideous  than  Murder.  God 
reveng'd  the  innocent  Blood  o'i  Abel  on  guilty  Cain^  and 
will  he  wink  at  the  Damnation  of  a  Soul  ?  No,  no ;  thofe 
who  fhut  the  Gate  of  Mercy  againft  their  Brethren,  mure 
it  up  againft  themfelves,  they  provoke  God  to  retaliate 
their  Cruelty  in  the  next  World,  and  oftentimes  in  this; 
and  if  he  fuffers  fuch  Monfters  to  flourifh,  we  may  be 
fure  he  is  angry,  for  prefent  Impunity  is  the  deepeft  Re- 
venge, becaufe  it  forebodes  a  future  Mifery.  Plead  not 
the  Severity  of  military  Laws,  no  Court  of  human  Ju- 
ftice  has  Power  over  Souls,  thefe  come' not  within  the 
Verge  of  their  Jurifdidion.  God  alone  is  their  lawful 
Judge  ;  to  difpenfe  Rewards,  and  ordain  Punifhments,  is 
his  Prerogative, 

VIII. 

Procure  a  Chaplain,  that  your  Regiment  may  be  train'd 
up  in  the  Difcipline  of  Chrift,  as  well  as  oi  Mrrs :  But 
be  circumfpedt  in  the  Choice,  receive  not  thole  who  feek 
a  San(5luary  in  the  Camp  againft  the  Purfuit  of  their  Bi- 
fhops ;  fuch  Men  are  more  fit  for  a  Jayl,  than  for  the 
Pulpit,  and  rather  deferve  Penance  than  Preferment. 
Thofe  who  caft  ofFall  Care  of  their  own  Souls,  will  fcarce 
take  to  Heart  the  Salvation  of  their  Neighbour ;  and 
thofe  who  run  down  Virtue  in  Pradtice,  will  not  heartily 
preach  it  up  at  the  Head  of  the  Regiment.  It's  more 
probable,  they  will  improve  thofe  Vices  in  the  Army  they 
took  up  in  Town,  and  finifli  the  Debaucheries  in  Flanden 
they  only  began  in  England.  I  law  the  Chapkin  of  an 
Hanovfrian  Regiment  run  twice  the  Gaumlet  in  a  pub- 
lick  Street,  and  then  turi^'dout  of  hisRegiment  for  his  Be- 
haviour. 


ipo     A  Supplement  to  the  firfi  Part 

havioLir.  IirleeJ  the  Punifhment  was  extraordinary,  but 
his  iVlanners  defcrv'd  it,  and  the  Officers  concluded  no- 
thing but  a  publick  Anirnadverfion  was  able  to  atone  for 
the  Heinoulhefsof  the  Scandal.  How  are  Men  that  want 
Reformation  likely  to  reform  Soldiers?  They  may  open 
the  Gate  to  Diforders,  and  fcatter  the  Plague  they  carry 
about  'em,  but  will  never  ftop  the  Current  of  one  Vice, 
either  by  Counfel  or  Inftrudion. 

You  mull  have  a  Man  of  an  approv'd  Virtue,  M'hofe 
Example  edifies  as  well  as  his  Tongue,  and  who,  tho* 
he  preaches  well,  lives  better.  A  Man  that  neither  flat- 
ters the  Pride  of  fome,  nor  keeps  pace  with  the  unwar- 
rantable Ambition  of  others;  who  neither  courts  Great- 
nefs,  nor  fawns  on  Dignity,  but  is  above  all  the  little 
Views  of  Intereft  and  Pleafure.  A  Man  who  hopes  for  no- 
thing, will  fear  nothing,  he  will  no  more  pardon  Vice  in 
Commiflion,  than  in  theOntry-Box,  and  will  no  more 
fuJFer  the  Excciles  of  a  Colonel,  than  of  a  private  Sol- 
dier. A  Man  that  matches  Zeal  with  Prudence,  and 
knows  how  to  time  Reproof,  and  nick  Exhortation,  will 
do  Vv^'onders,  tho'  he  works  no  Miracle  ;  he  will  neither 
vi^relch  his  Patent  out  of  Arrognnce,  nor  (brink  it  out  of 
Bafenefs  and  Servility  ;  but  will  keep  up  to  his  Ghara6i;er, 
•and  maintain  the  Dignity  of  his  Poll,  and  the  Preroga- 
tive of  his  Profeffion,  .and  indeed  who  does  otherwifeex- 
poft^^  himfelf  to  Contempt,  renders  his  Inlhudtions  in- 
iigniucant,  and  makes  himfelf  defpicable  and  cheap. 

What  a  Reformation  would  a  Chaplain  thus  equip'u 
make  in  a  Regimentf  No  Vice  would  withftand  his  Zeal, 
no  Sin  appear  in  his  Prefence,  his  Words  would  be  re- 
ceiv'd  like  Oracles  by  the  Soldiers,  and  the  whole  Regi- 
ment would  fear  him  as  a  Cerifor,  and  love  him  as  a  Fa- 
ther ;  and  when  onc^e  a  Soldier  is  taught  to  live  well,  he 
is  fit  for  any  Entcrprize  :  For  whoever  dares  look  the 
otlier  Vv  orld  in  the  Face,  will  charge  thro*  all  the  Ter- 
rors of  this. 

IX. 

When  the  General  commands  you  upon  Service,  re- 
ceive his  Orders  with  SubmiHion,  and  execute  'em  with 
Valour  J  regard  iefs  the  Difficulty  of  the  Enterprize,than 
your  Duty  ;  and  vvlien  you  have  done  your  Part,  leave 
the  Event  to  Providence.  Succefs  ofteiuimcs  lies  out  of 
our  Reach,  and  forfakcs  Prudence  and  Valour  to  wait 

on 


of  the  Gentleman  Inflrn^fed.      i^i 

on  Temerity ;  lay  your  Defigns  with  Wifdom,  carry  'em 
on  with  Refolution,  and  you  have  difcharg'd  your  Duty. 

Expofe  not  your  Pcrlbn  out  of  a  meer  Pun6tilio,  nor 
refufe  a  Poll  out  of  a  Profpedl  of  Danger  ;  Life  is  more 
valuable  than  Grimace,  and  lefs  than  Reputation.  It's 
worth  coming  into  the  World  to  make  a  handfomeand 
honourable  Exit,  and  more  creditable  for  a  Cavalier  to 
fall  in  the  Field,  than  to  come  off  with  Infamy. 

I  laugh  at  thofe  fiery  Hot-fpurs,  who  (like  Salaman- 
ders) can  only  breathe  in  Smoak  and  Flames ;  they  are 
never  well  but  when  they  ftand  within  an  Inch  of  Ruin  ; 
they  are  for  trying  a  Rubber  at  Loggerheads  with  Can- 
non-Bullets, and  for  knocking  out  their  Brains  againft 
Half-Moons  and  Baftions ;  nay,  they  cannot  live  out  of 
the  Reach  of  the  Enemy's  Batteries,  and  are  ready  to  ex- 
pire out  of  Fear  of  living  too  long ;  they  dun  the  General 
to  be  fent  upon  every  Attack,  when  neither  Duty  nor 
Prudence  require  their  Service,  and,  like  the  Indian  Wo- 
men, who  rave  to  caft  themfelves  upon  their  Husband's 
Funeral-pile,  bear  a  Repulle  with  Indignation.  Now  in 
my  Judgment  this  is  to  miftake  Courage  for  Temerity, 
and  to  place  Bravery  in  Felly. 

J,  H^.  was  of  this  Temper ;  he  bore  a  Command  in  the 
Cavalry,  yet  in  fpight  of  Diffuafion  would  leave  his 
Horfe  to  court  Honour  on  Foot,  he  florm'd  a  Counter- 
fcarp,  and  was  the  firft  Man  that  fell  in  the  Adion ;  he 
run  on  without  Reafon,  and  was  brought  off  without 
Life, without  Reputation;  all  pitied  his  Misfortune,  tho' 
no  Body  excus'd  his  Conduit,  feme  ftiled  him  brave,  but 
not  one  durft  venture  to  call  him  prudent.  Bullets  di- 
ftinguifh  ra{h  Volunteers  in  the  Crowd,  and  Providence 
feems  to  withdraw  its  Protedtion  from  Stragglers,  and  to 
leave  'em  to  the  Government  of  another  Influence. 

I  know  indeed  we  throw  this  Heat  on  a  Pretence  of 
Preferment.  We  mull,  cry  they,  dillinguifh  our  felves^ 
from  the  Crowd,  and  do  more  than  our  Fellows  to  plead^ 
Merit.  A  Soldier  indeed  mufl  look  above  his  own  Sta- 
tion, he  who  confines  his  Defires  to  a  moderate  Poll,  de- 
ferves  none  ;  to  be  content  with  a  mean  Commiinon, 
marks  a  narrow  Soul,  and  ungenerous  Inclination  ;  it's 
a  Symptom  of  more  Flegm  than  Heat,  and  that  he  is  ra- 
ther cut  out  for  a  Shop,  than  for  the  Camp.  Diilinguiih 
therefore  your  fclf,   in  God's  Name,  but  affect  not  to 

be 


ijp2      A  Supplement  to  the  firft  Fart 

be  remarkable  for  Folly:  Tho'  BethUm  be  in  the  Way  tiS 
Hogfden,  certainly  it  lies  out  of  the  Road  to  Promotion, 
Lite  was  given  by  our  Almighty  Creator  for  a  noble  End, 
and  therefore  we  mull  not  expofe  it  fooliflily ;  I  would 
no  more  throw  it  up  out  of  a  Bravado,  than  out  of  a  Pet, 
nor  facrifice  it  rafhiy  in  a  Fight,  more  than  in  a  Duel. 

But  when  a  noble  Occafion  prefents ;  an  Occafion  that 
will  ftand  the  Ordeal  of  Reafon,  and  con  be  pleaded  to 
Advantage,  tho'it  be  not  follow'd  by  Succefs,  let  it  not 
flip  by,  but  lay  hold  of  it  with  Joy  and  Tranlport,  and 
thank  the  General  for  the  Honour  of  the  Opportunity. 
Exert  aRefolution  equal  to  the  Difficulty,  and  do  to  the 
height  of  the  Enterprize.  Difcover  nothing  that  is  lowj 
nothing  that  is  boifterous,  nothing  that  argues  Fear,  oi: 
betrays  Prefumption  ;  be  more  folicitous  how  to  go  on^ 
than  how  to  come  oft'.  Kind  take  a  greater  Care  of  your 
Carriage,  than  of  your  Life.  Thefe  Occafions  are  not 
rare  in  our  modern  Camps ;  they  open  a  fiiir  Profpeft  to 
Preferment  by  giving  Matter  to  Courage,  and  Merit  to 
work  upon,  and  tho'  we  fall,  it's  in  the  Difcharge  of  our 
Duty;  and  fuch  a  Man  may  look  this  World  in  the  Face, 
and,  Vv'haL  is  more,  the  other  too,  if  nothing  elfe  hinders. 
To  die  in  the  Defence  of  our  Poft  is  honourable  in  the 
light  of  Men,  and  of  God  alfo,  if  we  refine  our  Motive, 
and  difpute  our  Ground  out  of  a  Point  of  Duty :  Nay, 
it's  aneafy  Paffage,  tho'  violent,  for  a  Bullet  or  a  Rapier 
does  our  Bufinels  more  gently  than  a  Fever. 

X. 

If  your  Merit  raifes  you  to  the  noble  Degree  of  Gcne- 
rql,  let  your  Zeal  for  your  Prince  fly  as  high  as  your  Sta- 
tion ;  Favours  call  for  Gratitude,  and  a  Subjedlcan  only 
return  this  natural  Duty  by  Service.  -Re'member  in  the 
firft  Place  you  are  to  adt  as  a  publick  Perfon,  and  there- 
fore no  private  Defign  muft  regulate  your  Conduct.  The 
Honour  of  a  brave  A6cion  may  carry  you  oft',  but  your 
Mafter  muft  go  away  v/ith  the  Profit. 

High  Pofts  are  intoxicating,  they  often  fly  up  to  the 
Brain,  and  turn  our  Heads;  they  take  away  the  Memo- 
ry of  our  former  State,  and  perfuade  us  we  are  not  Men 
fo  foonaswe  become  great.  Tho'  we  are  never  fo  big, 
fuch  a  Conceit  makes  us  little,  and  gives  a  convincing 
Proof,  that  our  Judgment  falls  fliort  of  our  Dignity.  A- 
las!    thefe  ornamental  Privileges  are  but  a  decent  Var- 

iiifh 


of  the  Gentleman  lnflru5ledi      i^jj 

bifh  that  lies  on  the  Superficies ;  they  are  a  Royal  Im- 
preffipn  ftampt  upon  us ;  but  this  changes  not  the  Metal, 
this  gives  no  intrinfick  Value,  but  either  fuppofes  Merit 
or  Favour :  Befides,  fuch  an  over-weening  Conceit  of 
your  lelf  is  a  Mark  of  Pride.  Now  this,  tho'  pradis'd  by 
all,  is  hated  by  every  one,  it  tempts  even  thofewho  made 
you  great,  to  make  you  lefs,  and  draws  your  Friends  to 
be  Enemies,  it  will  alienate  your  Officers,  and  if  you 
have  not  their  Hearts,  you  will  want  their  Hands  upon 
Occalion.  For  whoever  wiihes  another  lower,  will  en- 
deavour to  bring  him  down. 

Beware  of  Rafhnefs ;  this  is  the  Bane  of  Generals,  yet 
they  eafily  flip  into  it,  becaufe  it  often  carries  the  Appear- 
ance, and  borrows  the  very  Name  of  Courage ;  how- 
ever, it's  of  another  Race,  and  nothing  allied  to  that  Vir- 
tue; the  one  defcends  in  a  diredl  Line  from  Prudence, 
the  other  from  Folly  and  Prefumption.  Succeis  feldonl 
waits  on  Temerity,  twice  I  find  it  profperous  and  trium- 
phant, in  AJia  under  Alexander  the  Great,  and  in  G,  under 
Aurelius  the  Firft,  (as  Curtius  notes)  by  his  Rafhnefs 
won  an  Empire,  and  the  fecond  almoft  loll  one.  But 
thefe  Examples  are  rare,  and  the  Captain  that  frames  his 
Condudl  by  theirs,  fleers  by  Hazard,  and  will  not  likely 
find  Fortune  fo  favourable. 

Go  upon  the  furefl  Method  Prudence  and  Thought  can 
fuggeft;  leave  nothing,  ifpolTible,  to  chance :  It's  true, 
indeed  you  will  not  engage  fo  often,  but  then  you  will 
ifeldomer  be  overcome.  Now,  methinks,  it's  wifer  to  keep 
one's  Ground,  than  out  of  Prefumption  and  Eagernefs  to 
lofe  it.  Take  therefore  as  fure  Meafures  as  if  you  put 
no  Confidence  in  Valour  ;  but  when  you  come  to  Adion, 
fight  as  if  you  trufted  in  your  Sword  alone.  Courage 
may  be  trepann'd,  but  feconded  by  Caution  and  Gondudl:, 
it's  invincible.  But  if  Numbers  over-top  you,  if  Chance 
out-wits  Prudence,  and  Multitude  bears  down  Virtue,  in 
fine,  if  you  are  forc'd  to  abandon  the  Field,  and  to  leave 
Vidlory^  behind,*  you  may  carry  ofF  your  Honour  un- 
touch'd,  and  may  fland  the  Stroke  of  Satyr  or  Calumny 
without  a  Blufh. 

Fortune  is  unflable,  neither  conftant  to  her  Friendsj 
iior  implacable  to  her  Enemies,  never  long  in  the  fame 
Situation,  never  tiue  to  the  fame  Intereflj  now  on  this 
Sidej  now  en  that;,  but  faithful  to  neither,  and  fufpe£tei 

Q  by 


i5>4     ^  Supplement  to  thefirft  Fart 

by  all.  You  muft  therefore  expeft  a  Mixture  of  bad 
and  good  Succefs,  now  Victory  will  perch  on  your  Stan- 
dards, now  'twill  fly  over  to  your  Enemies;  Ibmetimes 
you  will  conquer,  and  fometiines  you  will  be  overcome. 
Generals  always  march  in  a  Circle  of  Profperity  and 
Misfortune;  let  not  one  fwell  your  Confidence  too  big, 
nor  the  other  Ihrink  your  Courage  ;  neither  prefume  nor 
defpond ;  in  the  one  State  fear  a  Check,  in  the  other  hope 
for  an  Advantage. 

A  Vidory  that  intoxicates  the  Conqueror  is  more  dan- 
gerous than  a  Defeat,  it  difarms  Caution,  inftills  Negli- 
gence, and  lulls  us  afleep  with  a  traiterous  Security ; 
now  whofoever  lies  under  thcfe  Difadvantages,  Hand  at 
the  Mercy  of  an  Enemy  ;  and  tho'  he  leads  an  Army  of 
Lions,  'twill  be  routed  by  another  of  Stags. 

What  loft  U.  M.  at  To.  but  this  haughty  Humour  ? 
Succefs  had  turn'd  his  Brain,  and  difmounted  his  Rea- 
fon ;  he  fought  a  Battle,  and  won  Applaufe,  but  tho'  he 
brought  ofFX/. /l-f.  he  left  the  General  behind.  He  was 
no  more  tlie  fame  Man,  his  ufual  Prudence  abandon'd 
him,  the  Vapours  of  Pride  fmoak'd  and  fmother'd  him 
out  of  Counfe!  and  Caution, fo  that  at  'To.  he  loft  the  Day 
before  the  Fight  began.  Never  any  Man  rang'd  his  Men  ' 
with  lefs  Judgment,  nor  took  more  diltidvantageous 
Ground  ;  one  Wing  was  unable  to  fuccour  the  other,  the 
Foot  was  of  no  fupport  to  the  Horfe  ;  one  would  have 
thought  he  play'd  Booty,  and  refolv'd  to  try  the  Chagrin 
of  a  Defeat. 

Onthe  other  fide,  a  Captain  muft  not  fink  under  a 
Misfortune  :  To  fuppofe  all  loft,  is  a  fhort  way  to  lofe  all 
in  earneft.  When  Fortune  is  at  a  low  EbH,  expedl  it  will 
foonflow,  and  when  it  frowns,  hope  it  will  quickly  fmile. 
The  brave  Duke  IVeymar  receiv'd  a  difmal  Check  from 
the  I.mperialifts,  but  tho'  his  Troops  were  overthrown,  his 
Heart*. was  not  overcome;  nay,  his  Cournge  rofe  with  his 
Fall,  his  Pulfe  beat  higher,  and  he  refolv'd  the  next  Day 
to  wafli  out  the  Difgrace  of  the  former  with  the»Blood  of 
his  Conquerors :  He  kept  his  Word,  and  gain'd  an  intire 
Viftory,  nnd  Brifac^  as  ihc  Price  of  Refolution:  So  that 
the  News  of  his  Vidory  overtook  that  of  his  Lofs,  and 
his  Glory  ported  thro'  Europe  as  fwift  as  his  Misfortune. 
Had  he  not  lain  under  a  Cloud,  his  Merits  had  fliined 
lefs;  the  Dilgrace  of  the  firft  Day  redoubled  the  Glory 
of  the  fecond.  '  i  hate 


of  the  GentlbmXn  InjlruEled.      15)5 

i  hate  thofe  Generals  who  drill  on  Wars  out  of  Pride 
and  Intereft ;  they  may  be  good  Soldiers,  but  cannot  be 
good  Chriftians;  they  make  the  Intereft  of  the  Prince 
truckle  to  their  own,  and  facrifice  the  publick  Tranqui- 
lity to  their  private  Ends.  Provinces  muft  welter  in 
Blood,  and  Cities  flame,  to  crowd  your  Anti-chamber 
with  Vifitants  that  fawn  on  your  Dignity,  not  on  your 
Perfon  ;  and  are  as  ready  to  bow  to  your  Lacquey,  had 
he  a  Commander's  Staff,  as  to  your  felf.  Muft  People 
groan  under  all  the  Pangs  of  Poverty  to  pay  your  Safe- 
guards ?  And  agonize  under  Hunger  to  furnifh  your  Ta- 
ble ?  That  you  ma/  be  neceflary  to  the  State,  the  Sub- 
ject muft  be  fleec'd  by  Taxes,  and  Commerce  fink  to 
raife  your  Fortune.  Perchance  fuch  a  Condud  may  nick 
with  Policy,  but  it  bids  Defiance  to  the  Gofpel."  The 
Marfhal  de  Byron-  was  of  this  Humour ;  for  when  his  Son 
profecuted  a  Victory,  Hah.,  "cries  he,  have  you  a  mind  to 
plant  Cabbages  at  Byron  ?  This  Man  had  much  of  your 
petty  Surgeons,  who  never  clofe  a  Patient's  Wound,  till 
they  have  drain'd  his  Purfe.  He  had  drawn  much  Chri- 
ftian  Blood,  and  in  the  End  fpilt  his  own  in  a  Skirmifli. 
Believe  me,  Leander^  it's  more  glorious  to  end  a  War 
with  Advantage,  than  to  continue  it  with  Bravery  ;  and 
I  would  more  refpe6l  a  General  without  Attendance  in  a 
Hackney,  that  has  oblig'd  a  Nation  with  a  Peace, 'than 
him  who  rides  at  the  Head  of  an  Army  in  Triumph,  and 
plunges  it  into  an  expenfive  War. 

This  is  a  Summary  of  your  Duty,  and  I  could  wifh 
our  Soldiers  would  fpend  fome  cool  and  ferious  Thoughts 
upon  the  Subjeft  ;  they  would  not,  I  am  confident,  fight 
worfe,' and  might  die  better.  How  often  have  I  pitied 
the  Biindnefs  cJf  our  Men  ?  they  encounter'd  Danger  like 
Lions,  they  fought  like  Heroes,  and  expir'd  like  Beafts ; 
they  had  no  Concern  for  this  Life,  and  no  Thought  of 
the  other ;  Ignorance  had  fo  powerfully  feized  on  their 
Underftanding,  they  quite  forgot  the  Intereil  of  Eternity. 
Ah,  Leander^  if  you  value  not  Life,  be  tender  at  leaftof 
your  Soul,  it  was  made  for  Glory,  why  will  you  give 
it  over  to  Torments? 

Lean.  Thefe  Precepts,  if  obligatory,  are  very  feafon- 
able  ;  but  our  Officers  will  not  eafily  own  they  concern 
the  Camp  ;  I  am  fure  they  are  not  in  ufe,  and  am  apt  to 
think,  they  have  been  repeal'd  by  a  Court-Marflial,  or  are 

O  2  fallen 


ip6     A  Supplement  to  the  firft  Fart 

fallen  by  Prefcription.  Nay,  the  Camp,  as  well  asB/^- 
Fryars,  Is  a  privileg'd  Ground,  and  as  Mr.  Hohi?s  main- 
tain'd  the  Gofpel  did  not  bind  any  Common  wealth  till 
receiv'd  by  the  M.igiftrate,  lb  Ibme  are  of  Opinion  it  * 
mult  not  come  within  a  League  of  the  Army,  without  a 
Pafs-port  from  the  General.  Indeed,  a  red  Coat  Icems  to 
exempt  us  from  the  Incumbrance  of  divine  Precepts,  for 
w^e  govern  our  Conduft  not  by  the  Civil,  but  wholly  by 
the  Canon  Law.  Our  Buiinefi  is  to  make  the  moll  of 
this  Life,  without  any  Thought  of  the  future;  we  feed 
high,  till  our  Purfe  runs  low  ;  we  pamper  Nature,  and 
drink  down  Reafon,  dice  away  our  Pay,  and  fend  a  File 
of  Curi'ts  after  it ;  and  thus  we  level  away  one  Part  of 
our  Tim.e,  and  blafpheme  away  the  other,  till  a  Bullet 
or  a  Stab  packs  us  away  into  the  other  World  without 
Warning,  and,  whatisworfe,  without  Preparation. 

Eiifei'.  Without  Preparation  do  you  fay  ?  That's  a  Mi- 
ftake;  for  you  mud  know,  our  Men  of  War  have  voted 
a  T/iikiJ}j  Principle  free  Denizon  of  the  Gofpel:  Fiz. 
That  zvhuever  dies  for  his  Prince^  fujfers  for  Religion;  this 
Peifuafion  I  afl'ure  you  gets  Ground,  and  may  in  Time 
be  improv'd  to  a  fundamental  Point  of  the  Soldier's  Re- 
ligion. When  I  was  in  the  Army,  an  Officer,  the  very- 
Scandal  of  the  Camp,  was  v/ounded,  he  had  no  Senfe 
of  God,  no  TiniSlure  of  Religion,  and  his  Life  fquar'd 
exadly  with  his  Belief.  Well,  Tom,  faid  I  to  his  Man, 
How  does  thy  Mafter? 

He  is  in  Reft,  reply'd  he. 

In  Reft,  faid  I,  did  he  make  his  Peace  with  God  ? 

No,  anfwered  Tom^  he  breathed  out  his  Soul  with  a 
Curk".     Bjtt  he  dy^d  /«  the  Kiag'sService. 

In  the  King's  Service,  faid  I,  is  that  fufficient? 

Sufficient,  reply'd  To???,  ay,  my  Life  for  yours  :  Why, 
Sir,  hediedinthe  Bed  of  Honour.  The  Simplicity  of 
the  Fellow  forced  me  to  fmile,  and  his  Ignorance  to  weep. 
He  had  heard  his  Betters  preach  this  Do6trine,  and  he 
efpous'd  it  without  Examen ;  and  indeed  it's  the  Officer's 
Interefl  to  fend  it  round,  for  if  once  it  be  well  eftablifh'd. 
Recruits  will  come  in  Shoals  without  beat  of  Drum,  or 
the  Trouble  of  kidnapping:  For,  I  affiure  you,  good  Pay, 
Pleafure,  and  Impunity,  and  Heaven  in  the  Rear,  are 
powerful  Attraftives.  Who  would  not  venture  a  Stab, 
or  charge  up  to  a  Cannon's  Mouth  for  fuch  a  crowd  of 
Advantages?  But 


of  the  G  E  N  TL  E  M ;^  N   Inflriitfed.      i  ^y 

But,  alas!  Sir,  when  People  fport  with  Religion,  ar.d 
burlefque  thofe  Things  they  {hould  revere,  it's  a  ^A-m 
they  have  difcarded  Principles,  and  are  relblv'd  to  die 
like  the  Bcafis  that  perifh. 

Leu'id.  Do  you  think  R.eligion  is  hnniili'd  the  Camp? 
Why,  5ir,  I  fear  we  have  rather  too  much  than  too  little, 

Euj'eb.  Xhe  Camp  is  divided  into  two  Bodies,  yet 
the'  they  run  different  Ways  they  meet  in  the  End.  Soitie 
are  for  all  Religions,  and  then  how  can  they  he  in  the 
wrong  ?  Thofe  Gentlemen's  Church,like  a  Chedder-cheeje^ 
is  made  of  the  Milk  of  one  and  twenty  Parifhes.  Others 
t^eny  all  Religion,  and  thofe  can  hardly  be  in  the  Right ; 
yet  after  all,  at  the  Bottcm  they  ;.re  alKBrethren,  and  of 
the  fame  Communion.  For  Soldiers,  in  Te-i^'s  Divinity, 
whoever  they  are,  and  whatever  they  are,  provided  they 
ferve  the  King,  are  God's  People,  and  the  Wolves  and 
Sheep  make  up  the  fame  Fold. 

But,  in  gocd  earneft.  Sir,  fetting  Raillery  apart,  thofe 
Notions  of  Religion  are  hideous;  in  a  poor  Brafilian  they 
move  Pity  and  Compaflion,  but  I  cannot  hear  an  £«- 
glijh  man  wtntiwch  Stuff  without  Indignation.  Example 
and  Immorality  have  fpread  the  (^lontagion,  why  may 
not  the  virtuous  and  regular  Behaviour  of  Officers  flop 
the  Infedlion  ?  Virtue,  I  beliere,  is  catching,  as  well  as 
Vice,  and  as  capable  of  being  dilated  b}'  Example  j 
the  Matter-Js  of  Concern,  and  deferves  a  Trial,  and  I 
know  no  Man  more  qualified  to  begin  the  Experiment 
than  your  felf :  Your  Poll  gives  you  Authority  and  Re- 
fpe6l,  and  as  it  raifes  you  above  the  Crowd,  fo  it  expo- 
fes  your  A6tions  to  the  View  of  the  Fublick,  and  if  they 
breathe  Piety,  the  Perfume  may  reach  and  charm  your  In- 
feriors ;  and  if  once  they  gain  fo  far  as  to  be  approv'd, 
Imitation  follows ;  for  the  Pafl'age  from  one  to  the  other 
is  fhort  and  eafy. 

Leand.  I  will  endeavour  to  live  up  to  the  Principles 
of  Religion,  and  to  wafh  out  the  Stains  of  my  former 
Life  by  a  thorow  Reformation.  I  will  countenance  Vir- 
tue, and  keep  under  Difcipline  the  publick  Profeflbrs  of 
Impiety,  and  proclaim  Regularity  the  Way  to  Promo- 
tion in  my  Regiment. 

Eufeb.  U  you  can  draw  over  to  your  Refolution  the 
great  Officers  of  the  Army,  the  Method  will  take.  Con- 
demn Debauchery  ,once  or  twice  to  the  Gauntlet,and'twill 

O  3  fculk 


i5>8     A  Supplement  to  the  firft  Part 

fculk  in  the  dark,  and  withdraw  to  Privacy,  for  who 
will  dare  to  abet  it  in  Publick,  when  he  knows  he  fhall 
be  mark'd  with  Infamy,  and  feel  the  juft  Indignation  of 
his  Officer  ?  And  then  if  Goodnefs  be  rewarded  in  this 
World,  as  well  as  in  the  other ;  if  there  be  no  way  to 
rife  but  by  Virtue,  and  he  be  the  higheft  in  the  General's 
Favour,  who  is  mqft  in  God's,  Men  will  carry  on  their 
Pretenfions  not  by  Blufteror  Blafphemy,but  by  the  more 
warrantable  Methods  of  Piety.  They  will  make  Good- 
nefs the  Step  to  Greatnefs,  and  deferve  a  Commiffion  be- 
fore they  have  it.  Nay,  I  dare  promife  Succefs  to  all 
your  Enterprizes,  if  once  the  Army  be  modell'd  by. Vir- 
tue ;  for  belides,  that  God  watches  over  his  Friends,  and 
takes 'em  under  his  Protedlion;  Vice  is  a  Coward,  and 
no  Man  dares  look  Death  in  the  Face,  that  fears  to  be 
damned.  But  Virtue  that  dreads  nothing  in  the  next 
World,  fears  nothing  in  this  but  Sin. 

I  wifh  you  Succefs,  and  altho'  your  Defign  mifcarrieSj 
the  Undertaking  is  heroical ;  for  it's  more  noble  to  ftorm 
Impiety,  than  to  carry- a  Town,  and  I  had  rather  bring 
a  Regiment  to  the  Service  of  God,  than  force  a  Province 
to  the  Obedience  of  a  Prince.  You  muft  expe6l  Oppo- 
iition,  for  Vice  is  ftubborn,  aviid  lofes  Ground  by  Inches. 
Nothing  but  Force  an^  Conftancy  can  gain  upon  it, 
Flefh  and  Blood  will  ftrike  in  with  it,Cuftom  and  Exam- 
ple will  go  over  to  the  flmie  Intereft  ;  but  if  you  bear  up 
with  Refolution,  if  you  carry  on  the  Attack  with  Cou-\ 
rage,  and  flag  not  in  the  Execution,  the  Advantage  will 
lie  on  your  Sidej  and  tho'  the  Vidory  be  not  compleat, 
the  Glory  of  the  Adion  will.  Well,  Sir,  continued  Eu- 
febius  with  a  bniile,  we  have  taken  a  fufficient  View  of 
the  Camp,  it's  Time  now  to  return  to  Court. 

Lean.  I  wait  upon  you,  and  fhiUl  be  glad  of  3'our 
Company  ;  for  tho'  the  Queen  has  been  pleas'd  to  favour 
me  lately  with  an  Office,  yet  I  am  unacquainted  with 
the  Ground,  and  a  meer  Ignoramui  in  the  Ceremonial  of 
Behaviour.  I  fear  fometimes  to  be  too  much  for  Cere- 
mony, fometimes  too  little,  and  that  I  drop  Smiles  when 
I  fhould  letfiill  a  Frown. 


D  i  A' 


^/  it^^  G  E  N  T  L  E  M  A  N  Injlvu^ted,       ip^ 

DIALOGUE    IX. 

Eufebius  inftru^s  Leander  in  the  Duties  of  a  Courtier. 

0 

^Eufeif.*T^iiE  Court:  has  been  the  Subjedl  of  a  thoufand 
w  •*■    Satyrs,  and  the  Theme  of  as  many  Panegy- 

ricks  ;  and  if  Jnvedtive  has  mifreprefented  it  on  the  one 
Hand,  Flattery  has  over-flourifh'd  it  on  the  other.  If 
we  believe  thofe,  like  the  Sea,  it's  in  a  perpetual  Moti- 
on, and  as  infamous  for  Shipwrecks,  as  ■SylLi  and  Cba' 
rybdis ;  it's  a  kind  of  a  Turkijh  Mnrmora  inhabited  by 
Slaves,  who  have  loft  their  Wits  with  their  Liberty,  and 
hug  their  Chains  becauie  they  glitter  :  In  fine,  it's  the 
Palace  of  Vice,  the  Seat  of  Mifery ;  and  if  by  Chance 
Virtue  fhews  it's  Face,  it's  only  faluted  with  Sarcalm  and 
Raillery. 

But  if  we  credit  its  Admirers,  Lord  how  the  Chara-  . 
fter  varies !  one  would  think  Men  could  not  draw  fo 
different  Features  in  the  fame  Face.  Thofe  Gentlemen 
reprefent  it  with  another  Air;  every  Stroak  marks  Great- 
nefs,  every  Dafh  of  the  Pencil  A/Iajefty,  and  Charm  ;  it's 
a  Commonwealth  (like  that  of  the  li<»^ans)  compos'd  of 
Grandeur  and  A-Ierit  The  firft-rate  OfHcers  are  Princes, 
and  the  loweft  Knights  at  leaft.  The- Air,  like  that  of 
Ireland^  is  mortal  to  Toads  and  Spiders,  Nothing  that 
difobliges  the  Eye,  or  grates  upon  the  E;u-,  or  ruffles  the 
vSenfes,  can  pafs  the  Porter's  Lodge.  Care,  Sollicitude, 
and  Melancholy  have  no  Accel's,  and  thofe  Mihfortunes 
that  wait  on  other  People,  fly  from  Courtiers,  fo  that 
they  only  know  Miferies  by  others  Ruin.  In  fine,  in  one 
Man's  Fancy  the  Court  is  a  Hell,  in  another's  a  Hea- 
ven. We  are  miferable  in  it  if  we  believe  fome,  and  can- 
not be  happy  out  of  it,  if  we  credit  others. 

But  with  Submiflion,  all  are  miftaken,  fome  throw  too 
much  Dirt  upon  the  Court,  others  too  much  Luftre; 
fome  paint  it  too  black,  others  too  v/hite,  and  they  are 
no  lefs  guilty  who  magnify  its  'Faults,  than  thofe  who 
enlarge  beyond  meafure  upon  its  Perfedioi-is.  For,  in  a 
Word,  the  Court  is  not  all  Guilt,  nor  all  Innocence;  it's 
llain'd  with  great  Vices,  and  adorn'd  with  great  Virtues; 
|t  teaches  to  live  well,  and  tempts  to  do  ill.     Some  make  ^ 

O  \  in 


200    A  Svvvtiu^'i^T  to  the  frJlTart 

in  it  great  Fortunes,  jind  others  Ruin  greater.  There  is 
Pleafure,  and  there  is  Pain,  Glory  and  Reproach,  Hope 
lodges  in  one  Appartment,  and  Defpair  in  another  ;  in 
fine,  it's"*  Soil  over-run  with  Poifons,  and  fertile  in 
Antidotes:  So  that  a  Man  muft  ftand  upon  his  Guard, 
and  walk  with  Referve  and  Caution.  He  muft  beware" 
of  a  treacherous  Confidence,  and  arm  himfelf  againft  a^^^ 
cowardly  Pufillanimity.  I  doubt  not,  Sir,  but  you  have 
examin'd  the  Map  of  this  new  World,  and  made  a  Pro- 
vifion  of  Neceflaries  for  your  Voyage ;  you  are  embark'd 
for  the  Temple  of  Honour,  the  Road  is  intricate,  and 
befet  with  Dangers,  the  Journey  long. 

Leand.  I  have,  God  be  thank'd,  the  Education  of  the 
Univerfity  and  Academy;  I  handle  my  Sword  not  ill; 
Corelli  has  taught  me  to  play,  and  Abefio  fing  ;  and  be- 
fides,  lam  a  Gentleman:  Thefe  Advantages fuit  with  my 
Circumftances,  and  I  prefume  they  will  in  Time  improve 
my  Fortune,  and  raife  me  to  the  Poft  of  Honour. 

£a/e'^..Nay,  Sir,  your  Equipage  is  glorious,  you  have 
laid  in  with  Profufion  for  your  Journey,  and  if  you  mif- 
carry.  Fortune  alone  muft  bear  the  Blame  of  the  Difap- 
pointment.  A  Man  that  pleads  for  Preferment  with  Ef- 
cutcheon  and  Title,  with  the  Sword  in  one  Hand,  and  fuch 
Accomphfhmentsin  theother,  muft  undoubtedly  carry  the 
Suit :  For  here  are  Arguments  of  all  Complexions ;  fome 
are  tipt  with  Authority,  others  flafh  Terror,  and  fome 
again  flioot  Charms.  Now  unlefs  her  Majefty's  Breaft 
be  faced  with  Steel,  flie  will  yield  to  fuch  battering  En- 
gines, and  never  difpute  the  conferring  of  a  Dignity 
courted  with  fo  much  Bravery,  and  woo'd  with  fo  much 
Harmony  and  Sweetnefs. 

But  for  all  that.  Sir,  I  would  counfel  you  to  procure 
more  proper  Inftruments  to  work  with,  for  I  fear  thefe 
will  not  do.  I  have  known  Gentlemen  well  born  wait 
at  Court  the  moving  of  the  Waters  feven  long  Winters, 
and  yet  they  fared  no  better  than  the  lame  Man  in  the 
Gofpel,  fome  Body  always  ftepp'd  before  'cm  ;  fo  that  they 
were  forc'd  to  retreat  into  the  Country  with  a  light  Purfe, 
and  a  heavy  Heart,  and  to  rig  out  their  leaky  Vefl'el  for 
a  new  Voyage ;  and  tho'  you  are  a  Mafter  at  your  Ra- 
pier, you  muft  not  build  too  much  upon  thisAdvantage ; 
for  tho'  it  may  be  of  Ufe  in  the  Field,  it's  of  none  in  the 
Couit;  Men  do  not  tilt  themfelves  into  Pofts  inour  Age, 

nor 


of  the  Gentleman  Jnfni5ied.      201 

nor  hew  and  hack  out  Fortunes  like  Knights-Errant  in 
Romances.  Your  Scowrers  look  well  in  Taverns,  and 
have  fome  Repute  at  the  Play-houfe,  but  none  in  Court ; 
here  People  are  for  fleeping  in  a  whole  Skin,  and  for  Ipin- 
ning  out  the  Thread  of  Life  to  the  laft  Extent  of  Nature: 
"They'll  not  hazard  a  fingle  Pulie,  but  upon  good  Caution, 
and  extraordinary  Payment ;  in  fine,  Sir,  they  are  of  Opi- 
nion, that  a  Sword  hangs  more  conveniently  by  ihe  Side, 
Ihan  in  the  Lungs. 

Mufick  indeed  is  a  pretty  Accomplifliment,  and  had 
you  the  Touch  of  old  T'/'wi^/^'faj,  1  would  be  bound  for 
your  Advancement;  for  this  Artift  tied ///c'Ar.',7?i/t'r's  Paf- 
fiops  to  his  Fingers  end,  he  could  phy  the  Conquerour 
into  the  Tranfports  oi Hercules  jur ens,  and  then  take  hitn 
down  in  a  Moment.  Now  had  you  fuch  a  commanding 
Stroke,  I  conceive  you  might  play,  or  fing  your  felf  into 
her  Majefty's  Favour;  but  the  Secret  is  loft,  or  icw  im- 
prove to  this  Pitch  of  Perfeftion;  for  tho'  we  have  a  Lift 
of  thofe  who  have  rifen  by  the  Law,  I  cannot  find  one, 
who  owes  his  Title  to  the  Fiddle,  or  tlie  Voice.  Some- 
times indeed  a  Man  may  play  his  Way  to  an  Heirefs's 
Heart,  but  thefe  Adventures  are  rare,  and  it's  hard  to 
chop  upon  the  Dorion  that  will  find  the  Way  from  the 
Tympanum  to  the  Soul ;  for  tho'  the  Cut  be  fliort,  it's  in- 
tricate, and  the  Harmony  faints  in  the  Pallage. 
Leand.  Pray,  Sir,  appoint  me  Tools  to  work  with, 
Eufeb.  Lay  in  a  good  Provifion  of  Humility,  furniih 
your  lelf  with  Patience  for  feven  Years,  at  leaft,  and  for- 
get not  a  competent  Stock  of  Aflurance. 

Leand.  You  are  upon  a  Vein  of  Banter,  or  have  a 
Mind  to  divert  me.  Why,  Sir,  I  would  as  foon  appear 
at  Court  in  my  Grand-father's  RufF,  or  trunk  Hofe,  as  in 
this  outlandifh  Equipage.  Indeed  Aflurance  is  the  proper 
Growth  of  the  Court  Soil,  it  thrives  there  to- Admira- 
tion ;  but  Humility  and  Patience  require  another  Climate. 
Eufeb.  There  is  no  Banter,  no  Pleafantry  in  the  Cafe. 
I  am  upon  a  ferious  Pin,  and  counfel  you  again  to  pro- 
vide your  felf  with  Humility  and  Patience;  nay,  an  or- 
dinary Pittance,  let  me  tell  you,  will  not  carry  you 
through;  youmuftbid  fair  for  the  Humility  o[ Paul,  ana 
aim  at  the  Patience  of  j^o^,  without  thefe  Inftruments  you 
will  never  beat  out  a  Fortune,  you  will  fink  in  the  Enter- 
prize,  and  after  a  feven  Years  Jaunty  find  your  felf  in  the 
Place  you  fet  out,  Leand, 


201     A  Supplement  to  thefirjl  Part 

Lean.  A  Reafon  if  you  pleafe.     My  Lord  L.  Hands  in  ■ 
a  high  Poll,  and  makes  a  fluttering  Figure,  yet  I  never 
heard  he  was  a  great  Pretender  to  Humility  j  nay,  I  am 
inform'd  he  is  Pride  in  Life,  and  Vanity  in  Perfon ;  he 
keeps  no  Correfpondence  with  his  Friends,  and,  as  if  he 
had  taken  a  Morning's  Draught  oi Lethe ^  remembers  the* 
pall  no  more  than  he  forefees  the  future  ;  to  conclude,  he 
is  within  an  Ace  of  forgetting  his  Family,  and  if  he  ileps  < 
a  Peg  higher,  he  will  certainly  forget  himfelf. 

And  then  why  ftould  Patience  be  fo  neceflary  for  me  ? 
Has  not /C.  bore  all  before  him  without  it?  This  little 
Muftard-Seed  is  grown  up  into  a  Tree,  and  gives  Cover 
and  Protedlion  to  twenty  fmall  Infeds,  that  in  good 
Time  may  return  Ingratitude  for  the  Favour.  Now  this 
Gentleman  is  not  only  void  of  Patience,  but  even  of  all 
Pretenfions  to  it,  a  meer  Weather- Cock,  that  looks  Eaft 
and  Weft  in  a  Moment,  and  turns  Tail  to  all  the  Points  in 
the  Compafs ;  he  is  fo  far  from  executing  a  noble  Defign, 
that  he  has  not  the  Patience  to  lay  onej  and  this  fickle 
Diftemper  has  got  fo  furpriling  an  Afcendant  over  him, 
that  he  will  not  even  take  the  Pains  to  think.  But  if  you 
take  Patience  for  a  Virtue,  that  enables  a  Man  to  fufFer 
Contrarieties  with  Calmnefs,  and  Equality  of  Temper, 
he  is  a  meer  Stranger  to  it,  and  as  unacquainted  as  with 
the  great  Mogul,  or  Prejlor  John.  A  Gnat  by  Chance 
Tickled  his  Cheek,  the  Man  flew  out  into  all  the  Extra- 
vagances of  Paflion,  he  fell  upon  the  poor  Infedt's  Family 
with  all  the  Heat  of  Rage  and  Anger;  he  rogued  and 
rafcal'd  the  innocent  Animal,  and  then  Son-of-a-whor'd 
it  like  a  Scavinger;  and  tho'  I  endeavour'd  to  dilcourfe 
down  the  Fogue,  and  to  philofophize  the  Gentleman  into 
Terms  of  Moderation,  his  Choler  was  too  hard  for  Argu- 
ments, till  he  feized  on  the  Criminal,  and  condemn'd  it 
for  a  M.ute  to  the  Prefs.  Nor  was  he  more  bearing  with 
his  own  Species,  I  have  feen  him  fwagger  at  a  Footman 
for  faying  he  was  at  Home^  and  brow- beat  his  Porter  for 
faying  he  was  not\  he  adted  always  by  Contraries,  fo 
that  ibme  thought  his  Pleafure  was  to  be  diipleas'd,  and 
that  he  never  was  in  Humour  but  when  he  was  out  of  it. 
Now  fuch  a  Behaviour  looks  as  if  he  was  confcious  of 
his  own  Demerits,  and  that  he  had  nothing  but  Outfide 
and  Clamour,  and  bad  Nature  to  make  him  confiderable. 
Yet  this  Man  has  put-ftript  his  Neighbours,  and  left  'em 

'  out 


of  the  Gentleman  Inflru^ied.      203 

out  of  Sight,  he  tumbles  no  more  on  the  low  Ropes,  but 
vaults  on  the  high  ;  and  tho'  he  was  once  below  Con- 
tempt, he  may  (hortly  foar  above  Envy. 

Ettfeb.  One  Swallow  makes  no  Summer^  and  one  Inftance 
will  not  bear  an  univerlal  Inference.  Such  Conclufions  • 
are  not  to  be  trufted,  we  are  in  an  Age  of  Difcoveries  on 
Land  as  well  as  by  Sea,  and  if  a  few  have  fleer'd  thro'  a 
North-Eaft  Paflage,  i.  e.  2.  ftiorter  cut  to  Preferment, 
others  muft  double  Ihe  Cape  of  Good  Hope  i  this  is  the 
beaten  Road,  and  tho'  it  be  longeft,  it's  the  moft  fecure 
way  to  Honour.  Once  more  therefore,  let  me  advife 
you  to  lay  in  a  good  Fund  of  Humility  and  Patience. 

Lean.  I  cannot  yet  be  convinc'd  of  the  Neceffity  of  this 
Provifion ';  nay,  methinks  I  may  jog  fairly  on  without  it. 

Eufeb.  Not  convinc'd  ?  Pray  attend  ;  muft  you  not 
fawn  on  this  Favourite,  and  bow  to  the  other  ?  iVluft  not 
you  fly  to  his  Levee.,  and  make  as  many  apifh  Cringes  as 
a  French  Dancing- Mafter  to  this  Rifing-Sun?  Nay,  with 
the  old  Perjians.,  you  muft  commence  Idolaters,  and  in- 
cenfe  this  glaring  Planet  with  all  the  Perfumes  of  Flat- 
tery and  Affe6lation.  You  muft  place  his  Courage  above 
Alexa-ider'^s.,  his  Conduit  above  defar's.,  and  his  Policy 
above  the  greateft  Minifters  of  State.  You  muft  efpoufc 
his  Sentiments,  humour  his' Inclinations,  excufe  his 
Vices,  magnify  his  Virtues,  and  turn  all  his  Follies  into 
Apothegms  j  for  you  muft  wind  your  felf  into  his  Fa- 
vour before  you  can  enter  into  Service,  and  become  his 
Slave  to  pretend  to  be  his  Creature.  Nay,  you  muft 
creep  to  Valet  de  Chumbres.,  fee  Pages,  and  bend  to  Com- 
mis,  who  have  nothing  conliderable  but  an  Office,  no- 
thing great  but  Pride  and  Brutality. 

In  a  certain  Court,  I  had  the  Fortune  to  be  acquaint- 
ed with  a  Duke  ;  he  defired  my  Company  to  a  A-Iini- 
fter  of  State  upon  Bufinefs.but  the  Bci/bavj  was  indifpos'd, 
i.  e.  not  to  be  accofted ;  however  out  comes  a  petty  Scri- 
vener with  a  Pen  in  his  Ear  (or  to  ipeak  in  the  Court 
Diale6l)  an  under  Secretary  ;  the  Gentleman  was  fo 
ftarcht,  fo  formal,  and  fo  fupercilious,  that  I  miftook 
him  for  the  Mafter.  His  Grace  faluted  him  to  the  Ground, 
and  in  a  Moment  run  through  all  the  Difcipline  of  a 
Dancing- School,  he  plied  the  Commis  with  Vollies  of 
Compliments,  out  comes  firii  tres  humble,  tres  obedi^J/'anc 
treads  upon  the  Heels  of  the  former,  and  f^lei  leads  up 

the 


204     ^  SUPPLEMENT  to  the  firft  Part 

the  Rear.     Office^  I  allure  you,  overtopt  Grace ;  and  the 

Pen  had  the  Advantage  of  the  Sword.  The  Mufhroom 
flood  on  Tiptoe,  and  returned  Monjieur  le  Due  this  (hort 
Oracle,  On  fongera  avotre  Affaire.  The  Promife  called 
for  an  Acknowledgment,  and  the  noble  Peer  paid  it  with 
Profufion  and  Intereft.  He  ftoopt  fo  low,  that  at  laft  I 
apprehended   he  was  laying  down  his  Cordon  Blue  for  a 
Livery.     At  our  Return,  Well,  Monfieur,  f^iid  I,  Au- 
diences run  high  in  this  Country,  and  Promifes  are  tax'd 
at  unconfcionable  Rates :  Pretendants  are  put  under  ex- 
ceffive  Contribution,  and  you  mud  regard  Intereft  above 
Honour,  why  elfe  do  you  proftitute  Quality  to  To  vile 
a  Wretch  ?  For  my  part,  I  think,  you  have  purchafed  his 
Favour,  and  were  I  in  your  Circumftances,  I  would  ne- 
ver defcend  fo  loW  to  foar  higher.  No,  Sir,  I  fcorn  to 
trample  on  a  Peafant,  and  as  much  to  fneak  to  a  Sultan. 
My  Duke  lafht  at  an  extravagant  Rate  the  Pride  of  that  - 
Vermin,  and  fwore  he  would  lit  on  his  Skirts ;  healledg'd 
for  his  Excufe,  Cullom,  and  palliated  his  Submiffion  with 
the  Neceflity  of  his  Affairs.     This  put  me  in  Mind  of 
what  Cyprian  fays  to  Donatus.  Behold  that  Courtier ;  how 
he  fits  in  Scarlet  \  Did  you  but  know  how  many  Suhmijfions 
unworthy  of  his  Rank  it  has  coji  him  ?  How  many  Affronts  ? 
How  often  he  has  befiegcd  the  Gates  of  Favourites^  and  run 
before  the  Coaches  of  dtfdainful  Princes  \  you  would  rather 
pity  his  Perfon,  than  envy  his  Fortune  ?  Jn  fine,  Leander, 
you  muft  take  it  as  a  Pujlulatum^  that  honourable  Pofts 
are  not  entail'd  on  Merit,  that  many  Perfons  well  fur- 
nifli'd  for  Employment,  go  out  of  the  World  as  obfcure- 
,ly  as  they  came  in,  merely,  becaufe  they  will  not  make 
themfelves  lefs  to  become   greater,  nor  defcend  below 
the  level  of  Gentlemen  to  obtain  a  Patent   of  Peerage. 
You  may  learn  by  this,  that  Courtiers  zvtGens  fervi- 
tuti  nata^  as  well  as  the  Romans  in  T/'^er/ax's  Time.  Tho' 
they  maintain  their  Dignity  with  Haughtinefs  and  Em- 
pire, they  purchafe  it  with  Condefcenfion  and  Submif- 
fion ;  and  that  tho'  they  are  proud  to  Excefs,  when  their 
Babel  is  built,  they  are  humble  beyond  Meafure,  when 
they  provide  Materials  to  rear  in. 

It's  a  fuperfluous  Piece  of  Labour  to  prove  the  Ne- 
ceflity of  Patience,  the  Matter  is  beyond  Difpute,  and 
as  clear  as  Experience  and  Fa6l  can  make  it.  You  re- 
member the  Anfwer  an  old  French  Courtier  return'd  a 

Toungfier^ 


of  the  Gentleman  Inftru^ted*       205 

Toungfler^   who  was  very  inquifitive  to  know  how  he 
Hiould   behave  himfelf  at  Ferfailles.     Receive^  faid  he, 
daily  Injuries  with  Indifference,  and  pay  /Iffronts  with 
Thanks:  You  mult  pra^life  this  Lellbnifyou  intend  to 
thrive:  for  as  I  have  told  you.  Merit  and  Reward  go  not 
always  together,  one  would  think  fome  blind  Deity  in- 
fluenc'd  the  Court,  and  that  all  things  were  manag'd  by 
Hazard  or  Partiality  ;  you  will  fee  a  Man  of  Parts  turn'd 
over  to  the  Kitchen^'An^  a  Fop  fneak  into  the  Bed-chamber  ; 
a  Man  of  Brains  fliall  be  dubb'd  a  Fool,  and  my  Lord 
Littlewit  call'd  to  the  Counfel ;  one  kick'd  out  of  Flay  be- 
caufe  he  is  Loyal,  and  another  taken  into  Favour  becaufe 
he  is  a  Traitor;  in  fine,  one  ihall  make  his  Fortune  at 
his  firft  Appearance,  and  another  fhall  ruin  his  by  conti- 
nual Waiting.     Now  will  not  fuch  Proceedings  put  the 
moll  mafculine  Patience  to  the  Trial  ?  And  muft  not  his 
Humour  be  very  paffive  or  infenfible,   that  is  thus  pafs'd 
by  without  Regard?  This  may  be  your  Cafe,  Sir;  for 
altho'  you  plead  Nobility,  Breeding,  and  Deferts,  you 
will  founder,  unlefs  Recommendation,  Favour,  and  Ca- 
price alfo  help  you  forward.     I  omit  perfonal  Affronts 
without  End,  and  InciviUties  without  Number  ;    thefe 
Ragoufts  lie  hard  on  a  Gentleman's  Stomach,  and  nothing 
can  carry  'em  off  but  a  tried  Patience. 

Leand.  Seeing  Promotion  goes  fo  much  upon  thefe 
Virtues,  what  if  I  fhould  make  a  turn  into  Flanders^  and 
take  up  my  Winter  Qiiarters  with  the  Capucins  ?  I  fancy 
their  courfe  Habit  and  Fare  would  tame  Nature,  and 
drudge  all  my  Pafiions  into  Difcipline  and  Obedience. 

Eufeb.  You  need  not  pals  the  Sea  for  Abafements,  nor 
expofe  your  Perfon  to  be  convey'd  to  Dunkirk  Prifons, 
to  find  Materials  for  Patience  to  work  upon  ;  Occafions 
lodge  under  your  own  Roof,  and  you  meet  them  daily  at 
St.  James''s  in  the  Anti-chamber :  The  Court  reads  LelTons 
of  Humility  and  Patience,  as  well  as  the  Convent^  and 
provides  more  frequent  Opportunities  for  Pradlice  :  Op- 
portunities, I  fay  able  to  make  Saints,  nay,  Martyrs, 
did  you  but  take  the  Pains  to  fuffer  like  Chriftians,  and 
not  like  thedamn'd  with  all  the  Pangs  of  Blafphemy  and 
Defpair;  but  by  Mifapplication  you  undergo  all  the 
Toil  of  Virtue  without  tailing  of  Pleafure,  you  grafp 
at  Shadows,  and  hold  nothing  but  Wind  and  Vapour. 
The  Crofs  of  the  bad  Thief  is  your  Lot  in  this  World, 

and 


2o6    \A  Supplement  to  thefrft  Part 

and  God  fend  the  Brimftone  of  the  rich  Man  be  not  your 
Inheritance  in  the  next. 

LeaK.  I  am  but  a  Stranger  to  the  Court,  and  have 
not  made  a  full  Difcovery  of  the  Country  ;  however,  I 
perceive  Men  paint  as  well  as  Ladies,  that  the  outfide 
has  noRefemblancewith  the  Infide,  that  when  Joys  flows 
on  the  Face,  Grief,  Rage  and  Defpair  often  prey  on  the 
Heart,  and  that  the  Soul  hangs  on  Racks,  tho'  the  Bo- 
dy lies  ftretch'd  on  Down  ;  when  many  Pretenfions  meet 
in  the  fame  Point,  Affections  vary,  and  becaufe  one  car- 
ries off  the  Prize,  twenty  go  away  with  Difappointment 
and  Mortification;  and  fuch  Occafions  offer  themfelves 
fo  frequently,  and  they  imprint  fo  lively  a  Senfation, 
that  Nature  mufl  fink  under  the  Torment,  unlefs  an  un-' 
ufual  Indolence,  or  an  extraordinary  Patience  fupport  it. 
So  that  I  am  of  your  Opinion,  that  Virtue  is  the  befl 
Qualification  for  a  Courtier  ;  this  alone  fweetens  the  Vi- 
ciflitudes  of  bad  Fortune,  and  allays  the  intoxicating  Va- 
pours of  good ;  it  keeps  us  in  an  equal  Temper,  and 
teaches  us  to  gain  by  our  Lofles  •,  and  tho'  it  permits  us  to 
be  unhappy,  it  hinders  us  from  being  miferable.  But  if 
you  pleafe,  Sir,  ftand  off  no  longer  in  Generals :  Favour 
me  with  fome  particular  Maxims,  that  immediately  re- 
gard my  Condudl. 

Eufeh.  Let  your  Pretenfions  be  Chriflian,  and  your 
Meafures  juft  ;  leave  not  Confcience  for  a  genteel  Em- 
ployment, nor  charge  thro'  thick  and  thin  for  the  fake 
of  Money  or  Honour.  To  refign  Innocence  for  an  Of- 
fice, is  to  fet  too  great  a  Value  upon  the  one,  and  to 
under-rate  the  other.  Start  fair,  and  carry  on  the  Con- 
tefl  with  Generofity,  and  never  way-lay  a  Rival  in  the 
dark,  nor  trepan  him  by  the  unmanly  Methods  of  Trea- 
chery, Calumny,  or  Detradion :  Such  a  Condudl  is  as 
bafe  as  it's  finful,  and  favours  more  of  the  T'urk  than  of 
the  Chrlftian  ;  it's  a  Mark  you  fear  more  his  Merit  than 
you  rely  on  your  own,  and  that  you  defpair  to  carry 
the  Poll,  if  you  put  the  Succefs  to  the  ifiiie  of  Worth. 
Alexander  fcorn'd  to  fteal  a  Vidlory  by  Surprize  or  Stra- 
tagem, he  difputed  it  with  the  Sword  at  mid-day,  and 
chofe  rather  to  hazard  an  Empire  in  the  fight  of  the 
Sun,  than  to  fubdue  twenty  in  the  dark ;  in  fine,  h(% 
would  have  Vaiour  wfear  the  Crown,  not  Cowardice; 
and  refufed  to  be  gffiat^  than  Z)«rw,  unlefs  he  were  alfo 

more 


of  the  Gentleman  InJiruSied.     107 

tnore  deferving :  This  was  a  noble  Emulation,  hazard- 
ous indeed,  but  handfome  ;  here  was  nothing  mean, 
nothing  infidious,  but  all  Gallantry  and  good  Nature. 
Follow  this  Model,  drive  to  raife  your  felf  by  thofe 
Means  honefty  dares  own,  take  not  one  Step  that  looks 
like  Undermining  or  Circumvention,  and  apply  no  In- 
llrument  that  fhines  not  true  upon  the  Touchftone  of 
Honour  and  Confcience. 

11. 
Keep  your  Pretenfions  within  Compafs,  fufFer  'em  not 
to  mount  too  high  ;  if  ycu  give  Ambition  the  Rein,  'twill 
carry  you  too  far,  and  may  let  you  down  in  a  Precipice : 
Too  much  Sail  overfets  a  fhip,   the  Canvas  muft  be 
proportioned  to  the   Vellel  :    Some  People's  Psrts  are 
drawn  lefs  than   others,   they  are  not  caft  in  the  fame 
Mould,  their  Capacities  are  not  large  enough  to  hold 
a  great  Freferment,  and  the  very  Attempt  lays  open  their 
Inabilities,  and  demonllrates  their  Temerity  out-fhoots 
their  Prudence,  and  that  their  Strength  bears  no  Propor- 
tion with  their  Prefumption ;  and  when  a  young  Gentle- 
man fets  out  under  fuch  a  Difadvantage,  it's  odds  he'll 
founder  before  he  comes  to  his  Journey's  End. The  Bold- 
nefs  of  the  Enterprize  will  awake  the  Jealou  fy  of  a  hun- 
dred Pretendants,  and  when  this  Fury  takes  the  Cam- 
paign waited  on  by  Power  and  Numbers,  who  can  ex- 
pert to  go  on  with  Succefs,  or  even  to  retreat  with  Safe- 
ty ?  One  rallies  your  Wit,  another  your  Judgment ;  this 
Man  falls  upon  your  Courage,  that  upon  your  Honefty : 
Now  when  fo  many  draw  fuch  a  difadvantageous  Cha- 
radter  of  a  Gentleman,  the  Draught  will  raife  in  a  Prince 
ill-favour'd   ImprefTions,    and  rather  prompt  to  difcard 
than  to  promote  him ;  for  Princes  have  all  the  fpecifick 
Weaknefles  of  their  Subjcdls,  they  are  m^ade  up  of  the 
fame  Matter,  and  follow  the  fame  Biafs  of  Nature;  they 
believe  Evil  of  a  Man  rather  than  Good,  and  when  they 
are  well  fettled  in  their  Opinion,  there  is  no  removing 
'em.     In  a  Word,  who  courts  Preferment  walks  on  flip- 
pery  Ground ;   it's  his  Bufinefs  to  fence  againft  Rubs, 
and  not  to  tempt  People  to  crofs  his  Way,  or  to  trip  him 
up  in  the  Career. 

Aim  firft  at  a  lower  Station,  and  let  it  fute  with  your 
.Genius.  I  would  not  have  a  Man  that  can't  count  Twenty 
lay  in  for  a  Place  in  the  Exchequer ynox  an  Ignoramus  zt 

his 


2o8       A  Supplement  to  the  firft  Fart 

his  Pen. for  a  Station  in  ine  Secretary's  Office.  Mr.  TC 
in  Torlpire,  who  never  lookM  over  the  Limits  of  the 
County,  nor  rode  more  Southward  than  Po»?/rf ;,  (hould 
not  fue  for  Credentials  to  the  French  Court;  nor  Mr.  L. 
who  could  never  Mafler  As  in  prccfenti^  for  a  Place  in 
the  Bench  at  U'^eJlmiKflcr  Hall.  A  Man  that  puts  in  for 
an  Office  fo  difproportion'd  to  his  Capacity  is  unfit  for 
any,  and  I  would  rather  condemn  him  to  withdraw 
twenty  Miles  from  LondoK^  than  perfuade  him  to  fliew 
his  Face  in  Court.  Confult  your  Abilities;  and  when 
you  are  got  into  a  fit  Poll,  exert  your  Spirits,  and  try  to 
make  the  moft  of  your  felf;  apply  Care  and  Diligence, 
and  ftudy  more  your  Mafter's  Intereft  than  your  own. 
If  you  difcharge  your  Duty  with  Satisfaction  and  Ap- 
plauie,  you  may  look  higher  without  Envy,  for  in  fuch 
Cafes  People  rather  commend  the  Merit,  than  Repine 
at  the  Succefs,  efpecially  if  tte  Advantage  be  managed 
with  Civility  and  Moderation ;  but  if  you  launch  out 
into  Conceit  and  Arrogance,  if  you  fly  into  Oftentation,- 
and  fpurn  at  thofe  you  leave  behind,  all  is  fpoiled  j  for 
all  the  Worth  of  Sir  Thomas  Moor.,  or  of  a  Boetius.^  will 
never  protect  Pride,  nor  fence  ill  Nature ;  but  when  you 
make  ufe  of  your  Exaltation  to  oblige,  when  you  took  no 
bigger  in  the  highell  Station  than  in  the  lovvcft,  you  Hand 
fecure,  'and  will  have,  if  not  \^<i\Q.  Hand,  at  leaft,  the  good 
Wiflies  of  Hundreds  to  fupport  you. 

III. 

A  middle  Station  is  the  belt,  becaufe  the  moft  fecure ; 
it  diftinguiflies  enough  from  the  Crowd,  it  entitles  to 
Refped,  and  allows  Neceflaries  for  Decency  and  Plea- 
fure.  Now  methinks  nothing  is  wanting  to  compleat  a 
Man*s  Happincfs  thus  furnifli'd,  but  a  Senfe  of  his  Cir- 
cumftances,  t.  e-,  that  he  fliines  in  his  own  Orb,  tho'  it 
be  not  the  higheft  j  that  he  is  fo  far  confiderable  as  to 
fecure  Repute;  that  he  is  eafy  at  Flome,  and  fears  no 
Storm  from  Abroad  j  in  fine,  that  he  has  enough,  and 
cannot  poffibly  enjoy  all. 

But  the  Mifchief  is,  we  are  of  a  foaring  Humour,  and 
in  fpight  of  DiiRuifivcs  will  climb  fe  high  till  our  Heads 
turn,  and  wc  leave  our  Brains  on  the  Pavement.  A 
Soldier  is  upon  the  Strain  to  be  General,  a  Seaman  to 
ride  Admiral,  a  Lawvcrravd  a  Parfcn  to  fit  at  the  Head 

of 


of  the  Gentleman  Injm^kd.      20^ 

bfjuflice  and  Religion^  and  a  Co//r/^/Vr  to  bea  Favourite. 
yiui  C.ffar  aut  nullns  is  our  Motto,  all  or  nothing.  Each 
Man  looks  upon  his  fingle  feU"asa  Detachment  from  the 
hiain  Body  of  Mankind,  and  the  Proprietor  of  all  that  is 
Great  and  Plealing;  we  are  upon  the  Spur  till  we  come 
to  the  Land's  End^  i.  e.  the  laft  Point  of  Promotion. 
Now  what  is  all  this  but  Covetoufnefs  on  the  one. Hand, 
and  Pride  on  the  other?  Two  PalTions  never  to  be  fatis-  ' 
fied,  and  yet  always  obey'd. 

It's  certain  the  Qiiality  of  Pr/Wt/o  is  very  confiderablej 
and  though  it  does  not  always  command  Efteem,  it  calls 
for  Refped  ;  few  Courtiers  dare  pretend  for  the  Place,  yet 
all  wifli  for  the  Honour  •,  and  we  are  fo  kind  to  our 
felves,  as  to  think  a  Prince's  AfFedion  as  reafonably  plac'd 
on  us,  as  on  our  Neighbour,  and  we  fail  not  to  blame  his 
Choice,  if  it  falls  not  upon  our  Perfon. 

Yet  tho'  the  Title  be  in  the  general  Efteem  fo  valua- 
ble, I  advife  you  to  quit  all  Pretenfions  to  the  Favour ; 
level  your  Expe6lation  at  a  lower  Mark,  unlcfs  you  in- 
tend to  ftand  on  P^ecord  a  fad  Inftance  of  the  Inftability 
of  human  Greatnefs ; .  turn  over  the  Tranfadions  bf  paft 
Ages,  and  you  will  find  not  one  Favourite  of  a  thoufand, 
"whofe  End  was  not  more  amazing  than  his  Greatnefs  ; 
the  fame  Princes  that  fet  'em  up,  took  Pleafu'rc  in  pulling 
'em  down,  and  were  no  lefs  extravagant  in  their  Cruel- 
ty, than  in  their  Kindnefs.  Jmoa  look'd  down  from  the 
top  of  his  Glory  upon  his  Fellow- Subjeds  with  Difdain, 
and  Contempt,  but  this  bright  Sun  fet  in  a  Cloud  of  In- 
famy, and  turn'd  his  Rival's  Envy  into  Compaflion.  Ti- 
berius  bore  the  Title  of  Emperor,  Sejafjus  all  the  Power, 
the  proud  Senate  bow'd  to  his  Statues,  fwore  by  his  For- 
tune, and  his  Commands  were  as  facred  as  the  twelve 
T^cihles  :  Yet  when  the  Prince's  Affedtionschopt  into  ano- 
ther Corner,  this  Cobjjus  fell  to  the  Ground,  and  buried 
all  his  Creatures  under  the  Ruins  of  his  Cataftrophe. 
Our  Gavejlofis,  Spencers^  li^olfeys.  Sit.  teach  us  by  their 
Difafters,  that  the  Favour  of  Princes  is  not  Proof  againll 
Misfortune ;  that  it  can  arreft  a  Favourite  v/ithin  the  Pre- 
cindlofthe  Court,  and  draw  him  from  the  Bed-chamber 
to  the  Scaffold.  I  could  fingle  out  forty  more  Inftances 
of  a  reflier  Date,  and  Ibme  domeftick  too,  but  thefe 
fuffic;  10  caution  againft  too  great  intimacy  with  Sove- 
reigns, which  is  feldom  purchafcd  without  the  lale  of 
P  Liberty, 


,^^  2 !o    A  Supplement  to  the  firft  Part 

''Liberty,  and  never  continued  without  Danger  of  Body 
■  or  Soul,  and  too  often  of  both. 

The  Reafon  is  clear;  for  firft,  as  Princes  often  love 
without  Caufe,  fo  they  hate  without  Provocation  ;  they 
are  led  by  Caprice,  and  fway'd  by  Fancy,  and  by  Confe- 
quence  are  only  conftant  in  Change.  Fancy  is  never  long 
lived;  a  Word,  a  Look,  a  Surmife  nips  off  the  moft  fa- 
vourable Impreffion,  and  turns  the  moft  charming  Ob- 
je6ls  into  a  Monller ;  hence  it  comes,  that  Men  run  from 
Dotage  to  Difguft  in  an  Inftant,  and  are  as  unable  to  give 
a  tolerable  Account  of  their  Love  as  of  their  Averfion,  a 
meer  je  ne  ffay  quoy  kindles  Kindnefs,  and  a  je  ne  fpay 
amy  congeals  it ;  to  Day  freedom  pleafes,  to  Morrow 
you  muU;'  ftand  off  in  Refpedl  and  Refervednefs.  In  fine; 
an  Ephdjiion  will  have  Employment  enough  to  carry  an 
even  Fl^,nd  between  the  Emperor  and  /ilexander,  and 
to  difcJmrge  the  Duties  of  Familiarity  without  making 
too  bold  with  Majefty,  for  the  fame  Man  is  both  Friend 
and  Prince.  Now  one  muft  have  a  very  Metaphyfical 
Genius  to  feparate  thefe  two  Relations  fo  as  to  be  free 
with  the  Friend,without  coming  too  near  the  Monarch; 
and  yet  too  much  on  the  one  fide,  or  too  httle  on  the 
other  ruins  all. 

Secondly,  Not  one  of  ten  thoufand  are  qualified  for 
fuch  a  Poft ;  he  muft  have  the  Prudence  of  a  Solomon^  the 
Craft  of  an  Jchiiophel,  the  Courage  of  a  Cxfar,  the  Mode- 
ration of  a  Fabricius^  and  befides  the  Felicity  of  Sylla , 
he  muft  oblige  all  Men  no  lefs  when  he  denies  than  when 
he  confers  a  Favour,  and  take  care  to  make  no  Enemies 
on  the  one  Side,  whilft  he  makes  Friends  on  the  other; 
for  Enmity  is  more  clamorous  and  a6tive  than  Friendfhip, 
and  a  fuppos'd  Injury  finks  deeper  than  a  real  Benefit. 
Am  not  I  of  the  fame  Mafs  with  T.  L.  cries  one?  Why 
then  Ihould  he  lord  it  over  n-se  ?  Where  Natures  are  the 
fame,  Diftinftion  of  Privilege  is  unjuft.  Why  is  one 
Individual  of  the  fame  kind  ftamp'd  with  Honour,"  and 
the  other  with  Infimy  r  This  Complaint  firft  ftarted  in  a 
Corner  is  banded  from  one  to  another,  till  it  breaks  In- 
clofure,  and  appears  in  pubiick,  and  you  may  be  fure  it 
receives  fome  exafperating  Stroaks  in  the  Journey;  and 
when  People  are  warm'd.  Cabals  and  Contrivances  fol- 
low, all  the  Mifcarriages  in  Church  and  State  are  put  on 
the  Favourite's  Account.     The  very  Tempefts,  Plagues, 

and 


of  the  Gentleman  Inft ruffed.     211 

and  Famines  are  clap'cl  at  his  Door,  and  like  the  primitive 
Chriftians  he  is  mark'd  out  as  the  publick  NuiUmce  of 
Mankind.  He  fets  the  Prince  at  variance  with  his  People ; 
he  obftrucis  the  fitting  of  Parliaments  \  abets  Popery  and 
Arbitrary  Government  j  and  then  his  Majeflv  is  defir'd  to 
remove  Zl  L.  from  his  Perlbn  and  Counfel/  to  ftriphim 
of  his  Titles,  and  to  deliver  him  up  to  the  Juftice  of  the 
Rabble.  My  Gentleman  knocks  oil',  and  like  the  Ser- 
pent, expofes  his  Tail  to  fave  the  Head  ;  /'.  e.  drops  his 
Titles,  Offices,  and  Greatnefs,  and  gives  up  his  Favourite- 
fhip  with  all  its  Appurtenances  to  fave  his  Skin  ;  away 
packs  he  into  the  Country,  leaving  behind  a  thoufand 
Curfes  upon  the  Court.  The  Anguifh  of  his  Misfor- 
tunes puts  him  in  the  Wheel,  and  he  always  works  upon 
his  own  Difquiet,  pitied  by  fome,  and  fcorn'd  by-others, 
like  Vipers,  he  lives  on  his  own  Poifon ;  and  tho'  he  wants 
Power  to  execute  Mifchief,  he  has  Malice  enough  to 
contrive  it:  So  that  he  is  made  up  of  Impotence  and 
Malice,  and  where  thofe  difconfolate  Qualities  are  well 
blended,  all  other  Ingredients  of  Mifery  are  fuperfluous. 
This  is  the  end  of  Favourites,  and  the  moft  favourable 
they  can  expe6l,  tho'  not  the  molt  unfortunate  they  may 
fear ;  for  alas !  they  are  not  always  fo  happy  as  to  re- 
ceive Quarter:  No,  no,  they  quit  the  Court  to  take  up 
in  a  Dungeon,  and  aft  the  lalt  Scene  of  their  Lives  up- 
on a  Scaffold  ;  nay,  and  it's  a  Favour  too  to  change  the 
Halter  into  a  Hatchet. 

Check  therefore  Ambition,  and  give  it  not  too  much 
Line ;  court  rather  what  is  handfpme  than  great,  and 
ftudy  more  Convenience  than  Grandeur.^  Deferve  the 
firft  Place  in  your  Prince's  Efteem,  but  let  others  run  a- 
way  with  his  Affeftion  ;  though  you  fparkle  lefs,  your 
Value  will  be  greater ;  to  rife  to  a  moderate  Station  by 
meer  Merit,  is  more  noble  than  to  pollefs  the  highell  by 
Favour  and  Partiality. 

IV. 

Great  Men  need  Supporters,  and  prudent  Men  will 
provide  them  ;  Subftantives  are  out  of  Fafliion  in  Court, 
moft  walk  there  on  Crutches,  and  (qw  can  even  ftand 
on  their  own  Legs.  Lay  therefore  in  for  Countenance ; 
without  Stays  the  beft  built  Fortune  will  tumble :  How- 
ever fell  not  Favours  by  Inch  of  Candle  ;  there  is  no  de- 
pending on  bought  Friendfhip,  when  a  Man  has  paid  for 

P  2  his 


212     A  Supplement  to  the  firft  Fart 

his  Preferment  he  is  not  in  your  Debt,  bu^owns  the 
Obligation  to  his  Attendance,  Importunity,  or  Parfe, 
and  though  (to  get  a  good  Pennyworth)  he  may  fvvear 
Fidelity,  and  offer  his  Service,  be  all'ureH  he  will  follow 
the  Impulfe  of  Intereft,  and  leave  you  in  the  Lurch  up- 
on Danger  and  Diftrefs.  '' 

Bevvare  of  a  Court  Maxim,  Provide  fur  your  Enemies, 
Friends  will  never  flinck.  The  Principle  is  neither  con- 
formable to  the  Rules  of  Policy,  nor  Juftice  ;  it  cuts 
upon  good  Nature,  and  Gratitude,  and  has  no  Support 
but  Practice.  Shall  a  Man  thrive  by  Roguery,  and  be 
the  better  for  Villainy  ?  He  has  noos'd  me  into  a  Plot  by 
Forgery  and  Subornation,  and  fliall  I  llretch  my  Credit 
.to  fwell  his  Fortune  ?  Percliance  he  has  met  his  King  in 
the  Field,  and  promifed  to  make  him  a  glorious  Prince 
by  feizing  his  Towns,  and  fettering  his  Perfon,  and  fhall 
I  perfuade  his  Majefly  to  give  him  a  White  Staff  for  the 
Service  ?  In  fine,  he  is  dipp'd  in  Treafon,  and  over  Head 
in  Mifchief,  and  now  mull  be  bought  off,  and  incenfed 
by  his  Sovereign,  as  the  Devil  is  by  the  Indians,  that  he 
may  do  no  more  Harm.  Such  a  Condu6l  is  an  Invita- 
tion to  Dilloyalty  and  Treafon,  it  encourages  Vice, 
and  plunges  Virtue  into  Defpair.  Who  will  ftand  up  for 
his  Prince's  juft  Prerogative  at  the  Expence  of  his  For- 
tune, when  he  may  draw  upon  it  with  Safety  and  Profit? 
If  Honefty  be  requir'd  with  Poverty,  and  Knavery 
with  Wealth  ;  if  Loyalty  go  out  at  Elbows,  and 
Treafon  glitters  in  Gold-lace,  I  fear  Knights  of  the  Poft 
will  multiply  upon  the  Nation,  and  Round-heads  may 
once  more  vie  Numbers  with  Cavahers.  I  would  not 
outrage  where  I  fliould  reward,  nor  reward  where  I 
fhould  punifh. 

Le.-in.  Spare  me  a  Word,  left  I  lofe  the  Opportunity 
of  a  Queftion.     I4''hy  may  I  not  win  an  Ener/iy  ? 

Eujeb.  You  mean,  I  fuppofe,  buy  a  Friend  ?  Becaufe 
whofoever  dcferts  his  Party  for  Gain,  will  certainly  re- 
turn when  Intereft  calls  upon  him:  If  the  Senfe  of  Du- 
ty and  Confcience  are  not  able  to  reclaim  a  Delinquent, 
will  Title  work  a  real  Converfionr  No,  no.  Sir,  thofe 
Cattle  fiy  in  tl:;e  Face  oi  a  Benefit,  their  Organs  are  fo 
ill  fhap'd  they  cannot  feel  any  thing  that's  generous  and 
noble;  they  always  follow  the  loudeft  Cry,  and  tack  a- 
'•^"^-'-iLith  the  Wind  of  Intereft:    So  long  as  you  are 

too 


of  ?/j^  Gentleman   hiftrutfed.      215 

too  powerful  to  need  Help,  he  fhnll  ftand  by  you,  but  if 
you  begin  to  retreat,  he  will  fall  upon  the  Rear,  and 
charge  your  ftraggling  Forces  thro'  a  thoufand  Favours. 
It's  a  Pojlulatum  among  thofe  InfiJels,  that  it's  worfe  to 
fink  with  a  Friend,  than  to  fwim  with  an  Fnemy,  and 
therefore  like  Rats  before  a  Storm,  they  abandon  a  leaky 
Veflel,  and  fwim  for  Safety  to  the  Shoar,  To  be  fhort, 
thofe  Men  will  ply  down  the  Stream,  and  fuie  with  Suc- 
cefs  in  Defiance  of  Juftice  ;  they  will  never  crofs  upon  a 
prevailing  Crime,  nor  oppofe  Mifchiefs-  carried  on  by 
Numbers;  their  Bufinefs  is  to  Itand,  though  their  Friend 
or  Prince  falls,  and  to  make  a  Fortune  out  of  the  Ruins 
of  their  Neighbours  or  Country.  Keep  therefore  your 
Enemies  low,  they  will  no  no  Harm,  when  they  are  too 
weak  to  attempt  it,  their  Impotence  is  your  belt  Guard  ; 
Power  in  the  Hands  of  a  Mercenary  is  ill  placed.  1  had 
rather  fee  an  Enemy  unable  to  do  me  a  bad  Turn,  than 
in  a  Condition  to  do  me  a  good  one, 

Lea>i.  At  leaft  a  Rebel  or  private  Enemy  may  pofTibly 
be  obliged  by  Preferment,  and  it's  certain  a  Friend  will 
venture  a  broken  Head  to  refcue  bis  Homjly.^  and  rather  re- 
fign  his  Eftate  than  his  Fidelity. 

Eujeb.  Conclufions  drawn  out  of  Poffibilities  are  not 
to  be  relied  on,  they  plead  for  both  fides,  and  by  Confe- 
quence  neither  Advantage  nor  Prejudice  either.  An  ill 
Man  may  be  fee'dinto  your  Intereft,  as  well  as  Lawyers; 
but  then  as  thofe  Gentlemen  upon  a  fairer  Profpec^l  of 
Gain  fhift  Sides,  he  may  relapfe  at  the  Approach  of 
Temptation,  and  fall  into  the  old  Diieafe  of  Ingrati- 
tude, and  Infidelity  :  Face  therefore  one  Poffibility  with 
the  other,  and  perchance  you  may  conclude  with  me, 
it's  fafer  trufting  a  Rogue  in  the  Goal,  than  on  the 
Qiieen's  Highway  ;  indeed  he  may  poflibly  exped:  a 
Gentleman  to  efcorte  his  Perfon,  but  I  believe  it's  more 
probable  his  Bufinefs  is  tofecurea  Purfe. 

Befides,  I  am  perfuaded,  'tis  not  fo  very  certain,  that  a 
Man  who  has  fought  away  for  his  Prince,  or  his  Friend, 
both  Limibs  and  Ellate,  will  keep  up  to  his  former  Prin- 
ciples of  Loyalty  and  Generofity,  unlefs  he  receive  a 
more  comfortable  return  of  Acknowledgement,  than  a 
cold  God  be  withyoii^  ox  I  am  forry  to  fee  you  in  fo  drooping 
a  Condition.  For  fuch  a  Payment  bears  no  Proportion 
with  a  loft. Leg,  or  a  forfeited   Eftate.     He  may  very 

P  3  well 


214    A  Supplement  to  the  Jirji  Van 

well  expeft,  you  will  be  at  the  Expence  of  an  oaken 
Supporter  at  lealt,  and  that  you  will  not  condemn  hini 
to  the  Basket  for  his  Honefty,  and  if  ill  Nature  baulks 
his  Expectation,  and  he  cannot  make  a  Penny  of  his  Ser- 
vice, he  may  think  of  changing  Mailers,  and  may  re- 
folve  to  try  if  Vice  be  not  better  natur'd  than  Virtue, 
and  if  Treafon  will  not  piece  up  an  Eftate,  Loyalty 
has  disjointed.  For,  Sir,  give  me  leave  to  tell  you,  Ne- 
ceffity  pinches,  and  often  puts  Men  upon  unwarranta- 
ble Courfes ;  Indigence  works  more  upon  People  than 
Duty,  and  Generofity  feldom  bears  up  againft  Negledt 
and  Contempt :  You  muft  fometimes  be  at  the  Expence 
of  a  Cordial  to  keep  up  the  Spirits,  and  enliven  Refolu- 
tion  ;  for  Stoicifm  is  out  of  Fafhion.  Men  are  not  lb 
conceited  of  Virtue,  as  to  think  it  is  its  own  Recom- 
pence,  and  that  it's  worth  taking  the  Field  for  the  Ser- 
vice of  his  Prince,  tho'  he  take  up  in  Chclfea  Hofpital  at 
his  Return. 

Indeed,  tho'  a  good  Man  be  turn'd  off  here  by  his 
Prince  without  Regard,  he  will  have  Station  and  Happi- 
nefs  hereafter.  But  fome  Provifion  fliould  be  made  e- 
ven  in  this  World,  both  to  reward  and  refrefh  fuffering 
Virtue,  otherways  it  may  give  us  the  Slip :  For  prefent 
Service,  People  expe6l  prefent  Payment,  and  a  fmall 
Gratification  in  Hand,  wins  more  than  Millions-  in  Re- 
verfion.  Endeavour  therefore  to  raife  thofe  that  deferve 
Promotion,  and  whofe  paft  Behaviour  will  anfwer  for 
their  future.  But  to  grace  thofe  with  Title  and  Digni- 
ty, who  deferve  not  the  Benefit  of  an  Amhelly,  is  nei- 
ther fa  fe,  generous,  norjuft. 

V. 

Let  your  Actions  keep  touch  with  your  Promifes,  and 
your  Heart  and  Tongue  fpeak  the  fame  Language  ;  to 
proffer  a  Gentleman  Afhllance,  and  not  intend  ir,  is  bafe ; 
and  to  defign  a  Favour  that  lies  out  of  your  Reach,  is 
fooliih.  0.  P.  had  Credit  at  Court,  and  an  honourable 
Poll  to  fupport  it  J  fome  gave  him  a  world  of  good  Na- 
ture, others  as  much  Vanity,  and  indeed  the  Queftion 
Jies  yet  undecided,  .whether  he  Iteer'd  by  the  one  or  the 
other  :  However,  his  Antichamber  was  the  Rendezvous 
of  Pretendants,  and  his  Houfe  was  term'd  the  Sanctu- 
ary of  younger  Brothers.  Leave  your  Bufinefs  to  me  (fays 
he  to  one)  itjball  be  done  to  your  SatisfadioK.  Tour  Pre- 

tenfions 


of  the  Gentlem A  n  Inftru^fed.       2 1 5 

tenjlons  .(crys  he  to  a  Second)  are  moft  jufl^  his  Majejiy 
has  too  much  regard  for  Merit  to  refufe  fo  reafonable  a  Peti- 
tion. My  Gentlemen  return'd  to  their  Lodgings  on  Cock- 
horfe,  and  began  to  think  of  a  Fund  for  a  glorious  Equi- 
page; fome  were  already  Knights  in  Imngination,  and 
other  Barons  or  Vifcotints.  All  were  more  happy  with 
the  very  Expectation,  than  Fruition  could  have  made 
'em ;  for  Fancy  paints  beyond  Life,  and  over-flourifhes 
Objedls ;  thofe  Scenes  it  reprelents  in  the  Brain  out-fhine 
thofe  of  Creation:  In  fine.  Reality  fcarce  ever  patterns 
Imagination,  and  worldly  Greatnefs  charms  more  upon 
Report  than  Sight,  minuit  pr^fentia  famam. 

But  after  all,  their  Expe6lation  ended  in  Difappoint- 
ment,  and  their  Hope  funk  into  Defpair  ;  for  after  they 
had  run  through  a  long  Courfe  of  Submiflion  and  Atten- 
dance, they  were  difmill  with  a  6V»//^?«f»,  lamforrymy 
Labour  has  been  unfuccefsfrl,  unlook'd  fur  Accidents  have 
crofs^d my  Defigns  andyour  Fortunes.  Thofe  poor  Prelen- 
dants  were  forc'd  to  retire,  and  curs'd  their  Patron's  Im- 
potence or  Impofture ;  they  lafh'd  him  feverely  in  the 
Coifee-Houfe,  and  convinc'd  the  World  he  wanted  either 
Sincerity,  Credit,  or  Prudence.  A  Man  (liould  keep  his 
Promifes  within  the  Compafs  of  his  Power,  and  rather 
promife  too  little  than  too  much.  There  is  Goodnefs, 
Greatnefs,  and  Pieafure  in  forwarding  a  Gentleman  on 
his  way  to  Preferment;  but  it's  bafe  to  feed  him  with 
vifionary  Hopes,  and  then  to  turn  him  off  with  a  Com- 
pliment. He  might  have  placed  hia  AddreiTcs  more 
fuccefsfully,  and  manag'd  both  Time  and  Money  more 
to  Advantage;  but  being  thus  difappointed,  he  remains 
without  Friends,  without  Money,  without  Patience;  he 
has  waited  away  the  very  Materials  of  his  defign'd  Fa- 
brick,  and  has  nothing  to  truft  to  but  a  Musket.  Be- 
lieve me,  Sir,  it's  mortifying  to  fall  fliort  of  that  which  a 
Man  affefts  with  Eagernefs  ;  the  Misfortune  puts  his 
Fancy  into  a  Fever,  it  preys  upon  his  Blood,  b6ils  up 
his  Spirits,  and  flings  him  into  Impatience;  it  baulks  his 
Hopes,  cows  his  Courage,  and  makes  the  remaining  Sa- 
tisfa<flion  of  Life  a  Burthen.  I  am  apt  to  believe  the 
Gentleman  mearri:  well;  but  certainly  he  did  ill  in  tan- 
talizing fo  long  his  Clients :  For  the  fame  Inflant  their 
Hopes  ebb'd,  their  Anger  began  to  flow,  and  not  one 
but  thought  himfelf  tohave  juft  Provocation  given  him 

P   4  tQ 


ai6     A  Supplement  to  the  fir^;  Part 

to  imnair  his  Credit,  and  to  make  him  the  Subjedl  of 
their  Choler  and  Scorn ;  and  indeed  Men  generally  re- 
ceive as  little  Kindnefs  as  they  do,  and  find  as  few 
Friends  as  they  deferve. 

If  you  have  Power,  employ  it  to  the  benefit  of  Merit 
and  Quality  ;  but  be  not  too  magnificent  in  your  Promi- 
fcs,  nor  overconfident  ofSuccefs  j  pretend  not  toenfure 
a  Prefei  ment,  nor  talk  of  Uncertainty  till  the  thing  bedone. 
I  would  rather  give  a  Gentleman  too  little  Hope  than  too 
much,  and  dilpofe  him  to  fear  the  worft,  than  to  expedt 
the  beft  of  the  Enrerprize.  For  thus  he  will  receive  a  Baulk 
with  lefs  Surprize,  and  if  he  fucceeds  an  Expedation  will 
enhance  the  \  .due  of  the  Favour.  Tire  not  his  Patience 
with  tedious  Put-offs,  nor  torture  him  between  Hope 
nnd  Fear  ;  put  him  out  of  Pain  fo  foon  as  you  can,  and 
let  him  knov/  what  he  has  to  truft  to;  when  Fortune 
is  unkind,  it's  a  Satisfiidf  ion  to  know  how  far  fliC  can  af- 
front us,  and  a  Man  is  in  fome  refpedt  happy,  who  fees 
the  laft  Extent  of  his  Mifcry. 

VI. 

Some  People  over-rate  their  Merittofucha  monftrous 
Height,  that  they  prefs  forv^ard  upon  every  Appearance 
cf  Profit,  and  fancy  they  are  rarely  equip'd  for  every 
Place  of  Advantage  of  Honour  that  falls  in  the  Court  ; 
and  upon  this  Perfuafion  they  beg  hard  for  the  Employ- 
ment. Nothing  is  able  to  difcourage  them  fromj  the  Pur- 
fuit,  neither  the  Greatnefs  of  the  Competitors,  nor  the 
Number  of  their  Rivals.  Are  they  baulk'd,  the  next  Day 
they  return  to  the  Charge ;  they  rally  after  the  Defeat, 
and  grow  imperious  and  menacing  upon  a  Denial  ;  they 
will  heftor  and  ftorm  their  Prince  out  of  the  Privilege  of 
placing  his  Favours  where  he  thinks  fit,  and  plague  hirri 
into  a  Compliance:  But  if  he  yields  not  to  their  Impor- 
tunity, they  leave  the  Court  in  a  Pet,  and  flrike  in  with 
a  Fa61ion. 

Firfl  he  fets  up  for  a  mighty  Patriot,  and  pretends  a 
great  Concern  for  his  Country,  then  he  defcants  upon  the 
Advantages  of  Liberfy,  and  runs  thro'  all  the  Branches 
of  Property;  in  his  way  he  has  a  fling  at  the  Preroga- 
tive, and  fets  the  Subjctl  above  the  Sovereign.  Thcfe 
Difcoveries  work  upon  the  Rabble,  who  conftitutc  him 
Guardian  of  their  Privileges,  they  give  thcmfelves  up  to 

his 


jof  the  Gentleman  lnjiru6ied.      217 

his  Condud,  and  for  a  Pledge  of  their  blind  Obedience 
prefent  him  with  their  Eyes  and  Underftanding ;  he  is 
the  only  Patriot  in  the  Nation,  he  alone  fiands  in  the 
Gap,  and  oppofes  arbitrary  Defigns  and  prerogative  In- 
novations ;  the  Atlas  that  fuftains  Liberty  and  defends 
Property  againft  Court  Encroachments,  in  fine,  he  is 
baptized  the  Proteflant  Peer,  as  if  the  Houfe  of  Lords 
were  compos'd  of  Papijls  or  Infidels,  and  all  the  Pro- 
teftant  Gentry  of  the  Realm  were  fhipp'd  away  for  Bar- 
hadoes  or  New-EKgland. 

Now  has  this  Man  more  Zeal  for  his  Country,  or 
more  Religion  than  his  Neighbour  ?  Not  at  all ;  his 
Concern  is  Intereft,  and  his  Religion  Mask  and  Artifice  ; 
his  Vanity  at  Court  exceeded  his  Force,  and  his  Merit  or 
Fortune  kept  not  Pace  with  his  Ambition;  the  Wind 
blew  in  his  Teeth,  and  now  be  tacks  about,  and  makes 
for  a  Repiiblick.  Now  thefe  popular  Men,  thefe  Men 
.of  Applaufe  have  two  thirds  of  a  Traitor  ;  and  I  take  it 
for  a  general  Rule,  that  he  is  no  good  Subject  who  runs 
away  with  the  Heart  of  the  Vulgar,  their  Intelle6luals 
are  too  weak,  or  their  Paflions  too  llrong  to  diftinguifh 
Truth. 

But  in  Sincerity,  tho'  this  Pra(51ice  be  ordinary,  has  it 
any  thing  of  Reafon  or  Chriftianity  ?  A  private  Gentle- 
man fhall  place  his  Favours  as  he  thinks  bell,  and  a  King 
fhall  be  barr'd  with  Freedom  ?  Shall  Privilege  quite  o- 
veriliade  Prerogative  ?  And  the  Servant  be  more  abfo- 
lute  than  his  Matter?  Shall  Authority  be  a  Minor,  and 
Subjection  be  of  Age  ?  It  is  hard,  methinks,  that  a  King 
can't  chufe  Servants  as  well  as  his  Subjects,  and  that  he 
fliall  be  lefs  becaufe  he  is  greater. 

Befides,  the  Apcftle  commands  us  to  obey  our  Su- 
periors as  God's  Vicegerents,  not  only  when  they 
llroak,  but  when  they  ftrike  us  ;  not  only  for  Intereft, 
but  for  Confcience  lake.  So. that  our  Appealers  to 
the  People  are  not  only  bad  Subjedls,  but  worfe 
.Chriftians :  They  tranfgrefs  the  Laws  of  the  Gofpel  to- 
gether with  thofe  of  the  Land,  and  altho'  they  keep  off 
from  human  Juflice,  they  will  fcarccly  withdraw  from 
Divine. 

Step  not  into  thofe  Irregularities,  tho'  they  are  receiv'd 
with  the  Applaufe  of  the  Crowd,  and  huzza'd  home 
with  all   the  Pomp  of  a  Roman  Oration,  they  are  un- 

juftifiable 


2i8      A  Sv^v tiMinr  to  the  firji  Part 

juftifiable  before  God,  and  fober  Men.  Receive  a  Fa- 
vour with  Thanks,  and  bear  a  Repuhe  with  Patience. 
Tho'  a  Prince  be  unkind,  you  mud  not  beundutifulj  his 
Failures  are  no  cover  for  yours.  An  abufe  of  Power,  ne- 
ver juftifies  Difobedience. 

VII. 

Men  aim  at  Happinefs  in  all  their  Purfuits,  but  gene- 
rally they  miltake  the  Means.  Such  a  Place  in  Court, 
cries  one,  fuch  a  Poft  in  the  Army,  fays  another,  fits 
my  Temper  to  a  Hair,  put  me  into  ihiit,  and  I  fliall  be 
more  happy  than  a  Monarch  ;  I  will  for  the  future  check 
my  Dejires,  and  forlwear  vj'fjh'tng.  This  puts  me  in 
mind  of  the  famous  Dialogue  between  King  Pyrrhus  and 
his  ¥2LVonn\.eCyneas.  May  Ibefo  bold^  Sir^  faid  the  Philo- 
fopher,  as  to  ask,  what  you  pretend  to  in  all  your  Enterpri- 
zes  ?  When  will  you  end'{  Or  do  you  know  what  you  would 
he  at\  I  am  now.,  replied  the  King,  fur  the  Conquejl  of 
Italy,  then  to  Sicily  there  if  ajfjort  cut,  and  Africa  lies  in 
my  way  home  :  When  I  have  brought  thefe  Defigns  to  a  hap- 
py Conclujion,  we'll  live  merrily.  But  why,  anfwer'd  Cy- 
neas,  will  you  pur  chafe  at  fo  va/i  an  Expence  of  Money 
and  Men  a  merry  Life-,  which  you  may  buy  at  a  cheaper 
Rate  ?  Stop  your  Dejires^  ufe  what  you  pojfefs,  and  the 
Bujinefs  is  done. 

A  merry  Life  is  the  End  of  our  Labour,  as  well  as  of 
this  Pagan  King,  and  the  Reafon  why  fo  few  Courtiers 
enjoy  what  they  all  fo  pallionately  pant  after,  is,  becaufe 
they  ratlter  follow  his  Example,  than  the  Phiiofopher's 
Counftl.  Thofe  who  wiih  for  what  they  have  not,  for- 
feit the  Enjoyment  of  what  they  have;  when  they  defire 
eagerly,  they  hope  too  fall,  and  are  hair'd  by  Fear :  Now 
a  Man  may  as  foon  be  eafy  on  the  Wheel,  as  happy  be- 
tween thefe  two  Paffions.  Put  a  juftTermtoyour  Wifh- 
es,  and  when  you  have  touch'd  it,  m.ake  a  Stand.  It's 
both  fickle  and  fervile»to  overlook  the  Fortune  before 
you,  and  long  for  that  which  is  not  in  your  Power.  To 
fay  you  will  pufli  for  fuch  a  Station,  is  to  fay  you  will  be 
a  Slave,  that  you  will  lay  your  Content  at  the  Mercy  of 
Hazard,  and  by  confequence  be  miferable.  If  you  give 
way  to  Nature,  you  will  fpend  all  your  time  in  Pretenfi- 
ons,  and  leave  not  a  Moment  for  Enjoyment.  Happi- 
nefs only  begins  when  Wiflies  end  j  and  he  that  han- 
kers after  «2or^,   enjoys  nothing. 

Befides, 


of  the  Gentleman  lnftru6ted»       21^ 

Befides,  Sir,  it's  ten  to  one  that  if  our  Defires  tower 
too  high,  we  fl^all  ufe  foul  Means,  if  fair  will  not  raife 
us :  For  when  Pafiion  becomes  clamorous  and  importu- 
nate, the  whifpers  of  Reafon  are  either  not  heard,  or  not 
reo-arded.  He  who  is  bent  upon  a  thing,  will  have  it 
without  boggling  at  the  Notions  o^ Right  or  Wrong.  Ha~ 
-man  would  bring  Mardocheus  upon  his  Knees,  and  becaufe 
he  would  not  creep,  he  muft  hang  ;  Revenge  could  find 
no  Crime,  but  Calumny  foon  forg'd  one.  Now  to  rife  by 
Crimes,  is  to  pay  too  dear  for  the  Elevation  ;  ten  Thou- 
fand  Pounds  is  thefixt  Price  of  a  Title.  Why  M'ill  you 
purchafe  one  at  the  Price  of  Heaven  ?  In  fine.  Sir,  all 
the  Glory,  all  the  Worth  of  the  Univerfe  will  not  hold 
out  to  the  length  of  Pride  and  Covetoufnefs,  and  feeing 
they  are  too  little  to  fatiate  our  Defires,  they  fhould  not, 
methinks,  be  big  enough  to  provoke  'em. 

I  poftpone  Grandeur  to  Confcience,  and  time  to  Eter- 
nity ;  Goodnefs  is  your  Bufinefs,  not  Greatnefs  j  you 
were  made  for  Heaven,  not  for  the  Court,  let  that  be 
the  End  of  all  your  Actions,  and  the  Gofpel  the  Rule  ; 
profit  mull  not  regulate  your  Condu6t,  but  Juftice : 
Perchance  you  may  not  thrive  fo  well  in  this  World, 
but  you  will  fare  better  for  it  in  the  other ;  There,  not 
Title,  but  Virtue  makes  the  Diftinftion.  A  Thief  with 
true  Repentance  will  go  from  the  Gallows  into  Abra- 
ham's Bofom,  and  a  vicious  Prince  into  Hell.  In  fhort, 
let  your  Converfation  be  eafy,  your  Temper  fvveet,  and 
your  Piety  unaffected.  I  will  not  overcharge  you,  con- 
tinued Eufehius,  with  Precepts;  Time,  Prudence,  and 
Refleftion  will  fupply  the  reft. 

Leaf}.  I  return  a  ihoufand  Thanks  for  your  Charity, 
and  own  my  felf  indebted  to  Providence  for  thp  Favour 
of  this  Conference.  The  Scales  of  Prejudice  and  Igno- 
rance are  fallen  from  my  Eyes,  and  things  appear  in  a 
clearer  Light.  I  am  convinc'd  that  all  fublunary  Objeds 
are  thin,  fuperficial,  and  empty,  and  that  nothing  de- 
ferves  my  Heart,  but  he  that  made  it.  Had  our  Yefter- 
day's  Club  been  fo  fortunate,  as  to  have  enjoy'd  the  Be- 
nefit of  this  Entertainment,  I  fancy  your  Inftruftion 
might  have  awaken'd  their  Confciences,  and  dalh'd  their 
brutifh  Pleafure  with  Gall  and  Vinegar.  But  alas  ! 
poor  Creatures,  they  walk  in  the  dark,  and  place  their 
AfFedlions  at  Random  ;  they  never  confult  Reafon,  but 

hate 


's.0.6  A  SuPFLHMENT  to  the  jirji  Fart,  Sec. 

hate  by  Caprice,  and  love  by  Haf,ard.  A  dazling  Sur- 
face runs  away  with  the  Underftanding,  and  commits  a 
Rape  upon  the  will,  and  they  will  not  underftand,  that 
an  eternal  Punifhment  treads  upon  the  Heels  of  a  tranfi- 
tory  Pleafure. 

L^^Wi^^^r  fpoke  with  fuch  an  Emphafis,  that  his  Con- 
cern fparkled  in  his  Face.  Eufebins  embrac'd  him  with 
the  Tendernefs  of  a  Father,  and  difmift  him  with  this 
Farewel ;  Dear  Sir^  fufFer  me  to  end  with  our  Blefled 
Saviour,  you  are  healed^  now  fin  no  more^  left  God  take 
you  away  in  flagrante^  and  leave  not  a  Moment  betweer, 
the  Offence  and  the  Punifhment. 


The  End  of  the  Supplement. 


A 


Gentleman  Inftru^ed 

In  the  true  Principles  of 

RELIGION 


With  a  full  Confutation  of 

THEISM 

AND 

L  AT  I  T  U  D  I  N  A  R I  AN  I  S  M. 


The  Second  Part. 


Written  for  the 

Inftrudion  of  a  Young;  Nobleman.' 


LONDON: 
Printed  in  the  Y  e  a  r   i  7  ^ ; 


(  2^3  > 


■m^ 


THE 


P  U  B  L I S  H  E  R's 

Epiftle  Dedicatory 


T  O    T  H  E 


GENTRY 


Gentlemen, 

I  Make  bold  to  fue  for  a  Third  Audience, 
which  I  prefume  you'll  not  refufe  me.  I  have 
no^Defign  either  upon  your  Kitchen,  or  your 
Purfe  •,  and  will  neither  tempt  your  Charity,  or 
importune  your  Liberality.  I  wait  upon  you  to 
,give^  not  to  ask ;  and  expect  no  Reward  for  my 
Prefent,  but  a  civil  Reception. 

Atheifm,  that  grand  Plague  of  the  Living, 
and  Torment  of  the  Dead,  rages  in  our  liland  : 
Now  being  folicitous  for  your  Safety,  and  ap- 
prehenfive  of  your  Danger,  I  humbly  offer  this 
Conference  as  an  Amulet  againft  the  Contagion  ; 
tho'  it  prove  not  an  infallible  Remedy  againft 
the   Evil,  I  am  fure  it  can  do   you  no  Harm : 

And 


2  24  Epifile  Dedicatory. 

And  then  it  has  Cheapnefs,  a  molt  enticing 
Quality  to  recommend  it.  The  Difeafe  is  eafi- 
ly  catch'd,  not  eafiiy  remov'd :  So  that  a  Pi*e- 
fervative  is  more  reafonable  than  a  Rejlorative. 

Indeed  thofe  People  whole  Bufinefs  is  confin'd 
to  their  Lodgings,  who  live  out  of  Sight,  and  ra- 
ther work  than  fport  themfelves  down,  -  are  al- 
moft  below  the  Danger.  But  you  move  in  a 
more  elevated  Sphere,  you  are  defign'd  for  Com- 
merce, and  Converfation  ;  your  Occalions  draw 
you  from  Retirement,  and  your  Diverfions  call 
you  into  Company. 

Now  when  Infedlion  becomes  epidemical. 
Crowds  grow  more  dangerous  than  Solitude ; 
and  it  may  beprefum'd,  that  among  a  Multitude 
fome  carry  the  Tokens,  and  perhaps  the  Plague- 
Sores  upon  them.  It's  therefore  extreamly  hard 
for  Gentlemen^  who  are  eternally  infefted  with 
Squadrons  of  Spungers,  who  are  haunted  by 
Parafites,  that  muft  fawn  to  livcj  and  general- 
ly difcourfe  more  feelingly  on  the  Excellency  of 
a  Ragouft,  than  of  God  or  Religion.  I  fay  it's 
hard  in  fuch  a  Confluence,  to  efcape  the  Breath 
of  an  Atheift,  who  by  the  AlTiftance  of  a  volu- 
bly Tongue,  and  a  good  Forehead,  is  able  to 
fcatter  the  Diftemper  ;  and  it  it  once  fattens  on 
the  Heart,  it  immediately  polls  to  the  Head ; 
and  when  thefe  noble  Parts  have  imbib'd  the 
Contagion,  it's  odds,  the  Difeafe  either  carries 
you  off,  or  at  leaft  waits  on  you  to  the  Grave. 

Befides,  Curiofity  and  Pleafure  invite  you  to 
the  Play-houfe^  from  whence  you  adjourn  to  the 
Tavern.  •  Now  both  thefe  Places  are  infectious. 
There^  Atheifm  is  brooded,  hatch'd  here.  The 
Tenets  are  learnt  in  the  Boxes,  and  pradis'd  at  the 
next  Rendezvous :  When  Virtue  is  lafli'd  on  the 
8tage before  you,  and  Vice  recommended:  When 

you 


EpiJlJe  Dedicator fi  22^ 

you  fee  Villanies  carry  off  Applaufe,  and  Morali"* 
ty  Confufion.  When  you  hear  Religion  revil'd* 
and  the  very  Author  of  it  bJafphem'd  by  fome,and 
ridicul'd  by  others :  In  Time  neither  will  (land 
very  fair  in  your  Efteem  :  You  will  be  fhrewdly 
tempted  to  think  thofe  Things  cannot  be  very  fe- 
rious,nor  holy,when  Men  publickly  make  Ufe  of 
them  for  Subjefts  of  Merriment  and  Profanation: 
But  then  when  you  ftrike  off  from  the  Pit  to  the 
Eating-Houfe,  furrounded  witha  Tribe  of  Hang- 
ers on,  as  flcndet-ly  provided  of  Religion  as  Mo- 
ney,  what  leWd  Comments  do  thefe  Rakes  make 
on  the  Text  ?  How  do  they  fnarl  at  Providence^ 
and  glance  upon  the  Divinity  with  an  hundred  In^ 
fiuendd's^  which  mull  bellamp*d  with  Wit  (for- 
footh j  becaufe  they  are  profane  ?  Now  thefe  Blaf- 
phemies  at  a  full  Table, and  over  f  ullerCups ;  when 
the  Spirits  are  flulh'd  and  warm'd,  i.  e.  when  Rea- 
fon  is  fetter'd,  and  Senfuality  let  loofe,  firft  meet 
with  Applaufe,  and  then  with  Approbation  ;  for 
certainly  Men  are  never  mote  difpos*d  to  deny  God^ 
than  whilft  they  offend  him ;  nor  to  take  leave  on 
Religion,  than  when  they  have  loft  their  Wits. 

Again,  tho'  we  live  in  a  degenerate  Age,  Religi- 
on has  not  loft  all  Reputation.  A  Man  may  go  to 
Church  without  being  gaz*d  upon  for  a  Monfter, 
whilft  Atheifm  feems  at  leaft  to  live  under  the  dif- 
efteem  of  the  Publick.  Now  to  ftrengthen  their 
Party,  Atheifts  have  Gentlemen  in  their  Eye  : 
They  hope  for  Safety  Under  your  Proteftion,  and 
Credit  too  under  the  Wings  of  your  Authority  : 
Hence  they  employ  a  hundred  little  Artifices  to 
juggle  you  out  of  your  Faith,  and  to  hare  you  intCi 
Religion,  and  indeed  you  have  a  mighty  Influence 
over  the  Vulgar ;  they  model  their  Judgment  by 
yours  i  your  Averfion  is  the  Standard  of  theirs, 
and  what  you  approve  they  dare  not  condemn* 
Q  Fronm 


iiO  "Epifile  Dedicatory. 

From  you  they  take  Fafliions,  Breeding,  and  cveii 
Religion.  So  that  I  wonder  not  Atheifts  aim  at 
you  :  the  Conqueft  of  one  Nobleman  may  be  term- 
ed Legion  -,  for  his  Surrender  (like  that  of  Me- 
troj)oiis)  draw  in  the  whole  Province^ 

Moreover,  God  has  favour'd  you  with  Efau*i 
BlefTing  *,  the  Fat  of  the  Land  is  part  of  your 
Inheritance,  and  by  Confequence,  Honours, 
Pleafures,  and  Eftcem  ;  the  common  Sequels  of 
Abundance.  You  run  fmoothly  before  the  Wind, 
and  fail  on  with  a  profperous  Gale.  Your  Hal-^ 
(yon  Days  run  through  the  whole  Year  ;  Earth, 
.Winds,  and  Men,  drudge  for  your  Satisfaflion 
and  Intereft.  You  confute  JoFs  Aphorifm^  Man's 
horn  to  labour:,  and  demonftrate  by  Practice,  that 
Sport  is  the  proper  En^ployment  of  Gentlemen. 

Now  Profperity  is  heady,  it  intoxicates,  the' 
k  delights ;  and  not  only  dafhes  out  the  Memo- 
ry of  Things  pafl,  like  the  River  Lethe,  but 
(what  is  more  ftupendiou?)  of  thofe  that  are  to 
come.  Men  are  fo  taken  up  with  the  Charms  of 
the  Frefent,  that  they  have  little  Time,  and  a 
Icfs  Inclination  to  cafb  away  a  Thought  on  the 
Contemplation  of  the  Future ;  they  love  not  ta 
withdraw  their  Eyes  from  the  pleafing  Objcfts  of 
this  Life,  to  fix  them  on  the  fearing  Profpe<5l  of 
the  other:  And  without  doubt.  Gentlemen,  who 
liave  Pleafures  before  them,  would  be  as  little 
(lifpofed  to  enjoy  them,  as  Dionyjms  the  Tyrant, 
did  they  reflcd  v;hat  Torments  ft  and  behind" 
them. 

When  therefore  Things  glide  on  fuccefsfully 
Here^  it's  very  n.uural  to  lay  a  fide  all  Concern  of 
the  Future :  And  if  we  judge  the  badThings  of  ano- 
ther World,  thwai-t  the  Enjoyment  of  the  good 
Thmgs  of  tliis  ;  v/e  fliall  firit  wifii  there  were  no 
fuch  Place,  and  then  from  willing  a  Thing  were 

notv 


^pijile  Dedicator f.  ii'j 

hot,  to  believe  it  is  not,  is  but  a  very  fhoft  Tra- 
jeft,  for  the  Will  and  the  Judgment  feldom  difa- 
gree,  and  if  once  you  lop  off  the  laft  Article  of 
the  Creed  Vitam  (Bternam^  yOu  muft  throw  ouE 
the  firft.  Credo  in  Deum. 

Tho'  Gentlemen  lie  open  to  thefe  Temptati- 
ons, I  do  not  fay  they  are  always  overcome  ;  fome 
bear  up  with  Courage  againft  the  Aflault,  and 
force  thefe  lewd  Suggeftions  to  retire.  I  know 
Perfons  of  Quality^  whofe  Virtues  are  more  no- 
ble than  their  Blood.  Providence  feems  to  have 
made  them  Great,  that  they  might  appear  more 
fuperlatively  Good.  Like  the  Sun,  they  fcattef 
their  benign  Influence  dn  all  below  them,  and 
thofe  they  cannot  warm  with  their  Munificence, 
they  enlighten  with  their  Example.  But  how- 
ever the  Event  of  War  is  doubtful,  and  the  Dan- 
ger certain  :  Where  Temptation  reigns,  there's 
no  Place  for  Security ;  and  therefore  by  the  Laws 
6f  Prudence  you  are  bound  to  take  the  bed  Pre- 
cautions :  You  cannot  be  too  fure  when  Eternity- 
lies  at  Stake. 

I  prefent  you  with  a  Conference  in  which  you 
will  fee  the  Latitudinarian  nonplufi^  and  the  Athe- 
i(t  difarm'd.  You  may  eafily  defend  your  felves 
againft  thefe  Secfls,  with  thole  Weapons  Eufebius 
overthrew  their  two  Abettors,  Ariovifius  and 
^heomachus^  and  if  you  v/ill  but  take  the  Pains 
to  balance  the  Lightnefs  of  their  Defence,  w^th 
the  Weight  of  their  Impudence  ;  you'll  rather 
pity  their  Sillinefs,  than  apprehend   their  Rea- 


q^2  THE 


[«8] 


THE 


PREFACE 


T  O    T  H  E 


READER. 


Dear  Reade1(, 

1  Offer  to  your  Perufal,  the  Second  Part  of  the 
Gentleman  Instructed,  //'i  a  Treatife 
dgainji  Atheiftn,  I  hope  it  may  he  profitable  ;  1  am 
fiire  it  is  [eafonable.  It's  Time  to  prepare  for  a  De- 
fence^ when  the  Enemy  has  gained  the  fValls.  tFhen 
the  Plague  fages,  and  Death  fits  at  every  Door,  it^s 
Time  to  think  of  an  Amulet.  In  a  publick  Danger^ 
Nature  commiffions  every  SubjeSi  to  fight  for  his 
Prince  and  Country,  Unufquifq;  naturaliter  eft 
Miles.  Duty  arms  us,  and  Allegiance  enters  our 
Names  in  the  Mufier- Rolls.  God  lies  under  the  mofi 
vile  Circumftances  of  Infult  and  Outrage.  Libertines 
make  bold  with  his  ?noft  facred  Attributes  -,  they  bur- 
lejque  his  Mercy,  lampoon  his  Jufiice,  and  ridicule 
his  Omnipotence,  ivhil/l  Alheifis  attack  his  very  Be- 
ing,  flnd  fly  in  the  Face  of  his  Dixmity  :  Andfhall  a 
Cbriflian  fiand  an  idle  Spetlator  at  fo  hid,  fo  da- 
ring 


Preface  to  the  Reader.  229 

ring  an  Infolence  ?  For  what  were  'Tongues  made^ 
hut  to  [peak  on  fuch  provoking  Occaftons  ?  Silence  is 
criminal  as  well  as  Neutrality^  and  mi  to  jland  up 
in  our  Maker'* s  X)efence  when  Atheifts  rifle  his  Ma^ 
jefly,  and  rally  upon  his  Omnipotence^  is  to  hand  a- 
gainfl  him. 

Some  perchance  may  Jland  up  and  tell  me,  that 
S^reatifes  of  this  Nature  are  not  calculated  for  our. 
Meridian  :  That  they  may  be  ufeful  to  the  wild  Pa- 
tagons  of  America,  or  the  ftupid  Hotentots  of  the. 
Cape  ;  hut  that  Atheifm  is  Jo  great  a  Stranger  to  our 
Nation,  that  we  are  forced  to  fetch  a  Word  from 
Greece  to  exprefs  it.  We  are  rather  opprefs*d  with 
the  Light  of  a  Deity  than  want  it.  We  walk  in  the 
StinJIjine  of  Knowledge  ;  7iot  the  Obfcurity  of  Ig- 
norance. And  whilji  we  tolerate  all  Religion,  it's 
ridiculous  to  fuppofe  we  have  none. 

But  under  Favour,  Gentlemen,  we  need  not  fail 
to  the  Megalanian  Streights,  nor  cut  the  burning 
Line  to  find  an  Atheift.  Thefe  Monflers  breed  nigher 
Home  ;  theyfpawn  on  our  Shoar  j  they  thrive  in 
cur  Climate,  and  like  the  Egyptian  Locufts  over- 
run the  Country  :  So  that  they  are  become  an  univer- 
fal  Nuifance  to  the  SubjeSi,  and  a  Plague  to  the 
Realm.  Stupidity  and  Education  may  plead  for  poor 
American  Atheift  at  God's  Tribunal ;  but  cannot 
for  ours.  Thefe  are  haJch*d  in  the  Stews,  and  nursed 
in  the  Play-houfe  ;  the^^  take  their  Birth  from  De- 
bauchery, and  Growth  from  barefaced  Malice.  They 
pafs  thro'  the  whole  Alphabet  of  Crimes  before  they 
touch  this  Non  plus  ultra  of  Impiety. 

St.  Auftin  complains  thefe  Vermin  plagued  his  Age 
as  it  does  ours,  but  yet  they  lay  under  Difcipline,  they 
walked  abroad  incognito,  and  fcidk  d  under  Dif- 
^uife,  ideo  dixit  in  cordc  fuo  non  eft  Deus,  quia 
hoc  nemo  audet  dicere,  etiam  fi  fuerit  aufus  co-r 
gitare.  But  now  the  Scene  isjijiftsd  j   AtheifjnJlandJ! 

0^3  ^^ 


23«  Preface  to  the  Reader. 

no  more  on  Refervednefs  •,  it  /corns  to  lie  under  the 
Reproach  cf  Rejlraint^  or  the  Shame  of  Confine- 
ment ;  it  has  laid  down  the  Vizard^  and  appears  in 
publick,  not  only  without  Fear^  hut  even  with  Impu- 
dence. Other  Vices  retire  into  Darknefs  and  Solitude^ 
like  Bats.,  or  Screech-Owls  they  range  in  the  Night ; 
iutAtheifm  braves  it  at  Noon-J)ay  •>  and  fois  turned 
into  a  Mid-Day  Devil,  Dscmonium  Meridianum. 

It  has  removd  it's  Lodgings  from  the  Stews  and 
Bagnio's,  and  other  publick  Scenes  of  Lewdnefs,  tfi  the 
Court!  It  has  wheedl'd  into  its  Party  not  only  the 
Rakes,  but  the  Poets  alfo,  who,  like  Slaves  at  the 
Oar,  drudge  for  the  Caufe :  'Hhey  rhime  down  Piety ^ 
f.nd  then  laugh  Religion  out  of  Countenance  to  turn  it 
out  of  Doors  :  They  drazv  in  all  the  Succours  ifnagi- 
nable,  but  Reafon  and  Confcience  ;  fo  that  one  would 
think  they  intended  a  general  Invafion  upon  Religion^ 
and  refolve~to  force  Morality  into  an  Abdication. 

In  King  David*j  Reign  an  Atheijl  made  a  poor  Fi- 
gure ',  he  zvas  content  to  wear  the  Cap  and  Bauble  ; 
his  Ambition  look*d  no  higher  than  the  Pofl  of  Scara- 
mouch, dicic  infipiens  in  Corde  fuo  non  eft  Deus. 
And  indeed  all  Mankind,  together  with  the  Royal 
Prophet,  voted  him  the  Station  :  But  it  feems  we 
have  learnt  new  Notions  of  M^it  and  Wifdom  fince 
the  Deceafe  of  our  Anceflors.  tVhat  went  in  their 
Days  for  Stupidity  and  Folly,  by  the  Hocus  Pocus 
cf  a  new  Creation,  Jlarts  up  Ingenuity  and  Reafon  iu 
ours.  The  mojl  dull  Creature  that  dares  di/own  his 
Maker  is  duhb'd  a  Virtuofo,'  and  without  any  other 
"Tryal  of  his  Abilities  commences  Do5lor  in  the  Acade- 
my of  Rakes :  For  thefe  Men  having  now  ufurp'd  the 
Bench,  they  fit  upon  Wit,  Breeding,and  Religion ;  their. 
Judg'tnent  is  the  Standard  ofSenfe,  and  Scale  of  No- 
bility :  So  that  whoever  dares  but  defy  God  without 
Remorfe,  without  Sham^,  is  a  fhrewd  Man,  a  Per- 
fon  of  Parts,  and  a  Gentleman  without  the  Help  of 

Heraldry.^ 


,    Preface  to  the  Reader.  2  j  t 

Heraldry,  a  Peer  without  the  Kin^s  Patent ;  nay^ 
he  is  every  Thing  but  a  Man, 

I  wonder  what  they  drive  at,  if  they  dejign  to 
fpread  a  Varnijh  on  the  Face  of  Vice,  to  turn  Lezvd- 
nefs  into  Virtue,  and  Brutality  into  Diver/wn  -,  their 
"Plot  is  well  laid,  their  Meafures  are  jufl,  and  Sue- 
cefs  7nufi  crown  their  Endeavours :  For  if  God  be 
dajh'd  out  of  the  Creed,  'Morality  will  foon  abandon 
eur  Aoiions.  Man  will  fland  on  the  fame  Ground, 
with  Beafls  ;  Reafon  will  vanifh  into  Senfe,  and  Jo 
we  Jh all  fall  below  the  Level  of  our  own  Species* 
Power  will  decide  Right,  Interefl  will  define  Honeftyy 
and  Revenge  pronounce  upon  Honour  ;  and  then,  like 
difmantled  Towns^  wejhall  lie  open  to  all  the  Inroads 
of  Infolence,  and  to  all  the  Affaults  of  Vice.  Is  not  this 
afineMethod  to  cut  off  all  ihehines  of  Communication 
between  Man  and  Man  ?  'To  throw  all  Government 
off  of  the  Hinges  ?  To  drown  Order  in  a  Sea  of  Cofi- 
fufion  ?  To  flock  the  Nation  with  thieving  Arabians, 
and  to  let  loofe  upon  our  Bodies,  an  Army  of  hlood'y 
Tartars  ? 

And  indeed  our  Atheifls  have  Reafon  to  crow ;  their 
Trick  has  taken  to  Admiration.  Debauchery  fpreads 
fofaft,  that  the  InfeSiion  is  become  epidemical,  it's 
above  Expreffwn  ;  God  fend  it  be  not  alfo  pafl  Cure  ! 
One  zvould  think  Circe  had  flipped  her  magical  Po- 
tions hither,  Transfor?nations  are  fo  ordinary ;  and 
what  raifes  my  Sufpicion  is,  becaufe  they  all  end  in 
the  Be  aft,  and'inoji  in  the  Szvine. 

'lis  hard  to  affign  the  genuine  Caufe  of  this  extra- 
vagant and  unreafonable  Vice.  One  told  me,  he  was 
of  Opinion,  that  our  Natives  had  wafted  it  hither 
from  the  Indies,  and  that  thefe  Barbarians  had  bar- 
tered their  Infidelity  for  our  Engliili  Ware.  Cer- 
tainly our  Seamen  carry  abroad  a  fraall  Cargo  of  Re- 
ligion, and  a  lefs  of  Confidence  ;  both  are  a  trouble- 
fi?ne  kind  ofi  Lading,  and  ofi  no  Debate,  IVe  mufe 
Q^  4  ^<^^ 


S't  Preface  to  the  Reader.' 

'tiot  wonder  then  ^  if  a  Crew  Jlended'j  provided  of  both, 
lofe  feme  Grains  in  the  ■  I'raje^^  and  more  in  thofe 
Regions  where  they  fee  none.  'The  African  Infidelity 
may  tin5iure  their  Hearts^  as  the  African  Sun  tans 
their  Faces  ;  and  then  at  their  Return^  they  may  un- 
lade the  Atheifm  of  Guiney  with  its  Gold.  Thd'  thefe 
Apojlate  Mariners  may  fling  the  Infe^ion  among  the 
Mcb^  they  cannot  reach  thofe  who  move  in  a  higher 
Sphere  :  But  Swains  lie  too  far  out  of  Sight.,  to  in- 
fiuence  the  Nobility  ;  they  are  Creatures  of  too  fmall 
a  Size  to  fet  up  a  Fa^jion^  too  dejpicahle  to  de- 
ferve  Imitation. 

*Tis  certain  nothing  has  contributed  more  to  the 
Improvement  of  Atheifm  than  the  Liberty  of  the. 
'Prefs ;  like  Pandora'5  Box.,  it  has  poured  out  all  the 
Plagues  of  Schifm,  that  for  thefe  hundred  Tears  have 
'plagued  the  Nation :  They  fwarm  in  every  Corner., 
and  are  becojne  both  a  Drudge.,  and  Grievance.  Like 
Toad-fools  they  ft  art  up  in  a  Night.,  and  what  Won- 
der I  Nature  huddles  up  in  a  Mo?nent  thofe  Infers 
that  fpringfrom  Stench.,  and  feed  on  Corruption  ; 
They  are  for  the  mo  ft  part  abortive  Embrio^s,  with- 
out Shape.,  without  Figure.,  but  not  without  Poifon.   ., 

The  Prefs  hozvever  is  now  a  Branch  of  our  Pro- 
perty., and  a  Part  of  our  darling  Liberty  ;  we  think 
curfelves  fettered.,  unlefs  we  have  the  Freedom  to  fnarl 
at  the  Prerogative.,  to  vomit  Blafpheinies  againft 
Cod.,  and  to  revile  Religion  and  Morality ;  and  then 
that  our  Crinies  may  be  immortal,  'and  infe^f  future 
Ages.,  as  well  as  the  prefent.,  they  muft  appear  in 
Print,  to  outface  Modefty.,  and  ftare  Virtue^  Reli- 
gion, and  Obedience  out  of  Countenance.  Certainly 
thefe  People  fancy  Ignorance  and  Wickedhefs  are 
charming  Salifications,  why  elfe  do  they  take  fucb 
Pains  to  ft  and  Fools  and  Debauchees  upon  Record  ? 

Alas  !  their  Defign  looks  another  JVay  ;  would 
they  content  themfeh%s  with  the  Homur  of  pools  or 
' '  ■     •   •         ■  ,  "        •  ■      Debauchees^ 


Preface  to  the  Reader.  235 

Ipehauchees,  we  would  let  ihem  carry  off"  the  Prize  ; 
hut  they  level  at  Piety^  they  Jirike  at  Religion,  and 
aim  by  Refle^fion  at  the  Almighty :  And  that  their 
^rain  may  take,  and  their  Poifon  work  with  Effica- 
cy, 'tis  gilt  over  with  [oft  Language,  fwimming  Ex- 
-prejjions,  chiming  Periods,  i.  e.  they  blend  Poifon 
with  Poifon  to  make  the  Potion  Jironger.  Smut  and 
Baudery  are  fulfome  Obje^ls  in  their  own  Drefs,  they 
rather  work  upon  the  Stomach  than  the  PVill,  and 
are  fitter  for  Scavingers  than  Gentlemen  ;  when  a> 
little  Art  cafis  a  ^anch  over  their  Foulncfs,  and 
vails  their  Deformity,  they  enchant  Senfe,  and  Jlupify 
Reafon  -,  the  Monfter  withdraws,  and  the  Sound  af~ 
fe^s  the  Ear,  whilfi  the  Ohjeoi  lays  hold  of  the  Heart : 
Indeed  fofne  ft  and  upon  no  Ceremony,  they  draw  the 
Statues  of  fcandalous  Amours,  not  in  Bufto,  but  at 
length,  without  a  Fig-leaf  to  cover  their  Nakednefs, 
They  appear  under  all  Shapes,  and  in  all  PoftureSy 
hut  thofe  of  Decency.  WJoat  Virtue  can  ft  and  out  a- 
f^ainftfuch  murdering  Engines?  'Thefe  Obje^s  make 
Inroads  upon  the  Fancy,  they  fire  the  Blood,  and  put 
the  Humours  in  an  Uproar  ;  they  fit  the  Reader  f on 
any  Villany,  and  what  is  worfe,  point  cut  the  Occa- 
/ton  J  nay,  our  Authors  ft  and  not  in  Univerfals,  they 
defend  in  Particulars.  They  diffe5i  Brutality,  and 
expofe  Anatomy  to  View  and  Contemplation,  which 
is  a  fhrewd  Argument  their  Writings  are  only  Copies y, 
and  that  the  ASfions  are  the  true  Originals. 

In  a  Word,  the  whole  Fry  of  our  modern  Pam- 
phleteers feems  to  have  cojifpir*d  againft  Virtue  and 
Godlinefs,  they  canonize  Vice,  and  deify  Unclean- 
Vefs  J  and  by  this  Means  they  have  run  down  Sobrie- 
ty, and  fet  up  Incontinence  ;  they  have  brought  Li- 
hertinifm  into  Credit,  and  Morality  into  Contempt ; 
and  Things  are  come  to  fuch  a  Cofidition,  that 
Confcience  lies  under  all  the  Dreads  of  Reproach-i  and 
Apprehenfions  of  Infamy^ 

Now 


i|4  Preface  to  the  Reader. 

Noiv  when  the  agenda  of  Religion  are  laid  aftde^ 
the  credcnda  ".^nll  Joon  be  difmifs\l^  as  ufelefs  and 
cwmhcrfome.   A  Man  that  has  hut  the  Boldnefs  to 
charge  thro''  all  the  Terrors  of  the  Worlds  in  good  Timt 
'mill  laugh  at  them  \  and  then  becaufe  God  takes  not 
eff  Sinners  in  Flagrante,  but  leave  fome  Tears  he" 
tween  the  Crime  and  the  Punijhment^  he  will  he  apt 
enough  to  conclude  he  is  a  meer  Bugbear  of  our  own 
Creation.     To  be  Jhcrty  the  Prefs  has  not  only  cffe-' 
Piinau'd  the  Afindy  hut  unprincipled  the  Underjiand' 
iiigy  and  therefore  fitted  US  for  all  Diffohttion.    A 
Man  without  Principle  is  a  Creature  without  Rc" 
firaint ,  he  is  all  Senfe^  all  Appetite^  all  Beafi^  andy 
in  fine^  all  Monfler. 

Now  to  put  a  Stop  to  this  growing  Vogue  of  A-- 
fheifnt,  I  haie  publifh'd  thefe  Conferences^  in  which 
the  At  he i ft  will  fee  the  Weaknefs  of  his  Principles 
4ifc(yv€r''dy  and  if  he  be  not  convert ed^  I  am  fur e  he 
ii^ill  be  coitfounded.  I  deftre  thefe  Nullifidians  to 
read  the  Book  without  Prepojfejfion^  without  Bia/si 
the  Siihjeti  is  both  ferious  and  important^  and  thert' 
fare  deprves  un;prejudic'd  Refle^iions. 


THE 


[  '^isl 


I       .  m*'  'I 


•  THE 

Gentleman  Inftru^ed,  &c. 

DIALOGUE    I. 

How  Theomachus  became  an  PiXht\%fet  doivu  asaCax" 
tion  far  all  young  Gentlemen, 

TH  E  next  Morning  Keander  took  Coach,  and 
drove  direflly  to  Eufeb'ms^s  Lodgings.  He 
walk'd  up  Stairs,  and  found  his  Friend  in  his 
Clofet.  Good  Morrow,  faid  Neander,  laft  Night  I 
brought  you  the  Challenge,  and  now  I  am  come  to  carry 
you  to  your  Antagonift.  I  hear  he  is  ftrangely  flufh'd 
up  with  Hopes  of  Vidtory,  and  has  call'd  in  fome  Friends 
to  be  Speftators  of  his  Triumph. 

Eufeb.  Atheifts,  like  young  Narcijfus's,  dote  on  their 
own  Abilities  j  and  becaufe  they  are  more  proud  than 
we,  they  very  wifely  conclude  they  are  more  witty.  But, 
Neander^  thofe  who  talk  moft,  do  not  always  talk  beft. 
Speaking  and  Reafoningare  not  always  of  the  fame  Side  ; 
that  lies  within  the  Verge  of  a  Fool,  and  this  is  the  Pre- 
rogative of  a  wife  Man.  But  pray  why  fo  early  this 
Morning?  Atheifts  and  Libertines  are  now  in  their  firft 
Sleep ;  they  are  perfeft  Sybarites ^  and  never  open  tlieir- 
Curtains  till  the  Sun  has  drove  over  the  Meridian  :  So 
that  they  live  no  lefs  extravagantly  than  they  believe  : 
Their  Adlions  crofs  upon  Nature,  as  well  as  their  Faith 
on  Reafon.  But  indeed  we  mult  fling  in  fome  Grains  of 
Allowanc^e  ;  for  whereas  other  Men  fleep  to  refrefti  Na- 
ture, Atheifts  fleep  to  work  out  a  Debauch.  And  as  they 
drink  poor  Reafon  afleep,  fo  they  Heep  it  avyake,  and  this 

Opera- 


^3^      ^^  Gen  tt  EM  AN  InJIfuBed. 

Operation  requires  Time.  I  have  read  that  the  Morning 
Heats  are  admirable  for  Tranfpiration,  they  fupply  the 
f  lace  of  a  Bagnio^  and  fpare  both  Expence  and  Trouble, 

Neand.  An  Atheift  cannot  crofs  your  Way,  but  you  are 
prefently  on  the  Spur,  you  make  at  him  with  full  fpeed, 
and  feldom  leave  the  Chace  till  you  are  both  run  down : 
Have  you  forgot,  Th.21.1  Love  your  Neighbour  as  your  felf, 
takes  in  both  Infidels  and  Atheifts  too  ?  And  that  whofoever 
is  of  your  Species  comes  yvithin  the  Pale  of  the  Precept. 

Eufeb.  I  love  their  Perfons,  but  cannot  be  reconciled 
to  their  Principles ;  I  could  heartily  pity  'em,  had  they 
one  Grain  of  Compaflion  for  themfelves ;  but  they  are  a 
Race  of  Men,  that  neither  defire  Pity,  rior  deferve  it  % 
they  walk  on  the  very  Brink  of  the  Precipice,  and  (tho* 
they  know  the  Danger)  fljut  their  Eyes,,  that  they  may 
not  fee  it,  as  if  they  plac'd  their  Happinefs  in  their  Ruin. 
In  fine,  Neander^  they  fhall  have  rny  Prayers,  but  not 
my  Efteem.  But  apropos :  May  I  not  know  my  Anta- 
gonill's  Name  ?  I  forgot  this  Query  at  our  laft  Meeting. 

Neand.  And  really  I  forgot  to  acquaint  you :  He  is  cal- 
led Theomachus  j  he  is  in  gre^t  Requeft,  and  fpeaks  well, 
the'  he  believes  ill. 

Eufsh.  T'heomachus ! 

Neand.  Why  have  you  any  Acquaintance  with  the 
Genileman  ? 

E:ijel7. 1  never  exchang'd  a  Word  with  him  in  my  Life : 
But  a  Man  muft  have  led  the  Life  of  a  meer  Reclufe,  not 
xohzvthQd.rdo{Theomachus:  He  has  been  the  Town 
Difcourfe  thefe  thirty  Years ;  and  never  Man  has  been 
more  prais'd,  nor  more  blam'd  than  he.  1  have  heard  a 
thoufand  Panegyricks  of  his  Youth,  and  as  many  Satyrs 
of  his  old  Age,  that  leaves  no  place  for  Inveftive,  nor 
this  for  Excufe :  For  as  I  have  been  credibly  informed,  in 
his  tender  Years  he  pradlis'd  all  Virtues,  and  fince  he  be- 
gan to  decline,  has  plung'd  himfelf  into  all  Vices:  He 
has  not  only  debauch'd  himfelf  almoft  out  of  his  Eftate, 
but  quite  out  of  his  Religion  ;  he  turn'd  off  Chriflianity 
for  Libertinifm,  and  from  hence  ftept  into  Atheifm  ;  fo 
that,  like  Lucifer,  from  an  Angel  of  Light,  he  is  meta- 
morphos'd  into  a  Spirit  of  Darknefs,  and  has  improv'd 
the  Contempt  of  his  Creator  into  open  Rebellion  ;  nay, 
he  reads  Ledtures  of  Atheifm  to  others,  and  fo  fpreads 
ihp  Infe^lilion,  and  makes  his  own  Difeafe  incurable  i  for 


^)&<f  G  E  N  T  t  E  M  A  N  InJlruBed.      i^y 

if  the  Allurements  of  Pleafure  are  fo  bewitching  as  to  per- 
fuade  a  Man  in  fpight  of  Reafon  to  live  an  Atheift,  Ho- 
nour will  pufli  the  Illufion  farther,  and  invite  him  to  die 
one.  I  am  fenfible  enough  that  we  are  more  prone  to 
cenfure  our  Neighbour's  Vices,  than  to  take  notice  of  his 
Virtues:  Invedives  flow  more  eafily  from  us  than  Pane- 
gyricks;  and  therefore  I  thought  my  felf  oblig'd  to  fuf- 
pend  my  Judgment  oiTheomachus^  till  I  found  fome  bet- 
ter Evidence  than  popular  Reports,  which  oftentimes  owe 
their  Being  to  Miftake  or  Envy,  and  their  Growth  to  a 
talkative  Humour,  and  indeed  at  length  I  fell  by  chance 
in  the  Company  of  one  of  his  Friends,  who  gave  me  full 
Satisfaction:  His  Life  has  fomething  of  the  Romance, 
but  more  of  the  Tragedy ;  'tis  fitter  to  grieve,  than  to 
divert  us,  and  to  melt  us  into  Tears,  than  into  Laugh- 
ter: Time  does  not  prefs ;  I  will,  if  you  pleafe,  run  over 
the  chief  Circumftances ;  tho'  the  Narrative  be  not  di- 
verting, I  am  fure  it  will  be  inftruftive:  You  will  learn 
by  his  fad  Fall,  that  Man  can  find  no  fure  Footing  here^ 
that  Virtue  lies  within  the  Reach  of  Temptation,  and 
cannot  only  be  aflauited,  but  overcome. 

Neand.  Pray,  Sir,  favour  me  with  the  Relation;  In- 
ftrudtion  is  never  unfeafonable,  *tis  fometimes  neceflary, 
efpecially  to  young  Men,  whofe  Nature  bends  more  wil- 
lingly to  what  is  pleafant,  than  what  is  lawful,  and  who 
rather  fpur  on  their  Paflions  than  curb  'em ;  befides  Ig- 
norance waits  on  Youth,  as  well  as  Prefumption.  Thai 
hides  the  Danger;  This  provokes  it  j  but  both  betray  us. 
Pray  begin. 

Eufeb.  *Tis  a  kind  of  Pofiulatum  in  Spirituality,  that 
Men  end  as  they  begin,  and  die  as  they  live ;  and  indeed 
Experience  teaches  as  well  as  Scripture,  that  the  hit 
Adt  of  our  Lives  is  but  a  Copy  of  the  firft.  Virtue 
planted  in  the  Spring  of  Youth,  thrives  to  Admiration; 
it  flows  in  the  very  Winter  of  Age,  it  blooms  in  the 
Grave,  and  breathes  forth  Perfumes  when  our  Bodies  ex- 
hale Infedlion.  Now  if  an  early  Virtue  call  its  Roots 
fo  low,  that  the  Blafts  of  impetuous  Paflions  are  not  able 
to  (hake  it.  Vice  certainly  will  be  more  lafl:ing ;  this  is 
the  Produdl  of  our  own  Soil,  like  poifonous  Weeds  it 
grows  without  Planting,  and  in  Procefs  of  Time  winds 
and  twifl:s  it  felf  with  our  very  Nature ;  it  finks  into  our 
Bones,  and  not  only  conveys,  the  In(e6tion  through  all 

the 


i3^     T-^^  Gentleman  InfiniBei, 

the  Humours  of  the  Body,  but  corrupts  the  very  Facul- 
ties of  the  Soul ;  fo  that  like  chronical  Diftempers,  it  ac- 
companies  us  to  our  Coffins,  it  fleeps  with  us  in  the 
Gi'ave,  and  burns  with  us  in  Hell. 

Tho'  this  Rule  be  univerfal,  it  admits  of  fome  Excep- 
tions;  who  court  Sin  in  their  Youth,  fometimes  deleft  it 
in  their  declining  Years ;  and  thofe  who  quench  the  un- 
lawful Heats  ofLewdnefs  in  the  very  Summer  of  their 
Lives,  are  confum'd  by  'em  in  the  Autumn  of  their  Age ; 
even  then  like  Mount  Gibel,  they  are  Snow  without,  and 
Fire  within  ;  and  this  Providence  permits,  that  the  Saint 
may  not  prefume,  nor  the  Sinner  defpair.  St.  Paul  wzs 
a  Perfecutor  before  he  became  an  Apoftle.  He  made  a 
Martyr  in  Jerufalem  before  he  fufferM  Martyrdom  at 
Rome  ;  and  only  propagated  Chriftianityj  when  firft  he 
confpirM  its  Ruin.  What  could  be  more  promifing  than 
the  Beginning  of  unfortunate  Judas  ?  He  receiv'd  Power 
over  Devils,  as  well  as  over  Difeafes  ;.and  commanded 
Nature  whilft  he  obey'd  his  Mailer :  But  when  Avarice 
prey'd  upon  his  Innocence,  TreafOn  broke  in  upon  hi^ 
Loyalty,  and  Defpair  put  an  End  to  his  Life,  to  begin 
the  everlafting  Puniflimeiit  of  his  Offences :  But  we  need 
Dot  run  fo  far  back  into  Antiquity  for  fuch  Examples  ; 
our  Age  can  leave  nt  leaft  one  Prefident  to  Pofterity  ifl 
the  Perfon  of  unfortunate  Theomachus. 

This  Gentleman  feem'd  born  under  fo  happy  a  Con- 
ftellation,  that  all  Things  confpir'd  to  make  him  a  Saint, 
At  the  Age  of  Twelve  he  had  the  Prudence  of  a  Man  of 
Tv.'enty,  an  Air  of  Gravity  ran  thro'  all  his  A6tions,  fo 
that  he  had  nothing  of  the  Child,  but  Age  and  Inno- 
cence. The  Seeds  of  a  pious  Education  fown  in  a  Soil 
fo  grateful,  could  not  chufe  but  improve  almoft  to  a  Mi- 
racle ;  and  indeed,  fo  foon  as  he  heard  to  v;hat  End  he 
was  created,  together  with  the  dread  Myfteries  of  Chri- 
ftian  Religion  ;  that  the  Virtues  of  the  Juft  would  be 
rewarded  with  an  Eternity  of  Joys ;  and  the  Sins  of 
the  Impious  with,  an  Eternity  of  Torments:  He  never 
balanc'd  on  the  Choice,  but  refolv'd  to  fquare  his  Life 
by  the  Rule  of  the  Gofpel,  and  to  poftpone  all  the  Ad- 
vantages of  Time  to  thofe  of  l!.ternity. 

His  Condudi  was  an  Argument  that  his  5 efolution  nei- 
ther flow'd  from  Childiflmefs,  nor  Ignorance  ;  he  labour'd 
to  put  it  in  Execution  ■\vith  the  fume  Eagemei'she  made 


The  Gentleman  tnjiru^ed.     23^ 

it,  and  he  told  his  Tutor  one  Day,  that  to  defer  the  Exe- 
cution of  a  good  Purpofe,  and  to  break  it,  was  the  fame 
Thing ;  that  a  bad  Adion  fhould  never  be  done,  nor  a 
good  one  ever  omitted.  He  began  firft  to  mode!  his 
Paflions,  and  punifh'd  'em  likeTraytors  before  they  were 
able  to  rebel :  He  taught  'em  to  obey  betimes,  that  they 
might  never  pretend  to  Sovereignty,  and  refusM  them  all 
things  to  baulk  their  Importunities  j  fo  that  when  he  made 
his  firft  Appearance  in  the  World,  and  enter'd  upon  Con- 
verfation,  he  drew  ail  Mens  Eyes  and  Admiration  upon 
him :  He  feem'd  call  in  a  quite  different  Mould  than  o- 
4:her  Men,  and  wholly  exempt  from  the  common  Curfe 
of  Mankind ;  he  fear'd  thofe  Things  which  others  hope 
for,  and  ran  from  thofe  vain  Amuiements  they  purfue: 
He  placed  his  Wealth  in  the  purchafe  of  Virtue,  not  of 
Land,  and  defpis'4  all  Honour,  but  that  which  fuits 
with  a  Chriftian :  He  look'd  upon  his  Eftate  as  a  Proper- 
ty of  the  Poor,  and  therefore  return'd  them  the  Over- 
plus as  a  Debt,  rather  than  as  a  Benevolence;  and 
when  once  a  Relation  defir'd  him  to  fhape  his  Charity 
by  the  Rule  of  Difcretion;  my  Neighbour's  want,  re- 
ply'd  Theomachm^  is  the  Standard  of  my  Alms,  and  I 
had  rather  drive  my  Liberality  too  far  than  too  ihort. 
He  never  withdrew  from  thofe  Diverfions  that  recreate 
the  Body  without  endangering  the  Soul ;  but  then  he 
could  not  be  won  to  countenance  a  Debauch ;  and  altho' 
this  Nicety  often  expos'd  him  to  the  Scoffs  of  Raillery  of 
thofe  young  Blades,  that  rated  Pleafure  above  their  Du- 
ty, yet  he  either  detefted  their  Malice,  or  pitied  their 
Folly,  and  valued  his  Innocence  above  their  Favour.  We 
live  (faid  he  one  Day)  in  a  ftrange  Age,  and  as  llrange  a 
Kingdom;  we  profefs  a  Reformation  in  Religion,  and  a 
Corruption  of  Manners :  We  believe  what  Chrift  reveal'd, 
and  blufh  to  pradife  what  he  taught :  His  Religion  is  Ala- 
mode^  and  his  Precepts  of  Morality  out  of  Fafhion.  Sure- 
ly we  pretend  tojuftify  the  Lewdnefs  of  our  Adtions,  by 
the  Holinefs  of  our  Religion,  as  if  true  Faith  were  a  War- 
rant for  Immorality.  Cannot  a  Man  be  well  bred 
unlefs  he  lives  ill?  Nor  condefcending  unlefs  he  givee  up 
his  Title  to  Heaven  ?  Can  nothing  oblige  a  Companion 
but  my  Damnation?  Nothing  intitlc  me  to  good  Beha- 
viour but  Impiety  ?  This  is  certainly  to  confound  ideas, 
to  fettle  falfe  NoUonSy  andto  banter  Things  out  of  their 
•Njlufe^  You 


240       ^he  Gentleman  InfimBed, 

You  may  eafily  imagine  fuch  Ledlures  of  Morality 
Were  unpalatable  to  thoTe  young  Sparks,  who  fix  their 
Eyes  and  Thoughts  only  upon  the  prefent.  They  took 
the  Alarm,  and  immediately  cry'd  out,  Gentlemen  to  your 
Arms,  Young  Theomachus^  fays  one,  is  vaftly  pretend- 
ing, he  fets  up  for  a  Preacher  without  Holy  Orders,  and 
enters  upon  the  Miniftry  without  Licence.  "Nay,  replies 
another,  he  joins  Infult  to  Outrage,  Firft  by  Impeach- 
ing our  Condu6t,  and  Secondly  by  making-  Inroads  on 
our  Prerogative.  'Tis  a  Gentleman's  Privilege  to  fin 
without  Reproof,  as  well  as  without  Scruple,  and  who-^ 
foever  advifes  us  of  our  Duty,  tranfgrefl'es  his  own.  We 
Ihall  be  cloy'd  with  Homilies  unlefs  we  cool  his  Zeal', 
and  fweeten  his  morofe  Complexion.  I  am  not,  fays  a 
third,  for  being  always  upon  the  defenfive,  we  muft 
make  a  Diverfion,  and  carry  the  War  into  his  own  Do- 
minions. His  Virtue  I  fuppofe  is  not  impregnable  ;  it 
may  either  be  mafter'd  by  Force,  or  feiz'd  on  by  Sur- 
prize ;  and  if  our  Enterprize  fucceed,  we  fhall  gain  a  Pro- 
felyte,  and  lofe  a  Cenfor.  The  Counfel  was  receiv'd 
"With  Applaufe,  and  prefently  they  fell  to  work;  they 
attack'd  his  Reafon  with  Wine,  and  his  Chaftity  with 
Women.  But  T'heomachus  vented  their  Mines  before 
they  took  Fire,  and  fo  cover'd  his  Adverfaries  with  Con- 
fufion,  and  himfelf  with  Glory.  Nay,  he  painted  the 
Foulnefs  of  the  Attempt  in  fo  liy^ely  Colours,  that  he 
brought  over  forae  to  a  better  Life  ;  and  even  thofe  he 
could  not  perfuade  to  repent,  he  taught  to  blufh:  And 
row  he  had  obtain'd  fuch  a  Superiority,  that  all  thofe 
He6lors  who  could  not  love  him,  were  forc'd  to  efteem 
him.  His  very  Prefence  bridled  their  Paffions,  and  kept 
them  within  the  Bounds  of  Decency,  and  tho'  he  could 
not  controul  their  Thoughts,  he  was  abfolute  Mailer  of 
their  Adions. 

Theomachus  run  on  in  this  holy  Courfe  till  the  thir* 
tieth  Year  of  his  Age,  refpedted  by  Men,  and  precious 
in  the  Sight  of  God.  Never  Man  bid  fairer  for  Perfe- 
verance  than  he ;  he  had  kept  his  Paflions  under  fuch 
fevere  Difcipline,  that  tliey  feem'd  rather  dead  than 
mortify'd  ;  they  had  obey'd  fo  long,  that  they  loflalmoft 
all  Deiire  to  command:  He  lay  under  the  Violence  of 
no  ill  Habits,  no  criminal  Engagements,  in  fine,  he  judg'd 
himfelf  fecur?  when  he  was  within  au  Ace  of  his  Ruin. 

..      His 


fbe  Gentleman  InftrtiBed,      24 1 

His  Sifter,  affianc'd  to  a  young  Gentleman,  invited 
him  to  her  Wedding,  fhe  prefs'd  the  Invitation  with  that 
Earneftnefs,  Theomachus  forefaw  fhe  would  not  return 
with  a  Denial;  he  made  notwithftanding  fome  Refift- 
ance,  and  carried  on  his  Excufes  beyond  the  Laws  of  Ci- 
vility, for  he  knew  that  Meetings  devoted  to  Merri- 
ment, are  often  profan'd  with  Lewdnefs,  or,  at  leaft, 
that  Temptation  crowds  in  with  Youth  and  Gallantry^ 
yet  at  length  Importunity  overcame  his  Conftancy,  and 
this  Piece  of  innocent  Condefcendence  firft  threw  him 
upon  Temptation,  and  then  tumbled  him  into  the  Pre- 
cipice of  Libertinifm  and  Atheifm. 

Some  of  his  Relations,  Men  of  a  gay  Temper,  were 
grown  out  of  Conceit  with  his  Moderation  and  Re-, 
fervxdnefs,  and  therefore  refolv'd  eith^  to  bend  his  Vir-» 
tue,  or  to  break  it.  They  hire  a  Woman,  fair  as  a  He- 
len, but  lewd  as  a  Mejfalwe,  fhe  was  one  of  thofe  who 
proftitute  their  Honour  for  a  fine  Equipage,  and  firft  prey 
on  young  Gentlemen's  Hearts,  and  then  on  their  Eftates.- 
She  was  handfomely  fet  out  for  the  Employment,  and. 
well  vers'd  in  all  the  little  Arts  of  wheedling,  nothing 
could  be  more  engaging  than  her  Converfation,  her  Hu- 
mour was  pleafant,  and  yet  referv'd :  So  that  thofe  that 
did  not  know  her,  would  have  taken  her  for  a  l^ejlal  • 
fhe  was  well  inftru6led  in  her  Part,  and  promis'd  to  a6t 
it  to  the  Life,  nor  did  fhe  fail  in  the  Execution. 

Theomachus  on  the  Day  appointed  repair'd  to  his  Sifter's 
Lodgings,  where  he  was  receiv'd  with  open  Arms ;  every 
one  gave  him  the  welcome,  but  they  fcrew'd  up  Civility 
even  to  AfFedlation,  who  had  laid  the  Train  to  blov/ up 
his  Virtue :  And  now  the  deceitful  »Syr^»  I  fpoke  of  began 
to  enter  on  the  Stage.  She  continually  plac'd  her  felf 
before  him,  and  took  him  out  to  dance  a  Minnet  ;  flie 
found  Occafion  to  entertain  him,  and  fometimes  in  pri- 
vate. Theomachus  was  firft  charm'd  with  her  Converfa- 
tion, then  he  fought  it,  and,  in  fine,  he  found  an  Uneafi- 
nefs  when  he  was  out  of  her  Company;  in  a  Word,  his 
Paflion  made  fuch  Progrefs  in  the  Space  of  two  Hours, 
that  he  was  fcarce  able  to  mafter  it  ;  This  Bafdisk  had 
fiiot  the  Poifon  thro'  his  Eyes  to  his  Heart,  and  its  Ope- 
ration was  fo  quick,  that  the  peftilential  Flame  almoft 
confum'd  him  before  he  well  knew  the  Cuufe  of  fo 
Itrange  an  Alteration ;  he  blufh'd  within  himfelf  to  fub- 

R  mit 


14^     ^^Z*^  Gentleman  InJIrufkd, 

mit  at  the  Age  of  Thirty  to  a  Paflion  he  had  conquefM 
at  Twenty,  and  concluded  that  Magick  had  a  greater 
Hand  in  his  Overthrow  than  Nature,  but  'tis  a  Folly  ta 
impute  to  Philtrums  and  Incantations  thofe  Eftedts  which 
fpring  from  our  felves,  and  rife  out  of  our  own  Corrup- 
tion. 

He  endeavoured  to  pen  up  his  Paflion  within  his  own 
Breaft,  and  fear'd  it  fhould  take  Air,  but  Love  is  a  Flame 
that  cannot  be  confin'd,  it  breaks  out  in  fpite  of  Oppofi- 
tion,  andVorks  its  way  through  all  the  Marks  of  Diflimu- 
lation.  A  certain  Gloominefs  fat  on  his  Face,  Chearful- 
nefs  gave  place  to  Melancholy,  he  fhew'd  an  Unealinefs 
in  Company,  and  a  Diflatisfadlion  in  Solitude,  all  won- 
dered at  the  fudden  Alteration,  but  no  Body  more  than 
himfelf.  Some  call'd  the  Diftemper  a  Fever,  others  a 
Weaknefs,  but  all  mifs'd  in  their  Conjeftures,  befides  the 

•  Viper  that  fhot  the  Poifon,  and  the  unfortunate  Gentle- 
man that  receiv'd  it. 

'Theomachus  pretended  Sicknefs,  and  fo  withdrew  to  his 
Lodgings,'  but  he  trail'd  the  Dart  after  him,  it  ftuck  in 

•  his  Heart,  and  he  neither  had  the  Courage  to  difengage 
it,  nor  Refolution  enough  to  fupport  the  Torment:  He 
hated  the  Pain,  yet  doted  on  the  Caufe  of  it,  and  even 
feem'd  to  taftefome  Happinefs  in  the  very  Height  of  his 
Mifery.     But  Oh !  when  he  compar'd  his  paft  State  with 
the  prefent,  the  fweei  Calms  of  a  virtuous  Mind  with 
the  boifterous  Tempeft  of  a  diftemper'd  one ;  he  thought 
himfelf  faUen  from  Heaven  into  Hell,  and  confefs'd  no- 
thing was  wandngto  compleat  his  Mifery,  but  the  Eter- 
nity of  his  Torments.     His  Fancy  drew  out  a  Landskip 
of  all  the  difmal  Confequences  of  fo  unruly  a  Palfion ; 
and  Reafon  told  him  it  was  time  to  prevent  them,  but 
he  relied  too  much  on  his  Virtue,  and  fuppos'd  it  invinci- 
ble, becaufe  hitherto  he  had  not  been  overcome.     He 
thought  his  Power  over  Paflion  was  as  abfolute,  as  God 
over  the  Sea,  and  if  he  bid  it  ftop  within  the  Bounds  of 
Decency  and  Innocence,  it  durft  not  difobey.   But  alas ! 
Virtue  muft  not  without  great  Precaution  be  put  to  the 
Teft.     If  we  truft  it  too  far,  it  often  gives  us  the  Slip, 
and  by  a  moft  juft  Judgment  from  Heaven,  too  great  a 
Confidence  ends  in  Ruin. 

In  fine,  Theomachus  was  impatient  for  a  fecond  Inter- 
view i  he  concluded  no  Harm  could  follow,  becaufe  he 

intended 


^he  Gentleman  InftniBed.     24 j 

Ihtended  none.  That  there  was  no  Danger  of  Sin,  be- 
caufe  his  Thoughts  were  innocent ;  nay,  he  was  now 
flown  up  to  fuch  an  Height  of  Extravagance,  as  to  per- 
fuade  himfelf,  that  the  Impetuofity  of  Appetite  is  fooner 
tam'd  by  Liberty  than  Reltraint,  and  that  Hke  fome  ca- 
pricious Horfes,  it  runs  farter  v/hcn  you  draw  in  the 
Pveins,  than  when  you  llacken  them.  Thus  he  fetch'd 
Arguments  from  the  Stable,  and  play'd  the  Jockey  rather 
than  the  Gh^rillian. 

His  Companions  made  him  a  Vifit,  and  eaiily  per- 
ceiv'd  the  Caufe  of  his  Difeafe.  They  prais'd  his  Paffioni 
applauded  his  Choiccj  and  very  religioufly  ofler'd  their 
Service  in  this  amorous  Adventure,  t.  e.  they  faw  a  Jie- 
iation  on  the  Brink  of  the  Precipice,  and  would  by  all 
Means  fivour  him  with  a  civil  Pufli ;  for  you  muft  know^ 
JSIeafider^  there  is  a  Race  of  Men  in  thi>  Ciiy,  who  en- 
trench upon  the  Devil's  Employment,  or  rather  are  his 
Deputies,  they  tempt  by  his  Commillion,  and  damn  their 
Friends  out  of  Kindnefs ,  they  are  more  fuccefsful  and 
more  dangerous  than  their  Mailer,  becaufe  lefs  frightful, 
and  then  they  edge  the  Temptation  both  by  Example  and 
Counfel. 

Theomachus^s  ill  Fate  drew  him  to  a  fecond  Vifit,  this 
made  way  for  a  third;  yet  he  ftood  to  hivRefolution^ 
and  kept  within  the  Limits  of  Modefty  :  But  in  the  m.ean 
time,  the  Fever  of  Love  heighten'd,  and  the  maligni-.nt 
Humour  paft  through  the  Eyes  to  the  Heart,  and  from 
thence  fum'd  up  to  the  Brain,-  fo  that  now  the  Difeafe 
not  only  infefted  the  Will,  but  tainted  the  Underftand- 
ing.  He  began  to  venture  on  great  Freedoms  than  ftood 
with  Virtue,  and  in  a  (hort  time  plung'd  into  Debauche- 
ry :  But  when  he  retir'd  into  his  Clofet,  and  Solitude 
gave  time  for  ferious  Reflections;  Grace  open'd  his  Eyes 
to  fee  his  Fault,  and  they  dropp'd  Tears  to  deplore  it ;  h^ 
learnt  by  Experience,  that  the  Pleafure  of  Sin  bears  no 
Proportion  with  the  Torment  of  it,  that  the  Delight  is 
momentary,  and  the  Pain  may  be  eternal.  And  now  he 
feem'd  refolv'd  not  only  to  hate  his  Crime,  but  even  th^ 
Caufe  of  it:  But  thofe  Debauchees  who  had  been  the  In- 
ftruments  of  his  Fall,  dafh'd  all  his  pious  Refolutions,, 
and  at  length  not  only  xjepriv'd  him  of  Liberty,  but  of/ 
the  very  Defire  to  regain  it. 

R  2  Tearsj 


244      ^^^  Gentleman  In^mBeA. 

Tears,  fays  one,  have  no  ill  Grace  on  a  Child's  Cheeks, 
they  become  alio  well  enough  the  weaker  Sex,  who  of- 
tentimes plead  their  Caufe  with  them  when  Reafons  fail, 
and  io  at,  the  fame  time  redrefs  a  Grievance,  and  dif- 
charge  the  Brain:  But  they  argue  an  unpardonable 
Weaknefs  in  a  Man,  and  raife  a  flirewd  Sufpicion  he 
has  either  over  liv'd  his  Judgment,  or  never  had  one ;  you 
have  made  a  falfe  Step,  and  who  does  not  trip  fometimes? 
Let  your  Heart  ask  Pardon,  not  your  Eyes.  Repent,  if 
you  pleafe,  but  why  tnuft  you  defpair?  But  before  you 
pronounce  upon  your  felf,  examine  whether  you  are 
guilty?  Appeal  to  Reafon,  not  to  Fancy,  Prejudice, and 
Education :  Thofe  are  always  upon  the  hurry,  and  be- 
caufe  they  raife  a  Duft,  they  never  fee  Objeds  in  their 
Proportion.  God  is  a  Father^  not  a  Tyrant ;  if  he  has 
laid  fome  Precepts  upon  us,  he  never  intended  to  over- 
whelm us.  Why  did  he  create  Eyes,  but  to  fee  ?  Or 
Ears,  but  to  hear?  Will  he  permit  us  to  behold  nothing 
but  Monfters  ?  Or  to  fmell  nothing  but  Stench  and  In- 
fedion  ?  This  is  to  make  our  Senfes  a  Burthen,  rather 
than  a  Bleffing,  it*s  to  turn  into  a  Curfe  the  very  Benefit 
of  our  Creation. 

No,  no,  Iheomachus^  when  God  fram'd  our  Senfes  ca- 
pable to  receive  Pleafure,  he  created  Objedls  fit  to  give 
it;  and  1  am  of  Opinion,  that  Pleafures  of  the  Senfe  have 
nothing  criminal  but  Miftake.  I  thank  that  great  Deity 
that  made  me,  for  the  Favour  of  my  Creation;  I  pay 
him  Obedience  every  Day,  and  commit  my  felf  to  his 
Protedion  :  Now  jf  at  the  fame  time  I  indulge  Nature, 
and  give  it  a  Play-day,  where  is  the  Harm  ?  Mull  he  be 
offended,  becaufe  I  am  pleas'd  ?  Or  cannot  he  be  happy, 
if  1  am  m.erry  ?  Indeed  I  declare  againft  thofe  who  fly  in 
the  Face  of  Majefty  ;  who  burlelque  his  Goodnefs,  and 
lampoon  his  Juitice;  thofe  are  Attempts  againft  his  Per- 
fon,  Overt-ads  of  Hoftility,  and  Rebellion,  they  are 
Crimes  of  the  firft  Clafs,  and  if  they  are  not  punifh'd 
witli  Fire  hereafter,  at  leaft  they  deferve  it.  ,  Speak 
honourably  of  God,  pay  your  Workmen,  injure  no 
Man,  and  you  cannot  mifcarry. 

The  Gentleman  has  Reafon,  fays  another,  he  has  fpo- 
ken  like  a  Man  of  P^arts  and  A^erit.  I  lay  once  under 
the  fame  Miftake  as  you  Theomachns;  and  never  enjoy'd 
mv  Freedom  till  I  eas'd  myfcif  of  the  Yoak  ofConfcience, 

and 


The  Gentleman  InflruBed.       2 45 

and  Reftraint :  Qualms  damp'd  all  my  Pleafures,  and  me- 
lancholy Spedres  fiung  Wormwood'  into  all  my  Di- 
verfions;  but  I  have  realbn'd  my  felf  out  of  thefe  Iple- 
netick  Vapours  ;  and  laugh  at  thefe  fantaftick  Monfters; 
they  once  tormented  me ;  b,ut,  continu'd  he,  what  if 
there  be  no  God  ?  What  if  you  flafli  into  nothing  when 
you  ceafe  to  breathe  ?  And  that  Fear  and  Hope  lleep  in 
the  Grave  ?  Will  your  Virtue  then  convey  you  to  Hea- 
ven ?  .Or  your  Sins  to  Hell?  Be  firft  fure  there  is  a  future 
State,  before  you  part  with  the  prefent.  When  you  can 
demonftrate  there  is  a  God,  'twill  be  time  enough  toferve 
him :  Tell  me  not  the  Being  of  a  Deity  is  pall  Debate, 
nor  that  all  Nations  conipire  in  this  Belief  ^  JVIatters  of 
this  Nature  are  not  to  be  put  to  Vote,  they  mull  not  be 
judg'd  by  Plurality  of  Voice,  Rcalbn  muft  decide  the  Que- 
ftion,  not  Numbers ;  Truth  is  Truth,  tho'  all  the  World 
deny  it ;  and  Falfhood  is  Falfhood,  tho'  a;!  abett  it.  Pe- 
rufe  thefe  Books  with  an  unprejudic'd  Mind,  with  that 
he  laid  on  the  Table  Hobbs^  Spinofa^  and  other  Pam- 
phlets, the  Spawn  of  our  Age,  and  the  i^lague  of  our 
unhappy  Nation. 

This  new  Syllem  of  Divinity  llunn'd  him,  he  knew 
not  whether  he  fhould  receive  it  with  Laughter  or  Indig- 
nation, for  tho'  on  the  one  Side  he  fuppos'd  they  jelled, 
yet  on  the  other  they  play'd  on  too  lerious  a  Subjeft  : 
Tho'  he  had  forfeited  his  Innocence,  he  had  not  yet  took 
leave  of  Religion  ;  fo  that  he  could  not  endure  to  hear 
the  Decalogue  traduc'd.  Virtue  levell'd  with  Vice,  and 
God  himfelf  degraded  by  a  Pack  of  Atheifts,  who  have 
no  other  Reafon  to  quarrel  with  his  Being,  but  becaufe 
he  curbs  their  Lulls,  and  lafhes  their  Confcience  with 
Scorpions. 

But  the  Devil  of  Love  that  polTeft  this  unhappy  Gen- 
tleman, begun  to  rife  again,  he  perceiv'd  that  Indulgence 
had  whetted  his  Paffion,  infteadof  blunting  it ;  and  that 
it  was  impolTible  to  gratify  Scnfuality  without  provoking 
Confcience.  In  this  Agony  between  Fear  and  Delirehe 
firll  cried  out  ;  if  theJe  Gentlemen's  Tenets  are  not 
true,  they  are  at  leafl  convenient,  they  give  full  Scope  to 
Senfe,  and  reconcile  Confcience  with  Pleafure  ;  then  he 
wifh'd  they  were  true,  and  after  a  Paufe,  perchance  they 
are,  faid  he,  latter  Ages  have  difcover'da  new  World, 
why  may  they  not  a  new"  Truth  ?  At  leaft  there  is  no 

R  3  Harm, 


a4<^      'ithc  Gentleman  Inflni^ed, 

Harm  in  examining  their  Principles.  It  they  prove  fa* 
tisfadlory,  1  may  enjoy  my  Paffion,  if  not,  I  am  relolv'd 
toflifleit.  Thus  did  Atheilm  make  its  Approaches  by 
Degree,  it  work'd  at  firft  out  of  Sight,  and  under  a  Dif- 
guife,  and  then  turn'd  poor  Theomachus  out  of  his  Reli- 
gion and  Wits  too. 

He  fell  upon  the  Books  with  fo  great  Eagernefs,  that 
he  feem'd  rather  to  devour  than  read  them  :  And  when 
he  fell  upon  the  Panegyrick  of  human  Reafon,  or  an  In- 
veftive  againft  Prejudice  and  Education:  This  is  fair 
Pealing,  faid  he !  this  is  to  build  on  Principles ;  to  ftand 
on  a  fure  Foundation,  we  cannot  go  allray  under  the 
Conduft  of  Reafon  ;  Intereft  cannot  break  in  upon  its 
Integrity  ;  it  adls  without  Biafs,  without  Partiality  ;  its 
Judgment  is  infallible,  and  its  Decifions  Oracles.  Pre- 
judice and  Education  are  the  Bane  of  Truth  :  They  fo 
crowd  our  Heads  v/ith  old  Species,  that  they  leave'nQ 
room  for  new  ones  ;  fo  that  we  either  a6l  out  of  Cuflom 
or  Spite. 

But  he  had  done  well  to  confider,  that  they  who  inveft 
our  Underftandings  with  the  Prerogative  of  Infallibility, 
arc  infallibly  Coxcombs^  that  they  are  great  Strangers  to 
Keafon,  who  think  it  above  Error,  and  that  they  are  cer- 
tainly miftaken,  who  fuppofe  it  cannot  bcdecelv'd.  'Tis 
true  indeed.  Prejudice  and  Education  oftentimes  rather 
leads  us  from  Truth,  than  to  it.  And  it  is  more  fecure 
to  make  the  Enquiry  alone,  than  in  their  Company,  but 
when  Men  declaim  agaipft  them  without  Mean  or  Mea- 
fure,  'tis  a  Sign  they  are  tainted  with  the  Difeafe,  for 
where  there  is  Hear,  there  is  no  Indifference  :  And  fo  they 
only  condem.n  one  Prejudice  with  a  greater. 

However,  the  Bo^^ks  infeded  him,  they  convey'd  the 
Contagion  from  his  Heart  to  his  Head  ;  fo  that  within  a 
fhort  Time  his  Dife  ife  came  to  a  Crijis,  which  prognofti- 
cated  nothing  hut  Aiheifm  He  found  a  ftrange  (.harm  in 
the  Stilc,  their  flourifliing  Periods  ftruck  him  with  Ad- 
miration. He  thought  a  Vein  of  Wit  and  Elegance  ran 
through  all  their  Difcourfes,  fo  that  he  was  never  tir'd 
with  reading  nor  praifmg  them:  The  worft  of  Things 
were  prefented  him  under  a  handfome  Ma(k,  which 
made  them  pafs;  Poifon  will  not  go  down,  unlefs  it  be 
gilt  or  made  palat.ible,  and  for  this  Reafon  generally  the 
worft  Books  are  writ  the  beftj  barefac'd  Impieties  rather 

move 


The  Gentleman  InJiruBed.      247 

move  us  to  Indignation  than  Love,  and  therefore,  thofs 
Vt'ho  expofe  them  to  the  pubhck  View,  take  Care  to  fee 
them  off  in  a  gaudy  Drefs,  to  veil  their  real  Deformity 
under  beautiful  Trappings.  I  know  many  are  of  Theo- 
machus^s  Opinion,  and  make  ftrange  Difcoveries  of  Wit 
in  thefe  Authors,  where  I  find  nothing  but  Blafphemy, 
But  fome  Men  are  born  under  a  happy  Conftellation  ; 
they  have  the  good  Fortune  to  be  dubb'd  Wits,  meerly 
for  fcoffing  out  of  the  common  Road,  and  taking  the 
Confidence  to  deride  thofe  facred  Myfteries,  the  greateft 
part  of  Mankind  reverences ;  which  certainly  is  no  more 
an  Argument  of  a  Man's  Wit  than  of  his  Piety:  But  'tis 
a  Demonftration,  that  an  Engl'tjh  Atheift  was  in  the 
Right  when  he  faid,  When  Reason  is  againft  a  Man^  then 
a  Man  will  be  againfi  Reafon. 

You  muft  not  wonder  if  Theomachus  once  intoxicatecf 
•with  Atheiftical  Wit,  was  foon  bewitch'd  with  Atheifti- 
cal  Arguments ;  every  Sophifm  feem'd  conclufive,  and 
Demonftration  fparkled  in  every  Period.  You  would  have 
fworn  thofe  Gentlemen's  Arguments  were  as  evident  as 
Mathematical  Pofiulatums ;  or  that  they  prov'd  their 
Thejis  by  Apollonius  or  Euclid:  But  after  all,  they  build 
on  GuelTes,  and  ever  beg  the  Queftion,  but  never  prove 
it.  Sometimes  they  flirt  at  the  Governm.ent  of  the  Uni- 
verfe  ;  then  at  God's  Juftice  j  and  fometimes  again  at  his 
Mercy  ;  and  becaufe  they  cannot  reconcile  thefe  two  At- 
tributes, they  fuppofe  they  are  incompatible ;  as  if  Man's 
Reafon,  that  cannot  comprehend  a  File,  were  able  to 
grafp  an  Immenfity.  However,  thefe  Argumenr^  which 
rather  work  on  Fancy,  than  convince  the  Underftanding, 
debauch'd  Theomachus,  d^nd  becaufe  he  could  not,  or  would 
jiot  relblve  them,  he  thought  them  unanfwerable. 

Sometimes  he  would  adjourn  from  his  Clofet  to  the 
Coffee-Houfe^  and  venture  upon  a  Difpute ;  and  when  he 
was  put  to  a  piung?,  he  laid  the  Mifcarriage  rather  upon 
his  own  Ignorance,  than  on  the  Caufe  he  manag'd.  So 
befotted  was  he  of  his  nev/  Mafters.  In  fine,  the  Employ- 
ment of  Theomachus  jumps  with  his  Name,  and  his  xMo- 
rals  with  his  Faith ;  he  is  a  perfeft  Atheift,  that  is,  with- 
out Religion,  and  by  confequence  without  Morality:  He 
3ds  as  he  believes;  and  the  only  Apology  for  his  Vices,  is 
;he  Corruption  of  his  Principles. 

"R  4.  Tho' 


^4^      The  Gentleman  Inflru^ei, 

Tho'  this  unhappy  Gentlemari  abandon'd  God,  God 
did  not  abandon  him ;  he  ftruck  him  with  a  Fever,  which 
in  fome  Days  brought  him  to  Death's  Door,  and  the  Do- 
6lor  deliver'd  him  this  doleful  Mefl'age,  A'r,  you  mufl  die. 
He  who  before  difcours'd  of  Death,  as  if  he  had  been 
Immortal,  broke  into  a  Fit  of  Impatience  and  Diftradli- 
on  ;  he  fcarce  knew  where  he  was,  much  lefs  what  to  re- 
folve  on ;  he  faw  he  could  not  live,  and  yet  he  would  not 
die.  This  ftrife  between  Life  and  Death  call  him  into 
flrange  Convulfions ;  and  the  Lofs  of  the  prefent,  with  the 
Fear  of  the  future,  fet  all  the  Humours  of  his  Body  in  a 
Ferment.  God  awak'd  his  Confcience  which  flew  in  his 
Face,  and  fet  before  his  Eyes  a  whole  Inventory  of  his 
Crimes.  He  ftarted  at  the  Sight  of  thefe  ghaftly  Monfters, 
and  fear'd  himfelf  more  than  Death,  nay,  more  than  Hell  ; 
for  'tis  more  to  deferve  thofe  Torments  than  to  fuffer  'em. 
Oh,  cry'd  he,  there  is  a  God  !  Sicknefs  that  has  almofl 
kiird  my  Body,  quickens  my  Underftanding !  From  thefe 
laft  Moments  of  Time,  methinks,  I  take  a  Survey  of  E- 
ternity  ;  and  behold  there  a  Judge  who  will  punifli  me, 
if  I  die  in  Obftinacy,  or  reward  me  if  I  breathe  out  my 
Soul  in  Repentance.  Oh !  I  will  fly  to  his  Mercy  rather 
than  abide  the  Impartiality  of  his  Juftice !  His  Goodnefs 
exceeds  my  Malice  ;  he  can  pardon  more  than  I  am  able 
to  commit,  and  will  receive  me  into  Favour,  if  I  fue  for 
it  with  Humility  and  Contrition.  In  fhort,  he.  fent  out 
fuch  fiery  Ejaculations,  that  they  feem'd  to  flow  rather 
from  the  Bi>eaft  of  a  Seraphin^  than  of  a  Man.  He  de- 
tefted  Atheifm  with  all  the  Caufes  of  it,  and  wifh'd  he 
had  loft  his  Eyes,  before  they  look'd  upon  thofe  fcanda- 
lous  Books,  that  corrupted  his  Will,  and  poifon'd  his 
Underftanding :  He  water'd  his  Bed,  in  a  very  literal 
Senfe,  with  his  Tears  ;  nor  could  all  the  Perfuafions  of 
his  Friends  ftop  the  Current.  He  now  had  no  regard  for 
the  Body,  that  was  once  his  Idol ;  nay,  he  wifh'd  that 
Sorrow  would  rather  put  an  End  to  his  Life,  than  Na- 
ture. But  Theomachtts  beyond  Expeftation  recover'd, 
and  what  is  amazing,  relaps'd  into  his  old  Difeafe  : 
Scarce  did  he  enjoy  the  Favour  of  a  perfe6t  Health,  but 
he  fpurn'd  at  his  Benefadtor,  and  fell  into  thofe  Abomi- 
nations he  fo  lately  detefted  ;  as  if  God  varied  with  our 
Conftitutions,  and  vanifh'd  into  nothing  when  we  are 
ivell,  and  revives  when  we  lie  on  our  Death-Bed. 


^h  Gentleman  InftruBed.     24^" 

This  is  an  Abridgment  of  Tkeomachus^s  Life,  and  I 
have  been  more  particular  in  the  Narrative,  that  you 
may  learn  by  his  Misfortune,  and  draw  fome  Advantage 
from  his  Mifcarriage  :  We  may  date  his  Ruin  from  the 
Rife  of  hisPaflionj  tho'  debauch'd  Company,  and  lewd 
Books  compleated  it.  Love  funk  the  iVIind ;  Conver- 
fation  and  Reading  put  fire  to  the  fatal  Train,  that  blew 
up  T'heomachus^s  Virtue:  And  from  this  tainted  Spring 
flow  thofe  unheard-of  Abominations,  that  almoft  drown 
the  Nation.  Had  not  the  Printers  fo  much  Work,  the 
Preachers  would  have  lefs ;  but  now  the  Prefs  declares 
War  againft  the  Pulpit,  and  the  Hawkers  fcatter  the 
Defiance. 

Neatt.  This  is  a  ftrange  Story,  and  had  I  it  from  ano- 
ther, I  fhould  be  tempted  to  doubt  whether  Man  be  ca- 
pable of  fo  great  Inconftancy.  Certainly  it  deferves  a 
Place  in  Hiftory.  I  may  perchance  be  tempted,  with 
your  leave,  toexpofeit  to  the  Publick. 

Eufeb.  I  leave  that  to  your  Difcretion.  Let's  not  for- 
get our  Atheift ;  it's  time  to  take  Coach. 


DIALOGUE    IL 

Whether  there  are  any  real  Atheijis, 

T^Hey  walk'd  down  Stairs,  and  when  they  were  in  the 
■*■  Coach,  pray,  faid  Neauder,  give  me  your  Opinion, 
are  there  any  fuch  Creatures  in  the  World  as  real  Atheifts  ? 
They  fay  this  Vermin  fwarms,  and,  like  Egyptian  Frogs, 
crawl  into  the  very  Bed-chambers  of  Princes. 

Eufeb.  Atheifm  is  a  meer  Sound,  an  infignificant  Word, 
a  modifh  Blufler;  but  in  Truth  there  is  no  fuch  Monfter 
in  Nature,  as  a  downright  Atheift  :  I  mean,  no  body  in 
his  Senfes  can  ferioufly  perfuade  himfelf  there  is  no  God. 
Men  may  huff  and  hedlor  in  a  Rendezvous  of  Rakes 
and  Bullies  j  they  may  fwear  they  believe  no  fuch  thing  ; 
and  in  a  raving  Tranfport  of  Debauchery  defy  it  ;  but 
then  you  muft  take  all  this  for  nothing  but  Cant  and 
Bravade  :  The  denial  fits  on  the  Tongue  alone  ;  'tis  ra- 
ther a  Wifh  there  were  no  God,  than  a  ferious  Profeilion 
there  is  none ;  for  whilft  they  mock  this  pretended  No- 
thing, 


jijo     no  Gentleman  Injlru^sd. 

thing,  they  tremble  at  the  Apprehenfion  of  it;  they  fear 
its  Anger,  though  they  deny  its  Being:  So  that  thole  we 
call  Atheiftsaffedl  to  appear  what  they  are  not;  ;,nd  by 
a  ftrange  Frenzy,  lay  to  their  own  Charge  a  Crirricthey 
are  not  guilty  of:  And  indeed  the  Perfualion  that  there 
is  a  God,  is  rooted  in  Nature;  we  owe  it  neither  to 
Education  nor  Study :  As  our  Maker  has  ftamp'd  his 
.  Image  in  our  Foreheads,  fo  he  has  alfo  engraven'd  the 
•  Knowledge  of  himfelf  in  our  Souls;  and  altho'  Debau- 
chery may  deface  the  Charadters,  it  can  never  deftroy 
them. 

Nean.,  Pray  let  us  drive  home  again:  I  thought  we  had 
been  on  an  Expedition  againft  Atheifts  ;  but  I  perceive 
they  are  Enemies  of  our  Coining ;  they  are  meer  Phan- 
toms that  flafli  from  Fancy,  and  only  lervefor  Satyr  and 
Inveftive.  What  did  that  great  Champion  Dx.TtilotfotJ 
enter  the  Lift  againft  Chymccrd%  ?  Did  he  duel  with  emp- 
ty Apparitions,  and  fence  with  Shadows  ? 

JLiifeb.  Miftakemenot;  I  told  you  there  were  no  real 
Atheifts.  Idejl;  that  no  Man  can  be  fo  far  convinc'd 
there  is  kq  God^  but  ftill  he  fears  there  is  one.  Let  him 
draw  up  a  whole  Legion  of  Atheiilical  Arguments  in 
Bntalia,  they  cannot  fecure  the  Underftanding  from 
Frights  and  Sufpicions ;  for  tho'  they  may  look  under  the 
falfe  Lights  of  Prejudice  and  Partialiry  very  plaufible, 
yet  they  cannot  convey  to  the  Intelledt,  Evidence  and 
JDemonftration. 

But  then  there  are  a  world  of  limping  Atheifts,  who 
walk  between  a  God  and  no  God  ;  that  is,  who  fays  there 
is  no  Deity,  and  a<5t  as  if  there  were  none  ;  and  yet  at 
the  fame  time  fufped  there  is  one.  This  is  that  Race  of 
Men  vi'e  call  Atheifts,  who  havedifmift  their  Underftand^ 
ing  and  Reafon  with  their  Will. 

Neafi.  Under  Favour,  I  muft  trefpafs  upon  your  Pati- 
ence, and  crave  farther  Inftru6tion  ;  for  as  yet  I  walk  in 
the  dark,  and  do  not  apprehend  your  meaning:  Cannot 
the  Being  of  a  Deity  be  juftify'd  by  Arguments,  tha; 
|lafh  Convidion? 

Eufeb.  Yes,  it  can, 

Nean.  It  feems  then  impoffible  for  the  Underftanding 
even  to  doubt  of  a  Truth,  that  prefents  it  felf  in  the  glit- 
tering Equipage  of  Demonftration  ;  for  it  is  not  Mailer 
of  its  A6ts,  as  th$  Will  ;  it  lies  under  the  Command  of 

Necef- 


The  Gentleman  Injim^kd.     2.5 1 

NecefTity,  and  is  compell'd  to  acknowledge  Truth  if  it 
appears  in  Perfon. 

Eufeb.  The  Propofitions  of  Euclid  zxq  all  Demonftra- 
tions ;  and  yet  a  bare  caft  of  the  Eye  on  tlie  Lines,  or  the 
Titles,  do  not  fend  Truth  in  Poll  to  the  Brain  :  Wemuft 
iirft  fee  what  the  Author  would  be  at ;  then  we  muil:  put 
Antecedents^  and  draw  Confequences  before  we  can  difco- 
ver  that  Light  which  flows  from  the  Schemes  to  the 
Head,  and  gilds  the  Underftanding,  Now  an  Atheift  is 
iick  of  a  Deity,  and  therefore  will  make  no  Acquaintance 
with  thofe  Arguments  that  prove  one  ;  they  come  upon 
too  ungrateful  a  Meflage  to  find  a  kind  Reception  ;  and 
generally  when  they  afk  an  Audience,  the  Will  denies 
Admittance ;  or  at  leaft  it  cuts  out  fo  much  other  Work 
for  the  Underft  mding,  that  it  can  find  no  time  to  give 
them  a  full  Hearing:  Like  a  Minifter  of  State,  it  hovers 
about  the  Prince,  and  obftru6ls  the  free  Paflage  to  the 
Prefence:  But  then,  when  Arguments  for  no  God  ap- 
pear, the  Will  puts  on  foot  a  hundred  little  Intrigues  to 
enfnare  the  Underftanding  ;  they  are  trick'd  up  for  De- 
lufion,  and  fitted  for  Deceit. 

Neaff.  I  perceive  it's  a  fine  thing  to  be  a  Dupee :  Why 
elfe  do  Men  take  fuch  Pains  to  impofe  on  themfelves  ? 
But  can  Men  cheat  themfelves  in  Reputation  ?  Or  are 
there  fo  great  Charms  in  being  over-reach'd?  I  thought 
it  was  every  Man's  Intereft  there  were  a  God  ;  and  there- 
fore, methinks,  it  were  more  reafonable  to  believe,  than 
to  wheedle  our  felves  into  Infidelity. 

Eufeb.  No  doubt,  it's  the  Intereft  of  Reafon,  but  not 
of  Senfuality,  A  Man  who  takes  Pleafure  for  the  Rule 
of  his  Adlions,  muft  lie  under  ftrange  Apprehenfions  at 
the  very  Thoughts  of  another  Wo);ld.  The  dreadful 
Glory  of  an  exafperated  Deity  ;  the  fieiy  Profpe6l  of 
boiling  Brimftone,  and  the  horrid  Pourtraits  of  the  in- 
fernal Executioners,  cannot  chufe  but  work  upon  the 
moft  refolute  Debauchee:  Sin,  tho'  never  fo  pleafant, 
with  the  difmal  Confequencescf  Judgment  and  Damna- 
tion, fir  very  uneafy  on  his  Confcienee,  and  counterpoife 
the  SweetneJs  of  the  rrioft  refin'd  Senfuality  with  Gall 
and  Wormwood.  Now  thefe  Creatures  of  Pleafure, 
who  cannot  refolve  on  Repentance,  have  found  out  a 
fhort  way  to  plaifter  up  a  Peace  with  Confcienee  :  They 
commiflion  their  Lufts  todrtwupon  the  Underftanding, 


'2^2      'fhe  Gentleman  InflruM, 

and  compel  it  to  deny,  or  at  leaft  to  doubt  of  thoie 
Truths  that  alarm  them  :  And  it  cannot  be  deny'd,  but 
all  inordinate  Lulls  biafs  the  Intellect,  and  make  it  fit 
to  receive  thofe  Impreflions  which  favour  PaiTion.  When 
Men  live  as  if  there  were  no  God,  'tis  extreamly  expe- 
dient for  them  there  were  none;  and  when  once  they 
are  come  fo  far,  they  catch  at  all  thofe  Arguments, 
which  may  fortify  them  in  this  Perfuafion  ;  and  thefe 
join'd  with  the  Charms  of  Intereft,  abate  the  Dread  of 
Divinity.  'Tis  true,  all  thefe  pretty  Artifices  are  never 
able  to  fecure  them  againft  the  Furies  that  rile  from 
another  World  to  haunt  them.  Perchance  there  is  a  Gody 
perchance  there  is  a  Hell,  fright  them  into  their  Soli'i;ie 
and  Retirement,  and  fometimes  into  Taverns  too:  Yet 
they  have  gain'd  one  Point  by  doubting,  which  they  look 
upon  as  a  very  confiderable  Advantage,  viz.  that  they 
may  live  Rakes,  and  die  Athiefts,  without  being  fure 
there  is  a  God  to  call  them  to  Account,  or  a  Hell  to 
punifh  them  ;  and  certainly  a  Man  may  be  faid  in  fome 
Degree  happy,  that  is  not  fure  he  fhall  once  be  eternal- 
ly miferable. 

Now  you  fee  the  Heart  has  carried  on  the  Contrivance, 
and  from  this  apoftem'd  Member  flows  the  Corruption 
of  Atheifm.  And  to  cut  off"  all  doubt,  why  do  the  ve- 
ry high-flown  Atheifts  defert  on  their  Death-beds  thofe 
Principles  they  once  admir'd?  Why  do  they  turn  Rene- 
gadoes  to  Atheifm  at  the  laft  Gafp  ?  Have  they  receiv'd 
new  Lights  from  Doctors  and  Apothecaries  ?  No,  no, 
they  have  left  the  World  behind  ;  Pleafuresare  now  out 
of  their  reach,  and  paft  Happinefs  almoft  out  of  their 
Memory.  They  fancy  at  leaft  an  Eternity  before  them. 
Fire  under  their  Feet,  and  Vengeance  over  their  Heads. 
Thefe  difmal  Meditations  cool  PafBon,  allay  Luft,  and 
change  the  Heart  ;  but  work  no  Alteration  in  the  Un- 
derftanding :  So  that  I  may  conclude  with  David,  The 
Fool  faid  in  his  Heart  there  is  no  God.  Atheifm  lodges 
in  the  Breaft,  and  a  Deity  in  the  Head.  Men  do  not  be- 
lieve a  God,  becaufe  they  will  not ;  to  gratify  Senfe, 
they  difoblige  Reafon  ;  and  hug  Infidelity,  to  feer  Con- 
fcience. 


D  I  A- 


S%e  Gentleman  InftruBed,     2^3 

DIALOGUE    III. 

Eufebius  and  Theomachus  meet  And  agree  on  the  Pre^ 
liminaries. 

Scarce  had  Eufebius  ended,  when  the  Coach  ftopp'd  at 
Theomachus's  Lodgings,  who  expedted  him  with  a 
young  Gentleman  we  call  £»<^o;raj.  This  Blade  was  a 
great  Pretender  to  Wit ;  and  to  follow  the  Stream  of  Cu- 
ftom,  would  make  the  firft  Eflayofit,  in  a  Critick  of 
Religion :  He  receiv'd  the  Rudiments  of  Latitudinari- 
anifm  from  Arioviftus  ;  and  was  grown  a  wondrous  Pro- 
ficient in  the  Science  of  Impiety :  He  pafs'd  the  Line 
of  Chriftianity ;  and  although  he  had  not  yet  touch'd 
upon  the  Point  of  Atheifm,  he  was  arriv'd,  zs  Arioviftus 
us'd  to  talk,  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  ;  in  fine,  he  yet 
acknowledg'd  a  God,  admitted  all  Religion,  and  would 
condemn  none. 

After  fome  mutual  Civilities :  This  is  the  Gentleman, 
faid  Neander^  I  fpoke  of  Yefterday ;  if  Vi6lory  favours 
you,  I  hope  you  will  give  him  fair  Quarter  for  my 
fake. 

Theo.  Never  fear ;  'tis  more  glorious  to  ufe  a  Vidlory 
modeftly,  than  to  gain  one.  I  had  rather  receive  a  Foil 
from  Eufeitius^  than  be  fubdu'd  by  Infolence.  Reft  fe- 
cure,  continu'd  he  with  a  fmile,  if  Fortune  takes  my  fide, 
•your  Friend  fhall  have  reafon  to  be  fatisfied  with  me:  I'll 
immediately  releafe  him  on  his  Parole  not  to  bear  Arms 
againft  Atheifm,  till  he  be  better  inform'd. 

Eufeb.  I  am  much  oblig'd  for  your  Civility ;  if  I  fall 
under  the  Weight  of  your  Arguments,  I  abandon  my 
felf  wholly  to  your  Generofity  :  Prifoners  of  War,  like 
Minors^  are  uncapable  to  Article  ;  they  lie  at  the  Mercy 
of  the  Conqueror,  and  muft  receive  Conditions,  but  can 
make  none.  But,  Sir,  I  muft  beg  Pardon  for  my  Rude- 
nefs ;  for  altho'  Neander  told  me  you  earneftly  defir'd  a 
Conference,  yet  I  am  fenfible,  that  it's  neither  genteel 
nor  handfome  to  falute  a  Stranger  with  a  Difpute;  nor 
to  make  Acquaintance  in  a  Duel :  But,  Sir,  I  come  here 
todifcourfe,  not  to  contend.  I  feek  Truth,  which,  like 
Pearls,  is  only  found  in  a  Calm ;  and  unlefs  we  all  re- 
folve  to  abandon  Error  when  we  perceive  it,  'tis  better 

to 


254     ^^^  Gentleman  InfruBed, 

to  forbear  the  Engagement :  For  if  we  look  upon  the 
Conference  as  a  Tryal  of  Wit,  and  perfuade  our  felves 
it's  more  difhonourable  to  own  an  Error  than  to  defend 
one  in  Spight  of  Evidence,  we  fhall  take  a  great  deal  of 
Pains  to  difcompofe  our  felves  j  and  then  the  Queftion 
will  be,  who  has  molt  Paffion,  not  who  has  molt  Rea- 
fon :  For  when  a  Man  is  pinch'd  and  will  not  furrender ; 
when  his  Reafons  are  weak  and  his  Obftinacy  ftrong  % 
he  calls  in  Heat  and  Paflion  to  his  AlTiftance  ;  the  only- 
Supports  of  a  finking  Caufe;  and  I  take  it.  for  granted, 
that  a  IVIan  never  wants  Arguments  to  relieve  a  droop- 
ing Thefii.,  but  he  fupplies  the  Want  with  Noife  and 
Clamour. 

'theom.  You  fpeak  my  Thoughts ;  Reafon  forc'd  me 
to  deny  a  God,  and  when  Reafon  tells  me  there  is  one, 
I  will  fubmit  to  its  Didamens.  I  never  wed  an  Opinion 
for  better,  for  worfe :  What  I  took  upon  good  Grounds, 
I  lay  down  upon  better:  I  do  not  hug  a  Miftake,  nor 
Pride  in  an  Error,  nor  ever  laid  Claim  to  Infallibility.  I 
cannot  well  comprehend  What  thofe  Pretenders  to  Science 
■Would  be  at,  who  faften  on  the  firft  Notions,  and  will 
no  more  part  with  them,  than  a  Spaniard^\\\\  his  Basket- 
Hilt  or  Golilia  :  They  fancy  furely  that  Truth  fwims  oii 
the  Surface,  and  that  the  belt  Thoughts  lie  always  up- 
permoft ;  but  then  they  would  do  well  to  confider,  they 
give  Children  a  confiderable  Advantage  over  Men  ;  for 
Knowledge  will  no  more  be  the  Confequence  of  Time 
and  Experience  :  We  fhall  live  no  more  to  learn  Wif- 
dom,  but  to  be  fix'd  in  Folly.  In  a  word,  I  will  no 
more  enllave  my  Underftanding,  than  my  Perfon ;  and  I 
value  at  as  high  a  Rate  the  Liberty  of  Thinking,  as  of 
Adting.  Convince  me  there  is  a  God,  and  I'll  take  my 
laft  Farewel  of  Atheifm. 

Eufeb.  Indifference  is  an  excellent  Difpofition  ;  we 
feldom  purfue  Truth  without  Prejudice,  but  we  take  it. . 
I  have  a  Favourer  two  to  beg  before  we  begin,  conti- 
nued Ettfebius.  Firfl^  Let  us  fpeak  by  Turns  :  I  am  no 
Friend  to  Noife,  and  cannot  be  reconcil'd  to  thofe  fiery 
Difputants  who  iiingoUt  Arguments,  one  upon  the  Back 
of  the  other,  yet  will  not  have  the  Patience  to  receive 
one  Anfwer:  This  is  not  to  confer,  but  to  wrangle  ;  and 
altho*  it  may  become  the  Skippers  oilVapping^  or  the  Oy- 
ller- women  at  BilUngfsrate^  yet  it  fuits  not  well  the  Breed- 


^'he  Gentleman  Inflru^ed,     25^ 

ing  of  Gentlemen.  An  Argument  propos'd  with  Noife 
and  Bluftering,  may  break  the  Head,  and  dilmount  the 
Brain,  but  it  never  makes  laiprcflion  on  the  Underftand- 
ing ;  Truth,  Hke  a  gentle  Shower,  foaks  through  the  Ears, 
and  moiftens  the  Intelled. 

Theom.  I  was  drawing  up  that  Article,  and  am  glad 
you  have  foreftall'd  me  ;  you  are  of  my  Temper :  I  would 
have  a  Dhpute  manag'd  with  Vigour,  but  not  with  Heat ; 
that  infpirits  Converfation,  this  confounds  it :  Notwith- 
llanding,  difputing  is  hot  Service,  I  confefs,  and  gene- 
rally is  perforra'd  with  too  much  Eagernefs  to  be  fuccefs- 
ful ;  nay,  I  was  once  acquainted  with  a  moll  even  tem- 
per'd  Man,  who  after  he  had  drawn  Blood,  as  I  may 
fay,  and  was  flefli'd  in  Polemicks,  never  waver'd  his  good 
Humour  afterwards. 

Eufeb,  I  muft  alfo  defire  you  to  avoid  Miftakes,  to 
call  in  an  Amanuenfis.  When  our  Anfwers  and  Obje6li-^ 
ons  are  committed  to  Paper,  and  fign'd  by  both  Parties, 
there  will  be  no  Fear  of  Mifreprefentation.  I  have  often 
feen  a  Conference  in  Print,  nothing  like  the  Original ; 
and  he  who  crow'd  in  the  Pamphlet,  cry'd  craven  in  the 
Chamber.  Theomachns  prefently  approv'd  the  Propofition, 
and  fent  for  an  Amanuemfis :  So  that  now  the  Prelimina- 
ries were  agreed  to,  and  all  things  feem'd  ready  for  the 
Engagement. 

But  Eujebius  who  faw  a  great  Intimacy  between  £«- 
doxus  and  Theomachus^  fuppcs'd  they  Vv^ere  not  much 
divided  in  Opinion  ;  and  therefore  that  he  might  attack 
them  both  at  the  fame  time,  if  helean'd  towards  Z^^-z/w?^ 
delir'd  to  know  his  Principles.  Sir,  faid  he,  addreiling 
his  Difcourfe  to  Eudoxus,  I  hope  without  Rudenefs  I  may 
ask  what  Religion  you  profefs  ?  We  are  now  met  to 
difcourfe  of  that  Subject,  and  perchance  yours  may  come 
within  the  reach  of  thefe  Arguments  I  intend  to  level 
at  Atheifm.  In  Italy  and  Spain  fuch  Queilions  are  fu- 
perfluous  ;  and  in  France,  when  you  find  a  Man  no  Pa- 
pijly  you  conclude  he  is  a  Hugemt.  But  our  Ifland  is 
more  prolifick,  and  yields  annual  Crops  of  Religion,  as 
well  as  of  Corn.  One  Grain  of  Faith  fprouts  up  into  a 
hundred :  And  I  am  told,  that  you  may  poll  the  People 
more  eafily  than  their  Tenets:  So  that  Religions  rife  and 
fall  as  well  as  Men;  and  therefore,  with  Submiflion  to 
my  Lord  Mayor's  belter  Judgment,  I  would  have  the 

Morta- 


Z5(5      T'^^  G  E  N  T  L  E  M  A  N  Ififiru^ed, 

Mortality  of  Churches  put  in  the  weekly  Bills,  togethet 
with  that  of  the  Inhabitants. 

Eudox.  Liberty  and  Property  are  the  Birth-right  of 
every  free-born  Englijh  Subjedl :  And  I  fee  not  why  the 
fame  great  Charter  fhould  not  enfranchife  his  Belief,  as 
well  as  his  Goods  and  Chattels.  England^  Sir,  is  a 
nice  Nation ;  I  may  add,  and  pious  alfo.  We  pay  Ho- 
mage and  Obedience  to  the  Lord,  and  will  ftand  for  his 
juft  Right  and  Prerogatives ;  but  then  we  forget  not 
our  darling  Liberty  j  we  refpeft  him  as  Children,  not 
as  Slaves,  and  walk  in  his  Ways  with  Freedom,  not  in 
Tramels. 

Eufeb.  You  acknowledge  then  a  God. 

Eudox.  I  do.  I  am  alfo  perfuaded  there  is  a  Heaven, 
and  think  there  may  pofTibly  be  a  Hell ;  thefe  Articles  I 
fubfcribe  to :  But  no  Man  fhall  ftretch  my  Faith  to  ano- 
ther Tenet,  or  command  my  Obedience  to  a  Camu 
more.  This  is  my  Nonplusultra  ;  what  lies  on  the  other 
iide  of  thefe  Points,  is  an  unknown  Region  to  my  Faith, 
tho'  not  to  my  Opinion.  I  confefs  I  do  not  underftand 
what  God  is,  tho'  I  adore  him  j  yet  I  know  enough 
to  admire  his  Greatnefs,  and  my  own  nothing.  I  love 
fometimes  to  lofe  my  felf  in  the  Labyrinth  of  his  Perfec- 
tions; to  purfuemy  Reafon  to  an,  Oh  Altitudo!  In  my 
Retirement,  I  pofe  my  Apprehenfion  with  the  intricate 
Attributes  of  his  Eternity,  Goodnefs  and  Juftice ;  and 
thofe  very  Objedions  that  flartle  another  Man's  Faith, 
confirm  mine :  To  believe  what  I  can  prove,  is  rather 
Science  than  Faith.  I  recreate  my  felf  therefore  with  his 
Goodnefs,  and  confound  my  Underftanding  with  his 
Eternity ;  and  put  all  Suggeftions  of  Infidelity  out  of 
Countenance  with  this  old  faying  of  TertulUan^  Cerium 
eji,  quia  impojfibile  eft. 

I  read  no  Cafuifl  but  my  Reafon,  and  am  of  Opini- 
on, that  God  pardons  fome  Sins  as  eafily  as  we  commit 
them  :  My  Confcience  is  neither  of  Steel,  nor  of  Wax  ; 
heavy  Offences  batter  it,  but  a  Peccadillo  of  Infirmity 
makes  no  Impreffion.  I  thank  God,  all  my  Sins  have 
Names,  and  are  rather  Friends  to  Senfe,  than  Enemies 
to  Reafon ;  they  neither  attack  God,  nor  wound  my 
Neighbour  ;  they  only  refrefh  fometimes  my  drooping 
Spirits,  and  gently  purge  Melancholy.  In  my  folitary 
Thoughts,  1  compute  and  call  up  Accounts  with  my 

Maker  i 


'The  Gentleman  InflruBed,     257 

Maker ;  and  I  find  fuch  a  Confider.ce  in  his  Mercy,  that 
my  youthful  Failings  are  not  able  to  affright  me.  Nay, 
methinks,  I  am  tempted  freqi-ently  to  offend,  that  I  may 
have  the  Satisfadion  of  asking  Pardon  :  And  no  Medi- 
tation catries  me  fo  faft  to  God^  as  that  of  his  Goodneft, 
^hich  forgives  with  fo  fnueh  Eafe^thofe  Tranfgreffions 
that  hurry  me  from  him. 

Now  if  any  Man  will  quibble  upon  my  Syrtibol  of 
Faith,  I  can  eafily  forgive  him.  J  cannot  be  angry  with 
another's  Judgment  for  difagr.eeing  from  mine:  And  tho' 
I  think  my  felf  in  the  right  Way,  1  dare  not  conclude, 
my  Opponents  are  in  the  wrong.  Each  Religion  is  but 
a  difterent  Road,  that  meets  at  Heaven ;  and  if  fome 
will  walk  on  in  the  ftraight  Path,  charged  with  a  Lum- 
ber of  Articles,  Precepts,  and  Ceremonies,  let  them  jog 
on,  their  Burthen  will  not  load  me:  If  they  loVe  to 
fweat  under  their  Devotion,  I  vote  them  that  Satisfadli- 
on  :  If  they  will  not  communicate  with  me,  I  have  no 
Scruple  to  converfe  with  them  ;  their  ill  Nature  (hall  not 
influence  my  Charity :  I  can  enter  mto  a  Papift  Churchy 
and  either  pray  with  them,  or  for  them  ;  the  Place  can't 
prof^ine^roy  Prayers;  wherever  the  Creator  is,  he  may 
be'adbr-ci-j^a'rtdtherefofeat  Co»/?d«//»<//>/f',  I  would  enter 
"\x\X^i-''Mjyqt4e^QX  into  a  Pngode  in  Bengali  or  Siam ;  for  if 
,^  i-*'mdhn'rnet'ui^''i  or  Idjlater^^  Prayer  offends  God,  mine 
'  may  pleafe  him ;  if  theirs  pollute  the  Place,  mine  may 
fandtify-  it ;,  for  if  they  diredl  their  Devotions  to  a  Statue, 
©r  Impoftor,  1  offer  mine  to  God  ;  and  fo  rectify  iheEr- 
rorbf  their  Worfhip,  by  well  ordering  mine. 

Lufeb,  Tho'  your  Life  be  ftrait-l.ic'd,  your  Charity 
5s  comprehenIi\;^e.  I  fuppofe  the  Univerfality  of  this  muft: 
atone  for  the  Singularity  of  the  other.  Well,-  Sir,  in  a 
Word,  continued  he,  you  profefs  one  Religion,  and  ap- 
prove all;  and  fo  fall  into  the  Clafs  of  Lititfidinartans t 
You  are  a  Lexeller,  and  would  bring*  into  the  World 
an  Equality  of  Religions,  as  well  as  Goods  and  Dig- 
nities. You  lie  then  under  the  fame  Latitude  with 
J'heomiichus^  and  the  Stroke  that  hits  him  will  wound; 
you.  Well,  Sir,  (addreffing  himfelf  to  T'heomachus ) 
choofe  your  Weapon ;  are  you  ioi  the  offenlive  or  de- 
fenfive? 

Tbeom.  Let  us  have  our  Turns ;  We  will  engage  on 

«§ual  Terms,    But  you  are  in  ray  Houfe  5  the  Laws  of 

S  Braed-^ 


25S     ^^^«  Gentleman  InflruM. 

Breeding  and  Civility  command  me  to  give  you  the  Pre- 
cedency.    I  leave  it  therefore  to  your  Choice. 

Eufeb.  I  fee  you  are  refolv'd  to  overcome  me  with  Ci- 
vility, before  you  vanquifli  me  with  Reafon.  But  I  will 
not  contend  with  you  at  this  Weapon.  I  accept  your 
Offer,  and  will  not  offend  your  Principles,  before  1  de- 
fend my  own. 


DIALOGUE    IV. 

The  Atheift  cannot  he  [ure  there  is  no  God^  nor  the  Lati- 
tudinarian  that  all  Religions  are  faving. 

Eufeh.  T  Suppofc  neither  of  you  are  fo  fatisfy'd  with  your 
•*-  Religions,  as  never  to  be  haunted  with  Fears, 
nor  fcar'd  with  Doubts  and  Apprehenfions ;  for  nothing 
can  fecure  the  Underftanding,  and  fix  the  Judgment,  but 
Evidence.  Now  I  cannot  perfuade  my  felf,  that  any 
Atheifl,  Libertine,  or  Lat4tudinarian  dare  venture  on  fo 
bold  an  Attempt,  as  to  thruft  on  Mankind  thofc  Argu- 
ments for  Demonftrations,^  that  under  a  fine  Appearance 
hide  nothing  but  Falfhood'and  Sophiftry.  I  doubt  not 
indeed,  but  the  Will  may  byafs  the  Underftanding,  and 
force  out  an  AfTent ;  but  then  this  can  be  no  more  fteady 
than  meer  Philofophical  Concluiions,  that  f^y  no  higher 
than  Opinion  :  For  whilft  each  Side  of  a  Contradiction 
bids  fair  for  Truth,  we  cannot  tell  on  which  fide  it  lies, 
find  fo  float  on  Uncertainties ;  and  though  we  judge  the 
Thefis  true,  we  fear  it  may  be  falfe.  I  will  therefore,  for 
once,  deal  more  generoufly  with  you,  than  I  am  oblig'd 
m  Reafon  :  I  will,  I  fay,  grant  that  your  Tenets  are 
doubtful ;  but  then  when  I  do  you  a  Favour  be  pleas'd 
to  do  me  JuPdce,  and  confefs,  that  'tis  probable  there  is 
a  God,  and  that  there  is  one  reveal'd  Religion.  I  only 
ask  what  you  cannot  refufe  without  Injultice,  for  cer- 
tainly if  we  appeal  either  to  the  Tribunal  of  Reafon,  or 
Authority,  I  fliall  carry  my  Caufe  ;  for  the  Afferters  of 
a  God  plead  for  his  Exiftence  with  folid  Reafons;  where- 
as you  meerly  beg  the  Qiieftion  you  are  to  prove,  and 
bring  no  more  but  a  bare  PofTihility  for  the  Support  of 
your  Hypothefis;  And  then,  you  can  pretend  no  right  to 

Autho- 


^he  Gentleman  InfiruBe^,      25^ 

Authority.  The  Founders  of  Atheifm  and  Libertinifm 
were  look'd  upon  as  Monfters  in  the  very  Places  they 
liv'd,  and  delerv'd  Punifhmentfor  their  Lewdnefs,  before 
they  fufFer'd  Banifhment  for  their  Impiety. 
'  Epicure  and  Theodore  were  profligate  Wretches ;  their 
Morals  run  even  with  their  Divinity;  they  exterminated 
Virtue  with  P^eligion,  and  debauch'd  both  Pradtice  and 
Principle;  their  Scholars  have  out-done  both  the  Origi- 
nals, and  improv'd  both  Irreugion  and  Impiety.  Now 
Men  who  are  a  common  Nuifance  to  their  Country,  a 
Misfortune  to  the  Age  they  live  in,  and  an  eternal  Shame 
to  their  Species,  and  have  little  Authority  with  thofe, 
who  have  one  grain  of  Kindnefs  for  their  Nature  ;  they 
are  better  qualified  for  the  Bar  than  the  Bench,  and  more 
fit  to  fuf/er  than  to  witnefs. 

But  thofe  who  avouch  for  me,  are  as  admirable  for 
Learning,  as  Piety ;  they  are  without  Number,  and  a- 
bove  Reproach  :  So  great  Authority  back'd  with  weighty 
Reafon,  mull  be  confefs'd  fufficientto  makeour  Opinion 
probable,  I  might  fay  certain ;  but  I  wave  the  Advan- 
tage, I  may  claim  both  in  Equity  and  Juftice,  and  only 
ask  what  you  are  too  reafonable  to  refufe,  viz.  That  itii 
probable  at  leaft  there  is  a  God. 

Theom.  I  have  read  all  I  could  find  on  this  Subject ; 
and  am  forc'd  to  confefs,  our  Authors  hav-e  promised 
more  than  they  are  able  to  perform  :  Their  Demonftra- 
tions  for  no  God  leave,  methinks,  fome  Apprehenfion 
there  //  one  ;  and  I  find  them  work  more  efficacioiifly 
upon  my  Underilandingin  Company,  than  in  Solitude; 
and  in  Taverns,  than  in  my  Clofet. 

Eufeb.  That  is ;  when  Senfuality  has  ftarted  the  Gafne, 
and  Paflions  are  on  the  Wing;  when  Appetite  purfues 
criminal  Pleafure,  and  Confcience  checks  you  \vith  the 
difmal  Apparitions  of  Hell,  and  Judgment ;  then  the 
Will  is  too  hard  for  the  Underftanding;  it  turns  the 
falfeEnd  of  the  Profpedlive,  and  magnifies  thefe  Argu- 
ments that  favour  Li.ft,  and  folicit  for  Liberty:  But 
then  again,  when  the  Hurry  is  oyer,  and  your  difcerning 
Faculty  lies  under  no  Reftraint  nor  Fallacy ;  when  it  con- 
templates the  Proofs  for  no  God  in  their  juit  Proportion,  it 
tvavers  with  Fears;  and  tho*  on  the  one  fide  it  concludes 
there  is  no  God^  yet  on  the  other  it  fufpedts  there  is  one. 
Now,  Sir,  I  do  not  ask  what  your  Opinion  is,  when 

S  2  PalTtoa 


a 60      7'h  Gentleman  InJ}rt4£fed, 

Paflion  runs  down  the  Underftanding ;  when  Defire  de* 
bauches  it,  and  Senfe  flings  Reafon  off  the  Hinges;  but 
"What  it  is  when  your  Intelled  adls  without  Bribery, 
without  Illufion,  without  PariiaHty. 

Theom.  Well;  that  we  may  rid  our  Hands  of  Prelimi- 
naries, and  enter  upon  A6lion,  ril  condefcend  fo  far,  as 
to  grant,  that  it's  doubtful  whether  there  be  a  Gody  or 
no  God;  and  much  good  may  the  ConcefTion  do  you. 

Eufeb.  Eudoxui !  Will  you  enter  into  the  Treaty?  It*$ 
better  to  compound  a  le*  amiable^  than  by  Force. 

Endox.  That  is,  unlefs  I  fairly  confefs,  it's  doubtful 
^t  leaft,  whether  all  Religions  are  faving;  you'll  compel 
ine  by  dint  of  Argument. 

■  Eufeb.  Right;  and  pray  put  me  not  to  the  Labour  of 
proving  a  Truth  that  difcovers  itfelf,  and  even  glares  up-^ 
on  the  Underftanding. 

Eudox.  I  know  not  what  Imprtsflion  this  Truth  (as  you 
are  pleas'd  to  call  it)  makes  on  your  Organ,  methinks, 
itafFe61:s  not  mine  ;  and  I  am  perfuaded  that  a  Man  of 
inoderate  Parts  may  prove  ad  Evidentiam^  that  all  Reli- 
gions are  faving  ;  but  I  willingly  decline  that  Task,  not 
to  prejudice  the  Subjed: ;  yet  I'll  venture  to  propofe  one 
Argument,  that  offers  it  felf  to  every  Man,  and  may 
be  comprehended  by  a  Child,  tho'  not  evaded  by  a  Dt- 
•vine. 

Eufeb  Such  Arguments  deferve  Refped,  and  it's  pity 
to  Dury  them  in  Silence  and  Oblivion. 

Eudox.   Raillery  apart :    What  can  God  require  of 
li'Ian,  but  Worfhip,  Love,  and  Obedience  ? 
Eufeb.  Nothing. 

Eudox.  Therefore  whatever  Religion  a  Man  profelles; 
if  he  worfliips  God  as  his  Creator ;  if  he  loves  him  as 
his  Father,  and  obeys  him  as  a  Sovereign  ;  does  he 
not  difcharge  himfelf  of  thofe  Duties  God's  Excellence 
demands,  and  his  Dependency  ?  Does  he  not  comply 
with  all  the  Branches  of  Subjedtion?  Does  he  not  ftand 
within  the  Bounds  of  Submiflion  ?  Now,  what  Religi- 
on does  not  teach  its  Profelytes  to  proftrate  before  God's 
Majefty  ?  to  love  his  Goodnefe?  to  dread  his  Juftice? 
and  to  receive  his  Laws  with  Reverence?  Indeed  the 
rnanner  of  Worfhip  is  not  uniform;  it  varies  with  the 
Climate,  and  is  adapted  to  Mens  Conftitutions.  ?ref- 
byterianifm  jumps  with  a  Republican  Genius;   and  for 

lhi» 


^z  Gentleman  InJiruM.      i6i 

this  Reafon  was  moft  nicely  eftablifh'd  in  Scotland.  The 
Laws  fenc€  Prelacy  in  England.  Popery  bears  all  before 
it  in  France^  Spaift^  and  Italy.  The  /i/coran  bewitches  the 
Levant.  Amida  and  Xaca,  yapnn.  The  Laplanders  bow 
to  Che  red  Cloth,  and  fome  I/landers  to  a  Baboon's 
Tooth  :  Yet  thefe  different  Worfliips  meet  in  the  fame 
Center,  and  terminate  in  one  God  blejfed  for  ever.  I 
have  not  fprung  this  Divinity  ;  I  owe  it  to  a  late  re- 
verend Bifhop,  who  maintained  it  with  Applaufe  againft 
his  Popifh  Adverfaries  ;  the  ancient  Pagans  neither 
adorM  'jtocks  nor  Stones,  but  the  invincible^  liviyyg  God, 
under  the  Shapes  of  Marsj  Apolloj  and  Jupiter  Opt. 
Max. 

If  therefore  Men  of  all  Perfuafions  worfhip  God; 
why  fhall  they  forfeit  all  Right  to  his  Mercy?  Why 
fhall  loyal  Subjects  be  confounded  with  Mutineers?  or 
fufFer  for  Frcafon  they  never  dream'd  of?  If  they  do 
not  agree  in  Ceremonies,  they  do  in  the  Subllance  : 
Tho'  fometimes  their  Bodies  bend  before  an  Idol,  their 
Hearts  fall  a  Sacrifice  to  their  Creator ;  and  whilfl;  their 
Intention  goes  right,  their  Adlions  cannot  go  wrong, 

Eufeb.  Air  your  Demonftration,  Eudoxus^  it  fmells  of 
Brimftone,  and  rather  proves  the  Author  will  be  damn'd, 
than  that  all  Religions  are  faving.  Methinks,  it  has  lb 
black,  fo  monftrous  an  Afpe6t,  that  it  rather  frights  . 
than  convinces :  A  Man  muft  be  below  the  Standard  of 
human  Nature  ;  he  muft  have  fomething  of  favage,  and 
devilifh  too  in  his  Compofition,  to  bolt  out  fuch  killing 
Doftrine  in  cold  Blood.  Pardon  my  Heat,  I  am  not 
jMafter  of  my  Refentments  in  fo  provoking  Occafions ; 
and  when  can  Pallion  be  innocent,  but  in  fuch  an  extra- 
ordinary Circumftance  ?  But  pray,  can  God  reveal  a 
Religion  ? 

Eudox.  Doubtlefshe  can. 

Enfeb.  If  therefore  he  reveals  one,  and  commands  all 
Men  to  embrace  it  under  Pain  of  Damnation  ;  I  fuppofe 
the  Precept  is  obligatory  in  England^  without  the  Con- 
fent  of  the  great  Reprefentatives,  the  Lords  and  Com- 
mons in  Parliament. 

Eudox.  Yes,  certainly,  God's  Power  goes  higher  tha^j 
X)\Q  negative  Votes  j  his  Will  alone  is  a  Law,  without 
the  Concurrence  of  either  Houfe. 

S  3  Eufeb. 


2 6i      The  Gentleman  InftruBed. 

Eufeb.  If  therefore  he  has  reveal'cl  a  Religion,  and 
commands  all  to  embrace  it,  under  Pain  of  Dananalion  ; 
what  will  become  of  your  Demonilraiion  ? 

Eudox.  Why  faith,  like  a  difabled  Soldier,  it  fliall 
trudge  to  Chelfea,  and  take  up  with  the  Invalids  ;  for 
Arguments  that  have  receiv'd  on  Duty  Scars,  deferves 
Confideration  as  well  as  Soldiers.  Prove  he  has  reveal'd 
one,  and  I  am  yours. 

Er:feb.  Expcdl  not  a  general  Mufter  of  thofe  Argu- 
ments Chrjftian  Divines  draw  into  the  Field  againft  in- 
fidels ;  this  is  a  Task  above  my  Force,  and  requires 
much  Application ;  nor  does  our  Controverfy  require 
it ;  for  my  prefent  Bofinefs  is  not  to  convince  you,  that 
Chriftianity  is  evidently  true,  or  evidently  credible  ;  but 
only,  that  it's  probable,  at  leaft,  God  has  reveal'd  it, 
and  commands  all  Nations  to  embrace  it.  If  I  candif- 
charge  my  feif  of  this  Attempt  with  Succefs,  my  Defign 
is  at  an  End. 

Wells  Sir,  there  are  Chriftians  in  the  World  ;  and  if 
we  walic  back  into  paft  Ages,  we  fhall  ^nd  that  Jesus 
Christ  was  their  Founder;  thisisaTrutii  that  admits  of 
no  Debate:  It  cannot  be  queftion'd  by  thole  that  aft  like 
Men,  and  yield  to  Evidence.  This  Jesus  was  born  in 
a  Stable,  and  paft  thirty  Years  in  Poverty  and  Obfcurity. 
Then  he  began  to  preach,  and  confirm'd  his  Doctrine 
with  Prodigies ;  he  gave  Health  to  the  Sick,  Light  to 
the  Blind,  and  even  Life  to  the  Dead  ;  At  laft  he  died 
by  Man's  Malice,  and  reviv'd  the  third  Day  by  his  own 
Power  ;  he  fent  twelve  Fifhermen  to  fubdue  the  World 
to  the  Law  of  the  Gofpel ;  they  obey'd  his  Command  ; 
Succefs  waited  on  their  Labour,  and  crown'd  their  En- 
deavours ;  fo  that  in  fome  Years  the  Chriltian  Religion 
fpread  its  Conqueft  beyond  the  Bounds  of  the  Romayi 
Empire.  Prejudice,  Liberiinifm  and  Atheiim  confpir'd 
its  Ruin.  Philofjphers  oppos'd  Arguments,  Emperors 
Torments,  and  Libertines  the  (;^mnipotent  Attradlives  of 
Senfuality.  Y'et  Chri{lianityjlJroke  through  the  Violence 
of  the  Oppolitions,  it  mukiply'd  by  Difputes,  and  en- 
creas'd  by  Perfecution.  Ten  Millions  of  Martyrs  loft 
their  Lives  in  the  Quarrel ;  they  demonitrated  the  Truth  of 
their  Creed,  by  the  Conftancy  of  their  invincible  Valour ; 
and  though  they  funk  under  the  Excefs  of  Torments,  they 
evercarae;  nay,  oftentimesby  the  Force  of  Miracles  they 

turn'd 


turn'd  the  very  Executioners  into  Confeffions,  and  the 
Tyrants  into  Martyrs.  In  fine,  Chriftian  Religion  has 
always  appear'd  holy,  always  victorious,  always  attack'd 
by  the  impious,  and  always  triumphant  over  Impiety. 

Now,  if  we  confider  the  Means  Chrift  made  uie  of 
to  raife  this  Empire  over  the  Hearts  and  Confciences  of 
Men,  we  (hall  find  them  diametrically  oppofite  to  all  the 
Rules  of  human  Policy,  and  had  not  this  great  Defign 
been  jfirft  laid,  and  then  carried  on  by  God  himfelf,  it 
mull  have  prov'd  an  abortive  Embryon^  i.  e.  an  Attempt 
conmv'd  without  Prudence,  and  foUow'd  by  Difap- 
pointment. 

Firji,  The  Articles  to  be  believ'd  were  extraordinary, 
and  rather  feem'd  to  revolt  the  Underltanding,  than  to 
deferve  Credit.  A  God  ;  One  in  EfTence,  and  Three  in 
Perfons,  appear'd  a  Paradox  in  the  Pofition;  and  God 
made  Man  a  Blafphemy  to  the  Jews^  and  a  Folly  to  the 
Gentiles. ,  Tho'  the  Refurredion  of  the  Dead  might  be 
good  News  to  the  virtuous,  yet  it  could  meet  with  no 
kind  Reception  from  the  vicious ;  it  was  more  capable 
to  enflame  their  Anger,  than  to  work  upon  their  Belief^ 
and  to  make  them  Enemies,  than  Abettors.  .^ 

Secondly^  The  Precepts  of  Morality  crofs  more  on 
Senfe,  than  the  Credenda  feem  to  clafli  with  Reafon  : 
They  bridle  the  Sallies  of  corrupt  Nature,  and  not  only 
put  a  Reftraint  upon  our  Actions,  but  even  on  our  De- 
fires :  They  regulate  every  Motion,  and  bind  up  every 
Appetite  to  its  good  Behaviour ;  they  inculcate  nothing 
but  Mortification,  Perfecution  and  Self-abnegation  in  this 
World,  and  referve  Pleafures  for  the  future.  They 
brought  into  the  World  a  new  Syftem  of  Morality, 
they  condemn'd-  thefe  Vices  which  Senfuality  had  deified, 
and  canoniz'd  thole  Virtues  that  were  perfecuted  by 
fome,  unknown  to  others,  and  condemn'd  by  all.  Na- 
ture indeed  bids  us  love  our  Friends,  but  Chrift  com- 
mands us  to  ftretch  our  Affections  to  our  Enemies:  We 
muft  return  Favours  for  Injuries,  Kindnefs  for  Hatred, 
and' revenge  Affronts  with  Pardon:  We  muft  place  our 
Wealth  in  Poverty,  our  Glory  in  Ignominy,  and  our  Am- 
bition in  the  Conqueft  of  Heaven.  Such  mortifying  Do- 
ctrine in  all  Probability  was  more  likely  to  fcare  People 
from  Chriftianity,  than  to  draw  'em  to  it;  and  no  doubt 
?.S  Gamaliel  faid,  it  had  began  and  §nded  at  the  fame 

S  4  Time; 


164       7%e  Gentleman  Itjjruffed. 

Time ;  its  Rife  and  its  Fall  would  have  had  but  one 
Epcque,  had  not  God  by  the  divine  Influence  of  his 
Grace,  conquer'd  the  rebellious  Hearts  of  iMen,  whilft 
the  Apoftles  fet  upon  their  Underltanding  with  the  Force 
of  Rcafon  and  Miracles;  th^t  Mahomeiilm  Ihou Id  di- 
late it  felf  to  a  prodigious  Extent,  is  not  llrange  ;  it  at- 
tacks Men  on  their  vi'eak  Side,  its  Maxims  fawn  on  Na- 
ture, and  flatter  Senfuality;  it  permits  Crimes,  and  pro- 
rnifes  Impunity ;  and  yet  it  was  propagued  by  the  Sword, 
and  prefi'd  on  Mank  nd  by  Fire,  and  Devaftation  ;  it 
went  no  farther  than  the  Barhnrians  Coiiqueft:  And  the 
Levant^  with  part  oi  the  Indies  were  Slaves  before  they 
became  Mahometaas :  But  the  Increafe  of  Chriftianity 
is  owing  neither  to  Armies,  nor  Battles;  it  overcame  the 
World  by  fuftering  Humility  and  Perfecution  ;  and  God 
made  ufe  of  poor,  ignorant,  and  weak  Men,  for  the  ac- 
complifhing  this  great  Defign,  that  his  Fower  might  ap- 
pear the  greater. 

Now,  that  what  I  have  to]d  you  is  true,  w  hat  Surety 
do  you  require?  To  bid  me  fhew  you  thcfe  Matter§  of 
Fadt  is  ehilJifh  i  to  call  for  a  Mathematical  Demonftra- 
tion  i<:  ridiculous;  and  both  impcfliule:  We  cannot  be 
aflur'd  of  Things  p  .ft,  but  by  or:.l  cr  written  1  radiiion  ; 
both  which  Hand  Lr  me.  I  cun  bring  you  A  vouchers  of 
all  Ages,  and  of  all  Countries:  Some  writ  what  they 
faw,  and  feal'd  their  Writing  with  their  Blood  ;  others 
have  hrnied  dovi'ii  to  Pofterity  what  they  receiv'd  from 
their  Predeceflbrs:  In  a  Word,  a  Man  that  will  not  be- 
lieve Fafts  contain'd  in  my  fhort  Account,  by  the  fame 
Rule  mull  believe  nothing;  but  to  uave  farther  Difpute, 
and  not  to  enter  into  the  valt  Oceim  of  thit.  Controver- 
fy  ;  I  will  only  defire  you  to  grant,  that  'ti»  probable 
Chriftian  Religion  was  reveal'd  by  God. 

Eudox.  Well,  I  grant  your  Rtqueft,  but  then  wcfhall 
be  juft  where  we  were ;  for  ftill  hair  your  Task  will  re-» 
main  usdone:  For  tho'  God  has  reveal'd  this  Religion, 
by  what  Logic  will  you  infer,  that  he  comoiands  all  Men 
to  embrace  it  ? 

Eufeb.  I  thank  you  for  mindirgmeof  my  Duty,  and 
I  will  difcharge  my  felf  of  it  in  a  Moment.  Firft, 
Chrift  bids  his  Apoftles  promulge  his  Law  to  all  Nations; 
Then  he  fays,  that  thofe  who  are  baptiz'd  and  believe, 
fhall  be  fav'd  j   but  thofe  wbo  will  not  believe,  fhall  b$ 

con- 


The  GENTtiMAN  InjlruEld,      26^ 

condemned ;  that  he  will  laugh  at  ihofc  before  the  An- 
gels, whofhall  blufh  toconfelshis  Name  on  Eirih:  In 
fine,  his  Apoftle  tells  us,  we  can  be  fav'd  in  no  other 
Name  but  that  of  Jefus  Chrijl.  Thefe  Paffagc^  prove 
my  'Thejii  without  the  trouble  of  Inference;  th:y  arc 
plain  without  Glofs  or  Comment. 

Eudox.  Right,  if  you  can  afliire  me  the  Places  yoii 
quote  are  canonical^  id  eft^  either  deliver'd  by  Chrift,  or 
at  his  Command,  by  hisApoftles. 

Eu^eb.  Why,  Sir,  you  can  no  more  queftion  the  Pla- 
ces I  cite,  than  the  very  Exiftence  of  Chrill,  and  of  his 
Apoftles ;  for  they  Hand  on  the  fame  Botton  :  Tradition 
that  eftablifhes  the  one,  confirms  the  other. 

Eudox.  Well,  well,  goon. 

Euj'eb.  Thus  much  therefore  I  have  gain'd ;  *tis  doubt- 
ful whether  the/e  be  a  God  or  no :  'Tis  doubtful  whether 
Chrtjiiun  Religion  be  not  the  onlyfavi»g  Religion  in  the 
World, 

Theo.  You  have  ;  pray  make  your  Advantage. 

Eufeb.  I  will.  Sir,  and  hope  to  improve  my  Advantage 
fo  far,  as  to  demonitrale  that  Atheifts  and  Latitudina- 
rians  feem  to  lofe  their  Reafon  the  firll  Moment  they  a- 
buleit;  and  that,  tho'  they  pretend  to  fquare  their  Be- 
lief and  Condudl  by  the  Rules  of  the  molt  refin'd  Pru- 
dence, they  fail  mod  wretchedly  in  the  Execution. 

Theo.  I  perceive,  £Wca/<i,  wemufi;  prefently  away  to 
Beihlem-y  it  will  not  be  amifs  to  lay  in  Provifions  befor-e 
hand :  But,  Eufehias^  you  have  much  Bufinefs  on  your 
Hands,  and  before  that  be  difpatch'd  your  Head  may  be  ia 
fomeDiforderallb  :  To  your  Task,  if  you  pleafe. 


DIALOGUE    V. 

It  being  fuppofed  doubtful^  whether  there  be  a  Godj, 
or  whether  all  Religions  are  faving  :  The  Atbeijls 
and  LatitHdinarians  expoje  themfelves  to  extream 
Hazard. 

Eufeb.'^r  E  are  agreed  at  prefent,  Theomachm.,  that 

both  thefe  Propofitions  are  uncertain :   There 

is  a  God  J  there  is  no  God',  andygu,  Eudoxusy  are  on  the 

fame 


266      7%e  Gentleman  Injfrufhd. 

fame  Terms  with  me  concerning  thefe  two :  Any  Religion 
is  faving.  The  Chrijiian  Religion  alone  is  faving :  If 
therefore  it  be  true  there  is  a  Go  J;  'tis  certainly  falfe 
there  is  no  God ;  but  then  if  it  be  true  there  is  no  God,  by 
the  fame  Rule  'tis  falfe  there  is  a  God :  Again,  if  it  be 
true  all  Religions  are  faving ;  then  'tis  falfe  the  Chrijiian 
Religion  aloKe  is  faving :  but  if  it  be  true  the  Chrijiian 
Religion  alone  is  faving  ;  then  'tis  alfo  falfe  all  Religions 
are  faving:  For  God  who  can  do  all  things,  difowns  the 
Power  of  placing  Truth  in  both  Members  of  a  Contra- 
(di(5lion.     Now,  Gentlemen,  I  enter  upon  my  Proof. 

When  two  uncertain  Opinions  lie  before  me,  I  am 
oblig'd  by  all  the  Laws  of  Prudence,  to  chufc  that  which 
cannot  prejudice  me  m^uch,  tho*  it  chance  to  be  falfe,  and 
will  turn  to  my  Advantage  if  it  happen  to  be  true ;  and 
on  the  contrary,  'tis  an  infallible  Symptom  of  a  crazy 
Judgment,  toclofewith  that,  which,  tho'  true,  promifes 
an  inconfiderable  Gain,  and  threatens  me  with  Ruin  and 
Deftrud^ion,  if  falfe.  This  may  be  laid  down  as  a  Poftu- 
latum  for  Practice,  and  is  no  lefs  evident,  than  any  Axiom 
In  Malhematicks  is  for  Theory.  By  this  Compafs  the 
•wife  Statjfman  fteers  his  Courfe;  by  this  Card  the  thriv- 
ing Merchant'fiils,  and  the  cunning  Gamefter  models  his 
Play  by  this  infallible  Maxim.  A  wife  Prince,  before  he 
engages  in  an  Expedition,  draws  up  the  whole  Profpedt  of 
Gain,  in  cafe  Succefs  crowns  his  Enterprize;  and  that  of 
Lofs,  in  cafe  it  end  in  Difappointment  and  Mifcarriage  ; 
he  weighs  his  Hopes  with  his  Fears  ;  the  Hazard  of  lo- 
fuig,  with  the  Probability  of  gaining;  and  will  never  em- 
bark himfelf  in  an  Enterprize  hand  over  Head :  When  he 
inovvf,  thoug-'h  Succefs  follows  his  Standard,  he  fhall  only 
mailer  an  inconfiderable  Village,  or  a  contemptible 
Town  ;  but  if  it  flits  over  to  his  Enemies,  his  whole 
Kingdom  will  be  the  Reward  of  their  Vidtory,  and  the 
Price  of  his  Defeat:  On  the  other  fide,  if  a  Prince  falls 
upon  his  Neighbour,  at  leaft  with  equal  Forces,  and 
knows,  if  Fortune  favours  his  Arms,  he  fhall  fubdue  a 
K^ingdom ;  and  though  it  frowns  he  can  only  lofe  an  a- 
bandon'd  Bourg,  and  perchance  not  even  that ;  in  this 
Cafe,  tho'  he  be  difappointed  of  Succefs,  he  carries  off 
the  Title  of  Wife  and  Prudent ;  he  play'd  his  Game  well, 
though  he  loft  the  Sett;  and  every  Man  muft  be  fo  juft 
to  his  Merit,  as  to  confefs  his  venture  was  prudent,  tho' 
not  fuccefsful.  A  Mer- 


'fhe  Gentleman  Tnftru^ed,     2.57 

A  Merchant  manages  wjth  Prudence  and  Caution  his 
Affairs,  when  he  has  brought  the  whole  Myftery  of  Tra- 
ding to  fuch  a  Point,  that  his  Gain  may  be  excellive,  and 
his  Lofs  cannot  be  confiderable :  But  fhould  a  Man  of 
Traffick  and  Commerce  put  twenty  thoufand  Pounds  a- 
board  a  leaky  Vellel,  and  fend  it  to  the  Indies,  through 
as  many  Dangers  as  there  are  Shelves  in  the  Sea,  or 
Winds  in  the  Compafs,  with  the  bare  Hopes  of  gaining 
Six-pence  ;  would  not  -you,  and  all  the  World  poll  him 
up  for  a  Madman  ?  Would  you  not  think  him  fitter  to 
lie  in  Bethlem,  than  to  walk  on  the  Exchange  ? 

Theum.  Yes  furely,  I  would  judge  him  very  rich,  or 
fuperlativeiy  foolifli ;  and  would  duck  and  drake  away 
my  Money,  rather  than  confide  it  to  his  keeping. 

Eufeb.  Should  a  Man  lay  me  ten  to  one  at  Crofs  or 
Pile;  I  fuppofe  you  would  call  me  wif*  if  I  took  the 
Bett  ?  But  then,  iflfhould  turn  the  Tables,  and  ftake  a 
Million  againft  a  Farthing ;  would  you  not  brand  me  with 
Folly  and  Extravagance  ?  Would  you  not  conclude,  that 
either  I  knew  not  the  true  Value  of  Money,  or  thought 
it  a  Burthen  ?  For,  at  this  rate,  I  fliould  drain  a  Trea- 
fure  in  a  Moment,  greater  than  that  oi Potoji,  and  turn 
Bankrupt  in  fpight  of  good  Luck  itfelf. 

"Theom.  You  can  run  out  in  Politions  that  are  un- 
doubtedly true:  Pray  wheel  about  to  the  Application; 
methinks  you  llioot  at  Random. 

Eufeb.  I  am  for  you  prefently  ;  iVhen  two  Propojitions 
are  uncertain,  by  the  Rules  of  Prudence  you  ought  to  chufe 
that  which  cannot  prejudice  you,  thtP  it  chance  to  b^  falfe  j 
and  will  infallibly  turn  to  your  Advantage,  if  it  prove  true. 
On  the  contrary,  'tis  an  extream  piece  of  Folly  to  regulate 
your  Conduct  by  that  Opinion  which  will  lead  you  into  Ruin 
and  Defiruiiion,  iffalfe  ;  and  cannot  better  your  Fortune^ 
or  improve  your  Interejl,  though  true.  Now,  thofePropo- 
fitions  are  luppos'd  by  us  uncertain  ;  There  is  a  God; 
There  is  no  God :  All  Religions  are  faving  ;  only  the 
Chrijiian  Religion  is  faving.  You  are  therefore  both 
oblig'd  in  Prudence  to  embrace  thofe  Opinions  which 
will  prove  highly  advantageous  to  you,  if  true  ;  and  will 
bring  no  Difadvantage,  if  falfe. 

Theom.  We  lubfcribe  to  your  Conclufion. 

Eufeb.  But  you  embrace  thofe  Opinions,  which,  iffalfe, 
hurry  you  into  eternarMifery  ^  and,  if  true,  are  not  able 

to 


%6%       T!^/?  Gentleman  Inflni&ed. 

*o  advantage  your  Happinefs :  What  then  remains  but 
this  Confequencc ;  that  you  both  forfake  there  glorious 
Rules  of  Prudence  and  Reafon  fo  much  extolled  by  A- 
theifts  and  Latitudinarians,  and  never  regarded  when 
they  adt  by  their  own  Principles. 

Theo.  Ho,  Sir !  You  have  been  poring  on  Monfieur 
Pafcal;  at  leaft  you  are  not,  I  am  fureof  the  Society; 
for  thofe  good  Fathers  will  not  ftoop  fo  low  as  to  take  up 
Arguments  at  fecond  Hand,  or  to  ufe  Weapons  beaten 
on  that  Gentleman's  Anvil. 

Eufeb,  Under  Favour ;  Argumentsare  not  like  Cioaths, 
the  worfe  for  ufing ;  Nay,  methinks  a  Proof  that  has 
been  on  frequent  Service,  is  like  thofe  veteran  Soldiers, 
who  neither  ftart  at  the  Noife  of  Muskets,  nor  the  Re- 
port of  Cannons.  Sir,  let  us  not  wake  Monfieur  Pafcaly 
he  ileeps  quietly  in  his  Grave  j  and  if  he  has  laid  Crimes 
at  the  Jefuits  door  they  were  not  guilty  of,  he  has  long 
fmce  cry'd  peccavi ;  he  has  anfwer'd  for  his  Letters  at 
God's  Tribunal,  and  either  receives  Hell  for  the  Punifh- 
jnent,  or  Heaven  for  the  Reward  of  his  Labours :  Tho' 
fome  have  queftion'd  his  Charity,  no  Man  ever  doubted 
of  his  Wit  J  and  I  am  pretty  well  convinc'd  he  prefs'd 
the  Atheift  more  Home  with  this  Argument,  than  he 
pinch'd  the  Jefuits  with  his  Dialogues.  However,  let  us 
ftep  foftly  over  him;  the  Gentlemen  of  Port-Royal zm 
good  Friends,  but  dangerous  Enemies;  and  if  you  attack 
one,  you  draw  the  whole  Fraternity  upon  you. 

Theo.  Well,  Sir,  I  deny,  tho'thisPropofitionbe  falfe, 
there  is  no  God,  I  can  receive  any  Difadvantage. 

Etidox.  And  I  am  of  the  fame  Opinion,  tho' this  hap- 
pen to  be  falfe,  all  Religions  are  faviifg. 

Eufeb.  Let  us  then,  for  the  prefent,  fuppofe  this  Pro- 
pofition  is  falfe,  there  is  no  God;  therefore  this  is  true, 
there  is  a  God:  Now  if  there  be  a  God,  he  isjuft. 

Theo.  He  is. 

Eufeh.  Therefore  he  muft,  and  will  punifh  thofe  who 
tranfgrefs  his  Law,  and  queftion  his  Authority  :  For  he 
adls  no  lefs  againft  the  Laws  of  Juftice,  who  winks  at 
Crimes,  than  he  who  martyrs  Innocence  :  This  we  call 
Tyranny  and  Oppreflion,  that  criminal  Indulgence 
and  Partiality ;  both  ckfh  with  Juftice  ;  the  one  exceeds 
a  Mean,  the  other  falls  fhort  of  it :  Now  God  cannot  a6t 
with  Jufticcjunlcfs  the  Puniflimenrfcearsfome  Propoi^tioa 

with 


fhe  Gentleman  Ittftru^ed.      16^ 

with  the  Offence :  Seeing  therefore  there  is  an  infinite 
jbiftance  between  the  Offender  and  the  Perfon  offended, 
the  Puniihment  muft  be  in  fome  fort  infinite  ;  but  it 
cannot  be  infinite  in  Intention;  therefore  it  muflbe'in 
Extenfion,  or  Continuance. 

Befides,  the  Lives  of  the  mofl  refin*d  Debauchees  run 
on  in  a  never-interrupted  Series  of  Profperity  j  they  nei- 
ther groan  under  the  Fangs  of  Sicknefs,  nor  the  ThxovfS 
of  Poverty  ;  they  enjoy  the  Bleffing  of  Health,  and  wal- 
iovi^  in  Abundance  ;  their  Undertakings,  though  laid 
with  Folly,  come  off  with  Succefs ;  and  fo  they  carry, 
off  Profit  and  Applaufe,  though  their  Conduct  deferves 
Difappolntment  and  Contempt ;  they  fail  on  profper- 
ouily  with  all  Winds  ;  and  if  fometimes  they  ftick  upon 
a  Rock,  they  only  perceive  the  Danger  to  get  off  with 
I'leafure.  Now  feeing  God  is  juft,  and  does  not  drag; 
out  thefe  Malefadlors  to  Execution  in  this  World,  'tis 
clear  they  will  feel  the  Weight  of  his  juft  Refentmcnt  in 
the  other.  So  that,  Theontachus^  if  there  be  a  God, 
you  fee  what  awaits  you  hereafter,  Juilice,  Revenge, 
Torments,  and  Mifery. 

But  then,  if  Chriftian  Religion  be  true,  and  the  on- 
ly faving  Religion  in  the  World,  the  Scene  is  fhifted 
from  bad  to  worfe,  from  Horror  to  Amazement ;  and 
yon^Eudoxus^zxt  in  the  fameMisfortune  with  your  Friends 
Though  the  Light  of  Nature  tells  us  God  will  crown  his 
Friends  in  the  next  World,  and  chaftife  his  Enemies  ;  yet 
the  Light  of  Nature  cannot  particularize  either  the  Re- 
wards or  Punifhments*  This  Arcanum  we  owe  to  Divine 
Revelation  alone,  and  we  have  Grounds  fufficient,  at 
leaft,  to  make  it  highly  probable  he  has  reveal'd  it  ;  and 
if  it  be  true,  that  he  has,  the  Atheift  and  Latitudinarian 
play  Croj\  and  Pile  at  an  exceffive  Difadvantage  ;  they 
Itake  an  Eternity  of  Happinefs,  and  another  of  Mifery 
againft  a  Bauble  ;  for  they  cannot  lofe  the  firft  without 
falling  foul  on  the  fecond  ;  like  accurfed  Cain^  they 
will  be  banifh'd  from  the  Face  of  God,  and  carry  on 
their  Foreheads  a  perpetual  Mark  of  his  Vengeance, 
and  their  Reprobation :  They  will  fry  in  Pitch  and  Flame, 
in  Brimf^one  without  Pity,  without  Compaffion,  and, 
what  is  worfe,  without  Term,  without  Annihilation  ; 
and  can  Fancy  frame  a  greater  Torment,  than  always  to 
be  barr'd  of  the  Sight  9f  God  i*  And  always  to  defire  a 

Glimofe 


1J0      IH'e  Gentleman  Injiru^ed, 

Glimpfe  of  that  infinite  Beauty,  than  always  to  burn 
and  rags  with  Devils,  and  always  to  dc'fpair  of  Releafe- 
ment  fto  thefe  ftrange  Misfortunes  do  Atheifts  and  La- 
titudinarians  expo fe  them felves,  if  there  be  a  God ;  and 
ifChriJlian  Religion  be  the  only  favi»^  Religion  in  the 
World;  and,  for  ought  you  know,  both  may  be  true. 

"theo.  You  follow  your  Adverlaries  with  fo  much 
Pleat,  that  you  wound  your  felfin  thePurfuit;  your  ve- 
ry Arguments  deltroy  your  Hypothefis ;  and  whilft  you 
fuppofe  there  may  be  a  God,  you  very  learnedly  demon- 
Itrate  there  is  none. 

Eufeb.  You  have  a  mind  to  fport,  but  Jefts  never  im- 
prove into  Arguments,  nor  can  Raillery  grow  up  into 
Reafon. 

Theo.  Sir,  you  miftake,  I  am  not  in  ajeftingHumour : 
Pray,  if  there  be  a  God,  is  he  not  merciful? 

Eufeb.  He  is. 

theo.  And  if  you  fuppofe  a  God,  and  at  the  fame  time 
prove,  that  he  is  cmjuft,  unmerciful,  nay,  tyrannical  and 
lavage ;  do  you  not  pull  down  with  one  Hand,  what  you 
raife  with  the  other  ?  Does  not  your  Proof  fly  in  the 
Face  of  your  Pofition  ?  You  fay,  if  there  be  a  God,  I 
fhall  feel  the  Weight  of  his  exafperated  Anger  for  all  Eter- 
nity :  I  fhall  glow  in  Pitch,  and  boil  in  Brimftone :  What 
is  this  but  to  clap  the-  moft  exorbitant  Tyranny  on  Mer- 
cy it  felf?  To  blend  Cruelty  with  Meeknefs  ?  Barbarity 
with  Juftice  ?  To  fink  infinite  Mercy  into  Cruelty  ?  And 
to  turn  God  into  a  Chimera  ? 

You  may  perchance  fcare  poor  Children,  or  filly  Wo- 
men with  your  Quevedo's  Vifions  of  HelU  and  fwell  his 
Fancies  into  divine  Revelation  ;  but  Men  are  not  fo  eafily 
impos'd  upon.  I  know,  if  there  be  a  God,  he  is  merciful ; 
and  that  it  is  not  Mercy's  Office  to  butcher,  but  to  par- 
don :  Befides,  you  confefs,  that  God  is  the  Model  of  all 
Perfedlion ;  that  our  Virtue  is  but  a  dark  Beam  of  his. 
How  then  can  he  command  us,  as  you  fay  he  does,  to  re- 
venge Affronts  with  Favours  ?  To  lay  down  our  Lives  for 
our  Enemies;  when  he  profecutes  his  with  Racks  and 
Flames  ?  Either  therefore  there  is  no  Hell,  or  no  Mercy, 
in  God ;  and  then  there  will  be  no  God :  Take  which 
part  of  the  Dilemma  you  pleafe ;  I  fliiU  be  pretty  fecure 
againll  future  Contingencies :  So  that  you  fee  we  Atheifts 
and  Libertines  "walk  on  more  even  Ground  than  you  ima- 
gine. '  Eufebi 


I'he  Gentleman  InJlruM.      lyt 

Eufeh.  I  mightTeturn  your  own  Argument  upon  you  ; 
and  fhew  that  you  run  his  Mercy  fo  high,  that  you  quite 
difcardhis  Juftice:  But  I  will  wave  this  Advantage,  and 
lingle  out  your  Reafons,  which  rather  amaze,  than  con- 
vince. You  fay  God's  Goodnefs  hinders  him  from  taking 
any  cognizance  of  Crimes  in  the  next  World  ;  there- 
fore it  is  lawful  to  trample  upon  his  Majefty,  to  controul 
his  Orders,  and  to  fpurn  at  his  Commands :  He  who  fo 
dotes  on  our  Perfons,  cannot  revenge  the  Offences ; 
therefore  Blafphemy,  Murders,  Adulteries,  and  all 
thofe  Crimes  that  outrage  Nature,  and  put  even  Atheifts 
to  the  Blufli,  are  but  indifferent  Aifbions ;  they  have  no 
more  harm  than  what  flows  from  Vifion,  Prejudice,  and 
Imagination ;  for  were  they  Crimes,  they  would  deferve 
Punifhment  in  the  next  World  :  Now  Mercy  ties  God's 
Hands,  according  to  your  new  Syftem,  and  abfolves  the 
Criminal.  Hence  it  follows,  that  feeing  no  Adf  ion  de- 
ferves  Punifhment,  no  Aftions  are  Crimes;  and  bycon- 
fequence  there  is  no  Law,  for  every  Crime  is  a  Tranf- 
grelTion  of  the  Law.  This  is  a  comfortable  Do6lrine  for 
Whores  and  Rogues,  and  you  deferve  a  Penlion  from 
Goals  and  Baudy-houfes.  Such  Helps  as  thefe  keep  up 
the  Trade,  inrich  the  Hangman,  and  break  down  all  the 
Barriers  of  Shame,  to  let  into  the  World  a  Deluge  of 
Lewdnefs  and  Abominations.  Thus  whilfl  you  plead 
for  God's  Mercy,  you  folicit  for  Vice,  and  turn  Advo- 
cate for  Impiety. 

I  grant  God  is  good  and  merciful ;  and  we  need  no 
other  Evidence  to  illuftrate  this  Truth,  but  that  you 
breathe  and  enjoy  the  common  Blefling  of  Mankind  : 
Had  not  God  rather  foUow'd  the  mild  Inclinations  of  his 
Mercy,  than  the  more  fevere  Laws  of  his  Juftice,  Pu- 
nifhment had  trod  on  the  Heels  of  your  Crimes ;  he  had 
tore  you  from  your  Debaucheries,  in  flagranti^  and  left 
not  a  Moment  between  the  Sin  and  your  Damnation: 
But,  Sir,  he  has  forgone  his  Right,  and  taken  more  mild 
Methods ;  he  has  bore  your  Infolence  thefe  many  Years 
with  Patience,  and  call'd  you  to  Repentance,  when  he 
might  have  deliver'd  you  over  to  Punilliment :  No,  I  am 
told  what  bold  Returns  of  Ingratitude  you  have  made 
for  this  exceflive  Kindnefs :  You  have,  more  than  once, 
in  the  very  Face  of  the  Sun,  to  the  Scandal  not  only  of 
Religion,  but  of  Humanity,  fpit  iu  the  Face  of  this  in- 
finite 


i^i     ^he  Gentle ^fAN  InJIruifeJ. 

£nite  Mercy :  You  have  burlefqued  his  Goodnefs,  and 
profanely  deny'd  he  ever  faw  your  Crimes,  or  hated  'em  ; 
becaule  he  did  not  revense  them  on  the  Spot,  and  put 
an  end  to  your  Life  and  lilafphemies  the  fame  JVloment: 
Yet  after  all  thefe  flaming  Attempts  againft  his  Preroga- 
tive, and  Perlbn,  you  not  only  live,  but  receive  continu- 
al Favours  from  his  Munificence  j  he  experts  only  apee- 
cavi  to  feal  your  Pardon,  and  to  cancel  your  Offences; 
but  if  you  ^N''^\  ftand  to  your  abominable  Principles,  and 
droll  upon  his  Menaces  ;  if  you  will  pufh  on  Obftinacy 
to  the  Grave,  he  v\'ill  foften  your  hard  Heart  in  Flames, 
and  teach  you,  by  a  difmal  Experience,  that  he  wants  not 
Mercy,  but  that  you  do  not  deferve  to  feel  the  Effeds 
©f  fo  amiable  an  Attribute. 

In  fhort,  God  is  good,  becaufe  he  created  fo  vile  2 
Creature  as  Man,  to  fo  high  a  Fortune,  becaufe  when 
our  firft  Parent  Adam  withdrew  himfelf  from  Duty,  and 
engag'd  his  whole  Pofterity  in  open  Rebellion,  he  was 
pleabM  to  aflbme  our  Nature,  to  expiate  our  Sins-with  his 
Elood,  and  to  breathe  into  our  Souls  a  new  Life  of  Grace 
by  hisDeath  ;  bee  ufe  he  fets  a  thoufand  Wheels  on  work, 
to  draw  b.Tck  Sinners  to  Repentanccj  and  generally  gives 
them  Time,  and  always  Grace,  to  look  into  their  irregu- 
lar Conduft,  and  to  deleft  it:  Thefe  are  undoubted 
Marks  of  a  moft  folid  Goodnefs ;  and  by  this  Square  God 
commands  us  to  model  our  Behaviour  towards  our  Ene- 
mies, and  he  has  laid  before  us  fo  complcat  a  Pattern,  that 
we  fhall  never  be  able  to  reach  it. 

But  then  God  has  regard  to  Juftice,  even  when  he 
feems  to  abandon  him  felt  totally  to  the  Condudl  of  Mer- 
cy ;  for  thefe  Perfections  which  ftand  at  the  Helm  of 
Government  are  never  at  Variance  ;  their  Advice  is  uni- 
form, and  bothconfpire  to  banifii  Confufion,  and  to  efta- 
blifh  Order ;  for  God's  A'lercy  is  nothing  elfe,  but  a  fin- 
cere  Intention  to  procure  a  Creature  good,  fo  far  only 
as  Order  will  permit :  Therefore,  when  a  Creature  has 
difturb'd  this  Order,  God's  Mercy  purfues  the  Crimi- 
nal, he  olfcrs  him  his  Grace,  and  invites  him  a  thoufand 
times  to  re-eftabl  fh  by  Repentance,  the  Order  he  had 
broken  by  his  Dilobedience:  And  then,  if  he  will  not 
he;irken  to  thefe  kind  Exhortations,  Juftice  forces  him 
to  re- fettle  it  by  Torments ;  for  God,  tho'  he  be  Omni- 
potent, cannot  permit  Diforder;  He  muft  either  deftroy 

is 


fhe  G  E  N  t  L  E  :M  A  N  Injfru^ed,      :ly^ 

it  in  Time,  by  forgiving  Sins,  or  in  Eternity,  by  punifh- 
ing  them.  In  fine.  Sir,  Mercy  governs  in  this  World, 
but  its  Commiflion  extends  not  to  the  other  ;  ibere  Ju- 
ftice  reigns  alone,  and  either  diftributes  Rewards  or  in- 
Aids  Puniftiment.  Much  good  therefore  may  your  Di- 
lemma do  you :  There  is  a  God,  arid  He  is  merciful ; 
there  is  a  God,  arid  He  is  jufi.  If  that  be  a  Pei-fedtion, 
fo  is  this,  nor  are  they  incompatible :  For  tho'  one  Vice 
may  jarr  with  another,  Virtues  are  of  a  more  peaceable 
Complexion,  they  live  in  Union,  and  can  lodge  in  the 
fame  Breaft. 

Theom.  I  don't  deny,  but  that  OfFenc.es  againfb  the 
divine  Majefty  may  deferve  fome  Punifliment  ;  and  I 
know  that  if  there  be  a  God,  he  has  Power  to  chaftize 
as  well  as  to  reward  ;  but  an  eternal  Punifhment  is  very 
lafting,  and  looks  more  like  an  Adl  of  Tyranny  than 
Juftice.  I  could  allow  well  enough  of  a  round  Fit  of 
the  Gout,  or  Stone ;  or  let  God  punifti  my  Crimes  on 
my  Cattle  with  Murrains,  Plagues  and  Mortality,  I  am 
contented :  But  an  eternal  Torment  for  one  efcape  of 
Nature,  for  one  Sally  of  Paffion,  can  only  proceed  from 
Excefs  of  Cruelty. 

Eufeb.  We  fliould  live  Under  a  moft  happy  Govern- 
ment, were  all  our  Judges  of  your  foft  Difpofition  ;  what 
merry  Days  fhould  we  enjoy  if  Murtherers  were  only  pil- 
lory'd  ?  Sodomites  whipt?  And  Tray  tors  confin'd  to  their 
Lodgings  ?  Such  fevere  Laws,  would  no  doubt  difarm 
Vice,  difcourage  Villany,  and  put  all  Roguery  out  of 
Countenance.  But,  Sir,  tell  me,  would  not  fuch  over- 
llrain'd  Mercy  let  loofe  the  whole  Kennel  of  Abominati- 
ons ?  Would  it  not  cut  off  all  the  Lines  of  Communica- 
tion between  Man  and  Man,  and  turn  all  into  a  Heap  of 
Gonfulion  ?  Would  not  you  judge  thofe  more  guilty  who 
made  fuch  Laws,  than  thofe  who  broke  'em  ?  I  am  fure 
you  would  call  out  for  fo'me  Grains  of  Severity,  and  ap- 
ply a  more  violent  Remedy  to  cure  the  agonizing  Go- 
vernment. Yet  you  are  in  an  ill  Humour,  becaufe  God 
does  not  fteer  his  Condu6l  by  thofe  condefcending  Me- 
thods you  condemn  ;  and  if  he  did,  you  would  as  cer- 
tainly arraign  his  Mercy,  as  now  you  impeach  his  Ju- 
ftice. In  a  Word,  Theomachus,  as  I  told  you  above, 
there  is  an  infinite  Diftance  between  God  and  Man; 
Xherefore  the  Malice  of  every  Sin  is  as  Divines  hold,  in 

'V  f©roe 


274      T^'^Gen^tlem  AN  InJlruBed, 

fome  Sort  infinite  ;  therefore  it  deferves  a  Punilhment,  in 
fome  Sort  infinite.  Butit  can  be  only  infinite  in  Dura- 
tion ;  therefore  every  mortal  Sin  deferves  an  eternal  Pu- 
nilhment. How  then  dare  you  fallen  on  God  Cruelty 
and  Barbarifm,  when  he  only  proportions  the  Pain  to  the 
O.fence.  Sir,  take  my  Advice:  'Tis  more  fecure  for 
you  to  repent,  than  to  complain  ;  'tis  Madnefs  to  play 
with  the  fupream  Being,  Ingratitude  to  treat  ill  the  beft 
of  Friends,  Frenzy  to  provoke  the  ftrongeft  Enemy. 

Theom,  Iflcnrry  God's  Mercy  too  high,  you  (Iretch 
his  Juftice  beyond  all  Proportion.  What  Equality  cm. 
you  difcover  between  a  momentary  Offence,  and  a  never- 
ending  Pain  ?  Between  a  Malice  that  has  fome  Bounds, 
and  a  Punifhment  that  has  none  ?  Methinks,  at  leaft  an 
Age  of  Torments  may  expiate  a  Day  of  unlawful  Plea- 
fure:  But  to  rack  and  torture  a  fhort-liv'd  Frailty,  eter- 
nally, is  to  flrain  Juftice  to  the  very  pitch  of  Cruelty. 

Eufeb.  No  doubt,  Juftice  always  proportions  the  Pu- 
nifliment  to  the  Offence;  but  then,  this  Proportion  can- 
not confift  in  an  equal  Duration  of  the  Crime,  and  the 
Pain.     I  have  known  a  Perjury   that  pafs'd    through  a 

D 's  Teeth  in  a  Moment,  pillory'd  a  whole  Hour: 

And  I  have  feen  the  guilty  Patient  run  the  Gantlet  from 
Newgate  Xo'Tyhurn.  Yet  tho*  the  Punifhment  was  of  a 
longer  Continuance,  than  the  Oath;  whocomplain'd  of 
Cruelty,  but  thofe  very  Rafcals  that  deferv'd  the  Cor- 
redlion  ?  Does  not  Juftice  fometimes  take  Criminals  by 
the  Ears?  And  make  the  Guilty  compound  for  their 
Tranfgreflions,with  the  Lofs  of  thofe  innocent  Members, 
which  lelJom  return  to  their  Owners,  Felons,  Muriher- 
•  ers  and  Traytors  by  ihe  Law  of  Nations  fuffer  Death, 
that  is  a  Punifhment  in  Ibme  kind  eternal :  And  if  the 
Soul  be  mortal,  as  the  Atheifts  contend,  abfolutely  fo  ; 
because  it  forces  the  Crimipals  into  a  State  of  Nothing, 
in  which  they  muft  eternally  remain.  The  Vote  of 
Mankind  runs  therefore  againlt  your  Notion  of  Equity  ; 
and  the  Aiheift's  Idea  of  Juftice  is  no  more  defenfible, 
than  his  Pradlice.  Nay,  Sir,  if  any  Crime  againft  a 
Prince  or  the  Commonwealth  can  juftly  deferve  Death, 
one  againft  God  as  juftly  deferves  Hell  eternally. 

For  as  on  the  one  Side  the  Grandeur,  Majefty,  and 
Perfedlions  of  God  furpafs  infinitely  thole  of  the  greateft 
and   rnoft  abfolute  Monarch  that  ever  breath'd :  So  on 

the 


lloe  Gentleman  Injlru^led,     275 

the  other,  our  Obligation  to  obey,  refpeft  and  love  this 
auguft  Mafter,  rifes  with  his  Greatnefs.  Therefore  an 
Offence  againft  God,  exceeds  that  againft  a  Prince,  at 
leaft  terminative  in  the  fame  Proportion  that  the  Perfedli- 
ons  of  the  one  excel  the  Bafenefs  of  the  other.  There- 
fore as  there  can  be  no  Comparifon  between  the  Offen- 
ces, there  muft  be  none  between  the  Punifhments.  Now 
let  the  Punifnment  of  a  Crime  againft  God  be  never  lo 
great,  if  it  be  not  eternal,  there  muft  of  neceffity  be  fome 
Proportion  between  it  and  Death,  the  juft  Punifhment 
of  a  Treafon  againft  the  Perfon  of  a  temporal  Prince  : 
Therefore  no  Punifliment  can  equal  an  Offence  againft 
God  unlefs  it  be  eternal. 

Theo.  You  fuppofe  when  we  recreate  Nature  we  ere6t 
a  high  Court  oj  Jujitce,  and  commiffion  the  Judge  to  ar- 
raign him  ;  this  is  a  Theological  Speculation.  No,  no, 
we  are  fo  far  from  queftioning  his  Authority,  or  impeach- 
ing his  Mnjefty,  that  we  do  not  even  think  of  him  in 
our  Debauchees;  we  intend  not  to  difpleafe  him,  but  to 
pleafe  our  Appetites,  to  regale  our  Senfes,  and  enjoy  the 
Creature. 

Eufeb.  This  is  an  excellent  Plea  for  Thieves  and  Mur- 
derers ;  and,  would  it  hold,  the  Government  might  {hut 
up  Newgate^zwA  pull  down  the  Gallows;  for  few  High- 
waymen think  of  her  Majefty,  or  her  Laws,  while  they 
murder  and  take  Purfes  on  the  Road.  Let  us  fuppoie 
one  of  thoie  Gentlemen  on  the  Ladder,  haranguing  thus 
the  Spectators.  Good  People  !  I  am  brought  to  an  un- 
timely, and,  v/hat  is  woife,  to  a  moft  fhameful  End, 
againft  all  the  Laws  of  Juftice.  I  was  brought  to  the  Bar 
for  affronting  her  Majefty:  The  Jury  has  found  me 
guilty  ;  and  the  Judge  condemn'd  me.  Now  I  proteft, 
1  never  harbour'd  an  unbcfeeming  Thought  of  her  Ma- 
jefty. I  have  ferv'd  my  Sovereign  at  the  Expence  of  my 
Blood  ;  and  was  alw  ays  ready  to  maintain  her  juft  Rights 
and  Prerogatives  with  my  Life  and  Fortune.  I  follow'd 
my  A4after  to  StecKkerk,  and  Norvjinde^  and  loft  fome 
Tlefli,  and  my  Money  in  his  Service:  At  my  return,  I 
was  put  to  my  Shifts,  and  could  meet  with  no  Relief, 
but  on  the  Highway  :  Here  I  providentially  fell  upon  a 
prefent  Suj  ply,  I  truft  up  a  Brace  of  Lawyers,  and  ca- 
fed  a  folitary  Parfon  ;  but  in  all  my  Expeditions,  I  ne- 
ver dreamtof  her  Majefty  r  How-  then  could  i  affront  or 

T  z  offend 


27<^  .     ^he  Gentle  ma  n  Inflru^ed. 

offend  her?  What  Relation  is  there  between  the  Princefif 
and  the  Subjed,  that  an  Injury  offer'd  one,  muft  re- 
bound on  the  other?  What  think  you?  Would  this  loyal 
Speech  reverfe  the  Sentence  ? 

Theom.  No:  I  think  Mr.  Sheriff  would  bid  Jack-ketch 
do  his  Office. 

Eufeb.  I  am  of  your  Opinion  :  But  then  has  not  this 
Knight  of  the  Queen's  Highway  an  Atheift's  Plea  ?  He 
cries  not  gui/fy, good  People!  Becaufe  in  the  adual  Tranf- 
greffion  of  the  Queen's  Laws,  he  never  thought  of  her 
Majefty  ;  and  you  plead  for  Impunity  ;  becaufe,  whilft 
you  outrag'd  Nature,  you  never  dreamt  of  God.  Sir, 
God  is  abfolute  Monarch  of  the  Univerfe :  He  owes  his 
Title  to  Sovereignty,  neither  to  Birth,  nor  Election: 
His  Right  is  founded  in  his  boundlefs  Perfeflions.  Thofe 
Laws  of  Nature  you  tranfgrefs  without  Scruple,  or  Re- 
morfe,  are  of  his  making,  and  to  controul  his  Orders, 
is  to  affront  his  Perfon  ;  fo  that  though  Sinners  do  not 
queftion  his  Authority,  at  leaft  they  defpife  it :  Now  for 
a  vile  Worm  to  contend  with,  and  dare  fo  great,  fo  aw- 
ful a  Majefty,  is  to  overfhoot  Infolence  it  felf. 

TheoYh.  Well ;  God's  Juftice,  together  with  Devils, 
Flames,  Darknefs,  and  Defpair,  would  difcompofe  me, 
cou'd  I  perfuade  my  felf,  my  Soul  wou'd  revive  my  Bo- 
dy ;  but  alas,  we  enter  into  the  World  like  Beafts,  and 
make  as  inglorious  an  Exit ;  our  Bodies  fall  into  Duft, 
and  our  Souls  into  Nothing:  Twenty  Years  hence  I  fhall 
be,  what  I  was  a  thoufand  Years  ago,  a  meer  non  ens^ 
uncapable  either  of  Pain  or  Pleafure. 

Eufeh.  This  Evafion  chil's  my  Blood.  'What  can't 
you  defend  your  Caufe  without  drawing  upon  Na- 
ture ?  Nor  prove  you  are  no  Fool,  without  confeffing 
your  felf  a  Beaft  ?  I  could  eafily  force  you  from  this  Re- 
trenchment, by  demonftrating  the  Immortality  of  the 
Soul ;  but  I  leave  this  Enterprize  to  a  more  convenient 
Seafon.  In  the  mean  time,  I  only  defire  to  know  whe- 
ther you  are  fure,  the  Soul  ends  with  the  laft  Breath  j 
without  certainty,  you  are  juft  where  you  was,  expos'd 
to  that  miferable  State,  that  refpeds  Atheifts,  if  there 
be  a  God.  Tell  me  then,  are  you  fure  Mens  Souls  are 
mortal? 

T'heom.  When  I  compare  the  Operations  of  Beafts  with 
thofe  of  Men,  methinks  we  ftand  on  the  fame  Level, 

yet 


The  Gentleman  Injiru^ed,       lyj 

yet  a  Voice  within  tells  me  I  am  of  a  more  noble  Ex- 
tradion  ;  and  this  foft  Whifper  pefters  my  Brain  with 
Doubts,  and  my  Heart  with  Fears. 

Eufeb.  Perchance  therefore  your-  Soul  is  immortal  : 
Perchance  there  is  a  God,  a  Hell,  and  a  Heaven:  Per- 
chance Chriftianity  is  the  only  faving  Religion  in  the 
World.  Now  if  thefe  Things  are  real,  (and  for  ought 
you  know  they  are)  what  will  become  of  Atheifts,  and 
Latitudinarians?  How  nicely  will  they  have  manag'd 
their  Affairs,  when  they  fee  themfelves  Itript  of  all  Title 
to  Heaven,  and  find  an  eternal  Habitation  prepared  in 
Hell  ?  You  fee  what  Hazard  you  run  ;  and  therefore  I 
muft  conclude  your  Conduft  is  toolifh,  and  mad  to 
Frenzy;  unlefs  you  can  make  good  to  Evidence,  that  if 
■your  Opinions  prove  true,  you  Ihall  enjoy  jome  Good^ 
that  counterpoifes  the  eternal  Lofsfof  Heaven,  nay,  and 
the  exorbitant  Tortures  of  Hell  \  for  torifque  the  Mam 
without  good  Warrant  and  Caution,  is  Rafhnefs,  and 
even  Fury  beyond  Extravagance.  I  have  laid  open  the 
juft  Suhjeft  of  your  Fears ;  favour  me  with  a  full  Pro- 
fpe6l  of  your  Hopes. 


DIALOGUE    VI. 

Tbe  Advantage  Atheifts  and  Latitudinarians  can  expeii 
//there  be  no  God  ;  a)7d if  M  Religions  ate  laving,  is 
not  comparable  to  the  Dijadvantage  they  fear^  if  there 
be  a  God  ;  and  if  one  Religion  alone  be  iaving. 

TT'^ow. C I R,  you  have  allign'd  mean  eafy  Task,  and 
*^  I  undertake  it  with  Pleafure ;  you  have 
drawn  up  a  frightful  Bill  of  our  LolTes,  [^  there  be  a  God, 
and  \i  one  Religion  only  be  faving:  I  will  balance  it  with 
another  of  our  Gain,  if  we  are  in  the  Right ;  and  then 
you'll  confefs  our  Affairs  are  in  a  better  Pofture  than  you 
imagine,  and  perchance  than  you  wifh :  If  we  venture 
much,  we  hope  for  more ;  the  Harveft  balances  our 
Labour  and  Expence  :  I  know  not  through  what  Pro- 
ipedlive  you  view  the  Pleafures  of  Life,  methinks  they 
prefent  us  a  fine  Profpedl  i  and  in  fpight  of  the  molt  fevere 

T  3  Phi» 


2.y^      The  Gentleman  Jnfru5fed, 

Philofophy,dart  forth  too  melting  Charms  to  be  contemp- 
tible.    No  doubt  Life  is  a  great  Blefling,  'tis  above  Pur- 
chafe,  and  cannot  be  over-rated  ;  but  then  Pleafure  alone 
raifes  its   Value:    Diveft  it  of  ple^fing  Senfations,  and 
'tv/ill  become  a  Burthen.  Were  I  fure  never  to  be  pleas'd, 
I  fhould  unwifh  my  felf,  and  bribe  fome  Bravo  to  dif- 
patch  me;  I  fhould  fall  out  with  my  Exijlence^  and  long 
-to  return  to  my  quondam  Kotking.     How  valuable  then 
is  Pleafure,  that  can  fet  fo  vaft  a  Price  on  fo  mean  a 
Thing ;  and  give  it  the  firft  Place  in  our  Wifhes,  that 
would  take  up  the  laft  in  our  Dehres  ?  I  know  ill-natur'd 
Philofophers,  and  vilionary  Divines,  have  employ'd  their 
'Rhetorick  to  run  down  Pleafure,  and  to  talk  it  oui  of 
Countenance.  They  have  libcU'd  it  thefe  thoufand  Years, 
and  attack'd  it  with  Auxiliaries  drawn  from  Doggerel  and 
Invedtive  ;  yet  it  ftands  its  Grouud,  and  maintains  its 
Poll  with  Reputation.  Time,  that  lays  open  the  Defedls 
of  ether  Things,  has,  it  feems,  dilcover'd  fome  Perfedi- 
pns  in  Pleafure,  for  it  is  now  courted  more  than  ever ; 
and  this  i&\x Helei  has  more  Galnnrs  than  that  oi Greece: 
It  grows  not  cheap  under  Trial,  but  rifes  under  Ufe,  and 
Experiment;  it  neither  gluts,  nor  furfeits  ;  its  Btauty 
is  always  in  the  Flower,  and  out  of  the  Reach  of  Age. 
Cities  have  chang'd  Places,  Empires  have  funk  under  the 
Weight    of  their  own   Greatnefs,  new    Culloms  have 
worn  out   the  Memory  of  the  old  ;    but  the  delire   of 
Ple.iiure  has  never  vary'J:  This  runs  in  all  our  Veins: 
We  took  it  from  our  FiUl-.ers,  and  bequeath  it  to  our 
Children  ;  'tis  the  prime  End  of  Nature,  and  almofl  the 
fole  Objedt  of  Inclination.     Now  it  feems  ftrange  that 
all  Men  fhould   dote  of  Deformitv,  and  run  into  the 
Embracernents  of  Nothing  ;  that  they  fhould  prize  above 
all  Things,  what  ;s  below  Price ;  and  fo  turn  Fools  or 
Madmen  for  Company.    You  v.ill  perchance  tell  me, 
that  I  am  miftaken  in  my  Calculation,  and  marflial  up  a 
Brigade  of  Anchorites  to  confute  my  Arithmetick.  Thefe 
Men,  you'll  fay,  made  War  upon  Pleafure :  They  fafted 
and  difciplin'd  themfelves  into   a  Loathing  of  it ;    and 
fometimes  mur'd  up  a  Senfe  to  fortify  the  Avenues  a- 
gainft  fo  vile  and  fo  treacherous  an  Enemy.    Thefe  Men 
therefore,  who  thus  perfecuted   Pleafure,   were  neither 
fond" of  its  Charms,  nor  well  convinc'd  of  its  Excellence. 

But, 


The  Gentleman  In/iru^ed.     1 7^ 

But,  according  to  the  Proverb,  One  Svjallovj  makes 
not  a  Summer  ;  your  rare  Example  of  Abftincnce  and 
Mortification  cannot  weaken  my  univerfal  Induction  ; 
They  leave  it  in  its  entire  Force,  nay,  they  ftrengthen 
it ;  for  you  gaze  on  fuch  Men  as  Miracles,  and  propofe 
them  to  the  World,  rather  to  be  admir'd  than  imitated  : 
Nay,  they  purfu'd  Pleafure  whilft  they  renounc'd  it;  and 
fo  only  (hov'd  it  away  with  one  Hand,  and  drew  it  to 
them  with  the  other :  For  as  there  is  oftentimes  a  fecret 
Pride  even  in  Humility,  fo  there  is  a  Fleaaire  in  Self-de- 
nial ;  and  all  that  you  can  prove  by  thefe  Examples  is, 
that  Mens  Palates  have  different  Contextures ;  and  what 
tickles  gently  fome,  grates  upon  others:  In  a  Word,  to 
queftion  the  Goodnefs  of  Pleafure,  is  to  deny  Experi- 
ment, and  contradi6l  Demonftration. 

Thus,  Sir,  you  fee  if  Atheifts  hazard  fomething,  they 
hope  for  more:  Pleafure,  Satisfadion,  and  a  moft  hap- 
py Life,  balance  all  thofe  Miferies  which  may  befal  us 
after  Death.  For  my  part,  I  cannot  think,  that  the  fond- 
eft  Imagination  can  over-flourifli,  or  even  paint  to  the 
Life,  the  Happinefs  of  thofe  who  never  check  Nature, 
but  give  her  the  Reins,  and  follow  blindly  her  DireAi- 
ons.  They  can  regale  Ambition,  feaft  Revenge,  and 
treat  Senfuality  with  Splendour  :.  Thefe  odd  Notions  of 
Good  and  Evil,  fume  into  the  Head,  they  raife  Damps 
on  the  Confcience,  and  dafh  Delights  with  Gall  and 
Wormwood.  If  we  muft  pen  up  our  Appetites,  and 
confine  'em  to  Limits,  adieu  Content.  For  in  Reality, 
we  properly  enjoy  Nothing,  when  werefufe  our  Paffions 
nny  Thing.  But  when  we  follow  the  Bent  of  Nature, 
and  fwim  down  the  Current  of  Inclination,  'tis  then  we 
poilefs  a  Bills  equal  to  your  fo  much  talk'd  of  Heaven: 
But  with  this  only  Difference,  that  it  wants  Immortali- 
ty. Now  £a/>^/«j-,  where  is  your  Folly  ?  If  our  Opini- 
ons are  falfe,  'tis  fure  we  fhall  be  undone  hereafter :  But 
then,  if  they  prove  true ;  our  Happinefs  will  be  greater 
than  our  Mifery  can  be,  tho'  they  prove  falfe:  For  if  we 
lide  with  the  Belief  of  a  God,  and  of  Chriftian  Religi- 
on, and  live  up  to  the  Rigour  of  thofe  Beliefs,  we  difcard 
cur  felves  of  all  the  Pleafures  of  Life,  nay,  and  turn  it  in- 
to a  Torture.  Now  Miferies  in  the  Hand,  pinch  more 
than  Miferies  in  ReverJion, 

T  4  Eudox. 


;:8o     7he  Gentleman  Itiflru^eS. 

Eudox .Theomachus, yoM  have  forgot  the  toppingBranch 
of  our  Privilege :  If  vjq  believe  a  God,  and  the  Mylle-^ 
ries  of  Chriftianity,  we  mull  enflave  Reafon,  and  regu- 
late our  Opinions  by  the  Rules  of  Revelation :  We  muft 
both  Ihackle  and  hoodwink  our  Underftanding,  and 
llretch  'em  on  the  Rack,  to  force  'em  to  deny  firft  Prin- 
ciples. But  when  we  ad  by  our  A^axims,  we  breathe  a 
more  open  and  free  Air :  We  can  tofs  our  Aflent  from 
one  fide  of  the  Contradiftlon  to  the  other  :  And  believe 
to  Day  what  we  fhall  disbelieve  to  Morrow.  Now  this 
intelledual  Freedom  is  of  a  finer  Nature,  than  any  Plea- 
fure  of  the  Senfe ;  'tis  an  Appendix  of  Beatitude,  and 
a  Prerogative  of  the  Deity.  Add  this,  Eufehius,  to  what 
Theomachtii  has  already  produc'd,  and  you  will  have  lit- 
tle Reafon  to  lay  at  our  Door  Folly  and  Rafhnefs. 

Eufeb.  I  cannot  well  determine,  Theomachus^  whether 
your  Speech  deferves an  Anfwer,  or  Indignation:  Such 
daring  Impieties  furprife  me.  The  Pradlice  of  Lewdnefs 
and  Senfuality  is  both  ftiameful  and  fcandalous :  But  to 
turn  Advocate  for  Brutality,  to  canonize  Debaucheries, 
and  idolize  Murders,  Thefts  and  Adulteries,  is  to  throw 
down  the  Inclofures  that  feparate  Men  from  Beafts, 
to  clap  Reafon  in  the  Dungeon,  and  Senfe  on  the 
Throne.  ^ 

Had  Bulls,  Boars  and  Goats  the  Power  to  harangue 
in  our  Days,  as  in  thofe  of  JEfop^  they  would  have  dif- 
play'd  their  Rhetorickon  the  f^me  Subjedl  ;  but,  I  doubt 
whether  they  would  have  fcrew'd  it  up  to  your  Fitch  of 
Excellency.  No,no  ;  they  would  not  have  had  Wit  enough 
to  crowd  io  many  Follies,  Blafphemies  and  Impieties  in 
fo  fmall  a  Compafs  ;  nor  Impudence  to  flourifli  on  Lewd- 
nefs in  the  Prefence  of  Men. 

So  long  as  we  keep  within  the  Bounds  of  Moderati- 
on and  Law,  Pleafure  may  be  tolerated  ;  yet  let  unlaw- 
ful Defires  appear  never  fo  charming,  they  are  certainly 
contemptible,  becaufe  unwarrantable;  and  he  who  buys 
a  Satisfaction,  tho'  never  fo  glittering,  at  the  Expence 
of  Duty?  is  fure  to  over-purchafe :  The  outward  Appea- 
rance of  Things  cannot  be  the  true  Standard  of  their 
Value.  Tinfel  glitters  no  lefs  than  Gold,  and  a  falfe 
Guinea  often  fliines  more  than  a  true  one.  We  mufc 
wafli  off  the  Fucus^  before  we  can  frame  a  right  Judg- 
mentjordiftinguifli  Sterling  from  counterfeit  Coin.  Plea- 

fures 


The  Gentleman  InJlruBeL     i% i 

fures  afFe6t  the  Organ  well  enough,  but  then  they  grate 
Aipon  Reafon  ;  they  always  give  us  a  troublefome  Fare- 
well, and  make  room  for  Repentance.  I  am  confident. 
Sir,  that  the  Ghofts  of  your  paft  Delights  have  fome- 
times  diforder'd  you,  more  than  the  living  Pleafures  di- 
verted you,  and  you  have  wifh'd  undone  in  a  Calm,  what 
.you  did  in  a  violent  Tranfport  of  PafTion. 

A  Man,  as  you  fay,  who  was  fure  never  to  be  pleas'd, 
would  have  no  great  Reafon  to  be  over-fond  of  his  Be- 
ing. For  Pain  and  Suffering  without  any  Relation  to 
another  World  are  very  troublefome  Advantages ;  but 
then,  who  can  be  pleas'd  when  nothing  but  Riot  and 
Luxury  deferves  no  Exiftence  ?  He  is  a  Shame  to  Na- 
ture, and  a  perfect  Scandal  to  his  kind. 

You  would  fain  draw  a  Proof  for  the  Excellence  of 
Pleafure  from  the  Multitude  of  its  Abettors :  But  you 
do  not  confider,  that  you  have  chofen  an  untoward  Me- 
dium ;  for  Judgments  are  not  to  be  fram'd  by  Pradtice, 
but  Reafon.  The  Generality,  you  know,  ftick  in  the 
Surface  of  Things,  and  are  ten  Times  more  bigotted 
with  Appearance  than  Reality.  Ask  the  high-flown  De- 
bauchees, and  they  will  confefs  their  Judgments  jarr  with 
their  Conduit ;  they  even  condemn  Wickednefs,  whilft 
they  purfue  it. 

But  Pleafure  never  gluts ^  never  furfeits .  Why  thep 
are  you  always  on  the  Change  ?  Why  do  you  feaft  your 
Paflions  with  new  Ragoufts,  but  to  whet  your  Appetite 
with  Variety,  and  to  entertain  it  with  frefh  Appea- 
rances ? 

To  fay  we  are  as  eager  in  the  Purfuit  of  Pleafure  as 
our  Forefathers  were,  proves  only  we  carry  about  us  the 
fame  Corruption  ;  that  our  Nature  bends  to  ill,  as  theirs 
,  did  ;  and  that  we  are  all  Children  of  the  fame  rebellious 
Parent.  Their  Judgments  varied  from  their  Practice, 
and  fodo  ours.  They  fought  out  Vaults  to  fhade  their 
Impieties,  and  buried  their  Abominations  in  Darknefs 
and  Privacy :  And  this  is  a  fhrewd  Argument,  that  they 
did  not  efteem  much  thofe  Things  they  blufh'd  at. 

Believe  it,  Sir,  I  am  able  to  bring<nore  than  Divines  and 

Anchorets^  who  have  lafh'd  unlawful  Pleafures,  and  bur- 

kfqu'd  'em.     I  could  produce  fome  of  your  own  Tribe 

^3nd  Difcipline,  who^deferve  Credit,   becaufe  they  Ipeak 

upon  Experience.     l' took  a  Turn  the  other  Day  to  the 

Ki»g's 


aSa       The  Gentleman  InJlriSed. 

King's  Beach  to  vifit  a  Friend  j  I  found  him  in  the  Com- 
pany of  fome  other  Gentlemen,  who  had  taken  up  their 
Lodgings  in  that  melcUicholy  Retirement.  Difcontent  fat 
on  their  Faces;  every  Pofture  mark'd  Impatience,  and 
every  Word  both  Repentance  and  Defpair :  They  had 
out-hv'd  their  Eftates,  and  (what  was  worfe)  all  hopes 
of  regaining  'em  :  I  pity'd  their  Misfortune  ;  but  when 
I  underftood  they  had  raffled  'em  for  If'^we^  and  barter'd 
'em  for  Mtjfes,  my  Pity  turn'd  almoft  into  Indignation  : 
I  thought  with  my  felf  they  deferv*d  no  Eitate,  who 
knew  fo  ill  to  manage  one;  but  at  leaft,  faid  I  with  a 
Smile,  you  have  had  Pleafures  for  your  Money  ;  and 
you  feel  even  novv  this  Satisfaction,  that  once  you  were 
happy.  Quite  contrary,  faid  they,  our  former  Felicity 
prefles  harder  upon  us  than  our  prefent  Mifcry  :  And  then 
they  run  out  into  fuch  Invedives  againft  criminal  Plea- 
fure,  and  rated  Debauchery,  with  fuch  a  Pathos  and 
Energy,  that  I  eafily  faw  they  fpoke  from  the  Heart,  and 
declaim'd  in  earnell. 

I  believe  thofe  Gentlemen  who  lie  under  the  Surgeon's 
Hands,  who  are  ty'd  up  to  Faftingand  Mercury^  and 
drivil  out  in  a  Stove  the  Relicks  of  your  incomparable 
Pleafures,  are  much  of  the  Coap'd-up  Squite's  Mind. 
For  tho'  the  Vintners  and  Harlots  have  not  invaded  their 
Purfes,  nor  Luxury  like  a  Whirl-pool  fwallow'd  their 
Lands,  yet  Difeafes  have  over-fet  Health,  and  almoft 
funk  their  Bodies  into  the  Grave.  But  I  have  follow'd 
you  too  for,  'tis  time  to  leave  you  ;  only  I  will  add, 
that  I  cannot  efteem  that  Great,  which  makes  me  Lefs, 
and  tumbles  me  below  my  Level.  Reafon  is  a  Preroga- 
tive, no  Nuifance;  and  I  am  not  difpos'd  to  mortgage 
it  for  a  M'fs^  or  Claret. 

For  all  your  boafting,  I  fear  Athclfm  cannot  fupprefs 
thofe  odd  Notions  of  Good  and  Evil ;  they  alarm  your 
Fears,  awake  your  Confcience,  and  fprinkle  your  De- 
lights with  the  unpalatable  ingredient  of  I'itch  and  Sul- 
phur; but  if  they  do  not,  it  only  follows  that  yourUn- 
derftanding  is  drown'd  in  Senfuality,  that  your  Wit  is 
funk  into  Frenzy,  aud  that  you  are  ftark  mad  with  your 
Mahometical  H.tppinefs. 

I  confefs,  EudoxHs^  that  thePleafure  of  the  Mind  has 
fome  Value;  it  appears  better  fliap'd  than  that  of  ilenfe;^ 
it  fhines  brighter  \  it's  longer  liv'd  j  and  befides  has  no- 
thing 


T'he  Gentleman  InJlruBed,       283 

thing  of  Miftinefs,  or  Brutality  :  But  then  1  cannot  con- 
ceive, why  this  Satisfadion  mull  be  folely  ingrofs'd  by 
Atheifts  and  Latitudinarians :  You  fay  we  muftenflave 
our  Underftanding  when  we  embrace  Chriftianity,  and 
regulate  our  Judgments  by  divine  Revelation :  But,  pray, 
is  this  fuch  an  Outrage  to  Reafon  ?  Does  not  God  know 
perfedtly  all  Things  ? 

Eudox.  He  does. 

Enfeb.  Does  not  his  Revelation  agree  with  his  Know- 
ledge ? 

Eudox.  It  does ;  for  certainly  he  cannot  tell  a  Lye. 

Eufeb.  Now  ;  God  never  commands  us  to  believe  any 
Myftery,  unlefs  it  be  evidently  credible  he  has  reVeal'd 
it  5  from  whence  it  follows,  that  Chriftians  are  fo  far 
from  hoodwinking,  or  forcing  Reafon,  that  Men  cannot 
adl  more  rationally  ;  for  thus  they  proceed.  Whatever 
God  reveals  is  true  :  But  God  has  revealed  the  Myftery  of 
the  Trinity :  Therefore  it  is  true.  The  firft  Propofition 
is  evident  :  The  fecond  is  evidently  credible  :  For  till  the 
Revelation  appear  evidently  credible,  no  Chriftian  lies  ■ 
under  any  Obligation  of  believing;  and  when  it  comes 
up  to  fuch  an  Evidence,  no  Man  can  disbelieve  it,  with-s, 
out  Imprudence.  'Tis  true,  the  A4yftery  remains  in 
Darknefs  and  Obfcurity ;  tho*  I  believe  thatGod  is  6>»^, 
and  Three.,  yet  I  am  ignorant  of  the  Manner ;  nor  am  I 
oblig'd  to  know  it:  God  has  left  that  as  a  Subject  of 
Difpute,  to  exercife  our  Wits,  not  our  Faith. 

Gentlemen,  you  fee  when  Accounts  are  adjufhed,  you 
are  not  fo  much  before-hand  with  the  World,  as  you  ima- 
gined ;  but  to  favour  you  more  than  I  am  oblig'd  ;  let  it 
be  granted,  that  Pleafures  are  ten  times  more  valuable 
than  you  pretend  ;  at  lead  they  cannot  out-laft  Time, 
they  move  towards  their  Period,  and  can  accompany 
you  no  farther  than  the  Grave  ;  when  once  you  have  Iain 
on  that  cold  Bed,  Pleafures  take  Wing,  and  difappear  ; 
your  Body  is  made  over  to  the  Worms,  and  (if  there  be 
a  God)  your  Soul  will  be  deliver'd  into  the  Hands  of  un- 
merciful Devils.  Sir,  tell  me,  would  you  accept  of  the 
Empire  of  the  Univerfe,  together  with  all  the  beaftial 
Paftimes  of  Sardanapalus^  or  Helio^abalus^  if  you  were 
fure  afterwards  to  be  ftretch'd  on  Racks,  to  live  on  Stench, 
and  to  be  regal'd  with  Toads  and  Vipers  for  the  Space  of 
twenty  Years  ? 

Theo. 


284       'the  Gentleman  hiftru^ied, 

'Theo.  No  furely. 

Eufeb.  Yet  every  Atheift,  or  Latitudinarian,  cannot 
hope  for  Crowns  or  Scepters;  they  cannot  gratify  their 
Senfuality  with  fo  high-feafon'd  Lewdnefs,  as  thoie  two 
wretched  Princes ;  notwithftanding  (if  there  be  a  God) 
they  mull  buy  their  minute  Satisfaction,  neither  with 
Tortures,  nor  Toads,  nor  theTormentsof  twenty  Years, 
but  of  Eternity :  If  therefore  you  will  not  purchale  a  tem- 
poral Enjoyment  with  a  temporal  Punifhment;  why  will 
you  buy  a  temporal  and  fleeting  Satisfadlion,  with  a  Pu- 
nifliment  that  is  eternal  ? 

Theo.  Pain  is  a  very  lively  Perception,  it  flafhes  upon 
the  Organ  with  a  vaft  Impetuofity,  and  puts  our  whole 
Machine  in  Diforder ;  'tis  ftronger  than  Pleafure,  and 
keeps  it  at  a  Diftance,  when  we  have  it  not,  and  turns 
it  away  when  we  have  it :  Hence  I  would  not  take  twen- 
ty Years  of  Satisfa6lion,  with  a  fure  Reverfion  of  twenty 
Years  of  Pain ;  for  this  will  certainly  more  afRidt  Na- 
ture, than  that  can  pleafe  it :  But  the  Pains  of  Hell  and 
Pleafures  of  Heaven  are  wholly  uncertain,  and  thefe  of 
Atheifts  aflur'd ;  fo  that  tho'  thofe  Pains,  compar'd  pre- 
cifely  with  the  Pleafures,  are  infinitely  greater ;  yet  if 
you  confider  thofe  in  a  State  of  Uncertainty,  and  thefe 
in  a  State  of  Certainty,  we  mud  give  thefe  the  Prece- 
dence ;  and  this  is  conformable  to  that  capital  Maxim ; 
Keep  what  is  certain,  and  leave  what  is  uncertain.  Give 
me  leave  to  frame  this  fhort  Syllogifm:  '77j  Imprudence 
to  part  with  what  is  certain^  for  what  is  uncertain  ;  bzit 
the  Pleafures  of  Heaven  and  Pains  of  Hell  are  uncertain  ; 
and  thofe  of  this  IVorld  are  certain  ;  therefore  "'tis  Impru- 
dence to  quit  the  Pleafures  of  this  Life  out  of  Fear  of  jai- 
ling into  Hell,  or  out  of  Hope  oj  flying  into  Heaven. 

Eufeb.  The  Force  of  your  Difcourfe  is  wound  up  in 
your  Maxim,  and  the  Syllogifm  is  but  a  meer  Dedutli- 
on ;  fo  that  if  your  Foundation  be  weak,  the  Superftruc- 
ture  falls  to  the  Ground :  Now,  Sir,  1  mult  tell  you, 
your  grand  Principle  is  not  univerfally  true,  and  by  Con- 
ifequence  unfit  for  the  Polt  you  have  put  it  in ;  unlefs  it 
be  ftrain'd,  and  us'd  with  Difcretion,  it  proves  nothing 
but  Sophiltry. 

For,  does  not  the  Husbandman  cultivate  and  manure 
Jiis  Ground  at  the  certain  Expence  of  both  his  Eafe  and 
Money?  Yet  his  Gain  is  as  uncertain  as  the  Winds  and 

Seafons, 


fhe  Gentleman  Injlru0e3,      2S5 

Seafons.  Another  takes  up  at  the  Temple  j  he  finks  his 
Purfe,  and  beats  his  Brain  with  plodding  over  Cook  and 
Littleton  ;  he  pores  Night  and  Day  upon  the  Code,  and 
confounds  himfelf  with  the  Inflltntions  and  ¥andeds^^.x\A 
hopes  to  beat  a  Fortune  out  of  his  Labour  andExpences; 
yet  tho'  he  certainly  lays  out  his  Money,  and  facrifices 
his  Repofe,  he  is  not  certain  to  reach  his  Pretenfions ; 
his  Expe6tation  may  be  baulk'd,  and  after  twenty  Years, 
he  may  be  no  farther  advanc'd  in  the  World,  than  he  was 
the  firft  Day  he  fet  out. 

Our  Merchants  put  to  Sea  with  a  good  Cargo ;,  they  pur- 
fue  Profit  into  the  Indies  ;  the  Danger  of  their  Perfons 
is  certain,  they  expofe  their  Commodities  to  all  the  Ca- 
fualities  of  Wind  and  Weather,  that  lay  before  very  fafe 
in  Magazines ;  the  Gain  is  ill  afllir'd  :  Do  not  then  thefe 
Men  confute  your  Maxims  by  Pra6lice  ?  And  who  ever 
indidled  them  of  Imprudence,  or  tax'd  'em  of  Folly  ? 

In  fine.  Sir,  the  whole  Commerce  of  Liferouls  upon 
this  Principle  j  that  oftentimes  'tis  the  part  of  a  prudent 
Man  to  quit  what  is  certain,  for  what  is  uncertain  ;  and 
were  it  otherwife,  there  would  be  fo  little  Bufinefs  in 
the  World,  that  Mankind  might  fit  crofs  arm'd,  or  fall 
together  by  the  Ears  to  avoid  Idlenefs:  Mens  Under- 
ftandings  would  grow  dov/nward,  their  Courage  would 
flirink  up;  Induftry  would  turn  off  in  Lethargy,  and 
the  whole  World  would  fall  back  into  its  primitive  Ig- 
norance. 

Theo.  I  know  the  Principle  comprehends  a  Latitude, 
and  is  not  true  without  Refl;ri6lion. 

Eufeh.  A  little  Patience  if  you  pleafej  when  I  have 
convided  it  of  Error,  you  fhall  have  time  to  argue,  why 
Sentence  fliould  not  pafs  upon  it.  When  the  Good  we 
hope  is  equal,  or  inconfiderably  greater,  than  what  we 
hazard;  it  would  be  a  piece  of  the  higheft  Extravagance, 
to  expofe  what  we  pofiefs  in  Peace  and  Quiet,  for  that 
Avhich  is  only  equal,  or  inconfiderably  greater,  and  withal 
very  uncertain:  If  by  theLofs  of  the  certain  we  chance 
to  procure  the  uncertain,  we  are  but  juft  where  we  were  ; 
but  if  we  fail  in  our  Purfuit,  wefliall  not  only  fall  fhort 
of  what  we  hop'd  for,  but  even  of  what  we  poflefied  : 
In  this  Cafe  your  Axiom  may  be  allow'd  of,  but  then 
it  fupports  not  your  Caufe ;  for  there  is  no  Proportion 
between  the  moft  lufcious  Pleafures  of  Life,  which  you 

fup- 


0,^6  .^he  Gi^-i^TL-EUXti  InftruBed. 

fuppofe  certain,  and  thofe  of  Heaven  you  fuppofe  un- 
certain ;  for  thofe  are  built  on  the  tottering  Foundation 
of  Time,  and  in  fpite  of  Care,  within  the  Space  of  fome 
Years,  muft  touch  their  fatal  Period,  and  flafh  into  No- 
thing, whereas  thefe  are  infinitely  better  qualified,  they 
Hand  on  a  ftable  Bottom,  they  never  wither,  never  die  : 
So  that  tho'  we  confider  the  Joys  of  Heaven  in  a  State 
of  Uncertainty,  and  thofe  of  Time  in  a  State  of  Cer- 
tainty, thofe  muft  prevail ;  becaufe  the  exorbitant  Great- 
nefs  of  the  Divine  Joys  of  Heaven,  accompanied  with 
an  eternal  juration,  are  more  advantageous  than  all  the 
trifling  Satisfadlions  of  Senfe,  tho'  ftampt  with  the  charm- 
ing Attraftives  of  Certainty  and  Pofleffion. 

For  would  any  Man,  who  had  one  Grain  of  Prudence, 
accufemeof  Folly  or  Rafhnels,  if  I  fhould  venture  a 
Penny  upon  a  well-grounded  Prefumption  of  gaining  a 
Million?  Would  not  you  and  all  the  Merchants  in  the 
Nation  fhare  in  the  Venture  ?  Yet  in  this  Cafe  we  fhould 
quit  the  certain  for  the  uncertain.  Now,  //  there  be  a 
God,  if  the  Chriflian  Religion  be  the  only  faving  Com- 
winnion  in  the  IVorU,  and  you  live  up  to  the  Pfecepts  of 
Reaion  and  the  Gofpel ;  after  this  Life  you  will  enter  upon 
the  Pofleffion  of  a  Blifs  that  furpafles  all  the  brutifli 
and  fond  Enjoyments  of  Senfe,  more  than  a  Million  ex- 
ceeds a  Penny ;  for  between  thefe  two  Sums  there  is 
fome  Proportion,  but  all  the  Geometricians  in  Europe 
can  never  find  a  Medium  Proportionate  between  what  is 
temporal  and  eternal. 

Indeed,  if  you  fhould  fquare  your  Condu6l  by  the 
fevere  Rules  of  Chriftian  Morality,  and  afterwards  find 
no  God  to  recompenfe  your  Virtue  ;  or  that  you  might 
have  purchas'd  an  equal  Glory,  following  the  more  c®n- 
defcending  Precepts  of  other  Religions,  you  would  be  at 
fome  Lofs  -,  i.  e.  you  would  have  dcbarr'd  your  felf  of 
fome  lewd  Senfations  to  little  Purpofe ;  but  this  Difap- 
pointment  cannot  be  put  in  the  Scale,  againft  thofe  vaft 
Treafures  you  might  pretend  to,  if  there  were  a  God, 
and  if  only  one  Religion  were  faving  :  If  therefore,  he 
who  fhould  refufe  to  hazard  a  Penny  on  a  moft  prudent 
Expectation  of  gaining  a  Million,  wouM'in  the  Opinion 
of  all  Mankind  commit  a  Folly  almoft  too  extravagant 
for  Bedlam  it  felf;  why  fhall  we  fear  to  brand  Atheifts 
and  Latitudinarians  with  Frenzy  and  Madnefs,  who  pre- 
fer 


'the  Gentleman  InJiruBed,      287 

fer  a  paultry  Content  before  a  Pleafure  that  is  eternal? 
Yoiir<yrand  Principle,  leave  not  the  certain  for  the  uncer~ 
tain,  cannot  relieve  you,  becaufe  it  has  no  place  in  the 
prefent  Difpute ;  for  there  is  no  Proportion  between  the 
Happinefs  of  the  other  World,  which  you  fuppofe  uncer- 
tain, and  the  Pleafure  of  this,  you  fuppofe  certain  ;  for 
no  Arithmetick  is  able  to  multiply  Moments  into  Eter- 
nity.    Now  I  anfwer  your  Syllogifm. 

^Tis  Imprudence  to  part  with  what  is  certain,  for  what 
is  uncertain  ;  but  the  Pleafures  of  Heaven  are  uncertain^ 
and  thofe  of  Life  are  certain  ;  therefore  ^tis  Imprudence 
to  quit  the  Pleafures  of  t hit  Life  for  thofe  of  Heaven. 

1  diftinguifli  the  firft  Propofition  ;  'Tis  Imprudence  to 
part  with  what  is  certain^  for  what  is  uncertain  :  If  what 
is  uncertain  be  co»Jider<ibly  greater  than  what  is  certain^ 
I  deny  iu  If  it  be  only  equal^  or  incunjiderably  greater^ 
I  grant  ft :  I  tranfmitthe  fecond  Propofition,  and  deny 
the  Confequence :  Pray  take  Notice  I  do  not  grant  the 
fecond  Propofition ;  for  the  firft  part  is  only  true  in  our 
preient„Suppofition,  and  the  fecond  is  abfolutely  falfe; 
for  thofe  Pleafures  you  fo  much  talk  of,  are  as  uncertain 
as  any  thing  can  be  ;  fo  that  tho'  your  famous  Axiom 
were  never  fo  true,  'tis  impertinent  to  the  prefent  Dif- 
pute ;  feeing  your  Gain  is  as  doubtful  as  your  Lofs. 

Theom.  What,  will  you  maintain  our  Pleafures  are  un- 
certain ?  If  you  can  make  that  out,  I  confefs  Affairs  are 
in  a  worfe  Pofture  than  I  fancy'd. 

Eufeb.  I  will  maintain  it,  and  demonftrate  it  too. 
Your  Pleafure,  Sir,  confifts  in  the  Satisfaction  of  Senfe  ; 
now  all  fuch  Satisfadion  is  very  expenfive :  Burgundy 
and  Champaigne  Wines  grow  not  at  London^  they  mull 
pafs  the  Seas;  and  before  they  are  fit  for  an  Athieft's 
Palate,  the  Price  runs  high:  You  muftgive  the  Vintner 
leave  to  rate  them  at  Pleafure,  and  thank  him  for  his  Fla- 
vour, if  he  gives  you  a  Botile  for  an  Angel.  Ragoufts  are 
as  coftly ;  Cooks  will  not  toil  for  'em,  unlefs  they  be 
well  paid  ;  they  value  their  Sweat  as  high  as  the  Vintner 
does  his  Champaigne;  and  you  can  rely  no  more  on  the 
Confcienceof  the  one,  than  of  the  other;  for  rteither  is 
ftrait-lac'd,  and  you  muft  ftand  to  their  Mercy:  If  you 
cail  up  your  Accounts,  you  will  find  the  Taverns  and 
Treating-Houft'S  have  eas'd  you  of  a  round  Income. 
J*/ (//^x  are  farm'd  at  a  higher  Rate  ;  like  the  Monfter  Behe- 

met. 


uSS      ihe  Gentleman  InJlruBed, 

met,  they  drink  whole  Rivers ;  they  fwallow  Mines  and 
devour  Lordfhips :  You  may  rig  out  a  firft  Rate  Ship, 
at  lefs  Expence  than  a  Lady  of  Pleafure :  She  muft  ap- 
pear at //v<^^-P<?r^  with  a  ghttering  Equipage,  andfhroud 
the  Scandal  of  her  Life  under  a  Veil  of  Embroidery : 
And  what  is  worfe,  {he  prefently  falls  to  decay,  and  then 
the  Bills  of  Reparation  fwell  higher  than  thofe  of  the  very 
Building :  Now  if  you  let  her  lie  out  of  Repair,  you 
either  tempt  her  Fidelity,  or  her  ill  Nature,  and  then 
your  Heaven  may  chance  to  fink  into  Hell ;  for  if  you 
refolve  with  Eagernefs  a  Relief,  you  fend  her  a  Blank, 
and  encourage  her  Ladyjhip  to  draw  up  Conditions  at 
Pleafure,  and  to  rife  upon  you  at  the  Difcretion  of  A- 
varice.  You  fee  thefe  Pleafures  are  expenfive,  and  re- 
quire a  good  Fund  :  Now,  Sir,  are  all  Atheifts  fure  of 
good  Eftates  ?  Have  they  found  out  the  Philofopher's 
Stone  ;  or  have  they  MUas^s  Faculty,  of  turning  what- 
ever they  touch  into  Gold  ?  I  cannot  think  that  Maa- 
mrs  follow  Religion,  or  that  a  beggarly  Chriflian  can 
ftart  up  a  moneyed  Atheiji  :  Pleafures  therefore  are  not 
over  fure  to  every  Atheiftical  Profelyte^  unlefs  you  only 
admit  Z/or^j  and  Gemlemen  xnio  your  Communion,  and 
fo  compofe  your  Church  as  the  Vcneti^m  do  Xht'ix Grand 
Senate  of  Nobles ;  but  even  in  this  cafe,  your  happy 
Life  wants  good  Security  :  Eftates,  like  Eels,  often  give 
us  the  flip,  and  I  have  known  fome  who  began  the 
World  with  three  thoufand  Pounds  per  Annum,  end  in 
^n  Hofpital :  Some  forfeit  their  Fund  for  Loyalty,  others 
for  Rebellion  ;  fome  drink  it  away,  others  Dice  it  -,  fome 
wear  it  out  by  husbanding  it  too  v,"el!,  and  others  by 
managing  it  too  ill :  The  very  Foundation  therefore  of 
your  Pleafures  being  fo  precarious,  and  uncertain,  the 
Pleafures  themfelves  can't  be  aflur'd. 

Secondly,  Without  Health  the  moftexquifite  Pleafures 
are  dull  and  infipid  ;  they  rather  importune  than  pleafe, 
and  put  our  Patience  to  the  Trial,  rather  than  divert 
our  Senfes  j  the  Harmony  of  a  Lute,  tho'  touch'd  by 
an  Orpheus,  will  grate  the  Ear,  if  the  Head  be  out  of 
Tune  ;  and  a  difcompos'd  Stomach  receives  the  moft  de- 
licious Ragoufts  with  Reludtancy  and  Convulfions :  A 
Fit  of  the  Cholick  makes  a  Crown  uneafy,  and  turns  all 
the  Charms  of  Empire  into  Diflatisfadion.  Now  our 
Body  is  a  Compound  of  Contraries,  each  Part  clafhes 

with 


^2  Gentleman  Inftru^ed,      28^ 

M'ith  its  Fellow,  and  like  the  Midianites,  draws  upon  its 
next  Companion^  Heat  plays  upon  Cold;  Dry  nefs  up- 
on Humility  :  Whilft  Vidory  is  at  a  Hand,  our  Pulfe 
beats  even  ;  but  when  it  leans  to  one  Side,  'tis  Time  to 
call  for  a  Doctor:  Befides,  thefe  Hoftilities  are  adted  out 
of  Sight;  or,  \\k.t  Miners,  skirmifli  under  Ground  j  and 
fo  we  cannot  fend  Relief  to  balance  the  Advantage  v^^hich 
one  may  gain  over  the  other:  In  fine,  Sir,  Health  confifts 
in  an  equ.;l  Temper  of  capricious  Humours  ;  in  a  good 
Intelligence  of  a  thoufand  Veins  and  Arteries;  and  what 
can  be  more  uncertain?  I  never  meditate  on  the  Framo 
and  Mechanifm  of  Bodies,  but  I  am  rapt  into  Extafies 
of  Admiration,  and  wonder  more  we  are  one  Day  in 
Health,  than  that  we  ihould  continually  groan  under 
the  Pangs  of  the  moll  acute  Difeafes:  And  if  all  Men's 
Health  is  uncertain,  the  Atheift's  is  much  more ;  for 
their  exceffive  Irregularities  both  haften  Infirmities,  and 
inflame  them  ;  Debauchery  revenges  its  own  Excelles 
upon  our  Bodies,  and  plunges  them  into  a  State  of  Lan- 
gour  and  Weaknefs:  Health  muft  jade,  it  cannot  hold 
out,  if  we  live  too  faft,  and  are  continually  upon  the 
Gallop:  Artd  thus  you  make  vihxt  is  uncertain,  more 
uncertain;  if  you  do  not  manage  your  Conftitution,  but 
proftitute  it,  you  throw  it  away  before  you  have  done  li- 
ving, nay,  when  it  is  moft  uleful  to  your  Defign ;  and 
fo  betray  your  Senfes,  and  confpire  againft  the  Intereft  of 
Eafe  and  Pleafure. 

31^/y,  Life  is  the  Foundation  of  all  Happinefs,  on 
this  all  our  Hopes  and  Expe6lations  of  worldly  Pleafures 
are  built ;  yet  this  is  a  thou  land  Dca;rees  more  uncer- 
tainj  than  the  Exiftence  of  a  God :  We  know  no  more 
when  we  came  into  the  World,  than  the  Child  unborn, 
and  know  no  more  when  we  fhall  leave  it.  Our  Stay 
depends  on  a  hundred  Circumltances,  and  our  Remo- 
val on  as  many  Accidents,  we  are  neither  able  to  a- 
void,  nor  forefee:  An  Enemy  may  Poniard  us  ini6  the 
other  World,  a  Friend  may  carefs  us  tlVitbef  ;  Grief 
links  us  into  the  Grave,  and  Joy  overfets  us:  Nay,  the 
Scratch  of  a  Pin  oftentimes  bailies  the  Virtue  ^q^  Drugs, 
and  the  Art  of  the  Surgeon.  The  future  is  to  come, 
the  palt  is  flown  away,  and  .neither  at  our  Difpofal  ;  {q 
that  we  are  only  Mailers  of  the  prefent :  Now  A'loney, 
Health,  and  Life  itfelf  being  To  uncertain,  fo  precan- 

U  QUS, 


2 j)o      The  Gentle ^^i AN  Injlrti^ed. 

ous,  how  can  you  peiTuade  yourfelf,  that  PleafurCy 
your  I'ummum  bunum^  is  aflur'd  ?  But  ')£  this  be  uncertain, ' 
Aiheiils  and  Latitudinarjans  are  mad  to  Extravagance  ; 
for  then  they  chufe  a  Pack  of  brutifli,  fhort-liv'd,  and 
uncertain  Pleafures,  before  thofe  eternal  Joys  of  the 
other  World,  that  are  exceffivcly  beyond  Thought,  and 
Ion?;  beyond  Imagination :  Now  if  a  Man  would  adt 
fooliflily,  who  fliould  chufe  a  Crown-that  is  uncertain, 
before  a  Million  that  is  equally  uncertain;  with  what 
Terms  can  [  exprefs  your  Frenzy,  who  rather  lay 
hold  on  a  thin,  paukry,  uncertain  Pleafure,  than  a 
Happinefs  that  is  uncertain  indeed,  but  withal  eter- 
nal ;  efpecially  when  you  not  only  quit  all  Right  to 
this  exorbitant  Happinefs,  but  at  the  lame  time  run  up 
to  the  very  Brink  of  Damnation  ?  for  thofe  who  rejedl 
Heaven,  ipfo  fa8o  accept  of  Hell.  We  have  waded 
deep  enough  into  this  Matter.  I  will  now  draw  up  a 
fliort  Scheme  of  the  whole  Difcourfe,  and  then  leave  it 
to  your  Confideration. 

To  fhew  the  Unreafonablenefs  of  Atheifm  and  Lati- 
tudinarianifm,  I  have  condefcended  to  more  than  you 
durll  ask,  either  in  Juftice  or  Equity,  viz.  That  the 
Exiltence  of  a  God  is  doubtful ;  as  well  as  the  Neceflity 
of  profefling  the  Chrillian  Religion  for  Salvation :  Be- 
fore you  can  pretend  to  Evidence,  you  muft  turn  com- 
mon Senfe  topfy  turvy,  and  fly  in  the  Face  of  Reafon: 
I  have  lloop'd  fo  low  as  to  grant  thefe  two  Points  doubt- 
ful, to  difplay  the  Weaknefs  of  your  Pretenfions,  and 
to  demonftrate,  that  Courtefy  itfelfisnot  able  to  juftify 
your  Conduft. 

I  ground  my  Difcourfe  on  this  Principle ;  wlpen  two 
Opinions,  both  doubtful,  both  uncertain,  do  concur;  'tis 
a  Folly  to  chufe  that  which  will  ruin  me,  if  falfe;  and 
cannot  turn  to  my  Advantage,  tho'  true  :  You  have  fub- 
fcrjb'd,  and  indeed  all  Nature  has  put  its  Hand  to  the 
Principle:  Now,  Gentlemen,  if  the  Opinions  you  em- 
brace prove  falfe,  you  will  be  eternally  caft  out  of  that 
happy  Region  of  the  Bleiled,  and  eternally  confin'd  to 
the  Pitch  and  Sulphur  of  the  Reprobate.  It  is  pofTible  for 
a  wretched  Creature  tolofe  more  on  the  one  Side,  or  to 
fuffer  more  on  the  other?  Can  any  Man  be  more  un- 
happy than  to  be  banifli'd  from  his  Sovereign  Happinefs  ? 
Or  more  miferable  than  to  be  ingulphed  into  a  State  of 

eternal 


The  Gentleman  Injlni^ed.     2^1 

eternal  Suftcrings  ?  Is  not  he  undone,  who  has  turn'd 
Bankrupt  not  only  of  his  Fortune,  but  even  of4i!3  Hope  ; 
and  has  nothing  left  but  Torments,  K.age,  and  Defpair  I 
If  your  Opmions  chance  to  be  true,  what  Advantage 
can  you  reap  but  petty  Satisfa6lions  of  Senfe;  which  ra- 
ther furfeit  Than  fatisfy,  and  ftupify  more  than  they  de- 
light ?  They  look  big  only  at  a  diftance,  and  nothing 
when  they  draw  near;  they  are  indeed  Giants  in  our 
Fancy,  and  Pigmies  in  themlelves;  yet  you  chufe  thefe 
contemptible  Pleafures,  that  avail  you  little  while  you 
live,  and  nothing  when  you  come  to  die ;  you  leave  thofe 
which  lad  eternally;  Now  has  not  fuch  a  choice  all 
Characters  of  Folly  ? 

Pray,  Gentlemen,  fet  fome  Moments  afide  for  Re- 
flexion :  The  Bufinefs  is  of  Weight,  and  deferves  lober 
Thoughts.  Had  you  two  Souls,  you  might  lend  one  into 
the  next  World  to  difcover  how  Things  go  in  that  un- 
known Region  j  and  if  that  fhould  perifli  in  the  Enter- 
prize,  you  would  have  at  leafl;  another  in  Referye:  But 
alas,  you  have  but  one,  and  if  that  mifcarry,  you  are 
loft  for  ever :  The  firfl  Moment  that  lays  open  your 
Misfortune,  difcQvers  the  Impoffibility  of  retrieving  it. 

Theom.  Come,  Eufcbius^  we  have  almoft  drain'd  the 
Subje6t ;  let  us  change  our  Theme.  You  have  arraigned 
my  Choice,  and  in  your  Fancy  convi6led  it  of  Folly  and 
Extravagance  ;  I  impeach  you  of  the  fame  Mifdemea- 
nours :  Pray  let  us  fee  if  you  can  plead  your  own  Caufe 
with  as  much  Art,  as  you  have  againft  mine. 


DIALOGUE    VII. 

T'ho^  there  be  no  God^  and  th(j*  the  Chrijiiayi  Religion  be 
not  thti  only  fwvtiig  ReltgioM,  'tis  Prudence  to  believe 
there  is  a  God^  and  that  the  Chrlfllaa  Religion  is  the 
only  faving  Religion  in  the  Worlds  and  to  live  up  to 
the  Tenets  of  both. 

Eufeb.  V"  O  U  have  aHign'd  me  an  eafy  Province :  The 

-■-    very  opening  of  our  Caufe  is  fufficient  to  gain 

it.     That  we  may  not  beat  the  Air,  and  moot  at  Rovers, 

let  us  look  back  upon  the  old  Pr.nciple,  I4''hsn  two  iimer- 

U  z  tuia 


2pi       fhe  Gentleman  Injru^ed, 

tain  Propfifuions  lie  before  me^  I  am  obliged  by  all  tVe 
haws  of  Yr  tide  nee  to  chufe  that  whifh  will  turn  to  my 
Advantage^  if  true^  and  cannot  prejudice  me^  if  it  bs 
falfe  ;  I  have  eftablifhM  this  A4axim  above,  and  I  fee  not 
how  you  can  offer  againft  it  any  thing  of  Moment. 

Theom.  Go  on. 

Eufeb.  If  our  Opinions  are  true,  when  once  we  fhake 
OiF  thefe  Clouds  of  Clay,  thefe  Mills  of  Dull  and  Aflies, 
which  interpofe  between  us  and  Eternity,  we  fhall  be  in 
a  mod  comfortable  Condition ;  for  the  very  Moment 
that  deprives  us  of  Life,  will  repair  all  the  Decays  of  Na- 
ture, all  the  Ruins  of  Time;  we  fhall  enter  upon  a  State 
ofBlifs,  with  a  Spring  that  ever  flourifhes,  evet  blooms; 
upon  a  State  inaccefliblc  to  Infirmities,  unknown  to  Mi- 
feries,  above  the  Stroke  of  Fortune,  and  out  of  the  Ju- 
rifdiciion  of  Death :  Now  to  pafs  on  a  fudden  from  Fear 
to  AHuiance,  from  Sicknefs  to  Health,  from  Poverty  to 
Plenty,  and  from  Death  to  Life,  mult  be  a  very  enter- 
taining Change:  But  what  is  this  to  that  Ocean  ofBlifs, 
that  flows  from  the  Face  of  God?  One  Ray  llruck  Mo- 
fes  almoft  blind  ;  his  Mortality  funk  under  fo  glorious  an 
Appearance,  and  Nature  was  too  weak  tobear.the  Splen- 
dour of  the  Objeil,  or  to  continue  the  Correfpondence. 
The  Fondnefs  of  Imagination  always  magnifies  tempo- 
ral Pleafures  :  Fancy  over  flouriOies  the  Objeft,  and 
paints  beyond  the  Life ;  they  are  more  gaudy  in  our 
Brain,  than  in  thcmfelvcs,  and  the  Expedtation  of  'em 
out-weighs  Poileflion :  But  the  Pleafures  of  the  other 
World  are  above  Exprcflion,  and  Imagination  too  ;  nor 
can  we  take  their  Dimenfions  by  what  they  are,  but  by 
what  they  are  not :  All  that  I  can  lay,  is,  they  put  an 
V.vA  to  Fear,  a  Term  to  Hope,  and  a  Stop  to  Defire  ; 
nnd  certainly  that  Creature  has  touch'd  upon  the  true 
Point  of  Ilappinefs,  that  neither  wilhes  to  be  greater,  nor 
fears  to  be  lefs. 

T'heo.  Well,  well.  Sir,  you  will  indeed  be  very  well 
provided,  if  there  be  a  God;  but  fuppofe  there  be  none ; 
you  will  confefs  then  that  you  have  under- rated  all  the 
Pleafures  of  this  Life,  and  fold  'em  for  a  Dream. 

Eufeb.  Sold  'em  for  a  Dream,  fay  you?  You  lie  under 
a  great  Miftake  ;  tho'  there  are  I'O  fuch  Things,  as  God, 
or  Heaven,  I  fell  em  to  Advantage,  and  make  the  molt 
of  'cm  :  The  bare  Probability  of  a  happy  Eternity,  has 

more 


"/he  Gentleman  InftruBed,     25)3 

more  Worth,  than  a  certahi  Poltefrion  of  all  the  Advan- 
tages of  Life  :  Thefe  Toys  end  in  Vanity  and  Vex;wion 
of  Spirit ;  we  mif-fpend  our  Thoughts,  we  render  our 
felves  cheap  and  defpicable,  by  throwing  away  our  Incli- 
nations upon  thefe  Amufemcnts:  But  I  told  you  before, 
that  thofe  Pleafures  you  talk  of  are  as  uncertain  as  the  Joys 
of  Heaven  ;  and  in  this  Cafe,  I  only  truck  one  Uncer- 
tainty for  another :  But  then  what  I  give  is  only  tempo- 
ral, and  what  I  take  eternal  :  Now,  if  there  be  a  God, 
my  Fortune  is  made  for  ever ;  if  there  be  no  God,  I  re- 
ceive fmall  Difadvantage  ;  I  only  difcard  my  felf  of  thofe 
Things  that  are  noxious  to  my  Body,  and  fcandalous  to 
my  Nature:  At  leafl,  I  live  like  a  Man,  though  in  the 
End  I  die  like  a  Brute,  and  fall  into  nothing :  But  do  you 
think  Chriftians  and  Atheifts  muft  forfwear  all  Pleafure; 
that  they  muft  torture  their  Senfes,  and  only  know  they 
live  by  Mortification  and  Torture  ? 

Theo.  They  muft  check  Paflion,  arreft  Appetite,  and 
curb  the  very  Tendency  of  Nature  to  Pleafure:  They 
muft  continually  ftand  upon  their  Guard,  and  fcour  a- 
bout  for  fear  of  a  Surprize :  Now  thefe  Employments 
are  laborigus  and  mortifying  ;  a  Man  that  is  thus  upon 
the  Hoof  can  fcarce  find  Leifure  for  Diverfion :  In  fhort, 
who  lives  up  to  the  Principles  of  your  Belief,  muft  di- 
vorce from  Mirth,  disband  from  Company,  and  like 
Toads,  feed  on  the  Poifon  of  Spleen  and  Melancholy. 

Eufeb.  We  muft  indeed  have  a  watchful  Eye  over  our 
Paflions,  and  keep  'em  within  the  Bounds  of  Reafon ; 
we  muft  not  ftep  over  the  Limits  of  Decency,  nor  ex- 
ceed the  Prefcript  of  Moderation ;  yet  we  have  a  large 
Field  to  play  in :  Thofe  Reftraints  are  laid  upon  us,  be- 
caufe  an  univerfal  Liberty  would  undo  us;  and  indeed,  I 
find  (ew  A6tions  prohibited  befides  thofe,  that  either  de- 
bauch Health,  crofs  upon  Reafon,  or  undermine  So- 
ciety :  Now  he  who  cannot  be  pleas'd  unlefs  he  prepares 
Work  for  the  Dodlor,  unlefs  he  revels  away  his  Wits,  or 
unhinges  the  whole  Frame  of  Commerce  and  Converfa- 
tion,  deferves,  like  Lyons  or  Bears,  to  be  hunted  out  of 
Society. 

A  Chriftian  may  pretend  to  fome  Enjoyment  in  this 
World,  without  forfeiting  his  Claim  to  the  Delights  of  the 
other'.  If  Providence  has  furnifh'd  him  with  an  Eftate, 
he  may  both  keep  it,  and  ufe  it  too ;  nay,  he  may  take 

U  1  thofe 


ap4      ^-^^  Gentleman  Infru^ed. 

thofe  Meallircs  which  Prudence  and  Juft  ce  lliall  fugt 
geit  to  improve  it  j  he  may  alpire  handfomifly  to  an 
lionourable  Poft,  and  clap  on  his  Coach  a  Coronet^  if  he 
can  procure  a  Patent;  he  may  eat  wholfome  Food,  and 
drink, good  Wine,  fo  he  does  not  clog  his  Stomach,  nor 
offend  his  Brain:  Indeed  he  muft  beware  of  Excefs,  and 
this,  methinks,  is  no  great  Encroachment  on  his  Free- 
dom, no  .great  Confinement  to  his  Diverfion  ;  for  cer- 
tainly a  Surfeit  is  not  very  entertaining ;  and  a  Fit  of 
Drunkennefs  is  no  charming  Trance  to  any  but  to  the 
Spe6lators :  If  a  Chriflian  racks  his  Braili,  flirinks  his 
Purfe,  or  weakens  his  Body  with  amorous  Intrigues, 
he  pafles  his  Commiflion:  But  then  he  has  the  Freedom 
to  marry ;  and  v/hit  will  be  the  Difference  between  him 
and  an  Atheift ;  but  that  this  dotes  on  a  Miftrefs,  and  the 
other  places  his  Affections  on  a  Wife ;  that  the  one  fa- 
tisfies  Senfe  at  the  Expence  of  Duty,  and  the  other  joins 
Duty  with  Pleafure  ?  So  that  upon  the  whole,  unlefs  Sin 
be  the  only  charming  Circumftance,  and  that  nothing 
can  gratify  Senle,  unlefs  it  invades  our  Innocence,  your 
Advantage  over  us  is  inconfiderable  :  But  then,  we  have 
other  Advantages  that  balance  this;  our  Pleafures  are 
clean,  untainted,  and  (what  is  more  valuable)  inno- 
cent;  we  enjoy 'envwithcutb'cruple,  without  Remorfe, 
becaufe  without  Offence  ;  they  are  neither  mixed  with 
Fear,  nor  Shame,  nor  are  they  follow'd  by  Repentance, 
they  bear  the  Tell  of  Confcience,  and  dare  fland  a  Trial 
at  God's  Tribunal. 

Theo.  If  this  be  all,  we  ftand  on  equal  Ground:  My 
Confcience  enioys  a  continual  Calm  ;'  it  ileeps  as  ioundly 
as  if  it  had  taken  an  Opiate,  and  always  comes  to  the 
Lure  of  my  Defires. 

Eufeb.  You  are  flipt  into  a  Fit  of  Bantering  fure;  a 
Qu"ct  Confcience  to  an  Atheift  is  very  extraordinary : 
Tv.N  no.  Sir,  in  Spight  of  Debauchery  and  Infidelity  too, 
it  will  ftrugglc,  it  will  turn  upon  you,  when  it  finds  you 
alone,  and  fly  in  your  Face  :  A  Dofe  of  Claret  may  lay 
it  aileep,  the  Nolfe  of  Company,  and  the  Tumults  of 
P.iffr.-^'a  may  dri^-vvn  its  Voice,  or  put  a  Stop  to  its  Cla- 
mours ;  but  when  the  Fumes  are  fettled,  when  the  Com- 
pany withdraws,  and  P;iffion  runs  in  its  own  Channel, 
it  reads  you  unpleaf mt  Lefliucs  of  Shame  and  liorrour ; 
it  opens  a  full  Profpeft  of  Hell,  enlivens  Fear,  it  calls 

'  upon 


The  Gentleman  InflruBeiL     2^ j 

upon  Defpair,  and  conjures  up  a  Battalion  of  Fiends  to 
haunt  you.  ;  Tell  me,  Theomachu^,  when  the  Candles  are 
extinguifli'd,  and  Sleep  flies  from  your  Eyes;  when  the 
Fire  of  Wine  lias  boil'd  up  your  Blood  into  a  fmall  Fe- 
ver; are  you  not  plagu'd  with  Doubts,  and  hagg'd  with 
Apprehenfions  ?  Does  not,  what  if  there  be  a  God,  ring 
a  difmal  Knell  in  your  Ears,  and  tofs  the  Difeafe  from 
your  Head  to  your  Heart  ?  Would  you  not  purchafe  an 
Aflurance,  that  there  is  no  God  ;  no  Reckoning  with 
a  Lordfliip  ? 

Theo.  Such  Tlioughts  fometlmes  hover  about  me ;  but 
they  fpring  from  Cuftom  and  Education.  1  was  brought 
up  a  Chriftian,  and  imbued  with  all  the  Principles  of 
that  Perfuafion  ;  I  fuck'd  in  from  the  Cradle  thofe  fright- 
ful Notions  of  Judgment  and  Hell ;  and  Time  has  not 
been  able  to  wear  out  thofe  difmal  Ideas :  The  firfl: 
Tin6lure  flicks  clofe,  and  the  Errors  of  Youth  are  fel- 
dom  forgotten  :  But  others  who  have  had  the  good  For- 
tune to  meet  with  a  more  free  Education,  laugh  at  the 
Apparitions  of  thofe  childifli  Bug-bears,  firft  created  by 
Nurfes,  and  then  kept  up  by  Fancy. 

Eufeb.  Thefe  dreadful  Spedres  neither  owe  their  Be- 
ing to  Education,  Nurfes,  nor  Fancy,  they  are  very  real 
Things:  Nature  has  ftamp'd  the  Belief  of  them  in  our 
Soul,  nor  is  Atheifm  able  to  deface  them  :  Thefe  Sparks, 
who  have  not  lain  under  their  Difcipline,  who  have 
rang'd  about  the  Ifland  from  their  Youth,  like  the  barba- 
rous Brajilians  in  the  Wildernefs  of  America,  or  wild 
Afles  on  the  Mountains,  without  Reftraint,  without  In- 
ilrudtion,  may  hedtor  Confcience,  but  cannot  gag  it :  In 
fpite  of  Debauchery  it  will  fometimes  upbraid,  it  will 
throw  Crimes  before  their  Faces,  and  mufter  up  all  the 
Forces  of  Guilt  and  Punifliment  to  torment  them. 

Tell  an  Atheift,  you  have  a  Demonftration  againft  the 
Being  of  a  God,  the  bare  Prop6fal  quickens  him  j  it 
pours  into  him  a  new  Supply  of  Vigour  and  Activity  ;  it 
Iweetens  his  Nature,  and  throws  off  the  mifty  Vapours  of 
Spleen  and  Melancholy:  Pray,  why  fuch  Joy  at  the  very 
Apprehenfion  of  no  God  ?  Is  it  fo  welcome  News  to  hear 
that  he  muft  drop  into  Nothing?  And  take  Leave  of  Ex- 
iftence  when  he  bids  adieu  to  Life?  No  certainly:  But 
Atheifts  know,  if  there  be  a  God,  they  muft  once  ap- 
pear at  his  Tribunal,  and  they  have  no  Inclination  to  put 
U  4  '  th^ 


i3.p6     T'be  Gentleman  Inflru^ed. 

the  iiTue  of  their  Caufe  upon  the  Juftice  of  his  Sentence. 
Now,  why  fliould  they  fear  to  be  condemn'd,  unlefs 
they  know  they  have  done  ill?  And  hovv  can  rhey  dread 
Punifliment  without  trembhng  at  the  Crime  ?  Who  live 
up  to  the  Precepts  of  Chriftianity  fear  no  future  Evil,  be- 
caufe  they  adt  none  here ;  they  apprehend  no  Punifliment, 
becaufe  they  deferve  none.  Such  a  Security  is  above 
Price,  it  exceeds  the  fparkling  Diadems  of  the  Cefars, 
and  all  the  brutifli  Pleafures  of  the  Atheirts.  'Tis  ai5ove 
the  Value  of  Gold  or  Diamonds,  and  can  only  be  pur- 
chas'd  by  Virtue. 

Befidef,  tho'  we  cafl:  the  other  World  out  of  the  Que- 
ftion,  Chaftity,  Modefty,  and  Temperance  are  honou- 
rable Qualifications ;  they  draw  Efteem,  Refpedl,  and  Ve- 
neration from  the  mcft  vicious  j  for  all  efteem  Virtue, 
tho'  they  will  not  go  to  the  Charge  of  the  Purchafe  ; 
Now,  tho'  we  fliould  come  fliort  of  Heaven,  'tis  fome 
Satisfi(5Uon  to  think  that  at  leait  we  may  leave  a  wor- 
thy Memory  to  After-ages ;  thjit  our  Virtue  may  ftand 
upon  Record  to  the  laft  ]\4omcnt  of  Time  ;  and  that  our 
Names  will  not  fleep  by  us  in  the  Grave.  Epicurus  felt 
not  the  Fits  of  Stone  or  Gout,  when  he  m^editated  on 
the  App'aufe  Pofterity  would  give  his  Writings :  This 
imaginary  Pleafure  drowned  his  real  Pains,  and  made  him 
enjoy  a  Paradife  in  Torments:  The  Violence  of  the  Tran- 
fport  either  mortify'd  his  Senfe,  or  infpirited  his  Mind. 
J)ingenes  prcferr'd  Glory  before  fcandalous Delights;  and 
the  very  Appearance  of  Virtue  before  Libertinifrn  :  He 
thought  it  worth  his  while  to  tie  himlelr  up  to  hard 
Uiage,  to  filence  the  Clamours  of  Paflions,  and  to  leave 
behind  him  glorious  Inftances  of  Temperance  and  Mo- 
deration 5  that  he  might  make  a  Figure  in  Annals,  and 
raife  the  Fame  of  his  Tub  higher  than  the  Trophies  of 
jMiliiades:  And  indeed,  there  is  a  vaft  Difference  be- 
tween the  Delights  of  Senfe,  and  thofe  of  the  Mind  ; 
thofe  depend  on  various  Circumftances,  and  muft  touch 
the  Organ  topleafeit:  Perfumes  in  ylrabia  cannot  affc6l 
my  Nofe,  not  a  Ragous  in  J:ip.;n  regale  my  Palate  :  But 
the  Pie:  fures  of  the  Mind  move  in  a  larger  Compafs; 
they  aft  at  Dill  ince,and  are  neither  coiifined  to  Place,  nor 
Situation:  By  a  certain  Spell  of  natural  Magick  it  rai- 
fcs  up  paft  Pleafures,  and  feafts  itfclf  with  Futurities  ; 
I  can  plcafemy  felf  with  a  l"hing  that  is  paft,  and  franic 
■  '  enter- 


^he  Gentleman  InJiruBed.      i^y 

.entertaining  Thoughts  of  what  is  to  come :  And  this  Pri- 
vilege good  Men  po^efsj  they  perceive  a  prefcnt  Satif- 
fa6lion,  ihat  they  have  fecur'd  their  Memory  from  Oblo- 
quy and  Detraction ;  and  that  when  they  expire,  their 
Actions  will  ftand  up  in  Defence  of  tlieir  Integrity  :  If 
we  throw  thcfe  two  Advantages  in  the  Balance,  our  Con- 
dition will  not  be  worfe  than  yours ;  we  flioll  at  leaft  go 
oil"  tjie  Siage  like  wife  Men,  and  you  will  jump  intO' no- 
thing like  Fools.  But  tho'  we  grant  Atheifts  and  Latitu- 
dinarians  lead  more  pleafant  Lives  than  Chrillians,  this 
cannot  prejudice  our  Conduit;  for  ftill  'tis  true,  that  all 
is  little,  fuperficial,  and  inconliderablc,  thft  mull  end. 
Wherefore  to  conclude ;  if  it  be  true,  That  vjhen  txvo 
uncertain  Propojuions  lie  before  me^  I  am  obliged  by  the 
Laws  of  Prtidence  to  chufe  that  which  ivill  turn  to  my 
Advantage,  if  true,  and  cannot  prejudice  me,  if  it  chance 
tobe  falfe  ;  you  muft  confefs,  that  tho'  we  are  miftaken 
in  our  Succefs,  we  are  not  in  our  Choice;  and  that  we 
are  rather  unfortun;ite,  than  imprudent. 

Theo.  Well,  fuppofe  all  this  true  ;  I  am  not  one  Step 
nearer  my  Converfion  than  before. 

Eufeb.  That  is  very  ftrange.  I  have  drawn  out  a  Map 
of  your  Miftakes;  I  have  balanc'd  your  Hopes  with 
your  Fears,  your  Hazard  with  your  Gain  ;  I  have  made 
it  clear  to  Evidence,  that  your  Condu6l  pafles  iVladnefs 
and  Extravagance :  Is  not  this  fufficient  to  perfuade  you 
to  alter  it?  Has  Folly  fo  violent  Attra6lives ;  or  Frenzy 
fuch  unconquerable  Charms?  Is  it  better  to  burn  eter- 
nally for  a  Miftake,  than  go  to  the  Charge  of  cor- 
recting it  ? 

Theo.  Believe  me,  Eufebins,  I  am  not  dotingly  fond 
of  Errors  that  coll  fo  dear:  I  would  willingly  call  them 
oft",  were  it  in  my  Power ;  but  you  know,  that  to  ferve 
God  with  a  Doubt  of  his  Being,  is  no  lefs  criminal,  than 
to  deny  him:  Now  I  cannot  ftretch  my  Faith  to  Firm- 
r.efs  or  Certitude ;  I  muft  waver  on  Doubts,  and  float  on 
Sufpicions  ;  for  my  Underllanding  is  not  at  Command, 
it  lies  not  under  the  Difcipline  of  the  Will;  Evidence  a- 
lone  has  the  Power  to  bend  it :  I  confefs  I  want  Evidence, 
and  if  you'll  help  me  to  a  handfome  Dofe,  I'll  return  the 
Favour  with  Gratitude. 

Eufeb.  Were  you  not  educated  in  Chriftianity  ? 

Ti:>eo.  I  was. 

Eufeb. 


2.pS     ^he  Gentleman  Inftni^ed, 

Ejifeb.  Did  you  not  then  believe  the  Exigence  of  a 
God,  and  all  the  high  Mylleries  of  Chi  iilianity  without 
Doubts  or  Fears  ? 

Theo.  I  did. 

Eufeb.  When  you  grew  in  Years,  did  you  never  make 
an  Enquiry  into  Religion?  Did  you  not  take  the  Pains 
to  inform  yourfelf  why  you  believed,  as  well  as  what 
you  believed  ?  Did  you  take  all  upon  Truft?  And  owe 
your  Faith  to  the  Font  alone,  or  to  the  Climate? 

T'heo.  I  pafs'd  a  great  Part  of  my  Life  in  Retirement; 
^nd  made  Reading  both  my  Employment  and  Pleafurc  ; 
but  efpecially  I  levelTd  my  Study  at  ihofe  things  that 
were  rather  profitable  than  diverting;  and  contributed 
more  to  ray  future  Happinefs,  than  my  prefent  Satisfadi- 
on.  Among  thefe,  I  thought  then,  that  Religion  took 
the  firft  Place;  and  in  this  View  I  fell  upon  Polemicks 
with  Eagernefs,  and  continued  fome  time  with  a  never- 
interrupted  Application  :  My  Progrefs  anfwer'd  my  Ex- 
pedtation ;  I  fancied  I  could  defend  my  Religion  againft 
all  Opponents,  and  convince  any  Man,  if  it  were  not 
evidently  true,  that  'twas  at  leall  evidently  credible  :  To 
be  plain,  I  never  doubted  of  any  Article,  and  always 
fjfpefted  his  Judgment  or  Morals  that  did. 

Eufeb.  Perchance  thofe  Motives  have  given  your  Me- 
mory the  Slip,  perchance  Timje  and  little  Refleftion  has 
fullied  their  Luftre,  and  impair'd  the  Force  of  their 
A6tivity. 

Theo.  No,  I  have  them  all  before  me:  But,  methinks, 
they  have  another  Face  ;  they  want  their  former  Brisk- 
nefs  and  Vigour  ;  they  llrike  but  faintly  on  the  Brain  } 
and  tho'  they  move  the  Underilanding,  they  cannot  fet- 
tle it :  Their  Evidence  is  funk  lb  low,  that  it  fcarce  holds 
up  to  Probability. 

Eufeb.  Upon  Examen  and  fecond  Thoughts,  have 
you  difcovcr'd  Sophiftry  ?  Have  they  fail'd  under  Exa- 
men, or  ftirunk  under  a  due  Trial  of  Logick? 

Theo.  Indeed  I  never  put  them  on  the  Rack,  nor 
brought  them  to  the  Teil  of  Reafon  ;  but  I  have  read  in 
modern  Authors  fuch  home  Arguments  againft  the  Be- 
ing of  a  God,  that  'tis  impoHible  there  fliould  be  any 
fuch  Thing. 

Eufeb.  Hold,  T/^ero/K.^cZ;///,  you  take  Things  by  the  falfe 
Handle,  and  begin  at  the  wrong  End.    You  had  Proofs 

for 


'fhe  Gentleman  hfirti^ed,     29^ 

for  the  Being  of  a  God,  for  the  Trutii  of  Chriftian  Reli- 
gion, that  flafht  Conviftion  fo  ilrongly,  that  they  could 
not  be  relilled  with  Prudence  :    Now,  in  turning  over 
Atheiftical  Neotericks,  you  ftumhle  upon  fome  Excepti- 
ons :  One  cannot  reconcile  God'^  Juft ice  with  his  Mercy  ; 
this  feems  to  fall  foul  upon  that :    Another  can  neither 
Jook  back  to  the  iirft  Moment  of  his  Eternity,  nor  grafp 
his  Immenfity,    nor  comprehend  his  Immutability :    A 
third  is  out   of  Conceit   with  his  Government :    Were 
there  a  God,  fays  he,  this  would  happen,  and  that  would 
not  ;  the    whole    Management    of    the  World  argues 
Chance,  rather  than  Wildom,  and  wants  cither  Forecaft 
or  Power  :  hence  they  conclude,  ^ tlsimpofp.ble  there  jhould 
be  a  God;  therefore  there  is  none :  Blind  Worms!  who 
are  overpowered  with  the  Beamsofa  Planet,  and  dare  fix 
their  Eyes  upon  the  Sun;  they  know  not  themfelves, 
and  yet  would  comprehend  their  JVIaker ;  Alas !  there  is 
nothing  fo  mean,  but  has  fom.ewhat  above  us.     We  fall 
under  the  Weight  of  a  Straw,  and  are  not  able  to  diffccSl 
a  Fly,  or  to  anatomize  a  Glow-worm.     Could  I  com- 
prehend God,  I  would  fcorn  to  adore  him  :  The  very  No- 
tion of  an  infinite  Being,  implies  Obfcurity  ;  andReafon 
tells  me,  that  an  Underlfanding  conhn'd  to  Limits,  can 
never  take  a  full  View  of  a  Thing  that  has  none.     Look 
you.  Sir,  you  muft  not  turn  you  Back  to  plain  Truths, 
becaufe  you  cannot  anfwer    fomc  untoward   Qiieftions 
about  them.     Tho'  you  fubpoenu  a  thoufand  Objedions, 
their  Evidence  will  not  be  allow'd  of  in  the  Court  of 
Reafon,  againft  politive  Demonitrations ;  for  we  feldom 
meet  with  any  thing  fomanifeft,  that  does  not  put  Rea- 
fon to  a  puzzle  on  fome  Occafions.     Zeno  argued  him- 
felf  out  of  the  Exigence  of  Motion,  as  you  have  run  your 
felf  out  of  the  Belief  of  a  Deity.  Motion^  fays  he,  is  impof- 
JibL\  therefore  there  is  no  fitch  thing  :  But  his  Speculatiori 
was  not  receivable  againft  clear  matterof  Faft,  and  Dio- 
genes would  not  difpute,  but  walk'd  him  out  of  his  Error. 
We  lay  before  you  a  hundred  Arguments,  that  prove  the 
Exiftence  of  a  God  ;  you  neither  difcover  Weaknefs  in 
the  Principles,  nor  Error  in  the  CJonclufion ;  but  very 
fairfy  ftep  over  'em,  and  fall  upon  God's  Attributes :  You 
rifle  his  Condudl,  and  canvas  his  Proceeding ;  and  then, 
becaufe  your  purblind  Reafon  is  put  to  a  Nonplus ^  and 
baffled  in  the  Inquiry,  you  conclude  his  Efjl-ncc  is  impojfihle. 

Poffibi- 


300      7he  Gentle ^'J AN  Infru^ied, 

PolTibililies  would  be  drawn  up  in  a  narrov/ Compafs,  if 
a]l  thiiT^s  wereimpoflible  that  confounds  aur  Underiland- 
ing:  Follow  my  Advice,  Gentlemen,  reform  your 
Manners  if  you  intend  to  believe. 

Theo.  Had  I  Faith,  Virtue  would  follow ;  but  how  can 
J  mortify  Appetite,  when  I  have  no  Afliirance  either  of 
Reward  or  Punifhment  ? 

Eufeb.  Quite  contrary  ;  bid  farewel  to  your  Crimes, 
nnd  then  you  will  have  no  Difficulty  to  believe ;  whilft 
'tis  your  Intereil  there  fhould  be  no  God,  that  Chrifti- 
anity  fhould  be  an  Impoiliure,  you  will  believe  neither; 
for  Intcreft  fways  our  Judgment,  as  well  as  it  commands 
our  Aftioris,  and  Demonftration  itfelf  is  lefs  perfua- 
fiye :  'Tis  an  Error  to  think  our  Will  has  no  Jurifdicftion 
over  our  Reafon;  it  exercifes  its  Tyranny  every  day  over 
that  noble  Faculty  -,  it  treats  it  like  a  Slave,  rather  than 
a  Frincefs,  and  Atheifts  commit  Rapes  upon  their  Rea- 
fon, as  well  as  upon  the  Sex  :  Do  you  not  believe  you 
were  lawfully  begotten  ? 

"Theo.  I  do. 

Eufeb.  And  yet  you  have  only  your  Mother's  Word  for 
it ;  but  fliould  flie  declare  the  contrary,  I  lufpett  you 
would  not  pay  the  lame  Deference  to  her  Authority  : 
Now,  why  do  you  believe  her  in  one  Cafe  with  fo 
much  Eafinefs  ?  Why  do  you  disbelieve  her  in  the  other  ? 
I  luppofe  her  Negatives  are  not  lefs  credible  than  her  /If- 
firmatives  ;  and  that  flic  deferves  Belief  when  fhe  denies 
as  well  as  when  (lie  aflirms.  Here  is  the  DilFerence  ;  'tis 
your  Intereft  to  be  lawfully  begotten,  and  to  be  thought 
ib :  On  this  Account  you  enter  upon  your  Father's  Eftate, 
and  his  Titles;  but  then  to  come  in  at  the  Back-door  is 
a  mortifying  Difadvantage  ;  it  cuts  off  the  Plight  to  Suc- 
ceflion,  and  befides  throws  an  Afperlion  on  your  Perfon  : 
Now,  tho'  the  Motives  in  both  Cafes  are  the  fame,  the 
Will  biafled  by  Intereft,  rides  the  Underllanding,  and 
forces  it  to  alTent  to  the  firft,  and  to  diflent  from  the  fecond : 
Jf  you  fliake  off  ill  Habits,  if  you  walk  within  the 
Bounds  of  Moderation  and  Temperance,  and  confine  your 
Thoughts  and  Aftions  to  what  is  lawful,  you  will  pre- 
fenlly  look  upon  God,  and  Religion,  as  Things  advan- 
tageous to  you ;  becaufe  one  promifes  Rewards,  and  the 
(Qther  will  pay  them  ;  and  then  prudential  Motives,  by  the 
Power  of  the  Will,  can  eafily  draw,  and  fix  the  Under- 

ftanding 


fhe  Gentleman  Injra^ed,       301 

Handing  in  the  Belief  of  Truths  you  now  boggle  at ;  but 
if  you  perfevere  in  Lewdnefs,  and  makeover  your  Heart 
to  Licentioufneis;  if  you  dare  not  look  another  World 
in  the  Face,  nor  take  a  Survey  of  Hell  without  almoil 
feeling  the  Pains ;  you  will  never  firmly  believe  there 
is  a  God,  nor  frame  any  tolerable  Notion  of  Religion  ; 
for  a  liable  and  fettled  Perfuaiion  of  thofe  Things,  runs 
ib  contrary  to  your  prefent  Intereft,  that  the  Will,  in 
Spight  of  Evidence  it  felf,  will  fool  the  Undcrllanding ; 
and  either  withdraw  its  Attention  from  the  Conlidera- 
tion  of  the  Argument,  or  by  fome  fly  Trick  of  Leg^crde- 
main  deludeit:  No  Man  in  the  World  ever  deny'd  a 
God  before  hefear'd  him;  he  firft  defcrv'd  Damnation, 
and  then  thruft  Juftice  out  of  Being :  And  lb,  Eudoxus^ 
I  fancy  you  quarrell'd  with  the  Morals  of  Chriilianity, 
before  you  fell  out  with  the  Creed  \  and  all  Religions 
then  only  began  to  pleafe  you,  when  Reftraint  became 
cumberfome.  However,  itheomachus^  in  our  following 
Conference  I  will  attack  your  Underitanding ;  and  I  hope 
to  propofe  fo  lirong  Arguments,  as  will  be  able  to  fix  ic 
in  the  Belief  of  a  God. 

In  the  mean  time  difmifs  Pride,  and  turn  off  Prejudice; 
this  blinds  Reafon,  and  that  over-looks  it ;  the  one  will 
not  fee  Truth,  nor  the  other  ftoop  to  embrace  it:  You 
muil  not  fearch  after  Truth  as  if  you  fear'd  to  find  it ; 
fuch  Purfuits  are  nothing  but  Ceremony  and  Grimace, 
they  are  Symptoms  both  of  Folly  and  Obftinacy,  and  in- 
fallible Marks  that  you  have  fome  finiftrous  Defign,  either 
to  put  a  Cheat  upon  your  felf,  or  to  call  Scorn  and  Con- 
tempt upon  your  Adverfary,  Thofe  Arguments  I  fliall 
propofe,  examine  in  God's  Name  ;  difTed't  the  whole  Dif- 
courfe,  weigh  the  Principles,  meafure  the  Inferences  by 
all  the  Rules  of  Mood  and  Figure :  But  then  fall  not  up- 
on Criticifm^  as  if  your  whole  Bufinefs  were  to  find 
Faults,  not  Truths;  to  quarrel  with  them,  not  to  allent: 
Suppole  'em  not  counterfeit,  before  you  have  brought 
'em  to  the  Touch-Stone:  Again,  pray  remember  there  is 
a  great  Difference  between  Words,  and  a  good  Solution : 
To  return  an  Anfwer,  is  not  to  enervate  a  Proof ;  we 
may  talk  much,  without  talking  to  the  Purpofe  ;  and  ho- 
ver about  aQueftion,  without  coming  up  to  the  Point ; 
And  as  you  mull  take  care  not  to  be  too  great  in  your 
own  Opinion,  io  others  mult  not  be  too  little  ;  For  Men 

fcorn 


302       ^he  Gentleman  tnJiru^Ud, 

fcorn  to  learn  of  thofe  they  contemn:  And  befides,  the 
lead  lntelli;2;ence  from  fuch  a  Quarter  will  be  thorght 
apocryphal :  For  we  meafure  the  Force  of  Arguments  by 
the  Abilities  of  the  Propofer,  and  always  preiume  they 
cannot  rife  above  his  height  that  made  them  ;  fo  that  if 
we  under  rate  an  Adverfary,  we  fhall  by  a  neceflary 
Confequencedefpife  his  Reafons:  For  a  fmall  Prepolld- 
lion  crcrites  ill  Notions,  and  thefe  biafs  the  Judgment, 
and  give  a  wrong  Turn  to  the  Scale. 

But  above  all  things,  implore  the  Succour  of  that 
great  Being,  whofe  ExiftenceyOu  doubt  of:  Tellhimyou 
arc  in  queft  of  his  Exigence,,  not  only  to  know  his  Per- 
fedlions,  but  to  adore  his  Majefty,  to  love  his  Goodnefs, 
and  to  fue  for  Mercy.  Deiire  him  with  Tears  and  Sighs, 
todifpel  thofe  Mifts  that  darken  the  Underftanding,  and 
to  dafli  in  Pieces  thofe  Chains  of  Senfuality  that  fetter  the 
Will ;  that  you  may  be  fo  fortunate  as  to  fee  the  Truth 
of  his  Being,  and  fo  courageous  as  to  embrace  it ;  for 
the  Adivity  of  a  Caufe  anlwers  the  Difpofition  of  the 
Subject :  All  the  Light  in  Nature  will  make  no  LnprefTi- 
on  on  a  diforder'd  Eye :  Fire  may  confume  a  Member 
ftruck  with  the  Palfy,  but  cannot  heat  it  into  Senfation; 
and  Demonftration  may  fhine  upon  the  Underftanding, 
but  this  will  remain  in  Darknefs,  and  grope  in  Obfcurity, 
unlefs  the  Will  be  put  in  Order,  and  the  Veils  of  Preju- 
dice, Pride  and  Licentioufncfs  be  remov'd:  Now  this  is 
the  proper  Bufinefs  of  Grace,  which  God  will  fend  to 
your  Affiftance,  if  you  ask  it  WMih  Patience  and  Sin- 
cerity :  But  if  you  will  live  on  your  own  Fund,  if  you 
will  engage  with  a  Refolution  not  to  yield,  or  difputc 
meerly  to  overcome;  you  will  live  an  Infidel,  and  die  a 
Reprobate :  All  Arguments  will  only  ferve  to  harden 
your  Heart,  to  inflame  your  Guilt,  and  heighten  your 
Obftinacy. 


DIALOGUE    Vin. 

Eudoxus  is  not  fatisfy'd  with  TheomachusV  /Infwers. 

A  Fter  fome  Civilities,  Eufeblus  took  leave  of  his  Adver- 
■^^  faries,  and  T/&eo»z<?f/^w  conduced  hira  to  his  Coach  ; 

lie 


^he  Gektleman  InftruBed,      303 

he  promifed  to  appear  the  next  Day,  and  carry  on  the 
Converfiition.  In  the  mean  time  Eudoxus  found  himfelf 
in  fome  Dilbrder  above  Stairs:  This  Conference  had  bat- 
ter'd  his  Confidence,  avvak'd  his  Confcience,  and  alarm'd 
his  Fears:  He  had  only  enlarg'd  his  Beh'ef  to  make  room 
for  Debauchery,  and  would  needs  fave  all  Men  not  to 
damn  himfelf:  Reftraint  was  his  belt  Argument  againft 
the  Necellity  of  Chriftian  Religion  for  Salvation,  and  no- 
thing drew  him  into  fuch-,a  Latitude  of  Belief,  but  an  un- 
controird  Liberty  of  Ailing.  But  when  1  e  heard  from 
£ia/^/w/j- the  Danger  he  run,  and  the  Hazard  he  expos'd 
himfelf  to  ;  he  found  his  Blood  in  a  Ferment,  and  all  the 
Faculties  of  his  Soul  in  an  Uproar:  He  walk'd  about  the 
Room  in  fuch  a  mufing  Pofture,  ihziTheomachus,  now 
return'd,  could  not  tell  what  to  make  of  this  mute  Scene  : 
His  Motion  reprefented  a  Farce,  his  Looks  a  Tragedy, 
and  both  feem'd  extraordinary  amazing.  What,  faid  Jheo- 
machus^  are  you  wrapt  in  an  Extafy,  and  fallen  over 
Head  and  Ears  into  Speculation?  What  turn'd  Fhilofo- 
pher  ex  tem^ore'^  Your  Face  has  no  metaphyi:cal  Turn, 
lay  down  the  Diiguife,  and  put-on  your  Shape,  you  moke 
an  odd  Figure  in  Mafquerade. 

Eudox.  Is  Serioufncfs  fo  unbecoming?  I  am  forry  to 
hear  Gravity  lits  fo  unhandfomely  upon  me,  and  that  I 
cannot  put  on  a  thinking  Countenance,without  adling  the 
Comedian:  However,  I  hopeyou  willexcufe  me;  your 
Conference  has  given  me  fome  Reafon  to  look  demurely. 

Theom.  With  all  my  Heart,  upon  Condition  you'll  not 
turn  thinking  into  a  Pradice  ;for,  I  tell  you  again,  a  Stoi- 
cal Comportment  agrees  ill  with  your  Conftitution,  and 
a  contemplative  Humour  v/ill  four  the  Blood,  and  caft 
you  into  Fits  of  the  Hypocbondry.  Methlnks  I  can  read 
the  Subject  of  your  Meditation  on  your  Face :  I  have  tra- 
veird  far  in  Phyliognomy,  and  have  drawn  up  a  Map  of 
that  Country:  Inline,  Sir,  the  Afpedl  is  fitted  up  for 
Converfation,  as  well  as  the  Tongue ;  and  like  the  cV/^^r- 
/rt;7x  comprehends  much  in  a  little  ;  it  explains  a  Man's 
Mind  more  clear  than  one  can  fpeak  it :  You  are  now  an- 
villing  out  fome  petty  Revenge  againft  £«/^/j/W,  and  in- 
deed he  deferves  a  Mortification  for  his  Sophillry  :  He 
talks  with  fuch  a  magifterial  Confidence,  as  if  he  vented 
nothing  but  Evidence :  He  is  a  kind  offpiritual  Hcdor, 
and  banters  People  into  Subjedion  and  Slavery;  he  has 

an 


■504       'fhe  Gentleman  InftriiBecl 

an  impofing  Air,  and  varnifhes  his  Reafonwith  fuch  Af- 
furance,  that  unthinking  Gentlemen  miftake  one  for  the 
other  :  But  you  faw  how  I  teazed  him. 

Eudox.  i  cannot  tell  what  Judgment  you  frame  of  this 
Morning's  Conteft,  but  I  counfel  you  not  to  crow  or  cry 
V'tBoria;  let  it  pafs  for  a  drawn  Battle;  he  may  other- 
wife  think  of  the  Prefs,  and  if  the  Adion  takes  Air,  and 
appears  in  View,  perchance  the  Publick  may  pronounce 
againft  you.  We  are  often  fond  of  our  own  Exploits,  and 
eafily  turn  the  Advantages  upon  our  felves ;  whereas, 
God  knows,  impartial  Readers  may  give  it  toourAdver- 
faries,  and  lay  Difl:ionour  at  our  Doors.  I  mull  own,  I 
wifli  you  had  done  your  Part  better,  or  th^t  Eufel;iuj  had 
done  his  worfe :  I  find  my  interior  in  a  Flame  ;  I  feel  an 
unknown  War  in  my  Brealt ;  your  Converfation  has 
rais'd  it ;  my  Fears  are  enliven'd,  and  tho'  I  am  not  in 
Hell,  methinks  I  defervc  it, 

'Tbeom.  Certainly  you  rave,  you  have  a  feverifh  Di- 
flemper  upon  you,  and  the  malign  Humour  has  feiz'd  up- 
on the  Brain  :  I  never  faw  a  Man  before,  found  under  an 
Argument,  or  difcours'd  into  a  Calenture  :  You  take  Ap- 
prehenfions  for  Things,  and  turn  a  good  Nature  into  an 
Executioner :  Your  Troubles  are  but  Dregs  of  Educati- 
on, or  airy  Spirits  that  rife  from  Prejudice:  Time  will 
wear 'em  out*  or  Courage  will  daunt  'em;  bear  up  with 
Refolution,  and  you'll  fcare  your  Frights,  and  loo.k  thofe 
dreadful  Bugbears  out  of  Countenance. 

Eudox.  I  had  rather  you  would  reafon 'em  out  of  Coun- 
tenance :  Uncertainty  has  begot  'em,  and  I  fancy  Cer- 
tainty would  deftroy 'em.  A\\Theom<ichnsl  If  there  be  a 
God,  you  are  undone;  and  if  Chriltianily  be  the  only 
faving  Religion,  I  am  undone  alio. 

Tkeom.  Fie,  Fie,  I  took  you  for  a  Man  of  Parts;  for 
a  Man  above  Fear,  and  out  of  the  Reach  of  Apprehenfi- 
on.  I  tell  you  there  is  no  God,  and  by  confequcnce  that 
Chriftianity  is  nothing  but  pure  Mummery  and  Tmpo- 
fture  :  'Tis  a  poetical  Engine,  fram'd  by  crafty  Statefmen 
to  heave  Men  into  their  Duty. 

Eudox.  Butdid  younotconfefs  to£»/^^/>/,  that  you 
were  certain  of  neither  ? 

"I'heom.  Prithee  ask  no  Queflions  :  Let  us  take  a  turn 
to  the  Blne-Pofis:  Canary ck^rs  more  Controverfies  in  an 
Hour,  than  Difputcs  in  an  Age:  A  Glafs  of  good  Wir.c 

carrie.s 


The  Gentleman  InflruBed,      305 

carries  off  a  Doubt  in  a  trice,  and  I  have  found  by 
Experience  that  Fears  are  fooner  dranlt,  than  reafon'd 
away. 

Eudox.  The  prefent  Bufinefs  is  too  ferious  to  be  deba- 
ted in  a  Tavern ;  and  I  had  rather  argue,  than  laugh 
with  you.  If  I  comprehend  Eufebius  right,  we  are  in 
ill  Circumftances :  For  tho'  it  happen  that  we  are  nothing 
in  the  next  World,  we  are  without  peradventure  Fools 
in  this.  For,  look  you.  Sir,  both  our  Tenets  are  very 
uncertain,  and  by  legal  Inference  may  be  falfe;  if  they 
are,  what  will  become  of  us?  Can  any  Creature  fink 
into  a  more  defperate  Misfortune,  than  we  fhall  certainly 
meet  with  ?  Can  we  lofe  more  than  by  forfeiting  all  I 
Or  can  we  fufFer  more,  than  when  wc  fry  in  Flames 
for  an  Eternity?  I  confefs  this  Eternity  ftrikes  a  Damp 
through  every  Joint:  I  dare  not  play  with  Thunder,  nor 
Itand  the  Stroak  of  the  Omnipotent.  On  the  other  lide, 
though  the  other  Tenets  prove  true,  what  are  we  the 
better?  Firfi^  Thofe  Pleafures  we  pretend  to,  are  as  un- 
certain, as  that  Hell  we  now  ridicule,  as  that  Heaven  we 
burlefque.  Secondly,  Suppofe  they  were  moil  certain, 
they  are  not  able  to  render  us  happy  when  we  die,  nor 
content  whilft  we  live ;  they  only  ferve  to  engender  Dif- 
eafes,  to  provoke  Confcience,  and  to  prey  upon  our  E- 
ftates:  They  are  Things  beneath  a  rational  Creature,  not 
worth  enjoying,  nor  even  the  contending  for:  Now  fee- 
ing there  is  fuch  an  immenfe  Chaos  between  our  Hopes 
and  our  Fears,  fuch  a  monftrous  Difproportion  between 
our  Lofs  and  our  Gain,  how  is  it  poflible  for  Men  to 
fwerve  more  palpably  from  the  common  Diftamens  of 
Prudence  than  we  ? 

Theom.  I  tell  you,the  Immortality  of  the  Soul  is  a  meer 
flourifhof  Fancy.  'Tis  a  Platonical  Idea  form'd  at  A- 
ihens  ibme  thousands  of  Years  ago,  and  wafted  from  be- 
yond Seas  \no\xr  Smyrna  Fleet. 

Eudox.  Could  you  prove  your  Allertion,  my  Fears 
would  be  at  an  End  :  I  would  laugh  at  my  prefent 
Frights,  and  fport  with  thofe  Flames  I  tremble  at.  I 
nm  not  yet  cloy'd  with  Liberty,  nor  furfeited  with  Mirth ; 
nor  am  I  fo  befotted  with  Pleafures  of  Senfe,  as  to 
charge  thro,  gh  Fire  and  Brimftone  for  their  fake  :  But 
you  have  gi-.nted  to  Eufebius,  that  this  very  Point  has 
no  more  Certainty,  than  that  of  the  Exiftenceof  a  Deity; 

X  So 


3i:i6      T^^  G  E  N  T  L  E  M  A  N  InJIruM. 

So  thattho'  you  name  it  a  Fable;  for  ought  we  know  it 
may  be  a  real  Story. 

Theom.  But  do  ydu  remember  I  told  Eufehius^  that  a 
tottering  Belief  of  a  God,  or  of  Chriftianity,  would  not 
do  our  Turns,  tho'  we  bridled  our  PafTions,  and  bound 
up  our  Appetite  to  Penance  and  Mortification  :  Now  if 
you  have  in  ftore  an  Argument,  that  can  convey  Convi- 
6lion,  impart  it  to  your  felf,  and  ftand  to  the  Belief  of 
Chriftianity  with  Refolution :  But  if  you  have  not,  and 
there  be  a  Hell,  a  wavering  Faith,  tho'  waited  on  by  all 
the  Virtues  of  the  moft  rigid  Reclufe,  conducts  you  to 
Deftrudtion,  as  furely  as  Debauchery  :  Of  the  two  give 
me  therefore  a  pleafant  Life,  and  a  wretched  Eternity, 
rather  than  a  miferable  Life,  and  a  miferable  Eternity ; 
for  of  two  Evils  I  am  for  the  lefs.    * 

Eudox.  I  confefs  I  am  at  a  lofs  for  fuch  an  Argument ; 
yet  my  Mind  gives  me,  that  Induftry  may  make  a  Dif- 
covery,  either  for  the  one  Side,  or  for  the  other ;  that  is, 
we  may  fall  upon  a  Medium  that  will  unriddle  the  My- 
ftery  ;  and  either  certainly  convince  us,  that  all  the 
Dreads  and  Terrors  of  a  future  State  are  Fidlion  and  Im- 
pofture,  or  that  they  are  real  Things ;  for  if  the  Cafe 
Hood  otherwife,  I  fliould  be  tempted  to  Timonize,  and 
clap  a  Satyr  upon  our  whole  Species;  I  fnould  break  it& 
Efcutcheon,  and  throw  its  Titles  of  Honour  upon  Biars, 
LyoKS,  and  Tygers:  For  certainly  Man  with  his  pompous 
and  magnificent  Prerogatives  of  Reafon,  would  fink  be- 
low the  Level  of  the  vileft  Infeft ;  becaufehis  Lot  would 
be  Fear,  and  tormenting  Thoughts  here,  and  perchance 
more  tormenting  Fire  hereafter :  Beafts,  poor  Creatures, 
neither  wafte  their  Spirits  vinth  the  towring  Pretenfions 
of  Place,  nor  Precedency  ;  nor  with  the  carking  Appetite. 
of  having,  nor  with  the  trouhlefome  Apprehenfion  of 
lofing:  Their  Care  neither  looks  backward  nor  forward; 
their  only  Labour  is  to  fence  againft  the  prefent  Neccfli- 
ty  ;  they  neither  expe6l  any  Advantage  from  the  future, 
nor  any  Misfortune  ;  they  deiire  not  to  be  better,  nor 
fear  to  be  worfe»-They  gently  glide  down  the  Tide  of 
Nature,  and  fail  down  contentedly  with  the  Current  of 
Inclination :  All  their  Pains  and  Pleafure  expire  with 
their  Life,  and  when  their  Taper  is  fpent,  and  burn: 
within  the  Socket,  they  lie  down  to  fleep,  ;?nd  evapo- 
rate into  Nothing  :  But  alas !  poor  Man,  is  tantaliz'd  with 

plea- 


fhe  Gentleman  Injru^ed,      307 

pleafant  Dreams  of  a  future  Felicity,  and  haunted  with 
frightful  Spedres  of  never-ending  Miferies;  yet  accord- 
ing to  your  new  Theology ^  he  is  not  able  to  difcover  whe- 
ther thefe  Things  have  any  real  Being,  but  in  Imaginati- 
on :  What  is  this  but  to  hang  him  on  the  Tenters  ?  But 
to  ftretch  him  on  the  Torture?  And  to  make  his  chief 
Privilege,  Reafon,  fubfervient  to  his  Torment?  There 
may  be  a  God,  fay  you,  a  Hell,  a  Heaven,*  and  one  only 
faving  Religion  :  If  thefe  things  are  true,  and  we  live  as 
if  they  were  falfe,  we  are  loll:  On  the  other  fide,  if 
they  are  falfe,  and  we  check  Appetite,  and  conform 
our  Adions  to  the  moft  rigid  Morality,  we  labour  in 
vain,  and  take  Pains  to  meet  with  Difappointment:  But 
then  again,  if  they  chance  to  be  true,  though  we  live  pi- 
oufly,  if  we  believe  not  ftedfaftly,  our  Bulinefs  is  done: 
We  mult  pitch  our  Tents  with  the  Liberiwes  and  Athei[is^ 
and  keep  Company  with  the  unfortunate  Fry  of  the  Re- 
probate. 'Tis  true,  could  we  believe  without  Doubts, 
a  little  Mortification  of  our  Paffions,  fome  Reilraint  up- 
on Appetite  might  fecure  us ;  but  this,  you  fay,  is  im- 
poflible,  becaufe  there  are  not  to  be  found  in  Nature,  Mo- 
tives fufficient  to  fettle  our  Judgments  in  a  firm  Belief, 
either  of  a  Deity,  or  of  Religion ;  fo  that  in  fpight  of 
Fate,  of  Prudence  and  Virtue,  poor  Men  muft  agonize 
here  under  all  the  dreadful  Convulfions  of  Fear  ;  and,  if 
there  be  a  God,  under  the  Weight  of  his  Revenge  here- 
after :  This  is  a  murdering  Dodrine,  Theomachus  ;  and 
if  true,  you  muft  conclude,  that  Nature  is  a  Step- mother 
to  Man,  and  that  God  created  him  in  his  Fury  ;  that  he 
grac'd  him  with  Knowledge,  to  fit  him  up  for  Mifery: 
Let  us  rather  fay,  we  may  find  fome  Thread,  if  we  take 
t!jc  Pains  to  look  about  us,  to  guide  us  out  of  this  wan- 
dering Labyrinth:  We  may  dive  into  things,  till  we  fall 
upon  Certainty ;  and  difcover  whether  Impofture  lies 
on  our  Side,  or  theirs  who  oppofe  our  Principles:  But, 
Sir,  I  have,  1  fear,  Trefpafs'd  upon  your  Patience,  and 
perchance  good  Breeding  alio:  But  pray  charge  my  Dif- 
order,  wiih  thefe  Failings,  and  take  an  Excule  forAtons- 
mcnt. 


X  2  DIA 


308       fhe  Gentleman  InfiruM. 

DIALOGUE    IX. 

Eudoxus  unfat'isfied  with  the  Difcourfe  of  TheomachuSy 
goes  to  Eufebius. 

JPUDOXUS  return'd  to  his  Lodgings  with  a  heavy 
-^-^  Heart :  He  gave  Scope  to  his  Fancy,  which  warm'd 
with  the  Morning  Difpute,  was  become  ungovernable : 
It  flew  from  one  difmal  Apprehenfion  to  another,  till  at 
length  it  wandred  into  Hell,  and  drew  out  all  the  Ter- 
rors of  that  wretched  Region  to  fcare  him  :  The  Con- 
templation of  that  Place  of  Torment,  of  Fire,  Darknefa 
and  Defpair,  fqueez'd  out  Tears,  Sighs,  and  Lamenta- 
tions. Woe  be  to  me,  faid  he,  when  I  die  here  to  Plea- 
fure,  if  I  live  hereafter  to  eternal  Pains :  This  may  be 
my  Fate,  and  certainly  will  be,  if  Chrillianity  be  the 
only  faving  Religion,  and  there  be  any  Punifhment  for 
Infidehty;  I  fliy  it  will  be,  unlefs  I  lay  afide  both 
Doubts  and  Lewdnefs :  This  is  an  Affair  of  the  higheft 
Confequence;  it  deferves  my  Solicitude,  and  will  re- 
ward my  Labour  with  Intereft,  which  way  foever  it 
turns,  I  will  therefore  think  of  no  other  Bufinefs,  till  I 
have  brought  this  to  a  happy  Conclufion:  By  the  Suc- 
cefs  of  this  I  muft  ftand  or  fall. 

The  Refolution  was  taken ;  but  he  foon  found  himfelf 
in  an  unknown  Region,  without  Stars,  Mip,  or  Guide  to 
lleer  his  Courfe  by :  He  purfued  Certainty,  but  knew 
not  in  what  part  of  the  Globe  it  dwelt,  or  where  to  ad- 
drefs  himfelf  for  Diredtion.  firfi^  He  thought  to  fall 
upon  Reading ;  for  Books  being  the  Produdt  of  Time 
and  mature  Thoughts,  are  generally  polifli'd  ;  they  tell 
us  how  far  our  Underflanding  can  go  towards  the  Difco- 
very  of  Truth  ;  and  leaving  Impertinencies  behind,  draw 
off"  the  Spirits  and  Eilence  from  the  Subjeft:  But  then 
he  was  at  a  puzzle  about  the  Choice:  Bad  Books,  faid 
he,  are  as  contagious  as  lewd  Company  -,  and,  what  is 
worfe,  more  frequent,  and  more  afteding  ;  for  they  are 
fet  off  with  lufcious  Expreflions,  and  with  quaint  Lan- 
guage, which  carries  down  the  Poifon  with  Pleallire: 
Like  Ladies,  they  never  appear  in  Publick,  but  under  a 
gaudy  Drefs ;  and  care  is  taken  to  wafli  over  the  Foulnefs 
of  the  Subjeft  with  a  pleafing  Tarnifli:  A  Man  may  as 

well 


7%e  Gentleman  InJlruBed,      305) 

well  learn  Chaftity  in  the  Stews,  Temperance  in  Ta- 
verns, Honefty  in  Newgate,  Meeknefs  among  Heilors, 
and  the  Belief  of  a  God  among  Atheifts,  as  Chriftianity 
among  thefe  wretched  Pamphlets.  An  ill  Subject  well 
handled  doubles  the  Danger  of  reading  it;  the  Mifchief 
rifes  with  the  Wit,  and  infedls  in  Proportion  to  the  Art 
of  the  Author.  In  fine,  he  was  tofs'd  from  Refolution  to  ■ 
Refolution,  without  knowing  which'  to  refolve  on; 
till  at  length  he  reflefted  of  Eiifebius :  'Tis  true,  he  had 
no  Acquaintance  with  the  Gentleman,  but  being  taken 
with  his  Morning's  Difcourfe,  he  was  fatisfied  of  his  Ca- 
pacity, and  judg'd  favourably  of  his  Probity.  Thefe 
Considerations  made  him  break  through  all  Difficulties, 
and  the  prefent  Aches  of  his  Mind,  added  Wings  to  the 
Defire  of  finding  a  Lenitive. 

He  went  therefore  out  of  Hand  to  Eufebius's  Lodg- 
ings, and  laid  open  the  State  of  his  Interior;  he  conjur'd 
him  by  allthat's  facred  to  lend  his  Afiiftance ;  and,  if 
poflible,  to  cure  that  Wound  himfelf  had  made:  He 
fpoke  with  a  Vehemency,  that  eafily  perfuaded  Eufehius 
he  was  in  earneft ;  and  his  Suit  was  too  jufl  to  receive  a 
Denial. 

Sir,  faid  Eufebiu!,  you  have  addrefs'd  your  felf  to  a 
Perfon,  that  is  perchance  lefs  able  than  willing  to  affift 
you  :  I  aflure  you  of  my  Readinefs ;  the  Ifllie  mull  an- 
fwer  for  my  Ability.  I  anrglad  (pardon  the  Exprelfion) 
of  your  Dillemper :  When  we  feel  the  Difeafe,  there  is 
Hopes  of  a  Cure  ;  but  when  we  have  no  Senfe  of  our 
Condition,  'tis  time  to  think  of  a  Coffin.  Neither  fpurn, 
nor  kick  at  Providence  for  this  painful  Ufage:  The  O- 
peration,  no  doubt,  is  fharp,  but  withal  neceflary ; 
Health  of  the  Body  is  not  recovered  without  Pain  ;  an 
Impofthume  calls  for  a  Lance,  and  Oppletion  for  unpa- 
latable Evacuatories.  The  fame  Methods  are  applicable 
to  Difeafes  of  the  Soul :  Whilft  Confcience  fufFers  De- 
bauchery without  Murmur,  without  Complaint;  whilft 
we  enjoy  a  profound  Peace  within  us,  in  the  midft  of 
Crimes,  as  well  as  of  Innocence,  we  find  no  Inclination 
to  reform  :  That  falfe  Tranquillity  lulls  us  afleep,  it 
keeps  ferious  Reflexions  at  a  Diftance,  and  perfuades 
our  foolifli  Credulity,  that  no  Danger  threatens  us,  be- 
caufe  we  apprehend  none  :  But  when  Offences  fit  uneafy 
jipon  us,  when  Pleafuresgall  us,  when  Infidelity  becomes 

X  3  fufpedled^ 


310     T'he  Gentleman  Inftruthd, 

fufpe6led,  and  Lewdnefs  it  felf  troublefome  ;  we  begin 
to  furvey  our  Condu6t,  to  compare  the  Frefent  with  the 
Future,  to  face  our  Hopes  with  our  Fears,  and  tlie  De- 
lights of  this  Life  with  the  Torments  of  the  other  :  And 
when  we  difcover  thofe  grofs  illufions  we  he  under,  a 
httle  llruggimg  with  the  help  of  God's  Grace,  will  break 
through  all  Impediments  v.'hich  interpofe  between  us  and 
our  Duty:  Take  therefore  this  Anguifh  of' Mind  as  a 
Pledge  of  God's  Kindnel's,  and  of  your  future  Felicity  j 
he  ftrikes   in  his  Mercy,  as  well   as  in  his  Juflice  ;  he 
heals  when  he  wounds,  and  fpares  when  he  punifhes : 
Never  defer  the  fearch  of  Truth,  nor  faulter  till  you 
have  found  it :  Slacknefs  in  a  point  of  this  Importance  is 
always  dangerous,  and  fometimes  mortal :    When  we 
refufe  God's  kind  Invitation,  he  often  chaftifes  our  Incivi- 
lities/';^ /7rf^r««/7,  and  fcarce  leaves  a  Moment  between 
the  Affront  and  the  Revenge,     When  I  was  fome  Years 
ago  in  Flanders^  an  Officer  of  my  Acquaintance  gave  me 
a  Vifit;  he  was  one  of  thofe,  who  make  no  Diltindlion 
between  Religion  and  Faftion ;  who  jell  at  Faith,  and 
fpend  their  Lives  in  its  Service :   He  could  no  more  be- 
lieve that  Church  true  he  fought  for,  than  that  he  fought 
againil:  He  ridicul'd  the  one,  and  contemn'd  the  other  ; 
he  treated  Morality  ill  in  his  Difcourfe,  but   worfe  in 
Pradice:  I  thought  a  little  Warmth  and  Expoftulation 
were  juftiiiable  on  fuch  an  Occafion,  and  fo  I  took  him 
up  roundly  ;  I  drew  out  in  lively  Colours  the  Horror  of 
his  Life,  the  Unwarrantablenefs  of  his  Proceeding,  and 
the  Severity  of  thole  Pains  God  had  prepar'd  for  Liber- 
tines in  the  next  World ;  together  with  the  Curies  that 
would  fall  upon  his  Head  in  this :  He  took  leave  of  me, 
and  retir'd  to  his  Inn,  but  after  Dinner  he  return'd :  I 
have  often,  faid  he,  receiv'd  Proofs  of  your  Kindnefs,  but 
never  greater  than  this  Morning  :  I  have  look'd  into  my 
felf  fince  I  faw  you,  and  confefs  my  Cafe  would  be  de- 
fperate,  had  I  lefs  than  an  infinite  Mercy  to  confide  in: 
Some  urgent  Buiinefs  calls  me  to  my  Garrifon  ;  but  next 
Week  I  will  return,  and  advife  with  you  about  the  grand 
Affair  of  my  Salvation.     This  is  a  Call  from  God,  an- 
fwer'd  I,  and  perchance  it  maybe  the  laft:  The  Cam- 
paign draws  near ;  and  when  once  you  have  taken  the 
•  Field,  you  will  neither  be  Mailer  of  your  Time,  nor  your 
Life;  your  Employment  challenges  that,  and  a  Bullet 
may  difpofe  of  this  before  you  are  aware,  1 


the  Gentleman  Inftni^ed,     311 

I  am  fenfible,  reply'd  the  Gentleman,   of  my  Cafe, 
and  of  the  Danger;  and  nothing  fhall  alter  my  Refolu- 
tion  ;  and  fo  he  departed.     He  kept  his  Word,  and  with- 
in ten  Days  return'd;  he  pafs'd   by  my  Lodgings,  and 
told  me  he  would  not  fail  after  Dinner  to  wait  upon  me, 
and  hop'd  to  bring  his  Bufinefs  to  a  happy  Conclufion: 
Permit  me,  Sir,  faid  I,  to  attend  you  at  your  Inn:  'Tis 
much  more  ealy  to  fall  into  Company,  than  to  difengage 
your  felf :   Men  of  your  Calling,    had  rather  ftorm  a 
Half-moon  than  aflail  Cuftom,   or  attack  Ceremony  : 
But  he  would  not  hear  of  my  Propofition  ;   he  left  the 
Company,  and  was  on  his  way;  when  unfortunately  he 
met  with  a  Friend,  who  invited  him  to  a  Bottle  of  Cham- 
faigne:  He  would  not  accept  of  the  Invitation;  but  the 
other  would  not  be  deny'd  :    And  fo  at  length  away  they 
march'd  together.  One  Bottle  drew  on  another,  and  their 
Debauch  ended  with  the  Night:  In  the  mean  time,  an 
Exprefs  calls  him  to  his  Regiment :  The  French  have  taken 
the  Field  ;  and  all  muft  march  to  watch  their  Motions : 
He  returns  home  in  Poft  ;  he  goes  to  the  Camp,  and 
fhortly  after  lofes  his  Life  at  Steenkirk :  We  may  truly 
fay,  this  poor  Gentleman  was  near  Heaven ;  but  God 
fend  the  unhappy  Rencounter  of  a  Friend  d'id  not  put  him 
out  of  the  way  !  Fie  was  invited  to  Repentance,  he  made 
a  fair  Advance;  and,  I  may  fay,  the  Bulinefs  was  al- 
moft  finifh'd,becaufe  he  ferioufly  refolv'd  to  conclude  it. 
But  a  Bottle  oiChampaigne  put  in  a  demur:  It  fufpend- 
ed  the  Execution  ;    and  then  the  fudden  March  of  the 
Troops  broke  off  the  Negotiation.  He  went  to  the  Field 
a  Libertine,  and  in  all  Probability  dy'd  one.     As  God 
touch'd  his  Heart,  fo  he  has  foftened  yours :  Pray,  Sir, 
let  not  Negligence  mifufe  the  Favour,  nor  turn  it  into  a 
Curfe:  Let  it  Hand  up  for  you  at  God's  Tribunal,  as  a 
Witnefs  of  Gratitude,  not  of  Obftinacy.     I  counfel  you 
for  fome  Days  to  withdraw  into  a  Place  of  Retirement : 
Vifits  will  diftraft  you,  and  may  llifle  your  pious  Refo- 
lution,  if  your  Defign  takes  air.     If  your  Companions 
learn  you  are  going  into  another  Intereft,  they  will  raife 
a  hundred  Batteries  againft  your  Conftancy ;  and  though 
you  come  off  vi^ith  Vidory,  you  will  not  get  clear  of 
their  Temptations  without  Danger;  I  will  willingly  wait 
upon  you  into  the  Country,  if  yOu  can  pitch  upon  a  con- 
yenient  Place. 

^  4.  Eudox, 


312      ne  Gentleman  InJlruBei. 

Eudux.  You  will  infinitely  oblige  me :  My  Houfe  Is 
but  four  Miles  off;  and,  if  you  pleafe,  we  will  take 
Coach  this  Evening. 

Eufeb.  I  am  content,  but  I  muftexcufe  my  Departure 
to  Tbeomachus^  otherwife  he  may  fv^nd  Hue  and  Cry  af- 
ter me  ;  and  Si  quis  me  in  the  next  Gazette. 

He  fenthim  a  Letter  to  let  him  know  that  a  Bufinefs 
of  Importance  requir'd  his  Prefence  in  the  Country  ;  that 
he  would  difpatch  it  with  convenient  Speed,  and  that  the 
fame  Moment  his  Hands  were  rid  of  that  Trouble,  he 
would  return  to  profecute  the  Conference.  Theomachm 
anfwer'd  he  was  his  own  Mailer  ;  that  he  might  take  his 
Time,  and  that  he  would  expedl  his  Return  with  Plea- 
fure:  They  immediately  took  Coach,  andarriv'dat£a- 
doxush  Houfe. 


DIALOGUE    X. 

Eudoxus  retires  ivith  Eufebius  into  the  Cotmiry,  where 
they  meet  with  Arioviftus,  a  High-floxvii  Laiitudina- 
rian. 

XpUD  0  XUS\  Mother  receiv'd  her  Son  with  Tender- 
■*-'  nefs:  She  was  a  Lady  of  a  Piety  above  the  common ; 
fhe  lov'd  her  Son,  but  could  not  diilembJe  his  Vices:  She 
often  admonifli'd  him  of  the  Danger  he  expos'd  his  Soul 
to,  and  fometimes  mingled  Tears  with  gentle  Reproofs. 
But  his  time  v^^as  not  yet  come,  and  all  her  Admonitions 
only  ferv'd  to  heighten  his  Obduracy  :  Yet  fhe  gave  not 
over;  fhe  implor'd  God's  Alliftance  in  private,. and  be- 
feech'd  his  Mercy  to  ftrike  out  of  this  Rock  fome  Tears 
of  Repentance  ;  to  recal  this  Prodigal,  who  had  imbe- 
zell'd  all  his  Treafures  of  Grace,  and  pawn'd  his  Religi- 
on to  Proilitutes:  Her  Friends  admir'd  her  Charity,  and 
pity'd  it.  Once  a  Divine  aflur'd  her,  that  a  Child  of 
Tears  would  never  perifli :  She  took  the  Words  for  an  O- 
racle,  and  fancy'd  he  fpoke  by  Infpiration:  Though  her 
Son's  Profanenefs  touch'd  her  to  the  quick,  the  Hopes  of 
his  Converfion  kept  her  in  Heart ;  and  the  more  he  ra^ 
from  Piety,  the  more  fhe  praftis'd  if. 

When 


'The  Gentleman  InJIruBed,     313 

When  Eiidoxus  arriv'd,  fhe  read  fome  Change  in  his 
Face ;  his  Behaviour  was  more  grave ;  his  Looks  more 
fober,  and  all  his  Carriage  breath'd  an  Air  of  Modefty. 
At  firll  fhe  fufpefted'the  Dice  had  run  crofs,  and  that  the 
Caufe  of  his  Aielancholy  lay  in  the  Pocket :  Then  (he 
fear'd  he  was  hammering  out  fome  amorous  Intrigue,  or 
lay  under  the  Mortification  of  a  criminal  Difappointment. 
But  Eudoxus  foon  diffipated  her  Sufpicions,  by  telling  the 
Caufe  of  his  unexpefted  Arrival.  She  was  over-joy'd  at 
the  News,  and  almoll  funk  under  the  Excefs :  She  gave 
Eufeblus  a  thoufand  Thanks,  and  ftil'd  him  her  Son's  good 
Angel.  They  were  fitting  down  to  Supper,when  in  comes 
Ariovlflus  Wxih.  another  Gentleman.  The  Lady  was  fur- 
priz'd  at  the  Arrival  of  fo  unexpected  a  Gueft  ;  his  very- 
Sight  drew  the  Blood  to  her  Face,  and  though  fhe  was 
Miftrefs  of  her  Words  and  Adtions,  fhe  could  not  com- 
mand her  Refentment.  She  fear'd  left  this  importune 
Vifit  might  nip  her  Son's  Refolutions,  and  dafh  in  Pieces 
the  Hope  fhe  had  of  his  Converfion.  However,  fhe  forgot 
not  Civility  in  the  very  Heat  of  her  Difturbance,  and 
skreen'd  oft' her  Concern  with  a  hearty  Welcome. 

But  after  Supper  fhe  took  Eufebius  alide,  and  expos'd 
her  Fears  with  all  the  Energy  of  Tears  and  Paffion.  Sir, 
faid  fhe,  God  fend  your  Charity  meet  with  Succefs:  I 
fufpeft  Ariovijius  cloaks  fome  ill  Defign  under  the  fpeci- 
ous  Outfide  of  a  Vifit,  and  that  another  Errand  brought 
him  here,  befides  meer  Civility  :  His  Morals  run  even 
with  his  Religion  ;  he  believes  what  flatters  Pride,  and 
adts  whatever  fawns  upon  Senfe  ;  he  goes  upon  one  Prin- 
ciple, which  is  to  ftick  at  nothing,  that  fides  with  Inte- 
refl,  or  gratifies  Appetites.  This  Man  firft  furnifh'd  Eh- 
doxus  with  corrupt  Maxims,  and  Theomachus  taught 
him  the  Application.  In  fine,  both  have  contributed  to 
his  DeItru6tion,  and  my  Misfortune. 

Eufebius  defir'd  her  not  to  take  the  Alarm.  I  will  find 
occafion,  faid  he,  to  engage  /Iriov'iftns  in  a  Difpute,  I 
doubt  not  of  the  Succefs :  The  Overthrow  of  the  Mafter 
may  work  upon  the  Scholar.  He  may  yield  to  thofe  Rca- 
fons  Ariovijius^  I  am  fure,  will  not  be  able  to  refifl. 
The  next  Morning,  when  they  fat  together  in  the  Par- 
lour^ Chance  gave  the  cue  to  a  hot  Debate,  that  cover'd 
4rioviftus  with  Confufion,  and  Eufebius  with  Glory. 

D  I  A- 


314      S'^^^' Gentleman  Injiru^ecl, 

DIALOGUE    XI. 

God  does   tieither  command^  nor  permit  us  to  conform   ts 
the  Religion  of  ike  Country  where  we  live. 

'T'  H  E  Poft  hxo^JL^1iEudoxus  a  News  Letter  from  Lo»- 
"*-    don^  which  gave  an  x^ccount  of  new  Laws  enadled 

againft  Papifts. 

Anov.  This  A61  is  worthy  of  that  great  Aflembly.  I 

have  nothing  againft  the  Proceedings,  but  that  it's  too 
moderate,  and  indulging:  Belides,  methinks  it  fnould 
have  reach'd  all  DilTenters;  for  all  being  guilty  of  Obfti- 
nacy,  none  fhould  be  exempt  from  Punilhment. 

ILufeb.  How  !  Too  indulging!  What  will  you  call  fe- 
vere  ?  Papifts  are  difieiz'd  of  their  Birth-right,  ftrip'd  of 
Property,  and  expos'd  to  the  Infolence  of villanous  Infor- 
mers^ and  Catch-poUs ;  and  after  all,  you  complain  of  Mo- 
deration. Miftake  me  not,  Sir,  I  neither  arraign  the  Wif- 
dom  nor  the  Juftice  of  the  Parliament :  That  Atigufi  Bo- 
dy may  have  Reafons  unknown  to  us:  But  I  difapprove 
your  perfecuting  Humour :  DilTenters  are  our  Fellow- 
Subje6ls ;  the  Relation  dcferves  I'endernefs,  and  calls  for 
fome  Companion  :  It's  Barbarity  to  out-rage  a  Felon  at 
the  Bar,  or  to  infult  over  a  condemn'd  Wretch  2.\.Tyburn^ 
much  more  over  Diflenters;  who,  for  ought  we  know, 
have  no  other  Crime,  but  their  Religion. 

Ariov.  Let  them  conform,  and  they  (liall  enjoy  the 
Prote6lion  of  the  Government,  and  the  Liberty  of  En~ 
glipmen:  But  if  they  take  the  Pet,  and  ftray  from  the 
eftablifh'd  Worfhip  of  the  Realm  ;  the  Common- wealth 
muft  take  Notice  of  their  Prevarication,  and  punifh  it : 
And  as  thofe  who  fuffcr  for  the  Breach  of  Laws,  die  de- 
fervedly ;  fo  they  who  lay  down  their  Lives  fir  any  Re- 
ligion out-lav;'d  by  the  Common-wealth,  are  Malefi- 
(Ttors,  not  Martyrs:  They  only  pafs through  one  Punifl:i- 
ment   into  anottfer:    Thoufands,    Eufebius^  are  cano- 

^  niz'd  here  on  Earth,  that  will  never  be  Sainted  m  Hea- 
ven. 

Eufeb.  Hold,  Sir,  this  Dcftrine  fhould  be  bleach'd;  it's 
fo  monftroufly  foul,  there  is  no  enduring  it:  Jt  (hould 
fiafs   a    (^iurantaifie  in  fome  Lazaretta;    methinks    it 

fmells 


7%e  Gmrt  "EM A  u  JnJ^ruBed.       315 

fmells  rank  of  Infeftion.  Blafphemy  fits  on  every  Sylla- 
ble :  What  think  you  ?  Did  St.  Laurence  and  St.  Stephen 
die  like  Criminals  ?  Are  not  their  Names  regifter'd  in  the 
Book  of  Life,  as  well  as  in  the  Martyrologue?  Yet  they 
died  for  a  Religion,  condemn'd  by  the  Supreme  Autho- 
rity of  Rome  and  J«ry.  Sir,  I  would  have  you  difpute 
this  Point  at  the  Old  Ba'tly.  Blafphemy  is  punifli'd  with 
Fire  in  this  World,  as  well  as  in  the  next. 

Ariov.  Heat  and  Inveftive  rather  fret  an  Adverfary, 
than  convince  him :  More  Reafon  and  lefs  Paflion,  are 
proper  for  a  Man  of  your  Age  and  Chafadter :  You  are 
on  the  Decay,  Sir ;  your  Deportment  fhould  be  as  cold 
as  your  Blood  ;  and  your  Paflions  as  grey  as  your  Head. 
I  fay,  God  made  Man  for  Commerce,  we  cannot  live  on 
our  own  Fund ;  v/e  muft  barter  with  our  Neighbours-; 
and  this  Foreign  Correfpondenceis  requilite  to  furnifh  our 
Happinefs :  A  fociable  Life  is  imprafticable,  (I  would 
fay  impofllble)  unlefs  Inferiors  lie  under  an  indifpenfable 
Obligation  of  obeying,  and  Superiors  have  an  uncon- 
troulable  Power  to  ordain  all  thofe  things,  that  are  ne- ' 
ceffary  to  fupport  and  conferve  Society. 

Now,  what  can  be  more  neceflary  than  Union,  and 
Harmony  of  Opinions?  This  cements  all  the  Parts,  and 
moulds  them  into  one  great  Body  :  It  infpirits  them  to 
Adlion  in  their  defign'd  Station  :  It  combines  their  Inte- 
reft;  and  by  confequence  their  Endeavours:  But  when 
their  Minds  are  divided,  their  Interefts  are  feparated, 
and  then  they  club  into  Fadlion  ;  and  v^hilil  each  Cabal 
drives  at  private  Ends,  the  whole  Fabrick  of  the  Go- 
"  vernment  firft  totters,  and  then  falls  into  Confufion. 
But  of  all  Diviiions,  thofe  that  fpring  from  Differences 
in  Religion  have  ever  prov'd  the  moft  fatal.  Zeal  has 
open'd  more  Veins  than  Cruelty,  and  laid  wafte  more 
Provinces  than  Ambition  ;  it  has  rifled  thole  very  Places, 
Avarice  it  felf  left  untouch'd,  and  fet  on  fire  thofe  Reli- 
gious Edifices,  Impiety  revered  :  It  has  brought  fome 
Princes  to  the  Scaffold,  and  others  to  abdicate :  In  fine, 
new  Seditions  break  in  upon  the  State  with  new  Reli- 
gions, and  the  eftablifli'd  Government  is  always  ftruck 
at,  with  the  eftablifh'd  Church.  Pretence  of  Piety  leads 
the  Fan^  but  Sword,  Canmn^  and  Defolation  bring  up 
the  Rear. 

Seeing 


^i6      T'h  Gentl-eman  Inftru^ied, 

Seeing  therefore  God  commands  us  to  live  in  Society, 
he  has  impower'd  the  chief  Magiftrate,  with  a  full  Com- 
milTion  to  enadl  thofe  Laws  that  arerequifite  for  the  fur- 
thering this  great  Defign :  Now  nothing  under  Heaven 
can  be  more  neceflary,  than  a  power  to  eftablifh  Religi- 
on, therefore  God  has  entrufted  every  fupreme  Magi- 
ftrate with  that  Power ;  whence  it  follows,  that  every 
Religion  fettled  by  Law,  binds  all  thofe  who  live  ur)der 
the  Protection  of  that  State  ;  and  by  confequence  I  dare 
not  excufe  any  Dijfenter  from  Treafon,  both  againft  the 
Common-wealth  and  God. 

In  a  Word,  we  mull  conform  our  Belief  to  that  of 
the  Country  where  we  live  ;  nor  can  any  Pretence  of 
Confcience  or  Revelation  exempt  us  from  the  Obligati- 
on :  Hence,  I  fay,  that  Stephen  the  Deacon  loll  his  Life 
at  Jerufalem^  as  fairly  as  Stephen  the  Joyner  at  Oxford  : 
They  both  fell  by  the  Law,  and  therefore  juflly.  Death 
makes  not  a  Martyr,  but  the  Caufe;  this  alone  diftin- 
guifhes  the  Innocent  from  the  Guilty. 

Eufeb.  Blefs  me  I  where  are  we  ?  The  Jews  tore  their 
Garments,  when  they  heard  Blafphemies,  but  Chriftians 
turn  it  intoEntertainment ;  certainly  nothing  butDamna- 
tion  is  able  lO  force  out  fuch  flaming  Expreflions :  Your 
Difcourfe  is  too  rank  to  undergo  a  Difledtion  ;  it  carries 
with  it  a  Complication  of  Crimes,  that  won't  bear  the 
very  naming  :  Like  flagitious  Malefa6lors,  they  infecft 
on  the  Hurdle,  and  kill  at  their  Execution :  It's  almoft 
fafer  to  diflemble,  than  to  arraign  them ;  and  they  are 
taught,  whilft  they  are  reprov'd  :  But  feeing  you  have 
flung  Poifon  among  the  Audience,  I'll  venture  to  prefent 
them  an  Antidote.  You  fay,  St.  Stephen  dy'd  a  Rebel,  no 
Martyr ;  that  he  fell  by  Law,  and  confequently  by  the 
Hands  of  Juftice:  But  this  hellifh  Logick  argues  our  blef- 
fed  Saviour  into  Rebellion,  and  lligmatizes  him  for  a 
convided  Confpirator ;  for  certainly  he  died  by  Com- 
mand of  the  Magiftrate  :  Innovation  in  Matters  of  Reli- 
gion made  up  one  part  of  the  Charge  againft  him,  and 
Treafon  the  other.  I  fuppofe  this  horrid  Infolence  lay 
out  of  Sight ;  for  Gentlemen  of  your  Perfuafion  are 
fhort-fighted,  and  are  fo  taken  up  with  Principles,  that 
they  overlook  Iflations:  Remember,  Sir,  we  live  under 
a  pious  Princefs,  and  a  reforming  Parliament ;  fo  that  I 
do  not  defpair  within  feme  Days  to  hear,  that  fevere 

Laws 


7he  Gentleman  Injlru^cd.   ^  317 

Laws  are  paft  agalnft  thofe  that  blafpheme  God,  as  well 
as  againft  thole  that  ferve  him. 

/Iriovijius  began  an  Apology,  but  Eufebius  refus'd  to 
hear  it.  Sir,  faid  he,  the  Text  is  too  plain  to  need  a 
Comment,  and  too  horrid  to  deferve  one:  To  excufe 
Blafphemy,  is  but  a  Hair's  breadth  from  defending  it: 
The  very  hearing  of  the  Word  abates  the  Horror  of  the 
Crime  ;  for  no  Offences  are  lefs  detefted,  than  thofe  that 
are  often  fpoken  of:  Belides,  I  have  only  glanc'd  at  an 
Inference  ;  the  Principle  is  more  flagitious,  and  therefore 
muft  be  brought  to  the  Bar.  You  fay  God  commands 
us  to  conform  to  the  Religion  of  the  Country  where  we 
live  ;  and  that  to  profefs  any  other,  or  to  believe  nothing, 
is  equally  criminal. 

ArtGV.  I  fay  fo. 

Eufeb.  Is  your  AfTertion  univerfal  ? 

Ariov.  It  takes  in  all  Religions ;  it  reaches  all  Nations, 
as  well  as  all  Ages. 

Eufeb.  God  therefore  commands  me,  when  I  am  in 
England^X.0  deny  Tranfubflantiation ^Prayers  for  the  Dead^ 
Seven  Sacraments.,  &c.  But  if  Bufinefs  calls  me  to  J? arts., 
Rome.,  or  Madrid.,  he  commands  me  to  fteer  about,  and 
believe  them :  In  Chrijiendom  I  muft  believe  Chrift  is 
God ;  but  if  a  brisk  Gale  wafts  me  over  into  Afia,  I 
muft  deny  it :  At  Confiantinople  I  muft  fwear  there  is  one 
God,  and  that  Mahomet  is  his  Prophet;  but  at  my  re- 
turn into  the  Weft,  I  muft  change  my  Tune,  1  muft 
fwear  the  Prophet  into  an  Impoftor,  and  his  Revelations 
into  Forgery:  But  if  I  fteer  towards  the  North,  and  fet 
up  in  Laplandf  then  I  muft  bow  to  a  Red  Cloth,  and 
pour  forth  my  Orifons  to  Madam  Pufs :  Again,  if  I 
double  the  Cape^  and  put  in  at  Cochin,  I  muft  fall  pro- 
ftrate  before  an  Apeh  Grinder. 

Jriov.  Well,  and  what  harm  in  all  this  ? 

Eufeb.  Why  truly,  travelling  will  be  expenfive :  Be- 
fore we  fet  out,  we  muft  provide  ourfelves  with  Alexan- 
der RoJJ'e's  View  of  Religions  \  we  muft  make  a  handfome 
Collection  of  /iftrolabe's  Q^iadrants.,  and  j^rtfo^'s  Staffs,  to 
find  the  Lines  of  Longitude,  and  Latitude;  for  in  your 
Hypothefis,  Mathematicks  muft  be  our  Rule  of  Faith, 
and  Climates  the  Motives  of  our  Credibility.  This  is  a 
pretty  Syftem,  and  has  the  Advantage  of  Novelty  to  re- 
commend 


31 8      Th  Gi^TLiMAii  hjru^ed. 

Commend  it :  I  have  often  feen  Controverlies  try*d  by 
Scripture,  Tradition,  znd  Re af on ;  but  to  compofe  a  Dif- 
ference by  Logarithms,  Sinus's,  and  Tangents,  is  extra- 
ordinary: The  Invention  is  worthy  of  your  Wit,  and  of 
the  fame  Piece  with  your  Piety:  In  good  time  you  may 
improve  the  Difcovery,  and  find  cut  the  true  Rehgion, 
as  v^^e  do  true  Guineas,  by  the  IVeight. 

But  if  in  England  Tranfubjtantiation  be  falfe,  it  can- 
not be  true  in  France,  Spain,  and  Italy ;  and  if  in  Europe 
our  BleiTed  Saviour  be  really  God,  all  the  Power  of  the 
Grand  Seignior  can  never  turn  him  into  a  meer  Man  in 
Jijia :  In  fine,  if  Mahomet  be  an  Impojlor  in  the  IVeJi, 
how  can  he  be  a  Prophet  in  the  Eajl  ?  For  Truth  is  no 
Trimmer,  it  will  not  Hand  on  both  fides  of  the  Contra- 
didion. 

it's  evident  therefore  that  God  commands  me  to  believe 
a  Fallhood,  either  in  England,  or  beyond  Sea ;  nay,  and 
engages  his  Authority  to  perfuade  me :  He  threatens  Hell, 
if  I  refufe,  and  offers  Heaven,  if  I  conform.  In  England 
I  honour  him,  by  fwearing  Tranfubjlantiation  is  a  meer 
Fi6lion,  the  Produ6t  of  Ignorance,  and  Spawn  of  Super- 
ftition  ;  but  this  Tramontane  Honour  carries  Damnation 
with  it  at  Rome ;  here  I  muft  fv/ear  Tranfubjlantiation  is  a 
very  real  Thing,  and  fo  fly  in  the  Face  of  my  own  Evi- 
dence. Perjury  therefore  in  your  Religion  paiTes  for  an 
Adl  highly  meritorious,  id  eji^  a  Icandalous  Crime  for  a 
moft  edifying  Virtue.  What  mad  Notions  do  you  frame 
of  God  ?  You  level  him  with  Gates,  and  fling  him  below 
Bedloe :  You  feem  to  acknowledge  a  Deity  meerly  to 
make  him  capable  of  Contempt  and  Infamy. 

Ariov.  You  miftake  me,  I  neither  impeach  God  of 
Forgery,  nor  Impofture  ;  I  do  not  queftion  his  Veracity, 
nor  fquint  upon  his  Sanftity  :  I  only  maintain  he  com- 
mands me  to  be  a  Protefiunt  in  England,  ai'kl  a  Papiji  at 
Rome;  to  believe  Chriit  is  God  in  Queen  /i?;»'s  Court, 
and  that  he  is  ameer  Man  in  l]\e  Sultan's;  but  he  docs 
not  engage  his  "Word  for  Truth  of  either  Side. 

Eufeb.  And,  I  fuppofe,  he  commands  you  to  profefs 
IVhiggifm  iwlhQ/lmJierdara.Qo^^Q-liouk,  ideji,  to  blend 
Faction  with  Religion,  and  ihroud  Infidelity  under  Hy- 
pocrify  :  For  look  you,  Sir,  you  cannot  poflibly  believe 
the  Articles  of  the  Church  of  Rome  true,  without  pro- 
nouncing thofe  of  l\-iQQ\\MXzho^  England  falfe  :  For  thefe 

are 


,   The  Gentleman  Inflru^ed,     3 1 p 

are  Negatives  of  the  other  ;  if  God  commands  you  to 
chop  Beliefs  with  the  Chmate,  he  commands  you  to  play 
the  Hypocrite  on  one  fide  of  the  Water,  which  is  a 
Crime  againfl  the  firft  Principles  of  Reafon,  and  can  no 
more  be  commanded  by  God,  than  pradis'd  by  Man: 
For  fuch  a  Behaviour  is  a  Burlefque,  a  Satyr  on  all  Re- 
ligion, and  by  confequence  on  the  Authar  and  ObjeSi 
oi  it. 

But  again,  if  God  commands  me  to  be  a  Protejiant 
in  England,  and  a  Pjpift  at  Rome ;  a  T'urk  in  AJia,  and  a 
Chrijlian'm  Europe,  he  engages  his  Word  for  a  Falfity; 
for  the  Church  of  England  maintains  the  Articles  of  her 
Belief  were  reveal'd  ;  the  Church  o^  Rome  fays  the  fame, 
in  Defence  of  hers  j  and  the  Mnhcmetan  Congregation 
lays  all  its  Impoftures  on  Revelation:  When  therefore 
God  commands  you  to  be  a  Protejiant,  P apfl^ox  Mufful- 
■man,  he  commands  you  to  believe  he  has  reveal'd  the 
particular  Tenets  of  thefe  Se6ls,  and  confequently  avou- 
ches for  the  Truth  of  them ;  for  whatever  he  reveals, 
muft  be  true:  So  that  to  oblige  you  to  believe,  he  has 
reveal'd  fuch  a  Point,  and  to  engage  his  Word  for  the 
Truth  of  it,  is  one  and  the  fame  thing.  Now  the  par- 
ticular Tenets  of  thefe  Churches  crofs  upon  one  another, 
and  therefore  all  cannot  poffibly  be  true  ;  whence  it  fol- 
lows that  God  engages  his  Authority  for  a  Lye, and  pawns 
his  Veracity  for  a  Falfhood :  You  fubjeft  his  Sanitity  to 
a  Weaknefs  we  all  blufh  at,  though  we  all  commit  it,  and 
even  level  him  with  Knights  of  the  Poft, 

Moreover,  if  Chrill  be  a  meer  Man^  how  can  God 
command  Chriftians  to  adore  him  ?  And  if  he  be  God, 
how  can  he  forbid  the  ''Turks,  Ncjlorians^  and  Arians,  to 
pay  him  Homage  due  to  his  Divinity?  God  can  no  more 
llrip  himfelfof  his  Sovereignty,  than  of  his  Being;  he 
can  as  foon  take  a  Creature  into  his  Throne,  as  make  o- 
ver  his  Title  to  Adoration  :  In  a  Word,  either  Man  can 
offend,  or  he  cannot;  if  he  cannot,  let  him  bid  farewel 
to  all  Religions,  and  take  leave  of  Morality  ;  let  him. 
model  his  Adlions  by  Epicure,  and  his  Faith  by  Prota- 
goras :  But  if  he  can  offend,  what  clafhes  more  diredily 
with' all  Laws  Natural  and  Di\^ine,  than  Idolatry  ?  If 
this  fpiritual  Inceft  be  innocent,  what  can  be  criminal? 
And  if  God  can  command  fofacrilegiousan  Adlion,  what 
can  he  forbid  ? 

Ar'tovijlui 


320       ^he  Gentleman  InjlmBed. 

Ar'iovijlm  was  pinch'd,  he  faw  himfelf  in  the  Toils, 
and  knew  not  how  to  difengage  himfelf;  his  Concern 
flew  to  his  Face,  and  every  Pofture  fhew'd  Uneafinefs, 
and  Anger.  Come,  Sir,  faid  he  at  laft  to  Eufebius  with 
a  forc'd  Smile,  I  have  miftaken  my  Errand,  I  came  not 
to  difpute,  but  to  be  merry ;  let  Arguments  give  Place 
to  a  Bottle  ;  it's  more  fatisfaftory  to  fee  the  Bottom  of 
a  Glafs,  than  of  a  Queftion,  and  to  drain  Bumpers,  than 
Controverfies  j  we  have  run  the  firft  Heat,  it's  lime  to 
rub. 

Eufeb.  You  Latitudinarian  Gentlemen  are  ftrange  Crea- 
tures, you  heftor  Religion  and  Piety  with  fuch  a  daring 
Confidence,  when  you  are  out  of  the  reach  of  an  Ad- 
verfary,  that  one  would  fwear  both  Senfe  and  Reafon 
had  embrac'd  your  Intereft;  but  when  you  receive  a 
Blow,  you  retreat  to  Jefts,  you  parry  againft  Proofs 
with  Railleries,  and  oppofe  Laughter  to  Reafon.  To 
be  plain,  you  mifplace  your  Paflions,  you  fmile  when 
you  fhould  tremble,  and  laugh  when  you  (hould  cry: 
Had  you  any  Apprehenfion  of  a  God,  you  would  dread 
thofe  Flames,  that  his  eternal  Juftice  has  prepar'd  below 
to  burn,  not  to  confume  Blafphemies  ;  thefe  hideous 
Flights  of  Prophanenefs  and  Impiety  would  be  Pain  and 
Penance  to  you  :  You  lay  fuch  defperate  Commands  to 
his  Charge,  as  fit  him  rather  for  Contempt  than  Vene- 
ration, and  make  him  more  worthy  of  Horror  than 
Adoration ;  for  if  your  Divinity  be  orthodox,  he  abets 
Lyes,  commands  Idolatry,  and  perfuades  Perjury ;  and 
fo  Man's  Vices  make  up  the  Roll  of  his  Perfedtions,  and 
wemuft  revere  in  him  what  all  human  Laws  punifh  in 
us. 

Ariov.  You  are  difpos'd  for  a  touch  of  Polemicks  ; 
but  if  you  are  above  the  Laws  of  Decency  and  Breeding, 
I  am  not:  I  refolve  not  to  turn  Clown  for  Company  ;  I 
have  too  much  Refpedl  for  my  Lady  to  be  clamorous  in 
her  Prefence,  and  think  it  as  genteel  to  duel,  as  to  dif- 
pute before  her :  Befides,  we  are  upon  Theological  Nice- 
ties, unneceflary  to  be  known  by  the  Learned,  and  im- 
poffible  to  be  underftood  by  the  Vulgar. 

Sir,  faid  the  Lady,  let  no  Ceremony  break  off  the 
Conference ;  we  (land  not  here  upon  Grimace,  or  Re- 
fervednefs,  and  though  we  did,  your  Defeat  will  atone 
for  your  Rudenels :  To  be  plain,  I  am  impatient  to  fee 

your 


the  Gentleman  InftruBed,      321 

your  Vanity  ladi'd,  your  Pride  difciplin'd,  and  yourrho"" 
domontading  Genius  penanc'd  with  Confufion.  How  of- 
tqn  in  my  Houie  have  you  not  only  made  a  Pra6lice,  but 
a  Boafl:  of  Prophanenefs,  anJ  defended  the  Crime,  hy 
committing  a  greater?  You  have  lampoon'd  thofe  Gen- 
tlemen that  durft  ftand  up  in  Defence  of  Religion,  and 
daub'd  them  with  ine  Reproaches  of  Bigotry  and  Super- 
ftition  ;  you  queftion  their  Judgments,  and  dubb'd  them 
Fools,  who  would  not  fwallow  down  all  Religions ;  and 
blufter'd  with  ifnpofmg  an  Aflijrance,  as  if  it  were  as  eafy 
to  defend  Libertinifm,  as  to  abett  it.  Sir,  you  are  in  fight 
of  an  Adverfary,  look  him  in  the  Face,  ftand  your 
Ground,  and  defend  your  Principles,  or  condemn  them' 
by  an  /^ffidavit^  that  your  Repentance  may  be  as  publick 
as  the  Scandal:  Your  Honour  is  at  Stake,  and  there  is 
no  Mean  between  a  Vi6lory  and  an  Overthrow. 

This  iudden  Tempeft  blown  from  an  unexpe6led  Quar- 
ter, foon  rais'd  a  Tumult  in  /^riovijius's  Breaft ;  Shame, 
Anger,  and  Revenge  broke  loofe,  and  fan'd  his  Refent- 
ment  to  fuch  a  heighth,  that  it  almoft  ftifledhis  Reafon. 
He  roll'd  a  hundred  Thoughts  in  his  Head,  and  almoft 
as  many  Refolutions,  yet  he  could  not  fix  on  any ;  to 
retaliate  was  not  only  unmanly,  but  alfo  uncivil ;  for 
though  a  Lady  be  not  below  a  Man's  Anger,  fhe  is  be- 
low his  Revenge  :  To  break  off  the  Difpute  was  difho- 
nourable,  and  to  baffle  Enfebius  difficilt;  however,  at 
laft  having  balanc'd  his  Fears  with  his  Hopes,  he  conclu- 
ded his  Reputation  would  fufFer  lefs  by  continuing  the 
Difpute,  than  flying  it :  For  though  Eufebius  might  foil 
him  with  Reafon,  he  thought himfelffuperior  at  Raillery; 
which  oftentimes  even  Men  of  Parts  miftake  for  Wit, 
and  receive  for  Reafon.  At  leafl  he  had  found  upon  Ex- 
perience, thatNoifein  Diiputes  ftands  for  Evidence,  and 
that  thofe  carry  off  the  Honour  of  Conqueft  in  the  Opini- 
on of  the  Audience,  who  fpeak  loudeft,  not  who  difcourfe 
beft:  Thefe  Confiderationsfway'd  him  to  accept  of  a 
fecond  Engagement ;  wherefore  turning  himfelf  firft  to 
the  Lady: 

Madam,  faid  he,  I  thought  I  ow*d  your  Charadler 
and  Perfon  fomc  Refpe6l,  but  feeing  you  are  pleas'd  to 
forego  the  Debt,  I  fhail  fupercede  the  Payment ;  I  per- 
ceive Deference  is  fometimes  u'-r.-'-eDtable,  and  Civi- 
lity clownifn.  I  will  therefore  for  Ujc  future  take  my» 
Y  Liberty 


32  2     ^^Gentlimai^  Inflru^ed, 

Liberty,  and  never  Hand  off  in  Reftraint  or  Ceremo- 
ny. 

Then  addreffing  himfelf  to  Eufeblus  ;  Sir,  continu'd 
he,  you  mifunderftand  me :  I  mean  not  that  God  com- 
mands us  to  conform  to  the  Reh'gion  of  the  State  where 

"  we  hve.  No,  he  permits  us  only ;  like  the  Royal  Eagle, 
he  preys  on  Hearts;  thefe  he  requires:  So  that  if  we  love, 
.'honour,  and  obey  him,  we  keep  up  to  the  very  heighth 

,  of  his  Commands.     He  permits  all  exterior  Ceremonies, 

':  though  vain,  fuperftitious,  and  wicked  ;  a  good  Intenti- 
on fan6lifies  an  ill  Adtion,  and  the  Uprightnefs  of  our 
Hearts  compounds  for  the  terrors  of  our  Worfhip :  In 
fine.  Sir,  God  looks  on  all  the  P'ailures  of  our  Under- 

■-ilanding  as  pure  Miftakes,  not  Crimes;  and  thofe  he  can- 

'  not  approve,  he  pities. 

Eufeb.  1  underflood  you  before,  and  apprehend  you  at 
prefent:  You  draw  the  Thefis  into  a  lefs  Compafs,  and 
turn  God's  Command  into  a  bare  Permiffion;  id  eft^  I 
have  driven  you  from  one  Retrenchment,  and  you  are 
clap'd  behind  another ;  but  this  is  no  more  liable,  than 
the  firft,  and  you  will  be  forc'd  to  furrender.  Tell  me, 
does  God  permit  all  Religions  ? 

Ariov.  All  that  are,  or  ever  were  in  the  World. 
Enfeb.  All  ?  That  Man  certainly  deferves  Damnation, 
that  can  find  no  Religion  to  his  Gouft :  But  do  no  A6li- 
ons  outrage  Nature  ? 

Ariovifim  made  a  Paufe,  and  feem'd  at  a  lofs  for  an 
Anfwer ;  he  faw  what  Eufebius  drove  at,  and  that  he 
only  coafted  the  main  Qiieftion,  to  draw  him  into  an 
Ambufcade.  Sir,  faid  he,  jour  Ouxre  is  captious ;  and 
though  fome  are  of  Opinion,  that  Virtue  and  Vice  are 
rather  Names  than  Things ;  yet  I  condefcend  fo  far,  as 
to  grant  that  Murders,  Blafphemies,  and  Adulteries  flie 
at  Nature,  and  are  in  a  very  obvious  and  literal  Senfe 
criminal  and  opprobrious. 

Eufeb.  God,  I  fuppofe,  permits  not  thefe  unnatural 
Abominations;  if  he  has  no  Punifliments  in  referve  for 
fuch  profligate  Offenders,  under-rate  Tranfgreffors  may 
expeft  a  Recompence. 

Ariov.  God  dilapproves  fuch  hideous  Enormities  as 
fhame  Nature,  and  even  entrench  upon  Breeding  ;  they 
deferve  Hell,  and  will  feel  it,  unlefs  Repentance  appeafe 
Divine  Juftice. 

Eufeh. 


l^he  Gentleman  InJlruBed.     323 

En^eh.  Why  then  this  Permiflion  is  no  more  univerfal> 
than  the  Command ;  for  if  God's  PermifTion  comprehends 
not  Crimes  that  alfail  Nature,  it  takes  not  in  thofe  Reli- 
gions that  infult  Nature  in  the  very  aft  of  Worfliip.  Strike 
off  the  Catalogue,  the  Religion  of  the  Mexicans^  who 
to  honour  their  God,  broke  through  all  the  natural  Laws 
of  Juftice,  and  Honefty  :  For  they  firft  invaded  the 
neighbouring  Provinces  with  Fire  and  Sword,  and  then 
ripp'd  open  the  Breafts  of  twenty  thoufand  Captives  up- 
on the  facrilegious  Altars  of  their  barbarous  Divinities, 
and  by  a  bloody  Metamorphofis  turn'd  Cruelty  into  Pie- 
ty, and  worfhipp'd  God,  by  prophaning  Nature. 

The  Superftition  of  the  Pfrz/t^/tf^j  lies  open  to  the  fame 
Exception  :  Thefe  favage  Idolaters  dy'd  the  Earth  with 
the  reeking  Gore  of  human  Sacrifices,  and  polluted  theii" 
Temples  with  unnatural  Proftitutions ;  they  train'd  up 
Youths  for  that  lewd  Purpofe,  and  hallow'd  their  moft 
Religious  Rites  with  the  mofl  flaming  Abominations ; 
In  a  Word,  Nature  forbids,  what  their  impure  Gods 
commanded,  and  human  Laws  purge  with  Fire  the  molt 
effential  a6ls  of  their  Religion. 

If  we  leave  America^  and  fliip  for  Afia^  we  fhall  meet 
with  the  fame  Vices;  tho' the  People  are  more  civiliz'd, 
they  are  not  lefs  brutal.  The  Thracians^  Hum,  and P^a?- 
mcians  worfhip'd  their  Deities,  by  worrying  their  own 
Species,  and  fo  built  their  Piety  on  Murders  and  Cruel- 
ty. In  Africa  ihe  Sw^^txHiAnonoilYiQCarthagimans  v^z% 
more  formidable  than  their  Arms ;  and  their  Priefts  were 
more  cruel  in  their  Temples,  than  their  Generals  in  the 
Field:  They  lock'd  poor  Infants  .in  the  glowing  Statues 
of  Saturn^  and  plac'd  their  Devotion  rather  in  the  Tor- 
ment, than  Death  of  Innocents.  The  old  Egyptians 
drown'd  their  Reafon  in  Honour  of  Mars  -,  and  then 
profecuted  their  Devotions  with  Clubs  and  Swords ;  and 
he  was  judg'd  the  moft  zealous,  who  had  the  leaftof  a 
Man,  and  moft  of  a  Butcher. 

The  Babylonians  and  Phoenicians  defil'd  their  Temples 
with  Whoredom  and  Sodomy.  Proftitution  always  pre- 
ceded Marriage ;  and  thofe  Women  who  refus'd  to  fhave 
their  Heads,  were  doom'd  to  expofe  their  Honour,  and 
to  adorn  the  Temple  of  Venus  with  the  Spoils  of  thtir 
Chaftity:  So  that  thofe  infamous  Religions  branded  Ho- 
nefty  with  Inflimy,  they  ftigmatiz*d  Continence,  ennobled 
Lewdnefs.  Y  2  1.  I  blufh 


:^ 


3 24      ^he  Gentlkman  InflruM. 

I  blufh  at  the  very  Thought  of  the  Rites  o^yenus  the 
Corinthian,  where  Women  were  ordain'd  Priefts  by  th- 
molt  fcandalous  and  outragious  Afts  of  Luft,  and  confee 
crated  by  Adulteries:  They  were  Strumpets  before  they 
could  be  qualified  for  Priefthood,  and  deferv'd  Bridewell 
to  be  fit  for  the  Altar.  I  fuppofe  thefe  Religions  come 
not  within  the  Pale  of  Permiffion  :  For  how  can  God 
permit  thofe  Adlions  good  Men  condemn,  and"  Debau- 
chees blufti  at ;  that  ftartle  Nature,  and  confound  Wick- 
ednefs  ?  He  muft  take  notice  of  fuch  Enormities,  or  re- 
nounce Sandity  ;  he  muft  punifh  them,  or  let  fall  his 
Claim  to  Juftice :  In  fine,  he  muft  maintain  his  Character. 
The  Atheift  who  denies  God,  is  lefs  criminal  than  he 
who  worfhips  him  with  Murders  and  Fornication. 

Ariov.  God  permits  not  thofe  Religio:^-  that  affront 
Nature,  and  difcard  the  firft  Principles  of  Re:  ion:  When 
Temples  become  Slaughter-houfes,  and  Priefts  Butchers ; 
when  the  Stews  are  confecrated,  and  Adulteries  cano- 
niz'd,  it's  time  to  feparate  from  fuch  Congregations. 

Eufeb.  You  found  a  Retreat :  Firft  God  commanded 
to  conform  to  the  Religion  of  the  Country  where  we 
■dwell ;  then  you  turn'd  his  Command  into  a  Permiffion, 
and  now  you  reftrain  this :  Like  the  Parthsans  you  fight 
in  your  Retreat,  and  place  your  Safety  in  your  Heels. 
f3ut  this  Expedient  will  not  anfwer  Expedation  ;  I  have 
you  in  View,  and  will  not  leave  the  Chace,  till  I  have 
either  run  down  your  Impiety  or  confounded  it.  But,  Sir, 
fuppofe  a  Montezuma  fhould  threaten  Death,  unlefs  you 
abjur'd  Chrift  for  VitziliputzU^  would  not  God,  on  fo 
preffing  an  Occafion,  permit  you  to  embrue  your  Hands 
in  human  Sacrifices  ? 

Ariov.  No  Man  living  In  a  noble  way  fears  Death  lefs 
than  my  felf ;  I  would  come  into  the  World  mecrly  to 
make  a  handfome  Exit ;  yet  I  would  not  part  with  my 
Life  for  a  Ceremony  :  My  Belief  is  not  untraftahle,  it 
can  bow  upon  Occafions,  and  connive  at  thole  things  it 
does  not  approve  :  What  is  not  impious,  is  always  law- 
ful ;  and  therefore  i  would  rather  upon  an  Exigency  con- 
form, than  dye.  Tho'  I  am  fure  there  are  Antipodes.^ 
I  would  not,  like  that  fooiifli  Bifhop,  maintain  the  Truth 
at  the  Expence  of  my  Blood  ;  this  would  be  tc  trifle  a- 
way  Life,  and  is  rather  a  Demonftration  of  my  Folly, 

than  of  the  Roundnefs  of  the  Earth. 

Should 


fhe  Gentleman  Injlm^ed,      3 1  j 

Should  Montexuma  command  me  in  his  Dominions  to 
abjure  Chrift,  I  fhould  reverence  his  Orders;  for  the  fu- 
preme  Magiftrate's  Will  is  the  Law  of  the  Subjed  :  But 
whether  I  might  in  Confcience  efpoufe  his  Religion  is  a 
Cafe  worthy  of  fome  fober  Reflections :  For  Life  is  a 
tender  thing;  Self-prefervation  has  Charms,  and  the un- 
experienc'd  Condition  of  Separation  is  a  very  lawful  Pre- 
text to  ftay  in  the  World:  To  be  firei  or  baftinadoed 
hence  is  a  painful  Operation,  and  we  are  not  oblig'd  to 
fuch  a  troublefome  Removal. 

Belides,  Life,  I  conceive,  was  given  us  for  noble  Ends, 
and  therefore  we  muft  not  part  with  it  out  of  a  Bravado; 
If  we  disband,  and  leave  our  Colours  without  our  great 
Mafter's  Leave,  we  (hall  pay  for  our  Defertion,  and 
meet  with  a  worfe  Welcome  from  an  angry  God  in  the 
next  World,  than  from  a  barbarous  Emperor  in  this.  See- 
ing therefore  I  may  give  my  Heart  to  God,  whilft  I  of- 
fer human  Sacrifices  to  the  Mexican  idol,  I  may  rather 
conform,  than  die  for  Difobedience  :  For  he  who  forces, 
commits  the  Sin,  if  the  Adion  be  unlawful,  not  he  who 
obeys  by  Compulfion. 

The  Company  ftartled  at  this  flrange  Divinity  ;  Amaze- 
ment tied  their  Tongues,  and  Horror  run  through  every 
Joint.  At  laft,  It's  well,  cry'd  Eufebius^  we  have  Scrip- 
ture to  appeal  to,  other v/ays  we  might  be  puzzled  by  the 
Impudence  of  thofe,  who  treat  Good»efs  unhandfomely 
by  Practice,  and  unchrillianly  by  defending  their  Excefles: 
Their  Manners  are  fo  bad,  that  nothing  can  be  worfe  but 
the  Wit  and  Confidence  they  employ  to  excufe  them.  I 
fee,  continued  Eufehius,  you  meafure  Man's  Perfeflions 
downwards,  and  judge  him  more  reafonable,  the  lefs  he 
a6ls  with  Reafon. 

You  are  a  Leveller  in  Morality  as  well  as  in  Religion, 
and  make  no  Diftin6tion  between  Vice  and  Virtue;  or  at 
leaft  with  an  extatick  Turn  of  the  Heart,  you  transform 
one  into  the  other:  This  is  Direction  of  Intention  with 
a  Witnefs.  A  Man  that  can  juggle  the  moft  flagitious 
Crimes  into  Piety,  muft  be  born  under  a  very  unfortu- 
nate Star  to  mifcarry.  You  may  dip  your  Hands  in  Blood, 
plunge  your  Body  into  the  very  Sink  of  Lewdnefs, 
and  with  a  fafe  Confcience  make  over  your  Soul  to  the 
Devil;  an  omnipotent  Caft  of  the  Heart,  reftifies  all,  a 
good  Intention  atones  for  a  bad  one, 

Y  3  But 


3 16      The  Gentleman  InJlruBcd, 

But  why  did  you  juft  now  exempt  from  the  general 
Permiffion  of  thofe  Religions,  that  in  the  Ad  of  Worfhip 
affront  Nature?  For  you  may  turn  your  Heart  to  God  e- 
very  jot  as  well,  when  your  Life  is  fecure,  as  when  it's 
endanger'd  ;  fo  that  if  Diredlion  of  Intention  falves  Con- 
fcience  on  fome  Occafions,  it  may  on  all :  Do  oot  Mur- 
ders, Cruelties,  and  moft  unnatural  Lufts  turn  upon  Na- 
ture when  my  Life  lies  at  Stake,  as  well  as  when  it  does, 
not?  Do  they  jar  with  Reafon  when  I  hazard  nothing, 
and  fawn  upon  it  when  I  rifque  All?  Certainly  Sins  of 
this  black  Dye  vary  not  withCircumftances,  they  change 
not  their  Nature  as  the  Camoeleon  floes  his  Colour ;  their 
Blacknefs  lies  in  the  Complexion,  not  on  the  Fancy  ; 
they  are  always  the  fame,  id  efi^  odious  to  God,  and  a- 
bominable  in  the  Sight  of  Men. 

You  fay  Life  was  given  us  for  noble  Ends,  and  there- 
fore mult  not  be  flung  away,  either  in  a  Pet  or  Bravado : 
It's  true,  but  then  what  can  Imagination  frame  more 
noble,  .more  fublime,  than  the  Defence  of  God's  Ho- 
nour, and  our  own  Nature  ?  Than  to  vindicate  the  juft 
Rights  and  Prerogatives  of  Virtue  from  the  illegal  U- 
furpations  of  Vice  ?  Thefe  Enterprizes  are  worthy  of  a 
Man  ;  it's  miore  glorious  to  die  for  fuch  a  Caufe,  than  to 
conquer  in  the  Field.  When  we  facrifice  our  Lives  for 
him  who  gave  them,  our  Generofity  will  be  pleaded  to  Ad- 
vantage, not  only  in  the  next  World,  but  alfo  in  this.  No 
Aftion  is  truly  glorious,  that  is  not  virtuous ;  and  there- 
fore your  Ccefars  and  Alexanders  in  fpite  of  all  Trophies 
are  infamous  in  the  Sight  of  God;  their  Temerity  is  laught 
at  by  the  Angels,  and  their  Ambition  feverely  punifli'd  by 
the  Protestor  of  Orphans,  and  juH  Avenger  of  Pupils: 
They  had  nothing  great  but  Pride  and  Folly ;  their  Glory 
fprung  from  Plunda*",  and  their  Renown  from  Slaughter  ; 
butif  they  deferve  Praife  for  ranficking  Cities,  for  over- 
turning Kingdoms,  and  invading  Empires,  we  may  make 
Panegyricks  of  Plagues,  raiie  triumphal  Arches  to  Fa- 
mines, and  eredt  Statue^ to  Hurricans,  and  Inundations; 
In  a  Word,  we  live  meerly  to  ferve  God ;  this  is  our  End, 
and  a  noble  One:  Palfion  indeed,  or  Difcontent,  are  ill 
Difeafes  to  die  of,  but  then  Libertinifm  is  a  dangerous 
Motive  to  live :  Our  Dilbbedience  is  no  lefs  criminal, 
when  we  refufe  to  quit  our  Poll  upon  Command,  than 
when  we  abandon  it  without  Order :  We  are  difcharg'd 

of 


fhe  Gentleman  Injfru^ed,     327 

of  the  Duty  of  Living,  when  we  muft  purchafe  Breath  at 
the  Expence  of  Confcience  ;  and  certainly  we  forfeit  In- 
nocince,  when  we  commit,  or  abett  Murders  or  Adulte- 
ries ;  and  by  confequence,  a  Man  muft  part  with  Life, 
when  we  cannot  keep  it  without  Treafon  againft  Nature, 
and  Rebellion  againft  its  Author. 

But,  I  fuppofe,  the  noble  End  you  propofe  to  your 
felf,  is  to  fpin  out  Life,  as  long  as  the  Thread  will  reach  j 
to  ftretch  Nature  to  its  utmoft,  and  not  to  venture  one 
fingle  Pulfe,  but  upon  good  Security  of  Pleafure:  Y~ou 
had  rather  fpend  it  in  the  Service  of  Fckus  than  of  Vir- 
tue ;  rather  confume  by  Inches,  and  pafs  through  a  Courfe 
of  Phyfick,  or  a  Sweating-Tub  into  the  next  World, 
than  to  be  well  one  Moment,  and  dead  the  next :  If  you 
call  this  a  noble  End,  you  will  be  at  a  Lofs  to  aflign  an 
infamous  one  :  In  fhort,  you  are  relaps'd  into  your  firft 
Error,  and  only  defend  it  with  a  new-found  Extrava- 
gance :  The  Amendment  is  ridiculous,  and  impious  into 
the  Bargain. 

Arioviftus  hw  he  had  fpokehis  Mind  too  frankly,  be- 
fore an  Audience  unacquainted  with  fuch  Libertine  Prin- 
ciples, and  therefore  he  very  nicely  confefs'd,  he  had  hi- 
therto play'd  the  Fool.  Sir,  faid  he  to  Eufebius,  though 
fome  abett  the  Dodtrine  I  have  deliver'd,  yet  it  difpleafes 
me :  I  cannot  clofe  with  fuch  wild  Ideas  of  Religion,  and 
rather  propos'd  'em  as  a  Jeft  than  a  Truth :  I  cannot 
commit  a  Crime  to  fave  my  Skin,  nor  even  purchafeLife 
at  the  Price  of  Murder,  or  Adultery  ;  and  therefore  I 
freely  grant,  that  thofe  Religions  that  enjoy  Abominati- 
ons in  their  Rituals  and  Liturgies^  are  out-dated,  and  ex- 
empted from  the  general  Permiflion. 

Eufeb.  1  muft  own  you  have  made  a  handfome  Retreat ; 
you  have  given  a  pretty  Turn  to  a  monftrous  Principle  ; 
but  for  the  future,  pi-ay  remember,  that  to  blafpheme  in 
jeft,  is  to  fin  in  earneft.  All  other  Religions  at  leaft  are 
ftanch,  are  they  not?  I  put  this  Queftion  to  avoid  Mi- 
Hakes,  for  we  have  been  to  Day  upon  the  Blunder. 

Ariov.  They  are. 

Eufeb.  Remember  your  Conceffion,  for  by  and  by  we 
fhair  difcard  all  the  idolatrous  Worfliips  of  the  Old 
World,  together  with  thofe  of  the  New  :  The  Roman, 
Grecian^  and  old  AJfyrtan  Polytheifm,  will  no  more  pafs 
Mufter,  than  that  of /!/fA-;Vo,  or  Peru-,  Jupiter  .Apollo, 
Y  4  Man, 


32S        ^he  Gentleman  Inftru^ed. 

Mars^  Jufio^  and  Minerva^  will  be  kick'd  cut  of  their 
Temples,  as  well  a  VitzHipuizH.  Will  God  be  wor- 
Ihip'd  as  an  eternal  Being,  or  as  a  Creature  ;  as  Ratio- 
nal, or  Irrational  ;  as  infinitely  Holy,  or  as  an  Adulter- 
er, Drunkard,  or  Murderer  ? 

Arioviflui  faw  the  Drift  of  this  Q^.icere^  and  was  at  a 
ftand  for  a  handfome  Anfwer  ;  he  perceiv'd  himfelf  en- 
compafs'd  on  all  Sides,  and  knew  not  which  way  to 
evade  the  Danger  :  To  fay  God  requires  to  be  honour'd, 
as  a  Being  infinitely  Holy^  infinitely  U-'ife,  Eternal  and 
Independent^  was  to  give  up  the  Caule  without  Dif- 
pute,  and  to  acknowledge  himfelf  foil'd  before  the  Com- 
bat :  On  the  other  Side,  he  durft  not  venture  to  affirm, 
God  is  content  to  be  worfhip'd  as  a  Creature,  an  Adulte- 
rer, or  a  Murderer ;  he  thought  fuch  hideous  Abfurdities 
would  grate  upon  the  Ears  of  his  Auditors,  unaccuftom'd 
to  Blafphemies,  and  ill-difpos'd  to  hear  them  with  In- 
dignation. 

The  Gentleman  that  came  with  him,  faw  his  Concern, 
and  refolv'd  to  difingage  his  Friend  from  thcEmbarrafs; 
wherefore  (turning  himfelf  to  EufebiHi)  the  Anfwer,  faid 
he,  to  your  Qiicere,  in  my  Opinion  is  obvious :  God 
requires  that  Worlhip  which  correfponds  to  the  natural 
Knowledge  we  have  of  him  ;  now  Nature  tells  me,  he 
is  a  Being  Eternal,  Indepe^idcnt^  infinitely  IVife^  and  in- 
finitely Holy,  therefore  God  commands  us  to  adore  him 
under  this  Notion. 

Eufeb.  You  have  brought  the  Controverfy  to  the  very 
Point  I  defir'd,  and  have  utterly  defeated  yom-  Friend's 
Syftem:  For  if  God  muft  be  ador'd  as  Eternal^  Indepen- 
dent, infinitely  Wife,  infinitely  Holy,  had  I  been  at  Rome 
in  the  Reign  of  'Jupiter,  Apollo,  Mercury,  &c.  I  could 
not  have  believed  nor  talked  of  God  as  the  Romans  did  ; 
much  lefs  had  it  been  lawful  in  Egypt  to  adore  an  Onion, 
an  Ox,  a  Crocodile,  or  a  Hippopotamus  ;  for  thefe  Crea- 
tures have  no  Perfedion,  that  comes  near  thofe  noble  At- 
tributes of  Eternity  and  Independence. 

Saturn  was  Jupiters  Father,  Juno  his  Sifter,  fo  that 
their  Nativity  muft  fall  infinitely  fnort  of  Eternity;  it's 
of  a  very  frelhDate,  of  a  iaie  Edition,  and  younger  than 
Time :  They  had  a  Father,  and  therefore  are  depen- 
dent;  their  Sandity  keeps  pace  with  their  Eternity: 
Jupiter  firft;   welter'd  in  his  Father's  Blood,  and  then 

ufurp'ci 


the  Gentleman  InJiruBed,     325) 

wtop'd  his  Kingdom ;  fo  that  he  rather  deferv'd  to  be 
flung  into  the  Tybur  with  a  Cock  and  a  Serpent,  than  to 
be  feated  in  the  Capitol ;  and   the  Gemonu-e  better  fuited 
V/ith  his  Crimes,  than  an  Altar.    Juno  was  a  Mtj's^  even 
to  her  Brother,  and  as  infamous  for  Scolding,  as  her  In- 
ceft  ;  fhe  deferv'd  at  leaft  a  Houfe  of  Correction  for  the 
.firft  Crime,  and  a  Ducking-ftool  for  the  fecond.     Mer- 
mry  was  a  Jack  of  all  Trades  \  fometimes  he  play'd  the 
Piper ^  fometimes  the  Sharper ;  he  turn'd  Poft-Boy  upon 
Occafions,  and  then  Cut-Furfe :  And  to  fhew  the  World 
he  could  ftoop  to  the  bafeft  Crimes,  as  well  as  the  meaneft 
Employments,  he  fets  up  for  a  Pimp^  a  Pander^  and  Pro- 
curer. Apollo  may  be  faid  to  be  better  than  his  Father,  only 
becaufe  he  was  not  quite  fo  bad :  His  Amours  were  with- 
out Number,  as  they  were  without  Shame :  The  Hea- 
then Theology  feems  to  have  drawn  in  this  Perfon  the  Fi- 
gure of  a  perfeft  Beau  ;  for  it  allow'd  him  fome  Wit, 
more  Beauty,  a  World  of  Impudence,  but  no  Confci- 
ence.     Thefe  were  Divinities  of  the  firft  Clafs^  majorum 
Gentium,  Gods  of  Quality  and  Figure,  in  fine,  of  the 
Upper-Houfe  ;  and  yet  Partiality  it  felf  would  not  have 
clear'd  them  at  any  Bar :  I  except  the  Right  of  Ignoramus 
Juries,  when  Crimes  found  Mercy,  and  Innocence  Hal- 
ters,    The  Egyptian  Deities,  Ofyris  and  Anubis,  were  of 
the  fame  Stamp;  they  were  neither  better,  nor  more  an- 
cient, than  thofe  of  Rome  and  Greece. 

Now,  Sir,  if  God  commands  us  to  worfhip  him  as  an 
eternal  and  independent  Being,  we  cannot  clap  in  with  a 
Roman,  Grecian,  or  Egyptian  Congregation ;  nay,  nor 
with  any  idolatrous  one,  that  is,  or  ever  was  in  the 
World :  For  they  tell  us,  God  is  a  Man,  a  IVoman,  a 
Snake,  a  Tree,  a  Crocodile,  and  a  Red-Cloth  ;  but  it's  evi- 
dent thefe  poor  Creatures  can  claim  no  Right  to  Eternity, 
much  lefs  to  Independence  ;  therefore  had  I  liv'd  in  thefe 
blind  Ages,  when  Serpents  crawl'd  upon  Altars,  and 
Monfters  inva^ded  Temples,  I  could  not  proftrate  my  felf 
before  them  ;  I  muft  have  protefted  againft  the  Impiety, 
and  rather  have  fallen  by  the  Magiftrate's  Hand,  than 
have  paid  Obedience  to  his  Law. 

Again,  God  will  be  worfhip'd  as  infinitely  Holy ;  how 
then  can  you  fall  proftrate  before  an  inceftuous  Jupiter., 
a  thieving  Mercury,  a  bloody  Mars,  a  peevifh  Juno,  or 
a  proftitute  Ff^a;  ?  Such  Crimes  entertain  no  Commerce 

with 


with  Sandity  ;  their  place  is  Hell,  not  Heaven,  and  the- 
Criminals  rather  deferve  Infamy  and  Tortures,  than  A- 
doration.  Does  he  adore  God  as  infinitely  Holy,  who 
acknowledges  him  guilty  of  Inceft,  Murther,  Felony, 
and  even  of  thofe  Oflences,  that  night  and  ftartle  Na- 
ture? That  put  to  the  Blufh,  not  only  the  Modefty  of 
the  Innocent,  but  alfo  the  very  Impudence  of  the 
Guilty  ?  In  fine,  that  infed  Hell,  and  plague  the  Dam- 
ned ?  • 

Moreover,  God  requires  to  be  honour'd  as  a  Beifjg  w- 
finitely  IV'tfe ;  by  what  Rule  therefore  can  you,  with  thofe 
of  Coromand?},  fay  and  believe  he  is  an  Ape  ?  With  the 
Romans^  Grecians,  and  all  the  other  idolatrous  People  of 
the  World,  he  is  a  Man^  a  Statue  ?  or  with  the  fuper- 
ftitious  Egyptian^  he  is  an  Onion^  a  Wolf,  a  Crocodile  ? 
Some  of  thefe  fantaftical  Deities  are  even  void  of  Senfe, 
much  more  of  Reafon  ;  and  the  Men-Divinities  have 
left  Pofterity  no  other  Marks  of  their  Reafon,  but  their 
Crimes :  We  know  they  had  fome  Wit,  by  the  enormous 
Abufes  of  it  ;  their  Wifdom  had  a  fmall  Reach,  it  w-ent 
no  farther,  than  to  lay  Snares  for  fond  Boys,  or  forfim- 
ple  Girls:  Seeing  therefore  all  the  idolatrous  Worfhip 
that  ever  was  in  the  World,  fince  the  Birth  o^Polytheifm 
to  this  very  Moment,  clafhes  with  thofe  Notions"  under 
which  God  will  be  adored,  you  can  no  more  join  with 
any  idolatrous  Congregation,  than  with  its  Crimes.  It 
remains  therefore,  that  God's  Permiflion  is  no  more  uni- 
verfal,  than  his  Command  ;  and  though  at  firft  you  were 
pleas'd  to  extend  it  to  all  Religions  except  two  or  three, 
you  muft  now  turn  the  Tables,  and  exclude  all  but  two 
or  three.  So  that  to  conclude,  that  great  Principle,  we 
muft  conforr/i  to  the  Religions  oj'  thofe  Countries  where  we 
live,  is  not  only  notoriouHy  falfe,  but  alfo  fcandalous  to 
Extravagance. 

Ariov.  You  fancy  I  am  run  a-ground,  and  that  you 
have  wounded  my  Principles  beyond  Recovery ;  but  ftay, 
you  have  been  upon  the  Ramble,  and  miftaken-your 
Way:  You  reafon  upon  a  falfe  Bottom  ;  for  you  fup- 
pofe  Heathens  worfliipp'd  Creatures,  and  paid  Homage 
to  Statues ;  whereas  moft  certainly  they  ador'd  the  true 
God  under  thofe  fenfible  Refemblances ;  nor  can  you 
reafonabiy  prcfume  they  worfliip'd  Men^  Statues^  or  Beafls, 
iinlefs  you  fuppofe  them  Fools,  to  make  them  impious.    I 

might 


fhe  Gentleman  Injlru^ed,        331 

might  then  with  a  fafe  Confcience  adore  "Jupiter^  Apollo^ 
and  Venui  at  Rome^  and  would  now  (were  I  in  the  In- 
dies) bend  before  Ram^  or  in  Japan  before  Zncas ;  for 
thefe  vifible  Objefts  are  but  dark  Emblems,  or  different 
Yi2iVnt^  oi God  blejfed  for  evermore.  Tho'  therefore  God 
commands  me  to  adore  him,  as  eternal,  independent,  in- 
finitely Holy,  and  infinitely  V/ife,  he  has  not  determin'd 
under  what  Name  ;  tho'  v/e  call  him  Jupiter,  Mars,  or 
Apollo,  he  fcorns  to  formalize ;  if  Ram,  Zacas.,  or  Amidas, 
he  will  not  pet:  A  great  Name  adds  not  a  Grain  to  his 
Perfeftions,  nor  can  a  vulgar  Appellation  diminifh  them. 
In  fine,  Reafon  teaches  us  his  Nature,  but  his  Name  we 
learn  from  Cuftom,  and  this  will  vary  till  you  bring  all 
Languages  to  their  primitive  Unity  ;  lb  that,  methinks, 
you  have  all  this  *.vhile  skirmiili'd  with  a  Shadow,  or 
fenc'd  with  a  Nothing :  You  have  rais'd  a  fottifh  Idola- 
try in  your  Brain,  meerly  to  deftroy  it ;  but  great  Wits 
often  miflake  the  Queftion,  as  well  as  great  Blockheads : 
Like  ill-bred  Spaniels,  they  run  at  Check  on  a  falfe  Scent; 
flufli  their  own  Fancies  for  their  Adveifaries  Opinion, 
and  cry  Vidory,  when  they  have  handfomely  lafh'd  their 
own  Errors. 

Eufeh.  Becaufe  jufl  now  I  put  you  in  Mind  of  fome 
Miftakes,  and  cenfur'd  feverely  a  Vein  of  fhuffling  that 
runs  through  all  your  Difcourfe,  you  very  fairly  cruife 
for  Reprilals,  and  would  fain  bring  me  in  guilty  of  the 
fame  Over-iight,  I  have  legally  prov'd  upon  you.  Believe 
me,  Sir,  I  have  not  caper'd  in  the  Air:  I  aim'd  at  your 
Principle,  and  have  hit  it ;  and  you  are  fenfible  enough  I 
am  come  up  to  the  very  Point  in  Debate,  and  fo  ftart  a 
new  Queftion,  either  to  entangle  me,  or  to  delude  the 
Audience.  But  I  intend  not  to  wade  far  in  this  Contro- 
verfy,  whether  the  Pagans  adored  the  true  God  under  the 
Shape  of  Jupiter,  Apollo,  l^c.  Dodlor  Stillin.  maintain'd 
they  did,  but  all  impartial  Men  wifh'd  he  had  employ'd 
his  Talents  on  a  more  defenfible  Subjedt;  for  certainly 
his  Reputation  fuffer'd  in  the  Enterprize,  and  he  had 
fhew'd  more  Judgment  in  ftepping  over  fo  nice  a  Point, 
than  he  did  Wit,  in  treating  it  fo  little  to  the  Purpofe. 

However,  becaufe  you  have  flung  this  Difficulty  in  my 
Way,  I  muft  take  fome  Notice  of  it;  not  that  the  IfTue 
of  our  prefent  Difpute  depends  on  the  Decifion  of  this 
Queftion  ;  but  becaufe  I  am  relblv'd  to  give  you  full 

Satis- 


:j3a     ^^s  Gentleman  InfrtiBel 

Satisfaiiion,  I  fay  then,  That  the  Heathens  did  not  adore 
the  true  God^  under  the  Name  of  Jupiter,  Mars,  Apollo, 
l^c.  and  this  is  fo  manifeft  a  Truth,  that  a  Man  muft 
Ihut  his  Eyes  to  overlook  it :  Di't  non  fuerunt  ab  atemo^ 
fd  ita  eorum  quifquis  natus  eft  ut  nosnafcimur.  T'our  Gods 
(lays  Athenagoras  to  the  Gentiles)  are  not  eternal^  they 
vj'^'f:  ^11  hnrn.  as  we  are  :  And  Min.Ftelix  laughs  at  the 
Pag.uii  -oi  '.i->ring  thole  as  Gods,  who  were  born  and 
died  like  Men  :  Manifeftum  eft  homines  illos  fuiJJ'e^  quos 
^  natos  iegimuSy  ^  mortuosfcimus.  St.  Cyprian  de  Idol. 
Van.  proves  they  were  not  Gods,  becaufe  they  have  been 
Kings.  Deos  non  ejfe^  quos  colit  Vulgus  hinc  Ttbttim  eft  : 
Reges  enim  fuerunt :  And  when  fome  Gentiles  (to  delude 
thofe  Chrillian  Arguments  they  could  not  anfwer)  had 
the  Impudence  to  deny  they  worfhip'd  any  Man,  Amobi- 
us  confutes  their  wretched  Evafion,  and  proves  home  up- 
on them,  they  really  adore  Men,  though  they  blufhed  to 
own  the  Folly,  lib.  ii.  cont.  Gent.  Vos  hominem  nullum 
celitis  ?  Non  unum  vel  aitum  ?  Non  innumeros  alios  ?  Quin 
imo  non  omnes^  quos  in  Templis  veftris  mortalium  fuftuli^ 
fiis  ex  numero^  ^  coelofideribufque  donaflis  ?  Et  infra  jam 
frofedo  difcetis  quibus finguli  fatribus ^  quibus  matribus  fu- 
erint  procreati  ;  qua  inregione  nati^  qua  gentCy  qutc  fece- 
rint,  egerint^  pertulerint.  But  to  put  an  end  to  the  Con- 
troverfy,  take  a  Turn  to  the  Capitol,  and  you  will  fee 
what  Opinion  the  Pagans  had  of  'Jupiter,  qui  ejus  nutri- 
cem  in  Capitoli  pojuerunt^  who  plac'd  his  very  Nurfe, 
Wife,  Sifter,  and  Daughter  in  this  auguft  Temple.  I 
i^iight  here  bring  a  Cloud  of  Witnefles,  who  liv'd  and 
convers'd  with  Heathens,  who  ftudied  their  prophane 
Theology  to  confute  it ;  who  were  Men  of  Learning  and 
Probity,  and  never  calumniated  an  Adverfary  to  opprefs 
him:  But  what  Ii>:ivc  faid  fuffices  to  convince  a  rational 
Man,  that  the  Pag?.:.3  adore  Creatures,  not  the  Creator, 
under  borrow'd  NatriCS  as  you  pretend. 

Ariov.  Indeed  the  Vulgar  might  pofTibly  miftake  the 
Fabl»s  of  Homer  for  Articles  of  Religion,  and  model 
their  Faith  by  .P:;Ilads;  they  might  divide  God  into  Sex, 
and  worfhip  A*;  .r.  and  V7omen  before  Statues  their  Re- 
prcfcntatives;  but  you  rnuft  grant  this  grofs  Impiety  con- 
cern'd  only  the  Rabble,  the  Philofophersand  leading  Men 
were  above  fuch  an  Abfurdity, 

Etifeh. 


The  G  Emr  L  E  M  A  N  Injiru[led,       3  3  3 

Eufeh.  No  doubt  the  Philofophers  condemn'd  in  thei^ 
Hearts  thofe  very  Deities  they  ador'd  ;  but  their  Praftice 
varied  from  their  Judgment ;  and  tho'  they  were  Theifts 
in  the  Schools,  they  were  Polytheifts   in  the  Temples. 
God  was  not  worfliip'd  according  to  the  Ideas  of  Philofo- 
phers, but  of  Poets,     ^uid  Jibi  vult  ifta  non  poeticafed 
inimica  plane  Varictas^  Deos  fecundum  Philofophos  in  I'lbris 
quarere^  [ectmdum  Poetas  in  tewplis  adorare.  ^ug.  lib.  2. 
deConfen.  Evan,  Cap,  23.     And  if  you  doubt  of  this,  I 
muft  delire  you  once  more  in  St.  /iufiin^s  Name  to  enter 
into  the  Capitol ;  this  was  the  Seat  ofjpipiter,  0.  M.  id 
^/?,  of  Rome's  lupream  God.    Here  you  will  find  Amal- 
thcea  a  Goat^  M'ho  nurs'd  this  Diety,  his  Sifter,  Wife  and 
Daughter  j  evident  Arguments  the  Romans  thought  he 
was  a  Man  to  whom  they  paid  fupream  Honour :  For  if 
they  thought  he  was  eternal,  why   gave  they  him  a 
Nurfe?  If  independent,  why  did  they  confefs  he  ow'd 
his  Prefervation  to  Goat's  Milk  ?   And  then,  if  he  were 
not  a  Man,  what  did  he  with  a  Wife;  or  how  came 
he  by  a  Daughter  ?  Do  not  tell  me,  thefe  are  poetical 
Inventions ;  I  know  they  are  :  But  thefe  Fableiswere  ex- 
pos'd  by  the  heathen  Divines,  and  cull'd  out  of  Poems 
to    piece  up  Religion ;  they  were  abfurd,  it*s  true,  yet 
believ'd  by  lome,  and  reverenc'd  by  all.  In  fine,  if  Poets 
invented  them,  the  Prielb  adopted  'em ;  they  were  con- 
vey'd  from  the  Stage  to  the  Temple  by  Blindnefs  and 
Superftition,  and  what  Men  laugh'd  at  in  one  place,  they 
adored  in  the  other.     Nunquid  ^  Capitolia  RomanorHYn 
opera  fimt  Poetarum  ?   Augufl^  Lib.  6.  de  Civ.  Dei. 

But  if  we  fuppofe  againil  Scripture,  againft  the  Au- 
thority of  Pagans  themfelves,  and  the  concurrent  Tefti- 
monies  of  Ages,  that  the  Heathens  did  adore  the  fu- 
pream God  blejfcdfor  evermore  ;  this  will  not  better  your 
Caufe,  nor  prejudice  mine:  For  ftill  it's  as  clear  as 
plain  Fa6tcan  make  a  Thing,  that  when  they  worfhip'd 
him  under  the  Shape  o^'Jupiter^  they  cjap'd  upon  his  infi- 
nite Sandtity  Rapes  and  Adulteries ;  they  impeach'd  him 
of  Robberies  under  the  Notion  of  Mercury^  of  Cruelty 
under  that  of  Mars.^  t^c.  Nay,  they  ftrip'd  him  of  all 
Wifdom  under  the  Figures  of  Beafts,  and  even  of  Senfe 
under  thofe  of  (^»;o»x.  Fire,  and  li'^ater.  If  therefore  we 
are  oblig'd  to  adore  God  as  a  Being  Eternal,  Independent, 
infinitely  Holy ^  and  infinitely  Wife  ;  you  could  not  believe 

nor 


534      r^^  G  £  N  T  L  E  M  A  N  liiJiru^leL 

nor  worfhip  God,  as  the  old  Heathens  did,  nor  can  you 
go  over  to  any  P<2^a»  Society  that  now  is,  either  in  the 
Eaji  ox  Weft-Indies :  For  tho'  they  do  worfliip  the  true 
andinvifible  God,  under  vifible  and  material  Images,  yet 
they  charge  him  with  a  thoufand  Impertinences,  deftru- 
6live  to  t'hofe  Notions  under  which  he  commands  Wor- 
fhip.  So  that  we  muft  reform  yo\ix  Thefts^  and  dafli  out 
of  the  univerfal  PermifTion,  not  only  two  or  three,  but 
two  or  three  thoufand  Religions  eftablifli'd  in  the  World 
by  Cuftom,  and  maintain'd  by  all  the  Supports  of  Force 
and  Authority  :  For  they  outrage  Nature,  and  burlefque 
God's  nioft  facrcd  Attributes ;  they  rifle  his  Majefty, 
entrench  upon  his  Wifdom,  afperfe  his  Sandity,  and 
turn  his  very  Being  into  Farce  and  Raillery. 

ArioviftHS  was  at  a  'Nonplus,  and  his  Concern  flew  to 
his  Face  :  Nay,  his  ufual  Confidence  withdrew,  and 
even  Raillery,  and  lafl:  Defence  of  Libertines,  deferted 
him  ;  fo  that  he  made  a  Figure  worthy  of  Laughter  and 
Gompaflion  :  At  laft  he  relblv'd  to  gain  -Time  for  Refle- 
xion, and  therefore  addrefling  himfelf  to  the  Lady ; 
Madam,  faid  he,  I  have  almoft  talk'd  my  felf  out  of 
Breath,  an  Hour's  refpite  will  not  beunfeafonable;  with 
your  leave,  we  will  put  off"  the  Conclufion  till  the  Even- 
ing. 

Upon  Condition,  anfwer'd  the  Lady,  you'll  return 
to  the  Conference,  or  condemn  your  Principle. 

Ariov.  I'll  be  bound  for  my  Appearance,  or  if  you  ask 
better  Security,  my  Friend,  I  prefume,  will  give  in  Bail 
for  my  forth-coming :  Then  turning  himfelf  lo  Eufebius ; 
we  are,  continu'dhe,  in  the  Pit,  and  muft  fight  it  out: 
There  is  no  place  left  for  Retreat.  Leaving  the  Compa- 
ny, he  walk'd  into  the  Garden,  rather  to  conceal  hisC^^- 
grin,  than  to  take  the  Air  :  And  indeed  I  wonder  not  at 
his  Concern  ;  for  it's  obferv'd,  that  tho'  Libertines  hate 
Confcience,  they  are  fond  of  Honour ;  they  are  Crea- 
tures made  up  of  Pride  and  Arrogance,  and  therefore 
neither  know  how  to  bear  an  Advantage  with  Modera- 
tion, nor  a  Difappointment  with  Patience. 

When  he  was  gone,  I  am  furpriz'd,  faid  the  Lady,  at 
the  Gentleman's  Confidence;  furely  his  Aflurancevi'eighs 
more  than  his  Judgment;  why  elfe  will  he  bring  his 
Caufe  to  another  Hearing?  I  love  not  to  laugh  at  ano- 
ther Man's  Misfortune,  nor  to  draw  Pleafurc  from  his 

Con- 


^he  Gentleman  InJIruBe^,      3 35 

Confufion  :  But,  m^thinks,  I  cannot  be  forry  to  fee  Ir- 
reliiion  punifli'd  in  its  grand  Protedtor  :  Humiliations 
work  more  on  a  Libertine's  Underftandin§,  than  Demon- 
llration ;  and  thofe  that  cannot  be  argu'd  out  of  loofe 
Principles,  are  fometimes  fiiam'd  out  of  them. 
■  Were  the,  Virtue  of  Arioriftus  equal  to  his  Wit,  faid 
his  Friend,  nothing  can  be  more  accomplifh*d  than  he; 
but  I  muft  own,  his  Morals  are  bad,  and  his  Principles 
worfe :  He  laughs  at  the  difference  between  Good  and 
Evil ;  and  I  have  heard  him  fay,  No  Si>i  is  bbcker,  than 
the  very  thi'/ikiKg  there  is  any  ;  nay^  he  defines  Sin^  a  thing 
thatfome  live  by  inveighing  againjt,  and  others  by  pra^if- 
ing.  And  hence  it  is,  that  he  not  only  makes  a  Pradice, 
but  a  boaft  of  Sin,  and  defends  it  with  as  much  Greedi- 
nefs  as  he  commits  it. 

Eiifeb.  But,  Sir,  tho' fuch  Men  carry  off  the  Reputa- 
tion of  Wit,  they  have  too  little  of  the  Man,  to  be  the 
Standard   of  Mankind ;    we   are  not,  God  be  thank'd. 
Fools  enough  to  take  Scoffs  for  Arguments,  nor  Raillery 
for  Reafon  :    He  is  a  great  Ignoramus^  who  knows  not 
that  it's  eafier  to  fport  with  Virtue,  than  to  praftife  it ; 
indeed,  if  Ariovifius  could   jell  Sin  into   Nothings  his 
Mirth  would  not  be  unreafonable  ;  but  the  wild  Humour 
of  a  Debauchee,  cannot  work  upon  the  Nature  of  things: 
Wit  may  dive  into  Eflences,    but  not  tranfmute  them. 
However,  I  hope  to  reafon  the  Gentleman  out  of  Conceit 
both  of  his  Wit  and  Religion,  and  to  perfuade  him  that 
thofe  are  Fools  who  fport  themfelves  into  Hell ;   and 
that  none  more  certainly  do  fo,  than  thofe  who  make  a 
Jeft  of  Sin,  and  a  Pageant  of  Religion:    For  tho' a  Man 
who  dares  defy  God,  and  look  Damnation  in  the  Face, 
may  be  witty,    I  am  fure  he  is  fuperlatively  foolifh. 
EudoxHs  was  no  lefs  mortify'd  than  Ariovijlns.     He  was 
not  indeed  concern'd  at  his  Difgrace;  no,  he  rather  felt 
Symptoms  of  Indignation  than  of  Pity  ;  and  wifh'd  he 
had  defended  his  Pojl  with  greater  Bravery,  or  render'd 
it  with  more  Ignominy  :    For  having  been  deluded  by 
Ariovijius,    he    thought  the  Weajcnefs  of  his  Defence 
■would  glance   upon  his  own  Reputation,  and  that  the 
World  would  tax  him  of  Levity,  or  Simplicity,  for  em- 
bracing Latitudinarianifm  upon  fo  weak  Grounds.     One 
would  fwear,  faid  he  in  a  Paflion,  thefe  A-Ien  by  their 
Talk  had  engrofs'd  all  the  Wit  of  the  Nation,  as  well 

as 


^^6     T'h  Gentleman  InJJmBed. 

^s  the  Vices ;  yet  bring  them  to  the  Touchftone,  ajtid 
you'll  find  nothing  but  Drofs ;  they  argue  as  ill  as  they 
believe,  and  areas  great  Strangers  to  Reafon,  as  to  Virtue  ; 
they  difpute  no  more  methodically  than  they  live,  and 
are  as  weak  in  Principle,  as  violent  in  Paflion.  Eudoxus 
was  going  on,  when  Dinner  put  an  end  to  his  Invedive. 
Arioviftm  had  not  walk'd  away  his  Refentment,  he  brought 
it  to  Table,  and  even  difcover'd  it  by  endeavouring  to 
conceal  it :  He  run  up  Pleafantry  to  Affedation,  and 
made  himfelf  ridiculous  not  to  appear  in  a  Paflion  :  So 
that  the  Lady  told  him  with  a  Smile,  He  was  merry  out  of 
Vexation  \  hnl  Ario'viftus  let  the  Compliment  fall,  think- 
ing it  the  bell  way  to  connive  at  a  petty  Aftront  he  durft: 
not  revenge,  and  fo  they  enter'd  upon  a  Converfation  of 
indifferent  Subjeils. 


DIALOGUE    XIL 

Ariovillus    is  forc'd  to    coafefs,    that  one  only   Religio}^ 
is  favi}3g. 

np  H  E  Lady  invited  the  Company  into  the  Garden  af- 
-*•  ter  Dinner :  She  was  impatient  to  fee  the  IlTue  of 
the  Difpute,  which  fhe  hop'd  would  prove  difadvantage- 
ous  to  Arioviftus :  Nay,  the  Morning  Succefs  had  not 
only  allay'd  her  Fears,  but  even  given  her  an  Afilirance, 
that  Truth  would  triumph  over  Falfity,  and  Religion 
over  Impiety;  befides,fhe  flatter'd  herfeli",  her  Son  would 
profit  by  Arioviftui's  Misfortune,  and  defert  thofe  Tenets 
his  Mafter  was  not  able  to  defend ;  for  he  was  diifatisfied 
with  the  Morning's  Performance,  and  the  Abilities  of 
jlrioviftHS  came  not  up  to  his  Expectation  :  He  faw  him 
always  upon  the  Retreat,  and  that  he  rather  fliuffled  than 
argued ;  he  fcarce  durft  look  an  Argument  in  the  Face, 
and  though  he  fometimes  fenc'd  off  Blows,  he  never  gave 
any  :  In  fine,  he  turn'dfhort  upon  himfelf,  and  generally 
confuted  one  Reply  by  the  Contrariety  of  the  other ;  fo 
that  Eudoxus  fufnpt^ed  the  Caufe  of  Arioviftus  was  no 
better  than  the  De'ence  of  it,  and  that  he  pleaded  it, 
becaufe  li:  was  deftitule  of  Reafon. 

After 


fhe  Qektleman  InpruBeL     337 

After  a  Turn  or  two  in  the  Garden,  the  Lady  lea- 
ding the  Company  into  an  Arhor^  methinks,  faid  fhe 
to  Artov'tflus^  this  Place  was  made  for  Converfation  ; 
we  have  both  Time  and  Convenience  to  give  a  fe- 
cond  Hearing:  You  are  I  am  fure  a  Gentleman  of  your 
Word. 

Ar'iov.  Madam,  I  delire  nothing  more :  Let  us  then, 
continu'd  he,  turning  himfelf  to  Eufebius,  begin  where  we 
broke  off  this  Morning:  Be  pleas'd,  Sir,  to  remember,  I 
call  before  you  a  Scheme  of  thofe  Religions  that  are 
A-la-mode  among  our  young  Town-Sparks.  Some  are  fo 
amazingly  irrehgious,  as  to  turn  Religion  into  a  Trick  of 
State;  they  fay  it's  a  Slave  to  Government,  and  cannot 
oblige  till  it  pailes  into  Law,  but  then  it's  binding,  tho* 
never  fo  execrable. 

Others  retrench  from  this  Command,  thofe  Religions 
that  welter  in  Blood,  and  flame  with  Proftitution  ;  fuch 
Religions,  they  fay,  are  fram'd  for  Cyclops^  and  calcu- 
lated for  Sodom  and  Gomorrha  :  A  Man  muft  turn  a  Ly- 
on, or  Baboon,  to  pradtife  the  Duties  of  fuch  Churches, 
and  a  Devil  to  command  'em ;  wherefore  they  ftigma- 
tize  the  Believers  of  fuch  fcandalous  Tenets,  and  throw 
both  the  Credenda  and  Agenda  out  of  the  Pale  of  God's 
Permiflion :  But  then,  a  few  excepted,  all  others,  they 
fay,  are  allow'd  of ;  a  good  Intention  redlifies  their  Er- 
rors, and  even  compounds  for  Idolatry  its  felf ;  it  per- 
fuades  God  to  wink  at  Impiety,  and  to  take  Affront  for 
Veneration.  This  is,  no  doubt,  to  trefpafs  upon  his 
Goodnefs,  to  make  bold  with  his  Greatnefs,  and  to  treat 
his  Majefty  with  Scorn  and  Contempt. 

The  Company  fmil'd,  and  admir'd  no  lefs  the  Gentle- 
man's Confidence,  than  the  Contrivance ;  by  this  little 
Artifice,  he  very  handfoniely  heav'd  the  Shame  of  the  De- 
feat from  himfelf  to  thofe  young  Sparks,  whofe  Perfua- 
Jion  he  pretended  to  defend  :  But  the  Impofture  lay  too 
open  to  trepan  the  Company,  for  he  difputed  not  as  Se- 
cond, hut  zs  Principal;  and  pleaded  hisownCaufe,  not 
others :  But  thofe  Men  are  above  the  Niceties  of  Honour, 
or  Pundtilio'sof  Confcience. 

Eufebiiis  knew  not  well  how  to  model  his  Countenance, 
he  was  both  tempted  to  laugh,  and  to  frown  ;  for  the 
Turn  was  witty,  tho'  impudent.  At  laft,  Sir,  faid  he  to 
ArioviJir^Sj  I  thought  you  had  undertaken  the  Defence  of 

Z  your 


33^      The  Gentleman  Injh^u^ed. 

j'our  own  Religion,  not  oVJ ohn  nn  Oakes ,  I  love  not  to 
encounter  lieprejentatives ^v>or  to  engage  with  Corporations 
by  Proxy.  However,  I  am  glad  you  have  chang'd  Sides, 
and  left  the  Poji  of  an  Advocate  for  that  of  an  Accufer ; 
we  have  at  laft  made  fome  Progrefs:  For  now  it's  agreed 
on,  that  in  fpight  of  Mr.  Hohbs  and  his  Profelytes,  the 
Laws  of  Common-wealth  mull  nut  be  the  Standard  of 
our  Faith  ;  that  God  permits  not,  much  lefs  commands 
us,  to  convene  with  thofe  Congregations  in  Religion, 
that  countenance  Impieties  ;  in  fine,  that  Idolatry  in- 
vades God's  Right,  ftrikes  at  his  Prerogative,  and  draws 
upon  his  very  Perfon  :  So  that  in  Conclufion,  thofe  Reli- 
gions that  are  permitted  take  up  but  little  room,  and  may 
be  caft  up  witiiout  the  help  o^  Arithmetick:  Now,  Sir, 
favour  us  with  a  Dfaught  of  your  Tenets. 

Ariov.  With  all  my  Heart,  I  neither  blufh  to  acknow- 
ledge my  Religion,  nor  fear  to  defend  it :  It's  upright  in 
its  Principles,  and  reafonable  in  the  Application  :  It's  fit- 
ted for  all  Capacities:  The  Peafant  comprehends  it,  and 
the  Philofopher  admires  it:  In  a  word,  my  Religion  is, 
what  Men  call  Nattiral :  It's  of  the  fame  Date  with  our 
Nature,  and  came  into  tlie  World  with  Adam :  God 
printed  every  Article  of  it  in  our  Hearts,  before  the  In- 
vention of  the  Prefsy  and  it's  propagated  by  Generation  : 
We  carry  our  Golpel  and  Prophecies  v/i thin  us,which  can 
neither  be  corrupted  by  Malice,  Ignorance,  or  Inadver- 
tency. Our  Creed  is  plain,  and  our  Decalogue  fhort,  but 
comprehenfive.  We  believe  a  God,  Maker  of  Heaven  and 
Earth  ',  a  God  that  punijhes  Vice^  and  rewards  Virtue  ;  he 
recjuires  no  Sacrifice  but  of  our  Hearts ,  no  Refped,  but  Awe 
of  his  Grandeur,  and  Obedience  to  his  Commands  ;  nor  does 
his  Law  put  any  Precept  upon  us  but  this^  Do  as  you 
■would  be  done  by. 

This  Religion  is  univerflil ;  it's  neither  confin'd  to 
Time,  nor  Place;  it  takes  in  all  Ages,  and  runs  thro' all 
Climates  ;  it  obliges  the  moil  occult  Nations  of  the 
World,  together  with  the  moft  polite  ;  and  becaufe  all 
know  its  Precepts,  no  Man  is  exempted  from  their  Obe- 
dience: Yet  it  permits  thofe  Rites  and  Ceremonies,  the* 
vain  and  fuperrtitious,  which  clafli  not  with  the  above- 
mention'd  Tenets :  But  the  very  Moment  a  Religion 
coins  an  Article,  oppofite  to  the  Belief  of  a  God,  or  con- 
fraryto  the  Attributes  of  his  Sandity,  Wifdom,  and  Ju- 

ftice, 


\, 


"he  Gentleman  InftruBed.     3  3^9 

ftice,  or  Mercy,  when  it  rr-fufes  to  this  all-powerful  Be- 
ing an  Acknowledgment  of  Dependence,  and  "withal  re- 
verfes  this  great  Law  of  Nature,  Quod  tibi  non  vis  fieri 
fi.lteri  ne  fecerii ;  I  fay,  the  Moment  a  Religion  falls  into 
fuch  bare-fac'd  Impieties,  it  becomes  facrilegious  and  a- 
bominable:  And  for  this  Reafon,  I  extend  God's  Permif- 
iion  to  three  only  Religions,  the  Cbrijlian,  yewijh,  and 
Mahometan ;  for  thefe  alone  ftand  upon  the  Law  of  Na- 
ture J  they  inftill  molt  excellent  Principles,  and  regulate 
our  Duty  to  God,  and  our  Obligation  to  Men. 

Eufeb.  Do  you  fpeak  your  own  Thoughts?  I  put  the 
Queftion  for  a  Caution  againft  Miftakes,  for  we  have 
play'd  away  the  Morning  at  crofs  Qtieftions. 

Ariov.  It's  my  Opinion,  and  will  Hand  the  mod  fe- 
vere  Teft  of  Reafon  ;  nothing  material  can  poflibly  be 
brought  againft  it. 

Eufeb.  For  all  that,  I  hope  to  banilh  two  of  the  three 
Religions  out  of  the  Permillion ;  nay,  and  force  you  to 
confefs,  there  are  no  more  Religions  than  Gods.  A  Man, 
you  fay,  may  commence  a  Jew,  when  he  has  taken 
Pet  at  Chrift'.anity,  and  change  Baptifm  for  Circumcifi- 
"on  ;  and  when  he  has  taken  a  Surfeit  of  the  Talmud,  he 
may  piouily  ftrike  off  to  Meccha,  and  truck  the  PeKia- 
tench  for  the  /Alcoran. 

yiriov.  He  may. 

Eufeb.  With  a  fafe  Confcience,  therefore,  in  England 
we  may  believe  Chrifl  is  the  true  Mefjias,  born  of  a  Vir- 
gin, true  God,  and  true  Man,  who  dy'd'for  our  Sins, 
and  was  butcher'd  by  our  Malice  ;  but  when  we  have 
given  up  our  Nmies  to  a  Rabbin,  and  are  adopted  into 
one  of  the  Tribes,  we  may  change  Language,  and  as 
fafely  protell  the  Meffias  is  yet  to  come.}  that  Chriilis  a 
meer  Man,  nothing  different  from  others,  but  that  he  was 
more  criminal ;  that  he  uy'd  for  his  own  Offences,  not 
for  ours ;  that  Juftice  took  him  off,  not  Envy  :  V/e  may 
believe  thefe  Tenets,  and  Iwear  to  the  Truth  of  every 
Tittle.  The  Chrillian  engages  God's  Authority  for  the 
Truth  of  his  Creed,  the  Jew  takes  the  fame  Liberty  ;  yet 
one  Side  jars  with  the  other.  Here  is  a  down-right  Con- 
tradiilion,  nor  can  all  the  Artifice  ofLogick,  all  the  Power 
of  the  Almighty  reconcile  both  Sides.  If  the  Chriluan  be 
in  the  right,  the  Jew  is  ih  the  wrong;  and  if  Truth  ftands 
for  he  Jew,  it  muff  of  Ncceffity  abandon  the  Chrillian. 


540        '^he  GENTtEMAN  InftruBecl 

Ariov.  You  have  Reafon,  but  becaufe  I  know  not 
which  Side  Truth  favours,  I  may  join  w^ith  either. 

Eufeb.  Suppofing  your  Pretenlions  grounded,  you  can- 
not take  both  Sides ;  for  tho'  you  are  ignorant  vf\th. 
which  Party  Truth  fides,  you  are  fure  it  can't  ftand  for 
both :  So  that  tho'  in  your  Hypothefis  you  may  either  be 
Jew  or  Chriftian,  you  can't  be  both  fucceflively  :  If  you 
fwear  to  the  Chriftian  Symbol  to  day,  and  to  the  Jewifli 
to  morrow,  you  are  perjur'd  beyond  aU  peradventure ; 
for  you  know,  the  Tenets  of  thefe  two  Churches  don't 
nick  hke  Tallies. 

But  this  is  not  all,  continu'd  Eufehius,  if  God  permits 
me  to  Jake  up  with  the  Brethren  of  the  Clrcumcifion, 
he  permits  me  to  refufe  Worfhip  to  Jefus  Chrift ;  nay,  to 
blafpheme  him:  If  I  may  turn  off  to  the  Chriftians,  he 
permits  me  to  adore  him.  Now  either  he  is  God,  or  he 
is  not:  If  the  Second,  I  muft  not  adore  him,  for  tho* 
God  be  Matter  of  his  Favours,  he  is  not  of  his  Honour ; 
he  can't  make  this  over  to  any  Creature  by  a  Deed  of 
Gift,  or  Conveyance  ;  tho'  he  be  eternal,  like  a  Minor ^ 
he  can't  alienate  the  Title :  But  again,  if  Chrift  be  God, 
certainly  he  requires  Adoration  as  an  indifpenfable  Duty, 
and  if  we  fail  to  difcharge  our  felves  of  the  Obligation, 
God  will  not  fail  to  punifli  our  Negleft. 

Moreover,  God  can't,  you  fay,  permit  thofe  Offences 
that  Nature  condemns  ;  his  Prerogative-Royal  reaches 
not  fo  far :  Now  what  can  intrench  more  upon  Nature, 
than  to  inveft  a  Creature  with  the  Title  to  a  Worfliip 
which  God  alone  can  claim  a  Ridit  to  ?  Than  to  with- 
draw  my  Allegiance  from  the  Creator  of  all  Things,  and 
bow  to  my  Fellow-Creature  ?  Yet  God  permits  Chrifti- 
anity  on  the  one  Side,  and  on  the  other  it's  flat  Idolatry 
to  adore  Chrift  if  he  be  only  Man ;  therefore  if  Chrift  be 
only  Man,  God  permits  Idolatry,  idejl^  a  ,S in  of  the 
Ihigheft.  Malice  againft  the  very  firll  Principle  of  Nature : 
It's  then  as  evident  that  one  of  thefe  Religions  is  forbid, 
as  that  one  is  meer  Practice  and  Impofture  ;  and  it's  as 
manifeft,  that  one  is  Pra6tice  and  Tmpofture,  as  that  both 
Members  of  a  Contradiction  can't  pollibly  be  true. 

Ariov.  Were  I  fure  that  Chrift  was  God,  I  fhould  lie 
under  an  indifpenfable  Obligation  of  adoring  him ;  I 
muft  then  adhere  to  Chriftianity,  and  if  Occafion  re- 
quir'd,  fign  my  Faith  with  my  Blood:  And  were  I  fure 

he 


The  Gentleman  lnpru5ied,      341 

he  was  Man  alone,  I  ought  to'wheel  off  from  xht  Church 
to  a  Synagogue^  and  exchange  the  Go/pel  for  the  Talmud: 
But  I  am  in  the  dark,  I  rove  in  Obfcurity,  and  cannot 
determine  for  which  Rehgion  Truth  Hands:  In  this  Un- 
certainty God  permits  me  to  clap  in  with  either  ;  my 
Ignorance  juftifies  his  Permillion,  and  my  Choice;  and 
though  by  refufing  to  adore  Chrift,  I  may  not  do  him 
Right,  Ignorance  hinders  me  from  doing  him  Wrong  : 
Thus  tho'  the  Jews  deprive  him  of  his  due,  if  he  be 
God,  and  the  Chriftians  give  more  than  his  due,  if  he  be 
not ;  yet  their  Sin  can  be  only  material,  that  is,  without 
Malice,  and  confequently  without  Offence ;  feeing  nei- 
ther Religion  is  impious  in  its  Worfhip,  and  both  excel- 
lent in  their  Precepts  of  Morality,  it's  clear  we  may  fol- 
low either. 

Eufeb.  Never  did  Men  talk  more  of  Religion  than  we, 
and  never  had  Men  lefs.     To  level  Judaifm  with  Chri- 
flianity,  even  in  a  Chriftian,  nay,  a  reform'd  Kingdom,  is 
one  of  the  moft  monftrous  Attempts  that  ever  I  heard  of: 
The  very  Thought  of  fo  bold  a  Blafphemy  almoft  calls 
me  into  an  Agony,  and  makes  me  I'weat  with  Difguft: 
This  is  to  raife  a  Crofs  for  our  blelTed  Redeemer  in  Chri- 
ftendom^  as  the  Jews  did  in  yerufalem,  to  play  upon  his 
Goodnefs,  to  reviie  his  Greatnefs,  and  to  falute  him  with 
a  Crucifige:  But  what  will  not  Men  do  to  fupport  a  dying 
Caufe,  who  have  nothing  left,  but  If^ill  and  Forehead  ? 
Your  Religion,  Sir,  is  not  calculated  up  for  rjoo,  but 
for  1642,  or  thereabouts,  when  the  Ten  Commandment i 
w,txt  only  authentick  during  Pleafure,  when  the  four  E- 
•vangelifts  were  upon  their  Behaviour,  with  a  quamdiufe 
bene  gejferint,  and  a  nemine  contradicente,  not  the  Bible^ 
govern'd  the  Pulpit :  In  fine,  your  very  Defence  of  Reli- 
gion ftrikes  at  Religion,  and  whilft  you  approve  either, 
you  fairly  condemn  both  ;  for  you  pretend  both  the  Jew- 
ifn  and  Chriftian  Religion  are  permitted,  becaufe  you 
doubt  of  both,   and  know  not  on  which  fide  Truth 
Hands :  Now  fuppofing  you  are  in  fuch  Circumftances, 
it's  evident  you  can't  in  Confcience  embrace  either; 
for  which  Side  foever  you  take,  you  fear  you  are  in  the 
wrong:  Now  whofoever  fquares  his  Adtions  by  a  dubi- 
ous Didlamen  of  Confcience,  is  certainly  guilty  of  a  for- 
mal Sin,  tho'  otherwife  the  Objeds  are  not  only  lawful^ 
but  laudable.    This  is  an  unqueftionable  Principle  \x\ 

Z  3  Morals. 


34*      ^^^  Gentleman  Injiru^ed, 

Morals,  and  can  only  be  deny'd  by  thofe  who  make  no 
Difterence  between  Good  and  Evil.  U  therefore  you  a- 
dore  Chrift  with  the  Chriftian,  and  at  the  fame  time 
dcubt  of  his  Divinity,  you  offend  God  in  the  very  Aft  of 
"VVorfliip:  You  are  a  kind  of  a  Pagan,  tho*  no  Idolater. 
On  the  other  Side,  if  you  blalpheme  him  with  the  Jew, 
if  you  ftrip  him  of  his  Divine  Nature,  if  you  herd  him 
with  the  accurfed  Crew  of  Hypocrites,  and  Impoftors, 
and  at  the  fame  time  fuipeft  he  is  more  than  a  Man,  tho' 
the  doubt  may  perchance  diminifh  the  Sin,  it  cannot 
poffibly  excufe  ir. 

jiriov.  This  is  pretty.  Muft  I  then  like  old  Erafmus 
dangle  in  the  Air  between  both  Churches?  Or  if  I  doubt 
of  all  Religions,  muft  I  profefs  none  ?  Certainly,  Sir,  you 
miftake  your  Errand  :  Whilft  you  pull  down  Latitudina- 
rianifm,  you  very  fairly  fet  up  Atheifm  ;  and  left  all 
Rel'igioyit  jhould be fav'iMg^  you  difallow of  <///.  -  I  would 
fet  out  at  "Jordan^  and  take  my  Progrefs  from  one  Reli- 
gion to  another,  I  would  let  any  Man  write  upon  me 
'Turk^  yevj,  A»iibaptijl.,  Presbyterian^  Independent.,  or 
what  Perfuafion  you  pleafe  rather  than  an  Atheiji.  In  fine, 
it's  more  orthodox  to  profefs  any  Religion  than  none. 

Eufeb.  Under  Favour,  I  would  no  more  perfuade  you 
to  condemn  all  Religions  than  to  approve  all.  I  know 
there  is  a  true  Religion,  and  I  am  fure  there  is  but  one. 
Nay,  I  am  confident,  that  the  Chriftian  Religion  carries 
io  many  vifible  Marks  of  divine  Revelation  about  it,  that 
a  Man  who  will  bring  Things  to  a  fober  Examen,  muft 
confefs  it  came  from  Fleaven,  and  that  he  who  turns 
Chriftianity  into  a  Fable,  or  the  Doftrine  of  the  Bible  in- 
to Illuiion,  defcrves  either  to  bebegg'd  for  a  Fool,  or  to 
be  ftigmatiz'd  for  a  Blafpbemer.  But  if  you  waver  with 
Doubts,  and  fluctuate  between  the  Synagogue  and  the 
Church,  without'  being  able  certainly  to  determine  in 
which  Truth  is  preach'd,  in  which  Impofture  ;  rouze  up 
your  Reafon,  bring  both  to  the  Bar,  hear  their  Pretenfi- 
ons,  examine  the  Motives  of  Credibility,  and,  in  fine,  fum 
up  the  Evidence,  and  if  you  do  this  impartially,  you'll 
foon  either  be  a  Madman,  or  a  Chriftian. 

/Iriov.  But  if  after  I  have  heard  the  Witnefles,  and 
weigh'd  the  Evidence  on  both  Sides  with  Deliberation, 
Maturity,  and  Impartiality  ;  if,  I  fay,  after  thefe  cere- 
monial Frtrliminaries,  I  remain  ambiguous,  muft  I  nei- 
ther convene  with  the  Jew,  nor  the  Chriftian  ?       Eufeb. 


floe  Gentleman  Injiru^ed,       343 

Eufeb.  With  neither,  if  this  ftrange  Cafe  fhould  hap- 
pen: I  fay,  fliould  happen,  for  in  Reality  it  cannot ;  the 
Motives  of  ChriiUanity  are  fo  many,  and  fo  convincing, 
that  unlefs  we  fliut  our  Eyes,  and  hood-wink  Reafcn, 
they'll  force  us  to  acknowledge,  that  if  it  be  not  evidently 
true,  it's  at  leaft  evidently  credible;  and  when  once  you 
are  come  up  to  this  Certainty,  then  you  are  oblig'd  to  de- 
clare for  Chrillianity,  to  believe  its  Tenets,  and  pradlife 
its  Morals. 

Ariov.  Tho'  Chriftianity  compar'd  with  Judaifm  may 
feem  credible,  perchance  it  m.ay  feem  incredible,  if  com- 
par'd  with  fome  other  Religion,  that  has  never  appeared 
on  our  Horizon:  For  as  there  are  Terrce  Incognitx^  un- 
known Regions,  fo  there  are  undifcover'd  Religions. 
Muft  I  therefore  take  my  leave  of  Old  England^  trudge 
to  Sea,  and  encompafs  the  World  with  Sir  Francis 
Drake^  before  I  pitch  upon  a  Religion  ?  Or  muft  I  at 
ieaft  rig  out  a  Veflel  of  Intelligence,  and  then  work  up- 
on thofe  Materials  the  Captain  or  Mate  brings  home  ? 
This  is  a  Work  both  tedious  and  expenfive  ;  nay,  I  may 
add,  endlefs  and  foolifh  ;  and  he  that  can  perfuade  him- 
felf  God  requires  fuch  a  puzlingand  fo  impollible  a  Scru- 
tinyj  muft  confefs  the  wile  Maker  of  all  Things  intended 
rather  to  be  laugh'd  at  by  Men,  than  worfhip'd. 

Eufeb.  Keep  at  home,  God  neither  commands  you 
to  fhip  for  Africa^  or  America.,  nor  to  run  in  Queft  after 
the  Fables  oiihtBrachmans,  or  the  Superftitions  of  the 
Bonzies.  A  Religion  that  is  evidently  credible  in  E»g- 
land^  is  fo  all  the  World  over,  with  what  Se6l  foever  you 
compare  it:  For  neither  God's  Goodnefs,  nor  Wifdom 
can  permit,  a  falfe  Religion  to  be  equally  credible 
with  the  true  one ;  much  lefs  can  he  permit  it  to  be 
more  credible,  and  leaft  of  all,  to  be  evidently  credible; 
If  therefore  after  a  lober  Examen,  you  find  fuch  an  Ap- 
pearance of  Truth,  in  the  Chriftian  Religion,  that  you 
cannot  doubt  of  it  without  Imprudence  and  Rafhnefs, 
you  may  conclude  without  comparing  it  with  any  other, 
that  you  are  oblig'd  to  adhere  to  it,  as  reveal'd  by  God  ; 
and  if  you  refufe  to  believe  his  fupream  Veracity,  (when 
you  cannot  without  a  high  Imprudence  doubt,  but  he 
fpeaks,  you  muft  exped;  to  pay  for  the  Contempt,  by 
groaning  eternally  under  the  Weight  of  hi«  Indignation. 
Z  4  DaOi 


3 44      ^^  Gentleman  Injl runted, 

Dafli  therefore  out  of  the  Patent  one  of  thefe  two  Re- 
ligions, and  I  couniel  you,  out  of  Refped  to  the  Bap- 
tifm  you  have  receiv'd,  and  the  Kingdom  you  live  in, 
rather  to  give  up  Judaifm  than  Chriftianity ;  and  after 
all.  Sir,  Gircumciiion  is  painful,  and  our  Englip  Con- 
ilitutions  will  not  bear  the  Operation. 

Ariov.  Take  your  Courfe,  we  have  been  upon  Duty 
a  great  while,  and  I  am  willing  to  come  to  an  Agree- 
ment upon  any  Terms. 

Eufeh.  To  an  End,  you  mean,  of  the  Difpute ;  for  we 
can  no  more  agree  than  Light  and  Darknefs,  than  Truth 
and  Falfhood,  than  Libertinifm  and  Religion.  The  pre- 
fent  Queftion  is,  whether  a  Man  may  in  Confcience  con- 
form to  the  Alcoran  in  Conftantinople,  and  to  the  Gof- 
pel  in  Chriflendom.  Pray  what  Opinion  have  you  of 
the  Alcoran^  Was  it  compil'd  by  divine  Infplration,  or 
Impofture  ?  By  a  Prophet,  or  a  Cheat  ?  By  the  Impulfe 
of  the  Holy  Ghoft,  or  the  Suggeftion  of  Lewdnefs,  and 
Ambition  ? 

Ariov.  Every  Tittle  breathes  Nonfenfe,  Impiety,  or 
Blafphemy:  It  puts  almolt  the  very  Alphabet  out  of 
Countenance,  and  infedb  the  Paper  it's  writ  on.  A  Man 
muft  commence  Fool,  before  he  can  impofe  upon  his 
Reafon  thofe  Forgeries  for  Revelations  ;  and  turn  Bealt 
to  pradife  the  Morals. 

Eufeb.  Enough :  Why  fo  much  Heat ;  fo  much  In- 
veftive  againft  a  Religion  that  comes  within  the  Verge 
of  Permiffion  ?  If  tolerated,  it  deferves  Refpe^St ;  if  not, 
why  do  you  defend  it?  It's  ridiculous  to  damn  the  Alco- 
ran^ and  canonize  the  Dodtrinej  to  cenfure  Mahomet, 
and  approve  Mahomcufm. 

But,  pray,  Sir,  if  the  Alcoran  favours  Lewdnefs,  and 
lets  loofe  Senfuality ;  if  it  draws  upon  Modefty,  and 
tilts  at  Reafon;  if  it  gorges  with  Impiety,  and  fmcUs  of 
Blafphemy  ;  how  can  you  put  on  the  Turban^  and  herd 
with  the  Mujftilman  ?  For  when  you  jump  over  the  Pale 
of  Chriftianity,  and  give  up  your  Name  to  the  Cady^  or 
Mufty^  you  muft  take  up  for  Truths  thofe  Fables  yoii 
now  brand  with  Forgery  and  Impofture  ;  you  muft 
change  the  Key  to  another  Tune,  you  muft  revere  at 
Conftant'tnople  what  you  laugh  at  in  London,,  and  bow  to 
what  you  ridicule;  you  muft  fay  and  believe.  Untruths 
^s  the  Language  of  Heaven,  Blafphemy  the  Dictates  of 

the 


I'he  Gentleman  InJiruSfed.     34^^ 

the  Holy  Ghoft^  Murders,  Lewdnefs  and  Rapines,  the 
Commands  of  a  meek,  holy  and  juft  Deity  ;  for  the 
Turh  take  all  the  Alcoran  for  Revelation  and  Precept: 
Now  to  fay  God  has  reveal'd  fome  Things  that  clafh  with. 
Truth,  others  that  check  Reafon,  and  others  again  that 
overilioot  Extravagance ;  that  he  commands  forne  Things 
that  difcountenance  Virtue,  and  encourage  Libertinifm, 
is  to  ftrike  at  all  his  Attributes,  and  to  make  at  his  very 
Perfon  ;  it's  to  frame  a  more  vile  Idea  of  his  Divinity, 
than  the  very  Laplander ;  for  theirs  is  only  ridiculous, 
whilft  yours  is  facrilegious  and  execrable. 

Ariov.  Were  I  at  CoKjlantinopley  I  would  fpeak  like 
the  Mufty^  and  do  like  a  Mujj'ulmdn^  but  then  in  my 
Clofet  I  would  laugh  at  their  Folly,  and  pity  their  Blind- 
nefs ;  though  my  Tongue  conform'd  to  the  eliablifh'd 
Religion,  my  Heart  fhould  be  a  Recusant ;  This  fliould 
adore  God  in  Spirit  and  Truth,  tho'  my  Tongue  and 
outward  Man  worfhip'd  him  with  Blafphemies,  and 
ferv'd  him  in  Senfuality:  All  exterior  Actions  are  to  be 
rated  by  the  interior,  this  is  their  proper  Standard  ;  if 
the  Intention  be  Sterling,  they  cannpt  poflibly  be  Coun- 
terfeit. 

Eufeb.  Ho!  We  are  juft  where  we  fet  out:  Now  all 
Religions  are  permitted  again. 

Jriov.  Why  fo  ? 

Etifcb.  If  the  Intention  can  fandlify  Hypocrify,  and  the 
moft  outragious  Blafphemies,  why  may  it  not  conveigh 
Piety  into  JVIurders ;  and  Holinefs  into  the  impure  Sab- 
baths of  F'enus  and  Priapus  ?  Why  can't  it  blanch  over 
the  Horrour  of  the  A'lexicam  human  Sacrifices ;  or  the 
Cruelty  of  the  Pumck  burning  Statues  of  Saturnl  You 
may,  you  fay,  at  Conftantinople^  expofe  Chriftianity  to 
the  Scorn  and  Petulancy  of  Infidels,  give  up  the  Bible 
to  Turks  and  Barbarians,  impeach  Chriftians  of  Apo- 
ftacy,  and  make  Impudence  and  Infpiration  fpeak  the 
fame  Language  :  If  a  good  Intention  can  juftify  at  Con- 
fiautinople  fucha  Catalogue  of  black  Impieties,  why  may 
it  not  authorize  lefs  Crimes  in  other  places  ?  Return  bold- 
ly to  your  firft  Thejis ;  exclude  no  Religion  out  of  the  A6t 
of  Indulgence ;  place  Virtue  and  Vice  on  the  fame  Le- 
vel ;  pull  down  the  Boundaries  between  Good  and  Evil ; 
take  off  the  Reftraint  of  Confcience,  and  blned  Men  arid 
^eafts  into  one  Species*    Come,  Sir,  pluck  up  a  good 

Heart : 


34<^      ^^  Gentleman  Inftni^ed, 

Heart;  cafttheZ)/^,  and  pafs  the /2a^/Vo»  of  Honour  and 
Confcience,  our  Difpute  will  otherwife  be  at  an  end ;  for 
we  have  call  out  the  Talmud  as  Apocryphal ;  you  have 
difcarded  the  Alcoran :  fo  that  the  Gofpel  only  Hands 
untouch'd,  and  God's  Permiffion  is  confin'd  to  Chriftia- 
nity  alone. 

Arioviftus  found  himfelf  in  the  Toyl,  and  knew  not 
■which  way  to  unhamper  himfelf;  his  Concern  flew  to 
his  Face,  and  every  Pofturebetray'd  an  extreme  Paflion  ; 
he  fcem'd  to  brood  fome  defperate  Refolution,  and  only 
wanted  Boldnefs  to  execute  it  :  After  a  fhort  Strife  be- 
tween Shame  and  Revenge;  I  perceive,  fnid  he,  to  Eu- 
febius^  you  take  Advantage  of  my  Condefcenlion,  and 
■  even  turn  my  Civility  againft  me ;  you  manage  a  Fa- 
vour fo  ungenteelly,  that  I  fhall  Hand  oft  in  Caution  and 
Refervednefs  for  the  future. 

Eujeb.  Explain  your  Meaning.  I  fuppofeinDifputes, 
Reafon  mult  take  place  of  Ceremony,  and  that  a  Man 
may  prefs  an  Argument  home  without  trefpafling  upon 
good  Breeding;  to  be  plain,  I  am  more  beholden  to 
my  Arguments,  than  to  your  Liberality  ;  you  have  con- 
defcended  to  me,  2isBoufflers  did  to  K.  IVilltam,  when 
he  Could  hold  out  no  longer.  In  a  Word,  I  have  not 
courted,  but  ftorm'd  you  into  thofe  Conceflions  you 
blufh  at. 

Ariov.  Hold  there ;  I  laid  the  Alcoran  at  your  Mercy 
without  Neceflity,  and  attack'd  it  of  Impofture,  Fallacy, 
and  Blafphemy,  out  of  an  Excels  of  good  Nature  and 
Complaifance. 

Eufeb.  Out  of  good  Nature  and  Complaifance  ? 

Ariov.  Yes,  for,  among  Friends,  it  carries  an  Air  of 
Truth,  iind  the  unlimited  Extent  of  that  Perfualion 
pleads  home  for  the  Divinity  of  its  Author. 

Enfeb.  Ho!  ho!  Vich^iWtTurhxn England:  I  thought 
the  Otto-man  Religion  reach'd  no  further  than  the  Otto- 
man Sword ;  but  I  perceive  it  has  fwum  over'into  our 
Ifl:\nd.  Pray,  continu'd  he,  with  a  Smile,  what  isyour 
Turk'ijh  Appellation  ?  Solyman  or  Achmet  ?  But  Raillery 
apart ; ,  had  I  been  upon  the  pinch,  I  would  have  dropt 
the  Turk^  and  kept  the  Chriftian :  For  a  Chriftian  Turk 
is  a  frank  Atheift  once  remov'd,  and  tho'  he  makesProfef- 
fion  of  a  God,  and  of  a  Religion,  molt  Men  conclude  he 
believes  neither.     Indeed  by  this  unexpected  Declaration, 

you 


^e  Gentleman  InJiruBed.     347 

you  have  difappointed  me;  I  intended  to  prove,  that 
one  only  Religion  was  faving,  and  that  all  others  were 
call  out  of  the  Ad  for  Toleration:  But  you  have  made 
clever  Work  of  it,  and  difcarded  all  Religions,  nay,  and 
1  fancy.  Salvation  too. 

Ariov.  With  PermilTion,  Sir,  tho' I  approve  the/^/<ro- 
4-an^  I  may  reverence  the  Gofpel :  And  tliough  I  unlock 
Heaven-Gate  to  Mujfiilmaas^  v/hy  muft  I  (hut  it  upon 
Chriftians  ? 

Eufeb.  Why  ?  One  runs  quite  counter  to  the  other, 
even  in  the  mofteffential  PcintSj  both  of  Belief  and  Pra- 
ctice.   Chriftian   Religion  tells  u3,  Chrift  is  God,  the 
Mahometan^  that  he  is  not;  that  commands  us  to  adore 
him,  this  forbids  us.     Now,  Sir,  if  Truth  favours  the 
Turks,  Chrift  is  a  meer  Creature,  and  by  confequence 
all  Chriftians  are  downright  Idolaters :  If  therefore  God 
will  be  adored  as  a  Being  Eternal^  infinitely  I4'ife,  and 
infinitely  Holy,  it's  evident,  you  ('who  difcover  Truth  on 
every  Tittle  of  the  Alcoran)  cannot  with  a  fate  Confci- 
enqe  profefs  Chriftianity  ;  for  that  great  Oracle  tells  us, 
Chriit  is  a  Creature,  and  therefore,  fo  foon  as  you  com- 
mence Chriftian,  you   pay  divine    Honour  to  a  Man, 
known,  and  acknowledg'd  fuch  :  Now  to  adore  God,  as 
a  Man,  is  not  to  v/orfhip  him  as  a  Being  Eternal^  infi- 
nitely iVife,  and  infinitely  Holy  ;  and   to  adore  a  Man, 
as  God,  is  to  ftrip  the  Almighty  of  all  his  Prerogatives, 
to  rifle  the  San6luary,  and  to  lay  the  confecrated  Trea- 
fures  at  the  Feet  of  a  Creature  :  Here  is  flat  Idolatry  on 
the  one  Hand,  and  a  Monfter  compos'd  of  Idolatry  and 
Sacrilege  on  the  other.     So  that  to  fum  up  the  Evidence, 
if  Turcifm  be  a  true  and  allow'd  Religion,  Chriftianity 
is  not ;  and  fo  my  Thefis  is  prov'd,  that  one  Religion 
alone  is  faving:  Which  glorious  Quality,  to  the  Shame 
of  Latitudinarianifm,  and  the  Scandal  of  Reafon,  you 
clap  on  Mahometifm. 

The  Lady  over-joy'd  at  the  Defeat  of  ArJoviJlus  was 
not  Miftrefs  of  her  Tranfport :  Thefe  Gentlemen,  faid 
fhe,  are  for  enfuring  Caufes,  and  never  fpeak  under  De- 
monftration:  Then  turning  to  him.  Sir,  continu'd  flie, 
I  pity  your  Malice,  but  I  am  glad  of  your  Overthrow  ; 
you  have  been  mcie  at  Variance  with  your  felf,  than 
with  your  Adverfary,  and  feldom  recall'd  one  Abfurdity, 
^ithout  advancing  a  greater  j  but  at  length,  in  Defiance 
"         ■  of 


34^     ^^^  Gentleman  InftmBed. 

of  Senfe  snd  Reafon,  you  have  out-fhot  Extravagance 
it  felf,  and  feal'd  a  Million  of  Impertinences  with  a  da- 
rjng  Blafphemy :  For  you  have  rais'd  up  Mahometifm 
upon  the  Ruins  of  Chrillianity,  and  funk  our  bleffed  Sa- 
viour into  an  Impoftor,  to  fwell  Mahomet  into  a  Pro- 
phet. I  counfel  you  to  fhip  for  /Ifia  in  our  Smyrna  Fleet, 
for  our  Engl'ifh  Climate  is  mortal  to  a  Turkijh  Confti- 
tution;  thefe  Animals  can  no  more  live  here,  than 
Toads  or  Spiders  in  Ireland :  Our  EngUp  Charity  em- 
braces all  Men,  befides  Papjfis  and  Mujjulmans :  Thofe 
have  too  much  Religion  for  a  reformed  Nation,  and 
thefe  too  little. 

This  Piquant  Irony  gall'd  Ariovijlus  to  the   quick; 
Patience  abandon'd  him,  and  Paflion  ran  away  with  his 
Judgment :  So  that  at  length  he  broke  thro'  all  the  Bounds 
even  of  Refpeft  and  Reafon.     Madam,  faid  he,  I  per- 
ceive you  are  furpriz'd  at  my  Dodrine;  out  of  Refpedt 
to  your  Ladyfhip,  I  freely  condemn  the  dlcoran  as  Pra- 
ctice and    Impofture ;  but  then,  give  me  leave  to  put 
the  Gofpel  in  the  Indies  alfo;  They  were  both  hammer'd 
on   the  fame  Anvil ;  this  to  hag  Men  with  Fears,  the 
other  to  divert  'em  With  plealing  Profped:s  of  fenfual 
Elyjiums :  We  have  been  Hob-goblin^ d  too  long  into  Reli- 
gion ;  but,  God  be  thank'd,  the  Vizard  is  torn  off,  and 
the  Cheat  is  unmafk'd,  and  now  we  dare  play  with  thpfe. 
Monflers  we  once  tremble  at :  We  enter  upon  the  Stage 
of  this  World  like  Beafts,   and  make  as  inglorious  an 
Exit;  our  Lives  and  Souls  fmoak  into  Nothing:  We 
were  flung  upon  Earth,  as  the  Leviathan  was  in  the  Deep 
to  play;  feeing  therefore  our  Days  are  few,  it's  Prudence 
to  live  apace;  Goo^  and  £?/// are  words  ad  placittim^  in- 
vented by  fome  to  impofe  on  others. 

He  was  going  on  when  Eufebius  put  a  Hop  to  his 
Impudence.  I  fufpefted,  fays  he,  you  a6led  hitherto  in 
Mafquerade ;  I  am  glad  the  Vizard  is  fallen  off,  and 
that  the  Monfter  appears  in  its  own  Shape :  Men  of  your 
Principles  fhould  be  coop'd  up  in  Peji-Houfes,  their  ve- 
ry Breath  (hoots  Contagion,  and  their  Converfation  is 
mortal.  ||Your  Atheiftical  Club  has  made  Religion  cheap, 
and  Morality  fhameful:  It  has  preach'd  a  confiderable 
Part  of  the  Nation  out  of  Sobriety,  and  Principles  too  : 
Jt  teaches  young  Gentlemen  to  fwear  and  blafpheme, 
before  they  know  rhe  Malice  of  the  Sins  ^  and  then 

when 


'the  Gentleman  InftruBeL     '^^^.^ 

when  Age  opens  their  Eyes,  they  rather  part  with  their 
Innocence,  than  Prophanenefs.  Thusyou  efpoufe'em  to 
Wickednels,  before  they  are  able  to  commit  it:  But  the 
Mifery  is,  that  thofe  who  curfe  God  in  their  Youth,  in 
good  time  will  defy  him  ;  and  others  who  tranfgrefs  the 
Decalogue  at  ten,  will  laugh  at  it  before  twenty.  Bold- 
nefs  grows  upon  us  with.  Age,  and  all  the  Terrors  of 
Confcicnce  declines ;  they  faint  under  the  Weight  of  rei- 
terated Crimes,  and  lofe  their  Emphajis  ;  and  then  when 
once  we  have  got  out  of  the  reach  of  this  importunate- 
Cenfor,  we  {hall  fwallowdown  your  accurfed  Principles, 
not  only  without  Reluctance,  but  even  with  Pleafure  : 
We-  fhall  not  only  countenance  Atheifm,  but  profefs  it  ; 
and  eafily  perfuade  our  felves  we  die  like  Beafts,  to  live 
like  'em. 

I  know  you  are  no  more  able  to  defend  your  Morals,- 
than  your  Faith;  and  I  would  rather  deteft,  than  con- 
fute 'em,  were  I  not  acquainted  with  the  Latitudinarian 
Impudence :  You  vent  fuch  hideous  Tenets,  that  they 
amaze  Chriftians,  and  rather  raifc  their  Indignation,  than 
call  for  a  Confutation;  like  Puddles,  they  cannot  be  ftirr'd 
without  Infection,  and  like  Plague  Sores,  they  endanger 
the  Surgeon. —Now  becaufe  good  Men  fometimes  think 
it  more  expedient  to  confute  thofe  Impieties  with  Silence, 
th^n  Arguments,  Libertines  prefently  raife  a  Trophy, 
they  fing  Pcsafia,  and  cry  out  l^iBory.  To  cut  off  this 
Retreat,  Pllfhew  you  in  fhort,  that  Virtue  and  Vice  lie 
not  barely  in  Opinion. 

And  here  I  appeal  to  the  Verdid  of  Mankind :  Single 
me  out  one  Man,  whofe  Reputation  did  not  fuffer  under 
the  very  Sufpicion  of  Vice;  and  if  the  bare  Sufpicion  of 
Evil,  has  fuch  a  degrading  Quality  in  the  Opinions  of 
Men,  Debauchery  it  felf  mult  have  a  greater:  Human 
Nature  has  fuch  an  Abhorrence  of  Sin,  that  it  cannot 
value  the  Wicked  equally  to  the  Virtuous.  I  never  yet 
heard  of  a  Man,  who  ferioufly  commended  another  for 
his  Intemperance,  or  plac'd  Lewdnefs  among  his  Titles 
of  Honour :  Tho'  Sobriety,  Chaftity,  and  Juftice  are  run 
downin  Pradice,  they  ftand  fair  in  our  Efteem,  and  no 
Man  yet  has  attempted  to  difgrace  an  Enemy,  by  laying 
thofe  Virtues  to  his  Charge :  In  fine,  it's  impoffible  for 
a  Man  in  his  Wits  to  efteem  another  lefs,  becaufe  he  is 
good  •,  nay,  in  this  degenerate  Age,  nothing  blaus  morea 

riiins 


jj;o       7%e  Gentleman  InJinStd, 

rifing  Reputation,  than  the  Imputation  of  Wickednefs* 
and  even  thofe,  who  in  a  frantick.Tranfport  applaud  a 
Debauchee,  upon  cooler  Thoughts  defpiie  himi  If  all 
Actions  are  equal,  why  are  their  Effeds  fo  different  ?  If 
Virtue  has  no  Advantage  over  Vice,  why  do  the  Profli- 
gates efteem  that,  the' they  embrace  this?  Why  do  Men 
pradife  Virtue  with  Confidence,  and  Vice  with  a  blufh- 
ing  FacCj  and  a  trembling  Confcience  ?  Why  do  they 
fm  with  Fear  in  their  Looks,  and  an  Earthquake  in 
their  Minds  ?  .Thefe  are  terrible  Symptoms,  that  the 
Difference  between  Good  and  Evil  lies  deeper  than  the 
Imagihation. 

Come,  Sir,  remember  when  you  feel  the  Smart  of 
everlailing  Flames,  you'll  take  fmall  Pleafure  in  the 
Thouglit  that  once  you  derided  'em;  you'll  not  fufFer 
lefs  in  that  dark  Region,  becaufe  you  go  laughing  thither  j 
nor  endure  the  Torments  better,  becaufe  you  would  not 
believe  'em. 

Arioviftti!  was  of  too  haughty  an  Humour  to  bear  fo 
fevere  a  Check  with  Patience,  and  too  violent  to  dif- 
femble  his  Refentment  ;  wherefore  turning  to  Eufehius^ 
Sir,  faid  he,  you  rail  better  than  you  reafon  :  Our 
Tongues  began  to  difpute,  our  Swords  muil  endit;  you 
have  left  my  Tenets,  to  attack  my  Perlbn,  and  rather 
ley  el  at  my  Anions,  than  at  my  Religion:  You  are  a 
.  Man  of  Honour,  ,and  can  manage  a  Weapon,  as  well  as 
an  Argument;  in  a  word,  I  expect  Satisfadtion. 

The  Company  began  to  fmile  at  this  odd  Rhodomon- 
tade,  but  Eudoxus  told  him  in  controvertiftical  Debates, 
there  was  no  Appeal  from  Reafon  to  the  Sword;  that  it 
was  more  prudent  to  confefs  Errors,  than  to  defend  'em  j 
to  cancel  paft  Crimes,  than  to  commit  new  ones. 

^•aiEiifebius^  who  refolv'd  to  dilcountenanceLatitudi- 
narianifm,  by  confounding  its  Abettor,  took  him  up 
roundly.  Sir,  faid  he,  ,J  fear  your  Gafconades  no  more 
than  your  Arguments,  nor  your  Sword  more  than  your 
Pvcafon ;  your  Conduct  is  as  ftrange  as  your  Religion  ; 
becaufe  I  have  wounded  your  Principles,  you  invite  m.c 
to  tilt  at  your  Body  :  No,  no,  Sir,  I  value  my  Life  too 
much  to  expofe  it  for  a  Punctilio,  and  your  Soul,  to 
fend  it  into  the  other  World  with  a  Rapier  :  I  had  rather 
fvving  o^ Tyburn 'mioY,\en\\iY,  than  to  beduel'dinto  it; 
for  a  Duel  is  a  very  ill  Diftcmper  to  dye  of. 

Beudeff, 


7'he  Gentleman  InJiruBed.      351 

Befides,  {hould  I  accept  your  Challenge,  perchance  you 
might difappoint  me:  I  have  known  Ibme  huffing  Bul- 
lies, who  never  were  couragious,  but  when  they  Irood 
out  of  the  Sword's  reach :  They  would  fend  you  a 
hundred  Defies  for  a  Word,  but  had  too  much  Honour  to 
juftify  one  ;  nay,  they  would  upon  fecond  Thoughts  fub- 
mit  toaBaftinade,  rather  than  occafion  Bloodfhedj  and 
if  once  their  Adverfary  drew  Blood,  like  Wizards,  they 
had  no  Power  to  hurt  him  ;  in  fine,  they  would  always 
begin  the  War,  and  conftantly  made  the  firft  Overtures  of 
Peace,  and  thus  theyfhew'd  at  once  both  Courage  and 
Difcrecion;  whether  this  Charader  fits  you,  I  dare  not 
determine:  This  notwithftanding I  muft affirm,  thatthofe 
who  pretend  to  believe  l&aft  the  Terrors  of  another 
World,  apprehend  them  moft ;  and  no  Men  fear  more  eter- 
nal Torments,  than  thofe  who  deny  the  Soul's  Immor- 
tality: Lay  by  your  Sword  for  a  more  urgent  Occafion, 
Fencing  will  never  relieve  a  Controverfy  abandon'd  by 
Reafon  ;  a  fatisfaftory  Return  to  my  Arguments  will 
lupport  you  much  better  than  a  Pufh  ;  for  tho'  you  chanc* 
to  foil  me  at  tilting,  you  will  not  difarm  my  Reafons. 

Ariovijlus  was  too  proud  to  fubmit  to  Truth,  tho'  he 
was  too  weak  to  withftand  it ;  he  could  not  defend  his 
Errors,  and  would  not  abandon  'em  ;  fo  that  in  a  HufF 
hecall'd  for  his  Horfe,  rub'd  off,  and  left  the  Field  to 
Eufeb'tus. 

His  Friend  apologiz'd  for  his  Rudenefs,  and  cafl:  his  In- 
civility on  the  Excels  of  Paffion.  I  hope,  faid  he  to  the 
Company,  ycu  will  excufe  Ariovijlus.  I  confefs  he  is  to 
blame,  but  oftentimes  Anger  runs  away  with  the  Judg- 
ment ;  the  wifeft  Men  are  fubjeit  to  Indifcretions :  He 
was  baffled,  and  you  know  a  Defeat  to  a  Man  of  Honour 
is  a  mortifying  Misfortune;  in  fine,  having  loft  his  Caufe, 
you  muft  not  wonder  if  Patience  deferted  him. 

Eufeb.  I  excufe  his  Incivility,  but  condemn  his  Pru- 
dence ;  he  faw  his  Error,  why  did  he  not  abjure  it  ?  He 
faw  Truth,  why  did  lie  not  embrace  it?  A  Man  that 
will  pawn  his  Soul  to  refcue  his  Honour,  forfeits  both  : 
But  I  confefs,  in  vain  we  expedt  Prudence  of  Libertines ; 
Men  without  Religion  are  always- without  Realbn  ;  they 
may  boaft  of  Science  and  Wit  till  Dooms-day,  but  no 
Body  can  believe  they  are  over-ftock'd  with  either  :  No, 
no  i  they  have  only  juil  Knowledge  enough  to  fee  their 

Errors, 


^  '^S^     ^fhe  Gentleman  InJlruBcL 

Errors,  and  Wit  enough  to  enfure  their  Damnation  ; 
when  once  they  aredrench'd  in  loofe  Principles,  they  are 
paft  Recovery  j  they  turn  all  Antidotes  into  Ratsbane, 
and  fo  either  live  in  Obftinacy,  or  die  in  Defpair. 

Then  l2i'k'mg  Eudoxus  afide:  Are  you  not,  continued 
he,  almoft  lick  of  Latitudinarianifm  ?  You  faw  how  weak- 
ly Ariovilius  defended  it,  yet  he  was  not  ill  provided  of 
thole  Materials,  that  are  necefTary  to  plead  well  a  bad 
Caufe ;  he  manag'd  his  Arguments  to  the  beft  Advantage, 
and  edg'd  his  Reafons  with  all  the  little  Artifices  of  Lan- 
guage and  Confidence  ;  but  Truth  has  prevail 'd  over 
Impofture,  and  he  carries  home  nothing  but  Chagrin  and 
Confufion.  I  hope  Providence  has  referv'd  the  Profit  of 
his  Defeat  for  you  ;  he  has  condemn'd  all  Religions,  and 
Chriftianity  among  the  reft,  and  at  the  fame  time  turns 
Atheift  to  live  a  Libertine. 

Eudox.  Nothing  but  Rage  drove  Ariov'tjlui  into  that 
Precipice,  he  was  upon  a  Pinch,  poor  Gentleman,  and 
jQiot  Blafphemy  when  he  had  fpent  his  Reafons;  his  Per- 
formance.falls  fliort  of  my  Expectation.  I  perceive  that 
Boafting  is  not  an  Argument  of  Wit,  and  that  Confidence 
and  Truth  are  not  always  on  the  fame  Side.  Ariovijlui 
whocaus'd  my  Infidelity,  has  now  cur'd  it;  I  owe  my 
Converfion  to  the  Weaknefs  of  his  Proofs,  and  to  the 
Strength  of  yours.  Chriftianity  is  certainly  the  only  fa- 
ving  Religion,  but  I  am  hamper'd  in  a  Labyrinth,  and 
unlefs  you  lend  me  a  Hand  fhall  wander  eternally  in'a 
Meander  of  Miftakes:  For  Chriftian  Religion  branches 
out  into  a  thoufand  Sedts,  our  Ifland  is  a  kind  of  Pan- 
theon,  and  our  People  like  the  old  Arabians^  bend  to  the 
Breath  of  every  pretended  fnlpiration  :  Some  pretend 
Law,  others  Scripture;  thefe  Antiquity,  thofe  Novelty, 
and  others  Illumination.  It's  hard  to  calculate  up  all  the 
Religions  that  divide  the  Nation,  and  almoft  impoflible 
to  examine  them.  If  I  muft  choofe  none  before  I  have 
impartially  furvey'd  all,  I  may  live  a  Seeker,  and  die  an 
Athe'tjl.  Are  all  thofe  Communions  faving;  or  is  there 
but  one  ? 

Eufeb.  There  is  but  one  faving  Congregation,  and  the 
Difcovery  of  it  is  eafier  than  you  imagine :  In  a  hw  Days 
I  will  put  you  in  the  Way  to  Heaven,  which  none  can 
mifs,  but  thofe  who  are  refolv'd  to  overlook  it  :  Intereft 
byafles  fome.  Education  others,  Fac^tion  deludes  many, 

and 


^he  Gentleman  Inflru^ed,      353 

snd  Senfuality  over-bears  more :  In  fine,  when  Men  con- 
fuk  their  Inclinations,  and  model  Religion  by  the  Advice 
ofPalTion,  you  mult  not  wonder,  if  they  take  Fancy  for 
Revelation,  and  hug  Iliufion  for  Truth. 

Eufebius  ftaid  a  Week  with  Eudoxus^  and  fettled  his 
Judgment.  Truth  flafli'd  fucha  Light  on  hisUnderfland- 
ing,  that  he  admir'd  his  former  Blindnefs,  and  thought  it 
more  difficult  to  miftake  the  true  Church,  than  he  did  be- 
fore to  find  it ;  he  learnt  what  he  was  to  do,  as  well  as 
what  he  was  to  believe,  and  refolv'd  to  fquare  his 
Thoughts  and  Actions  by  the  Rule  of  his  Duty  :  He  has 
kept  his  Purpofe,  and  at  preient  has  the  Reputation  of  an 
accompliftiM  Gentleman,  and,  what  he  values  moft,  of  a 
pious  Chriftian.  This  Providence,  which  permitted  Theo- 
tnachus  to  fiill  from  a  State  of  Virtue,  into  a  deplorable 
-Habit  of  Vice,  rais'd  young  Eudoxus  from  the  Abyfs  of 
Vice,  to  the  Top  of  Virtue ;  to  teach  poor  Mortals,  that 
the  Sinner  muft  not  defpair,  nor  the  Saint  prefume. 

Eufebius  having  brought  this  great  Bufinefs  to  a  mofl 
happy  Conclufion,  return'd  to  London j  and  gave  Notice 
to  Theomachus  of  his  Arrival. 


DIALOGUE    XIII. 

Having  fettled  Eudoxus,  Eufebius  meets  Theomachus, 
who  offers  to  believe  the  Exijience  of  a  God  upon  good 
ReafonSy  though  not  Mathematically  evident. 

"TipUfebius  the  next  Morning  save  Theomachus  a  Vifit. 
■*-^  He  found  him  in  the  Company  of  fome  Gentlemen  of 
his  Cabal,  whom  the  Noife  of  the  Difpute  had  alarm'd  ; 
they  were  concern'd  that  Eufebius  had  the  Face  to  Hand 
up  in  Defence  of  God,  to  plead  (o  warmly  againft  Athc- 
ifm,  and  that  after  the  firil  Camifcadu  he  was  return'd  to 
beat  up  their  Quarters.  Theomachus  perfuaded  himfelf, 
that  the  Journey  of  Eufebius  was  a  meer  put-ofF,  and  that 
he  had  really  no  Bufinefs  in  the  Country,  but  to  wave 
the  Conference  at  London,  and  fo  Ipread  abroad  his  latij 
Engagement,  you  may  be  fure  to  his  own  Advantage ; 
He  flatter'd  himfelf,  and  others  alio,  that  the  Difpute  was 
at  an  End,  and  being  freed  from  his  Enemy,  he  gave  full 
A  a  Libert/ 


354      ^^^  Gentleman  Injlrti^ed, 

Liberty  to  his  Tongue,  and  launch'd  out  into  Panegyricks 
of  his  valt  Performance,  to  the  Prejudice  of  Truth  and 
Modefty :  The  News  of  Eufebius's  Arrival  damp'd  his 
fJcpcs,  and  convinc'd  him,  he  had  rais'd  a  Trophy  before 
tliii  Vittory:  He  had  no  mind  to  engage,  nor  could  he 
rctrent  with  Honour;  but,  in  fine,  he  rcfolv'd  upon  the 
Conftrrence,  as  the  lefs  Evil,  and  invited  his  Friends  to 
the  Skirmilh :  He  recciv'd  Eufeb'ms  with  Demonftrations 
of  Civility,  and  was  rather  prodigal  than  fparing  of  Ca- 
Tefles :  After  many  reciprocal  Compliments,  Eafebius 
addreded  himfelf  to  Theumachus. 

Eufeh.  Sir,  at  our  lalt  Meeting  I  charg'd  Atheifis  with 
Imprudence,  becaufe  being  uncertain  whether  there  were 
a  God,  a  Hell,  or  a  Heaven,  they  liv'd  as  if  they  were 
certain  there  were  no  fuch  Things;  you  endeavour'd  to 
fence  againft  the  Charge,  and  to  plead  not  guilty  ;  be- 
caufe, though  you  fhould  take  up,  and  model  your  Life 
by  the  Rules  of  the  molt  fevere  Morals,  this  ungrateful 
Rcftraint  would  only  ferve,  perchance,  to  leflen  your 
Torments  in  the  next  Life,  if  there  be  a  God,  but  would 
never  be  able  to  fet  you  in  Heaven:  For  God,  faid  you, 
requires  as  an  indifpenfible  Homage,  not  only  a  well-regu- 
lated Life,  but  a  ftable  and  undoubted  Belief  of  his  Be- 
ing ;  the  one  is  of  fmall  Advantage  without  the  other ; 
yoM  pretended  this  llcddinefs  was  not  in  your  Power, 
and  ask'd  convincing  Reafons  to  fettle  and  fix  your  Judg- 
nient ;  I  promis'd  you  Satisfaction,  and  am  come  to  keep 
my  Word ;  but  I  fuppofe  an  P!vidence  below  that  of 
Mathematical  Demonltrations  will  fatisfy  you.    ■ 

Theom.  The  very  Qi_ie{lion  is  reflecting,  and  you  muft 
either  RifpeCl;  my  Wit  ^r  my  Judgment  to  propofe  it:  I 
kncAV  God  is  neither  a  L/»f,  Superpcies^  nor  Solid^  he 
comes  not  within  the  Predzcamerjt  of  a  Figure,  and  there- 
fore lies  our  of  the  reach  of  Mathematicks:  A  Man  that 
will  acquieice  to  nothing  but  ftridt  Demonftrations, 
v.ould  do  vv-ell  to  disband  from  Society,  to  lock  up  his 
Pvcafon  in  his  Clofet,  and  only  carry  it  about  him  on 
extraordinary  Occaiions ;  he  may  take  up  with  the  Scep- 
ticks,  ;ind  doubt  of  his  own  Being  :  No  Man  can  de- 
monltrate  by  Euclid,  or  Archimedes^  there  is  fuch  a  City 
as  CunJlantiKopIe,  or  that  there  has  ever  been  fuch  an  Em- 
peror as  Aiigujius  \  and  yet,  God  be  thank'd,  upon  the 
credible  Teitimony  of  thofe  who  have  feen  the  one,  and 

of 


^he  Gentleman  InJlruBed,      355 

of  thofe  Authors  who  have  writ  of  the  other,  I  no  more 
doubt  of  them,  than  of  this  unqueftionable  Principle,  ^rerj 
eft  minor  toto  :  Some  things  may  poflibly  be  falfe,  tho'  I 
dare  pawn  my  Life  they  are  not. 

Eufeb.  YonvDi^cowxiQisreafonable:  For  were  you  and 
I  caft  upon  a  defert  Illand  by  the  ftrefs  of  Wind  and 
Weather,  and  fhould  we  find  in  this  abandon'd  Region  a 
ilately  Palace,  built  With  all  Symmetry  of  Art,  we  (hould 
conclude,  it  was  the  Work  of  an  Archite<St,  not  of  Nature 
or  Chance ;  nor  would  it  be  in  our  Power  to  doubt  of  it ; 
yet  'tis  poflible  for  blind  Matter  to  rendezvous  it  felf  into 
a  ftately  Louvre  y  for  by  a  lucky  Meeting  of  Atoms,  it 
may  be  jumbled  and  fettled  in  this  beautiful  and  regular 
Form.  A  hundred  thoufnnd  blind  Men,  (tho'  they  fet 
out  from  all  the  Parts  of  the  World)  may  poffibly  meet 
together  upon  Black-Heathy  and  draw  up  in  Rank  and 
File ;  yet  fhould  we  lee  this  extraordinary  great  Army  in 
Battle-array,  without  the  Help  of  SylLugifm,  we  fliould 
infer,  they  were  led  to  the  Place,  and  each  conduced  to 
his  Station  by  fome,  who  had  better  Eyes  than  they, 

I  conceive  likewiie  you  do  not  require  Phyfical  Demon- 
ftrations,  id  eft^  convincing  Proofs  drav.'n  from  Senfe  ; 
for  God  being  fuppos'd  a  Spirit,  cannot  fall  under  cor- 
poral Senfe,  and  though  he  Ihould  prefent  himfelf  to  the 
Eyes  by  afluming  a  Body,  the  Spediacle  m.ight  amaze  us, 
but  could  not  give  us  any  rational  Aliurance,  that  there 
is  an  infinite  Spirit. 

Theom.  I  ask  fuch  Proofs  as  leave  the  Underftanding 
fatisfied,  and  fix  the  Judgment,  and  remiOve  all  prudent 
Doubt;  for  fuch  Arguments  deferve  as  firm  an  Affent, 
as  the  moft  ftri6l  Mathematical  Demonftrations.  1  am 
as  fure  there  is  fuch  a  Place  as  Cor^flantinople^  as  that  the 
firft  Propofition  of  Euclid  is  true ;  and  doubt  no  more, 
but  Cccfar  was,   than  that  I  am. 

Etifeb.  'Tiseafyl  fee  to  agree  in  Preliminaries,  when 
the  one  fide  propofes  nothing  but  whit  is  juft,  and  the  o- 
ther  will  receive  what  is  reafonable:  You  have  admit- 
ted what  neither  in  Prudence  nor  Reafon  you  could  re- 
je6f,  and  I  have  only  ask'd  what  I  could  not  omit,  without 
betraying  the  Intereft  of  Truth,  and  the  Merits  of  the 
Caule  I  have  undertaken  to  defend.  Now  feeing  the  Sob- 
jedl  is  not  capable  of  Mathematical  Demonftrations,  nor 
even  of  Phyfical  Evidence  in  the  Stale  we  are,  methinks, 

A  a  2  i  ap- 


55^     ^he  Gentleman  Injlru^ed. 

I  apprehend  two  Ways  by  which  God  can  manifeft  his 
Being  lo  Man:  Ftrji^  By  an  internal  Impreflion  ftamp'd 
wiih  his  divine  Signet  in  our  Nature,  which  leads  us  na- 
turnlly  to  the  Knowledge  of  his  Exiftence,  as  the  innate 
Light  of  our  Underftanding  (hews  us  the  Truth  of  the 
sirll' Priy/ciples  of  D'fcourj'e. 

Secmdh'^  By  viliblc  Effeds,  which  Reafon  tells  us  muft 
be  father'd  on  Ibme  Caule,  and  which  without  Conftraint 
and  V^iolence,  our  Underftanding  cannot  attribute  to  any 
thing  but  a  Bein^  infinitely  powerful,  infinitely  wife,  and 
infinitely  good. 

Tbeo.  1  agree,  thefe  two  Ways  would  be  fufficient  to 
iettlc  a  reafonable  Man  in  the  Belief  of  a  Deity,  and 
that  an  Athcill  would  be  the  moft  abfurd,  the  moft  un- 
reafonable  Creature  in  the  World,  if  he  required  more. 

Eitfeb.  Well,  Sir,  hitherto  we  have  walk'd  Hand  in 
Hand,  our  Judgments  have  been  uniform,  and  I  hope 
our  good  Intelligence  will  continue  in  the  following  Con- 
ference. 1  will  prove  you  have  thefe  very  Proofs  of  his 
Being,  you  confefs  fufficient,  and  as  plain  as  you  could 
in  Reafon  expect,  fuppofmg  he  were.  Let  us  therefore 
difcufs  things  in  Order,  and  produce  our  Proofs  in  their 
Turn  ;  when  we  confound  Arguments,  we  confound 
7'ieus,  and  only  contemplate  Truth  through  a  Cloud. 


DIALOGUE    XIV. 

Yhe  firji  Proof  for  a  Det!^^    drawn  from  the  uoiverfal 
Confefit  of  Mankind. 

Enfei\^  H  E  Notion  of  a  God  is  fo  deeply  ingrafted 
•*■  in  our  Minds,  that  it  feems  to  be  twifted  and 
interwoven  with  our  Nature  ;  it's  of  the  fame  Date  with 
our  Species,  it  runs  through  our  Veins  with  our  Blood, 
and  is  conveigh'd  to  us  from  our  Anceftor's  ;  it's  neither 
fix'd  to  Climate,  nor  Complexion,  it  takes  in  all  Times, 
as  well  as  all  Place<; :  It's  engraven  in  the  Hearts  of  the 
Africans^  as  well  as  of  the  A/iaticks  ;  the  barbarous  To- 
pinbays  oi  Brnjll  feel  the  Impreflion,  as  well  as  the  moft 
polite  Europeans  ;  and  the  very  brutifh  Hutentot s  o{  l\\t 
Caocy  in  fpight  of  SaviJgenefs,fhew  they  are  Men  meerly 

by 


The  Gentleman  Injlrufied,       ^^y 

by  acknowledging  a  fupream  Being  ;  the  old  j^Jfyrians 
have  left  Pofteriiy  a  convincing  Tellimony  they  believ'd 
a  God,  becaufe  they  coin'd  falle  ones ;  they  had  never 
multiply'd  Divinities,  had  they  believ'd  there  was  none, 
nor  paid  divine  VVorihip  to  "statues,  had  they  not  been 
perfuaded  there  was  fome  Being  above  them,  that  com- 
manded Homage,  becauie  he  delerv'd  it. 

The  Medes  brought  down  the  /ij}yria»  Grandeur,  and 
bury'd  the  Empire,  together  with  its  Emperour,  in  a 
Grave  of  Afhes ;  yet  thefe  new  Conquerours,  who  an- 
nuU'd  the  old  Laws,  and  enaded  new  ones,  who  thruft 
out  antient  Cuftoms  to  make  room  for  others,  qu;irreird 
not  with  the  Ajjyriam  about  the  Belief  of  a  God,  they 
liv'd  in  the  fame  Perfuafion;  Nebuchodotiozor  would 
needs  fhare  Worfhip  with  his  Maker,  and  fo  fet  up  his 
own  Statue  to  receive  thofe  Honours  which  belong'd  to 
the  fupream  Being. 

The  Perfians^  SuccelTors  of  the  Median  Greatnefs,  fuc- 
ceeded  alfo  in  their  Belief  of  a  Deity :  The  conquering 
Macedonians  agreed  in  this  Point  with  the  vanquifh'd  In- 
dians ;  and  Rome  furpafs'd  all  other  Nations  in  Superfti- 
tion,  more  than  Courage  ;  flie  built  her  Greatnefs  upon 
the  Suppofition  of  a  Deity,  and  as  fome  remark,  grew 
fo  great,  becaufe  fhe  was  fo  pious :  She  found  the  Stamp 
of  a  Divinity,  wherever  {he  carried  her  vidorious  Arms, 
and  the  Conqueft  of  foreign  Gods,  as  well  as  of  captive 
Princes,  fet  oft"  her  General's  Triumphs.  In  a  Word, 
the  Belief  of  a  Deity  reach'd  as  far  as  the  Plantations  of 
Men ;  it  has  never  yet  been  fhut  out  of  one  City,  one 
Bourg,  or  perchance  one  Family  :  The  moft  barbarous 
Wretches  that  ever  where,  knew  there  was  a  Deity,  tho' 
they  miftook  in  the  Application  of  their  Worfhip.  You 
may  almoft  as  foon  find  a  People  without  Souls,  as  with- 
out a  God,  that  tbey  rather  will  dedicate  an  Altar  to  an 
unknown  Deity,  than  have  none. 

The  En^lijh,  Dutch,  Portuguefe,  and  Spaniards,  bra- 
ving the  Fury  of  the  Winds,  and  the  threatning  Surges 
of  the  enrag'd  Ocean,  have  difcovered  a  new  World^in 
our  Days,  almofl  equal  to  the  Old,  they  have  rifled  liie 
very  Wildernefles,  and  ranfack'd  the  Mines  ;  wherever 
they  met  with  the  Traces  of  Men,  they  fell  upon  the 
Footfteps  of  a  God  ;  thefe  Barbarians  that  liv'd  without 
jLaws,  without  Houfes,  without  Commerce,  were  fel- 
A  a  3  <^iOm 


35S       ^he  Gentleman  Injfru^ed. 

dom  found  without  Temples;  and  though  a  favage  Edu- 
cation, an  J  more  favage  Vices  had  obfcur'd  the  Notion, 
they  had  nt)t  the  Power  to  deface  it ;  'twas  legible  in  the 
very  Night  of  Idolatry,  in  the  Obfcurity  of  Errors,  and 
fome  Nations  thought  'twas  lefs  Abfurdity  to  worfliip  the 
Devil,  than  to  deny  a  God.  Now  if  you  call  for  Proofs, 
lean  prefent  you  a  thouland,  as  Itrong  and  fatisfa6tory 
as  the  6ubje6t  will  bear:  Pafl  Matters  of  Fadt  can  only 
be  convey'd  down  to  us  by  written,  or  oral  Tradition  ; 
and  thofe  of  our  own  Time,  that  lie  at  a  Diftance,  can 
only  be  prov'd  by  credible  VVitnelles ;  what  I  maintain 
has  ail  thefe  Supports,  and  by  confequence  can  be  que- 
ll;:on'u  only  by  thofe,  who  will  be  fure  of  nothing  but 
that  they  doubt  of  all  Things. 

•  Theo.  Whether  this  be  true  or  falfe,  your  Caufe  will 
not  be  much  the  better,  nor  mine  worfe  ;  yet  I  mult  tell 
you,  you  are  miftaken  in  your  Account :  I  have  read  in 
Acofta^  and  others,  that  divers  People,  both  in  the  Eajh 
and  IVeft-Indies^  live  as  well  without  a  God,  as  without 
Houfes;  they  love  nothing  but  their  Eafe,  and  fear  no- 
thing but  their  bordering  Enemies :  Befides,  our  European 
Atheifts  mufter'd  up  in  one  Body,  would  make  a  confide- 
rable  Figure;  and  jLo«^&«  alone,  upon  an  emergent  Oc- 
cafion,  can  draw  out  a  brisk  Brigade :  I  am  coniident,  at 
leaft,  we  exceed  you  in  Qiiality,  if  you  furpafs  us  in  Num- 
ber, and  why  may  not  the  one  balance  the  other? 

Eufel>.  Oh  I  I  may  cry  out,  with  Seneca^  Mentiuntur 
qt4i  dicunt  [e  non  [entire  Deum,  nam  etji  tibi  affirment  in- 
ter diu^  noiiu  tamen  {^^  foli  duhitant ;  "  They  lye,  who  fay 
"  they  believe  no  God,  for  tho'  by  Day  in'the  Hurry  of 
*'  Company,  and  Heat  of  Debauch,  they  may  profefs 
"  Atheifm ;  yet  in  Darknefs  and  Retirement  they  change 
*'  their  Mind:"  Say  if  you  pleafe  no  God  \s  the  Wifh  of 
Many^  but  the  Opinion  of  None:  But  if  fome  Authors 
have  faid  fo,  others  equally  credible  have  contradicfted  'em ; 
yet  all  agree  that  thofe  People  have  more  of  the  Beaft, 
than  of  the  Ma.n  ;  they  wander  in  Woods,  like  Tigers, 
without  Commerce,  without  human  Society,  they  worry 
their  own  Species,  and  prey  upon  their  neareft  Relati- 
ons ;  fo  that,  like  Children,  though  they  have  Reafon,  they 
want  the  Ufe  of  it:  They  live  without  Refledion,  and 
confequently  without  Difcourfe;  and  indeed  I  do  not  fee 
^hy  Difeafes  of  the  Soul  may  not  untune  the  Organs  of 
'     '  the 


The  Gentleman  Injlmcfed.     355) 

;the  Brain,  as  well  as  thofe  of  the  Body ;  why  Education 
and  Barbarity  may  not  obftrudT;  the  Operations  of  the  In- 
telledt,  as  well  as  a  Frenzy.  The  whole  Set  o{  European 
Atheifts  are  but  a  Pack  of  daring  Debauchees,,  who  pride 
in  Infamy,  and  blufh  at  Modefty :  They  reafon  ill,  and 
live  worfe  ;  they  hate  Truth  no  Icfs  than  Sobriety,  and 
are  too  infignificant,  either  to  countenance  a  good  Caule, 
or  prejudice  it:  Their  Votes,  like  Cyphers,  without  an 
Unit,  make  no  Number. 

But  let  us  face  your  Atheift  with  thclj  who  believe  a 
God,  and  we  fliall  find  after  a  general  Mufter  (though 
you  appear  alfo  at  the  Head  of  the  London  Brigade)  an 
infinite  Difproportion.  Would  it  not  be  true,  that  all  the 
Citizens  ol  London  profels  the  Religionof  the  Church  of 
England^  altho'  one  Presbyterian,  or  Recufant  upon  Ex- 
amen  fhould  be  found  among  them  r  And  will  you  conteit 
this  univerfal  Variety,  that  reafonable  Creatures  endea- 
vour to  defend  themfelves  from  the  Injuries  of  Wind  and 
Weather,  becaufe  fome  brutifli  Savages  lie  under  the 
open  Canopy  of  Heaven  without  Fence,  or  a  Hut  to 
skreen  oft"  the  Heats  of  the  Summer,  or  the  Cold  of  the 
Winter?  Yet  the  Difproportion  between  you  and  us  js 
ten  times  greater,  than  between  one  Recufant,  and  the 
Citizens  of  London,  or  between  thofe  Men  who  make 
Provifions  againft  the  Rigour  of  Seafons,  and  thofe  who 
do  not:  If  therefore  in  one  Cafe,  a  particular  Fadl  does 
not  prejudice  the  univerfal  Inference,  why  muft  it  in  the 
other?  Arijlotle  tells  us,  that  fofne  rejedted  this  Princi- 
ple, A  thing  cannot  be,  and  not  be  at  the  fame  time,  and 
that  /Inaxagoras  maintain'd  Snow  is  Black ;  yet,  I  fuppofe, 
if  I  fay  the  Principle  is  receiv'd  by  all  Mankind,  you  will 
not  except  againft  my  Aflertion.  I  may  then  conclude, 
that  the  Perfuafion  of  a  God  runs  through  our  whole  Spe- 
cies, and  fpreadsas  wide  as  the  remoteft  Colony. 

Theo.  If  I  difpute  my  Ground  by  Inches,  we  fliall 
make  a  long  Work  of  our  Conference  :  Pray  go  on. 

Eufeb.  Our  difference  about  the  Matter  of  Faft  being 
at  an  End,  I  ask  you  the  Origin  of  this  univerfal  Imprel- 
iion  ;  From  whence  comes  it  that  this  chimerical  Objedl 
continually  encounters  and  haunts  our  Underftanding? 
Why  do  our  Apprehenfions  rove  in  another  World,  and 
|iufh  the  Being  of  a  Deity  ? 

A  3  4  Thee. 


3^0       ^he  Gentleman  Injiru^ed, 

Thes.  Some  wirty  Gentlemen  will  tell  you,  this  Notion 
came  into  the  World  by  an  accidental  Fright  j  Men  ftart- 
cd  at  Thunder,  before  they  knew  the  Caufe  of  it,  and 
fome  of  greater  Wits  than  their  Neighbours  improv'd  this 
pannick  Fear  into  Religion ;  they  perfuaded  the  Mobile 
there  was  fomebody  above,  that  fpoke  aloud,  and  breath'd 
forth  his  Anger  in  Flames  and  Smoak  :  Others  with  much 
Probability  affirm  this  Perfuafion  fprings  from  an  innate 
Fear  in  the  Mind  of  Man,  and  a  reftlefs  Apprehenfion 
of  the  worft  that  may  happen,  Primum  in  orbe  Deos  fe- 
cit timor, 

Eufcb.  A  Man  that  will  not  take  Notice  of  the  true 
Reafon  of  Things,  which  generally  is  but  one,  may 
forge  a  hundred  falfe  ones ;  for  though  one  Path  leads  to 
Truth,  a  thoufand  condudt  us  into  Error.  Pray,  Sir,  fee- 
ing Men  were  firft  frighted,  and  then  cheated  into  the 
Belief  of  a  Deity,  of  whom  did  that  witty  Gentleman 
borrow  the  Notion  ?  He  was  certainly  imbu'd  with  the 
Idea  of  a  God,  before  he  couid  communicate  it  to  his 
Neighbours.  The  Cheat  was  firft  put  on  him  before  he 
deceiv'd  others.  Who  impos'd  on  him?  His  Name  de- 
ferves  a  confiderable  Place  in  Hiftory,  and  I  do  not  fee, 
why  our  Fore-fathers  fhould  have  been  lefs  careful  to 
conferve  his  Memory,  who  flyly  brought  the  Notion  of 
a  God  into  the  World,  than  his  who  conveigh'd  the  Tro- 
jan Horfeinto  the  City,  and  betray'd  it  to  the  Grecians : 
But  though  you  fatisfy  this  Qu<ere^  the  fame  Queftion 
will  return,  who  cozenM  him?  Nor  will  it  ceafe,  till  we 
difcover  the  Origin,  or  have  run  you  up  beyond  the  firft 
Moment  of  Time ;  the  only  tolerable  Efcape  is  to  refolve 
this  Fear  into  Tradition. 

But,  pray  tell  me,  how  you  know  this  Im^rtKionabim- 
vnemoriali,  has  been  handed  down  from  Father  to  Son  ? 
You  are  Men  of  Parts,  and  glory  more  in  Wit  than 
Grace  ;  you  generally  fcorn  all  Authority  but  your  own, 
and  appeal  even  from  what  we  call  Scripture,  to  Rea- 
fon :  Back  your  AlTertion  with  any  tolerable  Proof,and  for 
once  I'll  take  it  for  Demonftration:  All  you  can  fay  a- 
mounts  to  this,  that  perchance  long  ago,  fome  thinking 
Brain  wrap'd  up  in  continual  Speculation,  blunder'd  up- 
on the  Notion,  and  fent  it  round  ;  that  it  found  a  kmd 
Reception  ;  and  even  fince  has  been  kept  in  Countenance 
^nd  Reputation?  But  it  is  not  ftrange  that  one  meer  Per- 
chance 


^he  Gentleman  Inftni^ed,     ^$i 

chance  that  ftands  for  no  God,  (hould  weigh  more  with 
an  Atheift,  than  pofitive  Reafon  for  him? 

This  Tradition  is  of  a  very  antient  Date,  and  older,  in 
all  Probability,  than  the  Invention  of  Writing;  for  ought 
that  you  know,  it  has  been  from  the  Beginning ;  nay, 
I  may  add  it's  ten  times  more  likely,  it  fprang  up  with 
Man,  than  that  a  Man  firft  ftarted  the  Impofture,  and 
others  made  it  over  to  Pofterity:  For  the  Impreffion  of 
a  God  finks  into  the  Souls,  not  only  of  thofe  polite  and 
civiliz'd  Niitions,  who  have  prelerv'd  from  Oblivion 
fome  Remnants  of  paft  Tranfadions  and  Books  of  Re- 
cords, but  even  of  thofe  who  are  as  ignorant  of  what 
pafled  in  the  laft  Age,  as  of  what  was  done  two  thoufand 
Years  ago,  and  of  thofe  whofe  Arithmetick  goes  not  be- 
yond their  Fingers,  nor  their  Knowledge  beyond  their 
own  Remembrance.  What  likelihood  then  that  thofe 
who  are  Strangers  to  all  Tradition,  fhouldbe  fo  well  ac- 
quainted with  this  ? 

But  to  difpatch  the  firft  Gentleman ;  when  the  natural 
Caufe  of  Thunder  was  difcover'd,  why  was  not  the 
Cheat  unmask'd  ?  Why  did  not  the  Phantom  difappear 
at  the  fight  of  Knowledge,  which  Ignorance  and  Error 
had  created?  Were  the  Underftandingsof  Men  fo  cow'd 
with  the  Cheat,  that  they  durft  not  ftruggle  againftit:  Or 
were  they  fo  enamour'd  of  their  Fears,  as  to  cherifh  the 
Objedtof  their  Torment?  If  this  be  true,  our  Anceftors 
were  caft  in  another  Mould  than  we,  they  hugg'd  what 
we  hate,  and  doted  on  what  we  abhor,  If  a  Man  im- 
pofes  on  us  by  a  Surprize,  fo  foon  as  the  Cheat  is  dif- 
cover'd, we  ftandupon  our  Guard,  and,  like  Birds  (hot 
at,  grow  wild:  We  become  cautious  and  referv'd,  we 
ftand  oft'in  Jealoufy  and  Sufpicion  :  But  our  tame  Ance- 
ftors,  who  were  thunder'd  and  lighten'd  into  the  Belief  of 
a  God,  kept  up  the  Illufion  when  they  had  unvizarded 
the  Trick:  Theylik'd,  itfeems,  the  Conceit,  and  were 
fo  pleas'd  with  Fears  and  Apprehenfions,  they  refolv'd 
to  make  them  immortal. 

Theo.  Thefe  Gentlemen  will  tell  you,  Timeworeout 
the  Memory  of  the  Impofture,  butnot  the  Effeds:  The 
Cheat  was  foon  forgot,  tho'  the  Notion  of  a  God  remain'd ; 
Education  kept  this  on  foot,  and  continu'd  it  to  our  Time  ; 
and  indeed  the  original  Tindlure  of  Education  feldom 
wears  out :  Tho'  fome  inbred  Principles  are  impregna- 
ble 


3^4      7he  Gentleman  Injirucfed. 

ble  againft  Education,  yet  fome  Cuftomsarife  from  Edu-^ 
cation,  wliich  Nature  it  felf  can  hardly  deal  with. 

Eiijeb.  /Itheijisj  when  they  have  loft  their  other  Holds, 
retreat  to  Education;  they  look  upon  it  as  an  advantagi- 
ous  Poft,  and  think  themlelves  there,  not  only  out  of  the 
Reach  of  Surprize,  butof  Aflault;  it  is  their  darling  Ar- 
gument, and  therefore  deferves  a  peculiar  Confideration. 
I  delire  you  therefore  to  keep  it  for  a  Referve,  at  prefent 
I  have  the  fecond  Gentleman  upon  my  Hands,  and  I  muft 
do  him  Right  before  I  leave  him.  You  fay,  other  Gentle- 
men affirm,  ■with  great  Probability,  tbattbePerfuafionof 
a  God  fprings  from  nn  innate  Fear  in  the  Mind  of  Man, and 
a  rejllefs  Apprehenjion  of  the  "worjl  that  may  ha^ fen  ;  and 
then  you  prop  the  Affertion  with  the  Authority  of  a  Poet. 
This  is  in  Mr.  Hobbs's  Phrafe ;  Fear  of  Power  invijible, 
feign  d  by  the  Mind,  or  imagined  from  'Tales  publickly 
told,  IS  Religion. 

This  Evalion  is  liable  to  great  Exceptions ;  for  fuppo- 
fing  Man  has  an  innate  Fear,  that  he  is  fubjedt  to  ima- 
gine dreadful  Things,  and  apt  to  fcare  himfelf  with 
ghaftly  Apparitions  of  his  own  coining  ;  yet  he  cannot 
fear,  unlefs  he  frames,  or  finds  the  Objeft  that  raifes  this 
unquiet  Faffion :  What  Objedl  can  we  frame  in  the  Shop 
of  his  Apprehenfions  which  has  not  fome  Relation  to 
Misfortunes  he  has  either  feen  or  heard  of?  The  Fancy 
may  makeftrange  Combinations,  and  tie  together  Things 
that  have  no  Connexion,  yet  it  muft  know  thofe  Things 
before  it  links  them  together ;  for  the  Apprehenfion,  like 
the  Will,  cannot  work  upon  thofe  Materials  that  lie  out 
o(  its  Sphere.  When  the  Streams  of  the  Hypochondry 
mount  up  to  the  Brain,  a  Man  may  fancy  himfelf  at  the 
laft  Gafp,  though  his  Pulfebeat  even,  and  he  enjoys  per- 
fe6l  Health,  for" he  has  feen  others  die,  and  knows  he  is 
liable  to  the  fame  Fate ;  but  the  moft  fplenetick  Coxcomb 
in  the  World  cannot  fright  himfelf  with  a  Pleurify,  unlefs 
he  knows  there  be  fuch  aDifeafe  in  Nature.  The  Noti- 
on of  a  God  may  therefore  awaken  Man's  Fear,  but  the 
moft  timorous  Nature  cannot  tremble  at  the  Apprehenfi- 
on of  a  God,  unlefs  fuch  a  Being  be  known:  Seeing 
therefore  the  Knowledge  of  a  God  precedes  his  Fear,  who 
ftamp'd  on  Man  the  Im.prefTion? 

Theo.  We  muft  take  Things  as  we  find  them.  Man 
depends  originally  on  himfelf,  he  is  beholding  to  no  ex- 
terior 


T'he  Gentleman  Inftru0cd.       3 6^ 

terior  Principle  for  his  Exiftence,  he  is  as  he  ever  was, 
and  will  always  be  without  any  intervening  Change  : 
The  Notion  of  Deity,  thefe  Gentlemen  fay,  has  lluck 
clofe  to  him  from  Eternity,  and  in  all  Probability  will 
jog  on  with  him  till  the  Species  fall  into  nothing  ;  but 
to  what  Intent  this  Fury  hovers  about  him,  Do61ors  have 
not  determin'd  ;  fome,  notwithftanding,  are  inclin'd  to  be- 
lieve, that  Nature  envious  of  Man's  Happinefs,  rais'd  this 
Spirit  to  cool  his  Hopes,  and  fophifticate  his  Pleafures. 

Eufeb.  Your  Gentlemen  Incognito, who  argue  by  Proxy, 
triumph  without  Doubt,  and  fancy  this  Anlvver  has  made 
the  Bufinefs  wonderfully  clear  ;  but  I  appeal  to  the  com- 
mon Senfe  of  Mankind,  whether  it  does  not  rather  Itart 
Difficulties,  than  folve  them.  I  have  prov'd,  that  Men 
knew  God,  before  they  fear'd  him,  and  confequently  that 
this  Fear  could  not  fpring  from  any  innate  timorous  Dif- 
pofition,  but  that  it  muft  be  afcribed  to  the  great  Author 
of  Nature,  who  hasftamp'd  on  our  Souls  the  Knowledge 
of  his  Being;  now  your  young  Gentlemen  very  conff- 
dently  tell  me,  Man  was  ab  ctterno^  and  ftands  indebted 
for  his  Being  to  no  Body  but  his  own  Nature,  and  they 
thrult  on  me  this  fine  Syflem,  with  fuch  an  Air  of  AlTu- 
fance,  as  if  it  were  clear  beyond  Debate,  and  near  allied 
to  the  firft  Principles ;  whereas,  the  Thing  is  not  only 
fahe,  but  abfurd  to  Dotage,  as  I  fhall  make  out  in  its 
proper  Place  ;  but  abyjfui  abyffum  invocat^  one  Abfurd ity 
ufhersin  another;  a  h?idTheJis  is  always  Supported  with 
weak  Proofs. 

But,  for  the  prefent,  I  admit  your  Hypothejis.  Ar'iftotle 
affumes  this  Aphorifm  as  a  Principle,  Natura  nihil  agit 
frufira^  Nature  does  nothing  in  vain  ;  now  whether  we 
call  our  View  without  us,  or  within  us,  whether  we 
furvey  the  great  World,  or  the  lefs,  we' fhall  fubfcribe  to 
the  Maxim  :  The  natural  Inclination  ofall  Things,  either 
tend  to  the  Perfedtion  or  Confervation  of  Individuals,  or 
elfe  to  the  Beauty  and  Symmetry  of  the  whole.  Sympa- 
thies and  Antipathies,  have  their  proper  Stations  and 
Employments ;  every  Being,  tho'  never  fo  minute,  a6ts 
its  Part  in  the  great  Theatre  of  the  Univerfe  ;  there  are 
no  Mutes  in  the  whole  Creation,  that  appear  meerly  to 
fill  the  Stage:  Seeing  therefore  all  other  Things  have 
their  Task  cut  out  for  them,  and  labour  in  their  feveral 
Pofls,  whv  fl-iould  this  Notion  of  a  God,  like  a  Drone, 
'  "  Hand 


3^4      -^^^  Genti-eman  Injlrutled, 

Hand  idle  without  Office,  without  Employment?  Has> 
Nature  liungitinto  the  World  at  Random,  as  theOftrich 
lays  her  Eggs,  and  then  flies  into  the  Defart  ?  Why  fhould 
you  arraign  her  Prudence  in  this  Point,  who  fhews  her 
Wil'dom  in  the  Management  of  all  Things  bcfides  ? 
Ought  we  not  rather  to  queftion  your  Integrity,  than 
her  Condudt  ? 

Befides,  whether  all  Things  were  ah  aterm  of  theni- 
felves,  or  juftled  into  Being  by  a  lucky  Hit  of  Chance, 
and  LegerdematK,  they  have  at  leaft  happen'd  as  well,  as 
if  an  infinite  Wifdom  and  Power  had  a  Hand  in  the  Con- 
trivance; but 'tis  moft  certain,  that  an  infinite  Wifdom 
would  never  have  engrafted  in  the  A-lindsof  Men  fo  vain, 
io  fuperfluous  a  Principle,  had  there  been  no  God  in  the 
World  ;  therefore  feeing  fuch  a  Principle  runs  thro'  the 
whole  Mafs  of  Mankind,  we  have  all  the  Reafon  in  the 
World  to  conclude,  there  is  »o  God. 

A  Perfon  of  Quality  in  the  Company,  who  meafur'd 
his  Wit  by  his  Eftate,  would  needs  come  into  Theoma- 
chas^s  Succour;  he  thought  his  Title  would  add  a  Luftre 
to  his  Arguments,  and  that  he  might  filence  Eufebius  by 
Authority,  tho'  he  could  not  by  Reafon :  Methinks,  faid 
he,  with  fubmiffion  to  better  Judgments,  Theomachus 
has  overlook'd  the  decifive  Solution  of  the  Difficulty, 
yet  I  mull  needs  fay,  he  hasbehav'd  hinifelf  in  the  Con- 
teft  like  a  Man  of  Parts,  he  has  not  fhrunk  under  the 
Charad:er  of  a  witty  and  well-fpoken  Man,  but  main- 
tain'd  his  Reputation ;  yet  oftentimes  Warmth  arid  Ea- 
gernefs  let  Advantage  flip,  and  we  remember  not  in  a 
Hurry  thofe  Arguments  that  occur,  when  our  Temper 
is  cool  and  fedate :  I  do  not  fee  why  we  Ihould  have 
Recourfe  to  accidental,  or  natural  Fears,  or  why  we 
fhould  fetch  this  Notion  from  the  further  end  of  Eternity  ; 
we  can  reconcile  the  Difference,  and  Hop  the  Breach 
at  lefs  Expence  of  Time  and  Labour:  I  am  apt  to  think 
Education  will  unriddle  the  Myftery ;  we  eafily  take 
the  firft  Tinfture,  and  when  it's  well  imbib'd,  it  never 
wears  off:  The  firft  Rudiments  ftick  fo  clofe,  that  often- 
times they  never  leave  us,  and  fo  by  a  pardonable  Mi- 
ftake,  even  wife  Men  afcribe  many  Things  to  our  Nature, 
which  we  owe  to  the  fole  Inftru6lion  of  our  Nurfe. 
Turcijm  runs  in  fome  Families,  Popery  in  others,  and 
the  reform'd Religion  in  mine:  Whence  cemesthis  Va- 
riety 


fhe  Gentleman  InJrtiM.     3^5 

riety  but  from  Education,  and  a  certain  Influence  of  the 
Climate?  Had  1  been  born  at  Conftantinople^  1  had  taken 
the  Turban  inftead  of  a  Hat,  and  Circumcifion  in  place  of 
Baptifm ;  had  I  Sfain  or  Italy  for  my  Country,  Popery 
would  have  been  my  R.eligion,  and  in  all  f^robability  I 
{hould  have  been  as  ready  to  fight  for  Clement  the  Xlth's 
Prerogative  of  Primacy,  as  I  am  now  to  fight  againft  it: 
Education  alone  has  continu'd  Religions;  we  are  Prote- 
Itanls  in  England  now,  becaufe  our  Parents  and  Govern- 
ours  were  fo  the  laft  Age :  The  Turks  have  taken  their 
Alcoran  from  their  Anceftors,  and  the  prefent  Papifis 
Tranfubftantiation,  feven  Sacraments,  and  the  Mafs 
from  theirs:  Now  if  our  Fore-fathers  by  Education  could 
infufe  into  us  the  Belief  of  thefe  feveral  Religions,  why 
not  that  of  a  God?  And  if  they  could,  why  fhould  we 
craze  our  Brain,  and  exhauft  our  Spirits  in  the  Purfuit  of 
another  Origin  ? 

The  Company  applauded  my  Lord's  Performance, and 
fome  were  for  petitioning  for  a  higher  Patent,  for  the  fig- 
nal  Service  he  had  done  the  Nation. 

Eufeb.  Under  favour,  my  Lord,  this  Expedient  will 
not  do;  nay,  thofe  Difficulties  I  objedt  againft  Theoma- 
chus  turn  upon  your  Hypothefis  with  rip  lefs  Violence 
than  his :  For  this  Notion  of  a  God  could  not  be  fpread 
by  Education,  before  it  was  in  the  World  ;  it  could  not 
be  toft  from  paft  Ages  down  to  the  prefent,  unlefs  it  was 
in  paft  Ages  ;  and  if  it  was,  it  either  was  ab  <eterno,  or 
began  in  Time:  If  you  fay  the  firft,  you  build  the  whole 
Proof  on  meer  Conjefture  and  Suppofition,  nor  can  you 
make  one  Tittle  of  it  good,  without  begging  the  Quefti- 
on:  If  you  fay  the  fecond,    then  either  it  began  with 
Man,  or  after  him  ;  if  with  Man,  then  God  who  made 
Man  ftamp'd  on  his  Mind  this  Impreflion ;  if  it  began  af- 
ter him,  pray  who  firft  fail'd  into  the  other  World,  and 
made  the  Difcovery  of  this  airy  Spedtre?  Where  did  he 
live;  and  when  ?   Or  at  leaft  if  you  are  not  able  to  date 
the  Birth  of  the  Notion,  (hew  me  when  it  was  not,  and 
I  will  pay  your  Argument  the  fame  Refpedl  1  owe  your 
Perfon ;  but  I  cannot  take  Words  for  Reafon,  not  a  proof- 
lefs  Suppofition  for  Evidence:  You  are  the  capital  Wits 
of  the  World  ;  cautious  Perfons,  that  will  not  be  impos'd 
on,  that  on  all  Occafions  call  far  Evidence, 

Befides, 


^66      The  Gentleman  injiruBecl. 

Befides,  according  to  the  Charaders  of  Education  and 
Nature,  theNotionhas  noRefemblance  with  Education j 
but  every  Line,  every  llroke,  reprefents  Nature  to  the 
Life.  We  lay  Self-love,  and  the  Inclination  to  Pleafure 
are  natural  to  Man,  becaufeWefee  thefe  twoPaflions  ac- 
company him  in  all  Ages,  in  all  Places,  and  in  all  Em- 
ployments ,  we  love  our  felves  nov/  as  our  Anceftors  did 
fix  thoufand  Years  ago;  we  purfue  Pleafures  in  1702, 
.with  the  fame  Eagernefs  our  Fore-fathers  did  in  1000, 
and  even  thofe  who  adting  by  more  high  and  divine  Mo- 
tives fly  Pleafure,  cannot  avoid  the  Inclination:  The 
Defire  of  Glory,  according  to  all  Men,  rifes  alfo  from 
Nature,  becaufe  it  puts  the  Thoughts  of  all  Men  in  a 
Ferment,  it  awakens  their  Induitry,  and  enlivens  them 
for  Action  ;  we  all  love  to  furvive  the  Grave,  and  hate 
that  our  Name  flrould  be  nail'd  up  in  the  Coffin:  This 
Perfuafion  begun  with  Man,  and  has  continued  in  his 
Blood  without  Variation,  without  Interruption  ;  it 
warms  old  Age,  and  fires  Youth,  it  aflaults  the  Peafant, 
it  captivates  the  Prince ;  thofe  who  dare  not  fetch  Glory 
frem  the  Camp,  purfue  it  at  the  Bar,  they  plead  up  their 
Names  when  they  want  Refolution  to  fight  them  up  ;  in 
fine,  Nature  is  the  fame  in  all  Men,  it's  liable,  uniform* 
permanent  \  but  Education  is  of  another  Complexion,  'tis 
always  upon  the  Change  ;  Time,  Intereft  and  Conqueft 
eflabliih  new  Culloms,  they  fet  up  new  Principles  of  Edu- 
cation, and  proclaim  new  Maxims:  The  Conqueft  of 
IViUiam  the  Firft  forc'd  Englaftd  to  bow  to  new  Cuftoins, 
as  well  as  new  Mafters ;  it  abolifh'd  the  old  Laws,  toge- 
ther with  the  antient  Kings,  and  our  Education  became 
French  with  our  Govcrnours :  Look  where  you  will, 
and  you'll  find  Education  always  follow'd  the  Fortune 
of  the  State,  the  Subverfion  of  this  was  a  Prelude  to  the 
Eilablifhment  of  that. 

If  therefore  upon  Inquiry  we  find  the  Inftindl  of  a 
Godhaspafs'd  untouch'd,  through  all  the  Revolutions" of 
Times  and  Empires;  if  it  has  bore  up  againft  the  Fury 
bf  the  mod  barbarous  Conqueror;  what  can  we  con- 
clude, but  that  it  is  fix'd  and  rooted  in  Nature  ;  but  that 
God  has  ftamp'd  this  Charader  of  himfclf  upon  us,  and 
that  it  Iprings  not  from  the  Principles  of  Education  ? 
Now  I  have  already  demonftrated,  that  the  Notion  of  a 
God  poilefs'd  all   Mens  Minds  from  the   beginning  of 

Ages  i 


7>^^  Gentleman  Injlru^ed,     3^7 

Ages;  that  it  has  flood  immoveable,  amidft  all  the  Vicif- 
fitudesof  Time,  and  all  the  Turns  of  Fortune:  Empires 
have  fallen  either  under  the  Weight  of  their  own  Great- 
nefs,  or  the  Fury  of  the  barbarous  Conquerors  :  Nations 
have  left  Barbarity  to  take  up  Civility,  and  again aban- 
don'd  Civility  to  replunge  into  Barbarity  ;  they  have  quit- 
ted their  old  Habitations  to  feek  out  new  ones,  and  loft 
their  very  Language  with  their  Liberty:  One  Cultom 
has  jullled  out  another,  and  Time  has  wore  out  that  to 
make  room  for  a  third  :  Thefe  ftrange  Revolutions  have 
wrought  no  Change  in  the  Belief  of  a  Deity ;  it  has 
furviv'd  Empires,  and  prov'd  more  durable  than  the  Co- 
lojfus  of  Rhodes^  or  the  Temple  of  Diana  j  neither  the 
Corruption  of  Nature,  nor  all  the  vain  Attempts  of 
Atheifts,  have  been  able  to  banifh  it  from  one  Town, 
Village,  or  Family  :  The  Notion  of  a  God  has  made 
Mankind  in  all  Ages,  and  in  all  Places  fall  before  it,  and 
thofe  Men  who  dare  difpute  againft  him  cannot  forbear 
to  tremble.  'Tis  then  molt  certain  that  either  Man  has 
no  natural  Propcnfion,  or  that  this  Impreflion  of  a  fu- 
pream  Being  is  one. 

In  the  meantime  I  do  not  doubt,  but  Education  may 
limit  our  natural  Inclinations,  and  rather  tie  them  to 
one  Obje6t  than  another  ;  for  though  naturally  all  Men 
propend  to  Pleafure,  yet  what  is  agreeable  to  fome,  is  not 
toothers;  what  touches  fmoothly  my  Organ,  may  grate 
upon  yours.  Domitian  delighted  himfelf  w^ith  fticking 
Flies,  iVifro  with  driving  Chariots;  fome  are  for  Vsnus^ 
others  iox  Bacchus :  And  this  confining  the  univerfal  Prin- 
ciple rifes  either  from  Education,  or  Conltitution,  or 
both.  Again,  though  the  Defire  of  Glory  be  natural  and 
univerfal,  yet  Education  often  affigns  the  Obje6l  •■,  and 
hence  it  is,  that  Punctilio's  vary  with  the  Climate;  fome 
place  their  Glory  in  overcoming  an  Enemy,  others  in 
pardoning  him  ;  fome  judge  nothing  more  glorious  than 
to  ride  at  the  Head  of  an  Army,  to  fack  Towns,  and 
drive  Defolation  before  them  ;  whilit  others  laugh  at 
their  Folly,  and  rap'd  up  in  Speculation,  think  it  more 
honourable  to  write  of  Wars,  than  to  wage  them  :  In  a 
'VJoxA^Theomachus^  you  perchance  perfuade  your  felf  no- 
thing can  be  more  illultrious  than  to  defy  God,  whilft 
lam  fatisfied  the  true  Glory  of  every  rational  Creature 
confills  in  Obedience  to  hixS  Commands,  and  love  to  his 

Perfctfi : 


3^8     7hc  Gentleman  Injiru^'ed, 

Perfon :  Thefe  are  the  Effedts  of  Education,  they  vafy 
with  the  Meridian^  they  become  obfolete  with  Time, 
and,  hke  Fafliions  or  Almanacks,  grow  out  of  Date. 

Let  us  fty  the  fame  of  God  j  though  the  Perfuafion  of 
a  God  be  engrafted  in  Nature,  yet  Education  may  contri- 
bute to  frame  different  Ideas  of  him,  and  to  propagate 
various  Worfhips:  Some  People  fell  before  a  Crocodile^ 
others  before  a  Red- Cloth;  the  Romans  worfliip'd  Men, 
and  ibme  hdians  the  Devil:  When  once  Ignorance  had 
.  hatch*J  thefe  monftrous  Ideas  of  God,  and  Authority  had 
given  them  Credit,  Education  Ipread  the  Errour,  and 
handed  it  down  to  Pofterity  :  But  the  Notion  of  a  Divi- 
nity preceded  the  Infedion  of  Education,  and  Men  be- 
licv'd  a  fupream  Being  and  a  true  God,  before  they  fet 
up  the  Statues  of  a  falle  one. 

I  grant  that  the  different  Sedls  which  divide,  and  fub- 
divide  Chriftianity,  owe  their  Propagation  to  Education; 
(I  me"an  generally)  and  what  wonder  ?  For  Chriftianity 
is  a  reveal'd  Religion,  its  A-Iyfteries  lie  above  the  reach  of 
Nature,  our  Underftanding  cannot  come  at  them,  God 
himl'elf  has  been  pleas'd  to  communicate  them,  he  has 
writ  them  on  Paper,  not  onourHeaits,  and  we  muft 
hear  them  before  we  can  believe  them:  Parents  take  care, 
either  by  themfelves,  or  others,  to  inftill  into  their  Chil- 
dren the  Principles  of  thofe  Seds  they  profefs,  and  to 
chufe  for  them  a  Religion  before  they  can  make  any 
Choice  for  themfelves:  Thus  moll  Men  enter  upon  their 
Parents  Religions,  as  they  do  upon  their  Eftates,  and  re- 
folve  that,  which  will  convey  them  into  an  endlefs  Mi- 
fery  or  Happinefs,  into  meer  Education  :  But  the  Exift- 
ence  of  a  God  is  printed  in  our  N.uure ;  we  know  it 
without  the  Help  of  external  Revelation  or  Preaching; 
we  are  our  own  Scripture,  our  own  Apoftles. 

But  do  not  think,  I  deny  Education  can  have  any  part 
in  framing  in  us  the  Knowledge  of  a  God;  tho'  it  be  na- 
tural for  a  Mother  to  love  her  Children,  and  for  a  Child 
to  refped  his  Mother,  yet  Education  concurs,  this  draws 
up  thofe  reciprocal  Duties  in  more  lively  Colours,  and 
puts  thelaft  Hand  to  the  rough  Draught  of  Nature:  Juft 
fo  is  our  prefent  Controveriy,  tho'  Nature  leads  us  to 
the  Knowledge  of  a  God,  yet  Education  haftens  it ;  this 
brightens  oftentimes  the  Idea,  and  poliflies  it  with  In- 
ftrudlions  and  Precepts :  Thus,  my  Lord,  I  have  return'd 

an 


"The  Gentleman  Inftm^ed.     ^6^ 

an  Anfwer  to  your  Objedlion,  and  without  the  lealt 
Grain  of  Partiality  prov'd,  that  Atheifls  retreat  in  vain 
to  Education. 

Theo.  What  you  deny  to  Education  cannot  be  refus'd  to 
PoHcy.  This  Whim  of  a  God  was  liatch'd  in  fome  Clo- 
kt  by  a  fecret  Juudo  of  Statefmen.  It  firft  illU'd  from 
the  Court,  and  was  probably  ported  into  the  Country  by 
Proclamation;  Authority  fent  it  Abroad,  Fear  kept  it 
Countenance,  and  at  hft  the  Stamp  of  Sovereignty  pro- 
pagated it ;  the  Trick  took  marvelloufly  j  the  Apprehen- 
lion  of  a  Deity,  the  Terrors  of  eternal  Pains,  with  the 
flattering  Allurements  of  etern:il  Plealure,  aw'd  the  Sub- 
je6t  into  Obedience  and  Submiffion;  and  then  thefe  Ef~ 
fedts,  fo  beneficial  to  Government,  eafily  perfuaded  Prin- 
ces to  cherifti  the  Illufion,  and  to  keep  up  the  Impofture. 

Eufeb.  'Good  God !  That  Men  fhould  be  fo  wile  to  de- 
ceive themfelves !  Is  the  Belief  of  a  God  fo  conducing  to 
the  buo\  ing  up  of  human  Society  ;  fo  neceflary  for  the 
fupprefling  of  Diforders,  and  the  Converiation  of  a  juft 
Suboroination  ?  'Twere  then  to  be  wifh'd,  at  leaft,  there 
were  fucii  a  Thing;  and  vv'ere  I  of  the  great  Counfel  of 
the  Nation,  I  would  offer  a  Bill  to  both  the  Houfes  for 
the  Extirpation  of  Atheifts,  who  endeavour  to  deprive  the 
State  of  fo  excellent  an  Inftrument  of  Government.  But 
'tis  ftrange,  that  Man,  into  whofe  Soul  Nature^  Chance 
or  Neceffity^  or  what  you  think  fit  to  call  his  originary 
Gaufe,  have  breath'd  fuch  a  Sympathy  to  Commerce, 
fuch  an  Inclination  to  Society,  fhould  have  left  him  fa 
naked  of  thofe  Materials  that  are  neceffary  for  carrying  on 
any  liable  Correfpondence,  that  he  is  forc'd  to  have  Re- 
courfe  to  Fidlion,  to  fiie  to  Forgery,  and  to  build  the 
whole  Frame  of  mutual  Communications  on  Cheats,  that 
are  the  Bane  of  Society,  the  Plague  of  Converiation,  the 
Difturbers  of  Peace,  and  declar'd  Eneraies  to  Order. 

Secondly^  What  Machiavel  firft  rais'd  this  Spirit,  that  all 
the  Power  of  Wit  pointed  with  Debauchery,  has  never 
been  able  to  conjure  down  ?  what  great  NebHchodonozor 
rear'd  up  this  gigantick  Statue  of  a  Deity,  and  thencowi" 
vnanded  all  People  and  Natium  to  fall  down  andworjh'tp  it  ? 
Where  did  he  keep  his  Court  ?  In  what  part  of  tJie  World 
did  he  reign?  In  what  Olympiad  did  he  live?  A  cre- 
dible return  to  thefe  few  Queries  might  ppdibly  make 
fome  ImprelTion  on  reafonable  Men;  ]^\x\.-niiHypQtheJis'm 

B  ti  the;- 


370      The  Gentle ma!i  Injiru^ed* 

the  Air,  that  wants  the  Prop  of  Proofs,  that  is  fuflain'd 
by  meer  Conje6ture  or  Poflibility,  muft  fall  to  the 
Ground  :  Authority  without  Reafon  makes  but  a  lean 
Figure,  and  if  you  intend  to  win  our  Faith,  firft  fubdue 
our  Underftandings. 

Thirdly,  If  the  Notion  of  a  Deity  be  a  meer  Trick  of 
Statefmen,  a  fly  Invention  of  Princes ;  methinks  they 
fhould  not  ftartle  at  the  Monfter,  they  only  fram'd  to  af- 
fright others;  they  may  turn  their  Subject's  Fears  into  Di- 
verlion,  as  well  as  Profit,  and  applaud  their  Cunning  for 
this  double  Advantage  of  Obedience  and  Pleafure  ;  but 
we  fee  the  contrary  ;  Statefmen  are  no  more  fecure  from 
Throws  of  Confcience  than  the  Mechatticks^  nor  the 
Prince  than  the  Peafant ;  the  Terrors  of  a  God  often 
rife  with  theC^^r^^^r;  great  Men  m6ft  dread  his  Juftice, 
becaufe  they  moft  ofFend  his  Goodnefs.  I  ask  then,  how 
thofe  who  fourb'd  others,  become  Dupes  to  their  own 
Ccatrivances  ?  If  by  State-Ma^hk  ihey  conjur'd  up  this 
Phantom,  why  do  they  tremble¥t  it  ?  Did  all  the  Prin- 
ces of  the  World  die  iKUftati,  without  making  over  this 
great  arcanum  Imperii  to  their  Succeflbrs  ?  Were  they 
cut  off  in  one  Night  as  the  firft-born  of  Egypt  ?  Or  did 
they  intomb  this  grand  Secret  with  their  Bodies?  A  Man 
that  can  fwallow  thefe  Abfurditics,  rather  wants  Helle- 
bore than  Arguments,  and  I  would  fooner  recommend 
him  to  z.PhyJician  than  a  Philofopher. 

Fourthly^  That  Hero  of  your  Faction,  the  great  Mr. 
Hobbs^  that  able  Politician,  who  wheedled  himfelf  firft, 
and  then  a  confiderable  part  of  the  Nobility  out  of  Confci- 
ence and  Religion  too:  That  Hobbs,  I  fay,  who  has  left 
us  a  Draught  of  Government,  I  mean  of  Atheiftical  Po- 
licy, in  Folio :  Who  knows  as  little  what  he  fays,  as 
what  he  believes,  crofl'es  upon  your  Syftem  ;  he  rather 
lays  thcKnavery  at  theSubjeft'sDoor,th'an  at  thePrince's, 
and  affirms  point  Blank  the  fetting  up  of  a  God  was 
to  drive  home  Liberty,  and  to  pen  up  Sovereignty,  to 
countenance  Difobedience,  and  to  cUp  the  Wings  of  Au- 
thority: Ft  is  impoj/ible,  fays  he,  a  Cummon-vjealih  JJjould 
fiand^  where  any  other  but  the  Sovereign  kath  a  Power  of 
giving  greater  Reward  than  Life^  and  of  infixing  greater 
Puntjhments  than  Death  ;  now  feeing  eternal  Life  is  a 
greater  Reward  than  the  Life  prefent,  and  eternal  Tor-- 
ment  a  greater  Punijhment  than  the  Death  of  Nature  ^it  is 

a  thing 


^  ■ 

ne  Gentleman  InJlruBed,      371 

A  thing  worthy  to  he  well  confider'd  of  all  Men,  that  dejire 
by  obeying  Authority  to  avoid  the  Calamities  of  Confujion 
and  Civil  IVar^  and  what  is  meant  in  Holy  Serif  ture  by 
Life  eternal,andTorments  eternal;  and  then  he  lays  before 
his  Reader  as  fine  a  Scheme  oi  Life  and  Death  eternal^  as 
a  Libertine  can  defire,  or  an  Atheift  invent :  According  to 
this  Gentleman,  thole  Princes  that  firft  let  up  the  Notion 
of  a  God  upon  political  Ends,  were  but  puny  Statifts, 
they  were  as  unacquainted  with  their  Intereft  as  the  Max- 
ims of  Ruling,  for  conftituting  a  fuperior  Power,  that 
could  reward  more  liberally,  and  punifh  more  feverely 
than  they ;  they  fuggefted  new  Pretences  of  Revolt  to 
their  Subjedts,  and  ftiew'd  a  Secret  till  then  unknown, 
"viz..  that  on  Occafions  they  might  war  upon  their  Lea- 
ders, not  only  without  Sin,  but  even  with  Merit :  For 
in  the  Hypothejis  of  a  God,  this  Maxim  is  evident,  God  is 
to  be  obeyed  before  Man  \^  now  Experience  teaches  us,  that 
Knaves  can  eafily  perfu^^  the  Mob^  any  Injundlion  of  a 
Prince  that  lies  a  littleTOavy,  is  againft  God,  and  when 
once  this  Frenzy  has  feiz'd  upon  the  Brains  of  the  Vulgar, 
they  flie  to  Arms,  they  flay  out  of  Zeal,  they  butcher 
their  Fellow- Subjedls  out  of  Devotion,  and  veil  the  Pre- 
rogative to  Property,  and  the  Crown  to  the  Prong  and 
Pitch-fork  :  Thele,  I  fuppofe,  are  the  Reafons  that  move 
Mr.  Hobbs  to  caution  Princes  againft  Religion,  to  quefti- 
on  the  Rewards  of  Virtue,  and  the  Punifhments  of  Vice: 
You  fee  how  you  recede  from  the  Opinion  of  Mr.  Hobbs, 
and  leave  your  Patriarch  in  the  Lurch  :  It's  unkind  to 
treat  a  Gentleman  with  fo  little  Ceremony,  to  whom  you 
owe  fo  much;  he  firft  brought  Atheifm  into  Credit,  and 
like  the  Giant  in  the  Fable,  firft  war'd  openly  upon  Vir- 
tue, and  then  turn'd  his  Fury  againft  Heaven  :  He  mo- 
dell'd  you  into  a  kind  of  Society,  who  before  rang'd  about 
the  World  like  the  wild  Tartars  or  Arabians,  without 
Government  or  Order:  'Twas  he  firft  rais'd  Impudence 
to  a  Science,  Frenzy  to  Wit,  and  Infidelity  to  Religion: 
From  him  you  borrow  your  Errors,  and  even  Arms  to 
defend  them:  Why  then  will  you  difoblige  a  Man  to 
whom  your  whole  Fraternity  Hands  indebted  ? 

In  a  Word,  the  Belief  of  a  Divinity  could  never  be  im- 

pos'd   on  Mankirid  by   the  Cunning  of  any  Prince  or 

Statefman  ;  for  when  one  Man  attempts  to  ever- reach  a- 

nother,  he  has  recourfe,  without  doubt,  to  Reafon ;  now 

B  b  7,  I  can- 


3 7 2       ^^^  Gentleman  Injlru^ed* 

I  cannot  perfuade  my  ielf  that  Reafon  can  invent  a 
Cheat  tliat  Reafon  cannot  difcover ;  for  it's  evident  the 
Belief  of -a  lupream  Being  carries  Dread  and  Terror  a- 
long  with  it  ;  it  humbles  Pride,  checks  Lewdnefs,  and 
curbs  the  plealing  Sallies  of  Senfuality  ;  it  prefcribes  Laws 
;o  Interelt,  and  Bounds  to  Pleafure,  it  reftratns  Thoughts 
no  lefs  than  Actions ;  tlien  how  can  a  Man  in  his  Wits 
prcfunie,  that  upon  the  bare  Propolilion  of  the  Do(ftnne, 
without  any  fenous  Exanien,  without  the  Recommenda- 
tion of  plaulible  Arguments,  all  Men  fliould  fwallow  the 
Impoilure,  and  vote  the  Being  of  a  God  at  the  Expence 
of  their  darling  and  favourite  Prerogative  Liberty,  of  their 
Qiuet  and  Tranquillity?  Before  you  can  admit  fo  palpa- 
ble an  Abfurdity,  you  mud  fuppofe  all  Mankind  flung 
up  their  Reafon  for  Company-fake,  or  run  mad  to  keep 
up  the  Frolick  :  You  muft  fuppofe  our  Anceftors  were 
of  another  Species^  than  we,  that  their  Inclinations  crofs'd 
on  ours,  they  plac'd  their  Pleafure  not  in  Enjoyment  but 
Self-dcniul,  their  Liberty  in  Conftraint,  and  their  Hap- 
pinefs  in  'Lrembling. 

But  if  you  fay  they  embrac'd  the  Tenets  on  Grounds 
fallacious  at  Bottom,  but  glaz'd  over  with  the  pi au Able 
Varnifh  of  Sophiftry  and  Paralogifm ;  it's  ftrange,  that 
Reafon  after  a  hundred  Attempts,  for  the  fpace  of  many 
Ages,  has  never  been  able  to  tear  oft"  the  Difguife,  or  to 
difcover  the  Fallacy  that  was  contrived  by  Reafon  t 
And  yet  it  is  more  aftonifhing,  that  the  univerfiil  Reafon 
of  Mankind  has  been  wretchedly  enfnar'd  and  blinded 
to  fo  prodigious  a  Degree,  as  to  take  thofe  Proofs  for 
reafonable  and  folid,  which  upon  the  Principles  of  Athe- 
ifts  were  never  able  to  give  any  rational  Account  of 
God's  Exiftence,  either  by  his  Efteds  or  Operations  : 
You  cannot  believe  this,  unlefs  you  believe  that  Reafon 
it  felf  is  unreafonable,  or  that  the  Reafon  of  all  the 
World  was  over-reach'd  by  that  of  one  crafty  Politician. 
li  you  dare  venture  to  clap  in  with  this  Abfurdity,  I 
muft  confefs  your  Faith  is  facile  and  cowprehenfive  in 
fome  Cafes,  tho'  ftreight-lac'd  in  others  ;  and  you  can- 
not refufe  to  believe  a  God,  unlefs  you  own  it's  in  your 
Power  to  believe  what  is  morally  impofiible,  but  not 
what  is  highly  credible.  To  conclude,  you  have  un- 
riddled the  Secret ;  it's  a  meer  State- Engine^  you  fay,  a 
petty  Craft  to  fright  fome,  and  flatter  others  into  Obe- 
dience ; 


The  Gentleman  InJiruBed,       573 

dience  ;  disband  therefore  your  Fears,  run  from  Confci- 
ence,  or  out-grow  it,  place  Good  and  Evil  on  the  fame 
Level,  for  nothing  can  be  Evil  below,  unlefs  there  be  a 
fupream  Law-giver  above.  A  Child  will  fcream  out  at 
its  Nurle,  under  the  Difguife  of  a  Vizard,  but  take  it  oft', 
and  he  turns  the  very  Objed:  of  Fear  into  Flay  and  Di- 
verlion  5  you  have  unmafk'd  the  Fourbery,  you  have  dif- 
cover'd  the  Impofture,  why  have  }''ou  lefs  Afllirance  than 
a  Child ;  why  lels  Difcretion?  Why  do  you  Hill  fweat 
under  the  Awe  of  a  Deity,  and  Ibmetirnes  groan  under 
the  Lafhes  of  Confcience  ?  If  you  have  been  gull'd  into 
-  thefe  Frights,  difcourfe  your  felf  outof  them  j  Fear  and 
Remorfe  are  not  very  entertaining:  If  a  Syllogifm  or  two 
would  rid  you  of  thefe  Incumbrances,  I  would  have  you 
try  Conclufions :  But  alas !  Your  own  Breaft  confutes 
your  Pretenlions,  vi'hen  you  affirm  the  Impreffion  of  a 
God  is  nothing  but  a  Trick,  your  Tongue  trembles  to- 
gether with  your  Heart,  and  like  a  Criminal  at  the  Bar, 
you  avow  the  Fa6l  by  a  faint  Denial. 

Theo.  Your  Difcourfe  amounts  to  this,  that  no  Error 
can  invade  and  fubdue  all  Mankind :  Now  can  any 
thing  be  imagin'd  more  univerfal  than  Folytheifm  ?  Did 
it  not  run  through  all  Countries,  as  well  as  all  Times?  Did 
it  not  fweep  away  the  Rich  with  the  Poor ;  the  Philofo- 
pher  with  the  Illiterate  j  and  the  Prince  with  the  Pea- 
sant ?  Through  what  Gate  did  this  profane  Wo rfhip  creep 
into  the  World  ?  If  many  Gods  may  be  foifted  in,  why 
not  one?  Does  the  Greatnefs  of  the  Abfurdity  facilitate 
the  Impofture  ?  Becaufe  a  Plurality  of  Gods  {hocks  Rea- 
fon  more  than  an  Unity,  can  Reafon  eafier  overlook  the 
Contradiifton  ?  Does  the  Cheat  lie  out  of  Sight,  becaufe 
a  Child  may  difcover  it  ? 

Eufeb.  Polytheifm,  tho'  it  fpread  wide,  was  never 
univerfal  :  We  know  as  fure  when  it  was  not,  and  when 
it  begun,  as  paft  Tranfadions  can  be  known  :  The  Me- 
mory of  things  paft  can  only  run  down  to  us  through  the 
Channel  of  Tradition  ;  Authors  both  Sacred  and  Pro- 
phane  mark  its  Origin  ;  it  takes  its  Rtfe  from  the  Tower 
oi  Babel,  and  the  firft  Emperor  was  metamorphos'd  into 
the  firft  Deity  :  Nor  did  it  infcift  all  People  ;  fome  Mil- 
lions of  Jews  detefted  the  Sacrilege,  and  tJiere  are  ma-r 
ny  probable  Conjectures  in  fpite  of  the  Sorbone,  that  the 
Worlhip  of  one  God  continu'd  in  China  two  thoufand 
■         B  b  3  Years: 


374      -^^^  Gentleman  InJiriiBed. 

Years:  Bui  however,  fince  the  Birth  of  Chriftianity,  Po- 
ly theifm  has  loft  Credit  and  Empire,  it  only  reigns 
where  Ignorance  and  Barbarity  domineer,  and  thofe 
poor  Creatures  hug  the  Cheat  who  are  willing  to  be  de- 
ceiv'd. 

Moreover,  the  Philofophers  and  wife  Men  of  all  Ages 
and  Countries  receded  from  the  Multitude  in  this  mon- 
ftrous  Veneration  :  Flato  confefs'd  he  was  a  Folytheijt 
when  he  fpoke  in  jeft,  but  a  'Theift  when  he  fpoke  in  ear- 
neft  :  Cicero  rallies  the  StateTi6fo/o^y,and  drolls  upon  thofe 
Gods  in  his  Books  he  ador'd  in  the  Capitol :  Seneca  bur- 
lefques  the  Multiplicity  of  Divinities  ;  and,  in  a  Word, 
all  the  Heathen  Divines  as  well  as  Poets,  evidently  demon- 
ftrate,  that  thofe  believ'd  in  many  Gods,  who  foUow'd  Cu- 
ftom,  and  thofe  in  one  who  obey'd  Reafon  :  So  that, 
tho'  the  wife  Men  were  not  guilty  of  the  Error,  they  were 
of  the  Sin,  becaufe  they  fwam  down  the  Stream  with  the 
Vulgar,  they  burnt  Incenfe  to  Stones,  offer'd  Vifcims  to 
Statues,  and  approv'd  in  their  Adtions  what  they  con- 
demn'd  in  their  Judgment. 

Nay,  if  we  believe  Tertulliaft,  the  very  Multitude  ia 
their  fudden  Frights  look'd  up  to  Heaven,  not  the  Capi- 
tol; and  invok'done  God,  not  many:  Whence  vi^e  may 
draw  with  him  this  Inference,  that  Nature  profefs'd  one 
God,  whillt  Corruption  and  Ignorance  allovv''d  of  thirty 
Thoufand :  But  belides,  in  vain  you  beg  univerfally  of 
the  Vulgar ;  the  Vote  of  the  Multitude  feparated  from  the 
Approbation  of  the  wife,  is  no  more  to  be  regarded  than 
the  Opinion  of  Bethlenis  ;  their  Authority  can  be  of  no 
greater  Weight  than  that  of  Children,  who  have  Reafon, 
but  cannot  ufe  it :  They  know  as  little  what  they  do,  as 
why  ;  they  aft  by  no  other  Rule  than  Pafiion  or  Cuftom  ; 
like  frighted  Sheep  one  treads  on  the  Heels  of  another, 
and  the  Miftake  of  the  firft  is  folio w'd  by  that  of  the 
whole  Flock:  In  fine,  they  judge  at  Random,  take  things 
upon  Truft,  and  ftamp  Truth  and  Falfhood  with  the  fame 
Impreflion  ;  and  fo  leave  us  no  A-Iarks  to  difcover  the 
Impofture. 

But  again,  your  Argument  is  fo  far  from  enervating 
my  Difcourfe,  that  it  confirms  it  :  People  had  never  a- 
dor'd  falfe  Gods,  had  they  not  been  firft  perfuaded  there 
was  a  true  one  ;  as  a  Pidture  fuppofes  fome  real  Original, 
fo  a  counterfeit  Excellency  fuppofes  a  real  one :   Who 

would 


lloe  Gentleman  InftruM,     S7S 

would  counterfeit  Guineas  if  there  was  no  fuch  Coin  ? 
Or  cheat  the  World  with  falfe  Diamonds  if  there  were 
no  true  ones  in  Nature  ?  The  Heathens  ador'd  falfe  Gods? 
I  think  we  may  therefore  with  a  great  deal  of  Proba- 
bility infer,  that  Nature  taught  them  there  was  a  true 
one. 

Now  it's  no  hard  Task  to  convince  a  Man  that  will 
ftoop  to  Reafon,  that  Polytheifm  might  eafily  be  fet  on 
Foot  by  Craft,  Policy,  or  Corruption,  though  the  Belief 
of  one  God  could  not:  Firft,  To  latisfy  the  Senfes, Men 
made  God  Vijible :  Secondly,  To  content  the  Imagination, 
that  could  not  cro\vd  all  the  Perfections  of  God  in  one 
Idea,  they  mukiply'd  the  Divinity  ;  then  Blindnefs 
growing  upon  them  with  the  Superltition,  ihofe  things 
that  were  intended  to  reprefent  his  Perfections  were  ap- 
plied to  Men ;  and  then  Darknefs  feiz'd  upon  them  to 
that  Degree,  that  they  deified  Difeafes,  and' ador'd  thofe 
Obfcenities  in  their  Temples,  they  durft  not  name  in 
civil  Company.  Lajily,  To  favour  their  Paffions,  and  to 
give  full  Wing  to  unreafonable  Appetites,  they  placed  \ 
Adulterers  in  Heaven,  Strumpets  on  Altars,  and  ador'd 
all  Vices,  that  they  might  be  exempt  from  the  Praftice 
of  all  Virtues ;  for  who  durft  condemn  what  they  ador'd ; 
or  punifh  what  they  worfhip'd?  What  Crime  might  not 
be  committed  at  Home  u^ith  Honour  and  Impunity,  that 
was  reverenc'd  in  the  Temples  with  Proftitution  and 
Vidims  ? 

But  if  this  Account  does  not  pleafe  you,  pray  attend, 
and  1  hope  you  will  receive  full  Satisfadhon.  Polytheifm 
is  a  Sin  of  the  deepeft  Dye,  and  •  therefore  we  cannot 
imagine  Men  plung'd  into  the  very  depth  of  Wicked- 
nefs  without  previous  Difpoiitions.  Crimes,  like  natural 
Bodies,  do  not  fhoot  out  in  a  Moment,  but  leifureiy :  Ne» 
mo  repentefitpojfimus.  Idolatry  like  all  other  monftrous  Of- 
fences came  upon  us  by  Degrees ;  iirft  Men  carv'd  Sta- 
tues, then  they  honour'd  them,  and,  in  fine,  ador'd  them ; 
and  as  the  Caufe  of  making  them  was  various,  fo  that  of 
deifying  them  was  alfo:  A  Father,  fays  the  wife  Maa^ 
afflidled  with  untimely  Mourning,  when  he  had  made 
the  Image  of  his  Child  taken  away,  now  honoured  him 
as  a  God,  which  was  then  a  dead  Man  ;  and  fome  fell 
into  fo  defperate  an  Ignorance,  as  to  ereft  Statues  and 
Altars  to  thofe  very  Perfons  they  mourn'd  for ;  they  con- 
B  b  4  itituted 


^y6      The  Gentleman  InjlruBed. 

ftjtuted  Ceremonies  for  the  Dead  as  Cures  for  the  Gritf 
of  the  Living.  Sacra  faiia  fant  quce  fuerunt  ajfumpla  So- 
latia. Min.  Felix. 

In  fome  Places  Idolatry,  fprung  from  the  Pride  of  Prin- 
ces, who  fubftituted  their  Statues  to  fupply  their  Frefence, 
and  commanded  their  Subjeds  to  pay  tlieir  Reprefenta- 
tive  the  Refpedl  due  to  their  Perfons ;  and  this  Worfhip, 
though  civil  in  its  Origin,  fwelFd  into  Adoration  by  tlic 
fervile  Flattery  of  fome,  and  the  ftupendious  Biindnefs 
of  others;  and  v^'hen  once  the  Gate  flew  open  to  Illufion, 
Idolatry  rufli'd  into  the  World  like  a  Torrent,  and  bore 
down  all  before  it.  Nebuchodonozo'r  would  be  ador'd 
whilfl  he  liv*d :  Alexander  obtain'd  Worfhip  of  the  Fer- 
fians^  but  could  not  of  his  Macedonians ;  thefe  to  fet  up 
their  Valour  would  never  own  their  King  was  a  God, 
the  others  deified  their  Conqueror  to  palliate  the  Shame 
of  their  Defeat ;  The  Roman  C<cfars  lov'd  rather  to  be 
fear'd  while  they  liv'd,  than  adored ;  they  would  firft-  die 
before  they  would  be  thought  immortal,  and  pretended 
no  right  to  Sacrifices  till  Death  cut  oft' all  Claim  to  Go- 
vernment; but  then  the  ignorant  Multitude  and  fawning 
Magiftrate  plac'd  their  Princes  above  the  S"tars,  and  built 
Temples  to  thofe  whom  they  ftabb'd  in  the  Senate,  or 
flung  into  the  Common-fhores. 

In  other  Places,  Polytheifm  and  Idolatry  came  from 
Gratitude;  the  People  dedicated  Statues  to  thofe  famous 
Men,  who  firfl  founded  their  Cities,  or  improv'd  them, 
who  fram'd  Laws,  or  invented  Arts  ;  and  in  Procefs  of 
Time,  the  exterior  Marks  ©f  Gratitude  became  Divine 
Worfliip:  If  you  doubt  of  thefe  Occafions,  let  me  re- 
commend to  your  perufal  LaSiantius.,  Philaflrius.,  Amo- 
btus  and  Mm.  Felix.,  and  I  am  confident  you  will  urge  no 
more  for  Satisfaction :  Now  if  you  ask  me  why  the  No- 
tion of  one  God  could  not  be  impos'd  on  Mankind  by 
Ignorance,  Stupidity  and  Cuftom,aswell  as  Idolatry  and 
Polytheifm  5  I  can  only  defire  you  to  fpend  a  Moment's 
Refledion  on  what  I  have  faid  already. 

Theo.  I  perceive  then  you  will  not  admit  it  poffible, 
that  sny  Error  can  be  univerfal :  Pray  do  not  balance 
plain  Matter  of  Fa<fl  with  Speculation.  Did  not  all  the 
^orld  believe  the  Antipodes  impoflible?  And  do  not  the 
C^wwj  of  all  Nations  to  this  Day,  take  the  Moon  or  Sun 
fu  be  ten  times  bigger  than  the  fix' d  Stars  ? 

Erifelf, 


^he  Gentleman  Injiru^ed.     377 

Eufeb.  Whether  an  Error  can  be  univerfal  or  no,  is 
not  my  Concern;  xhd'  Anjlutle  denies  it,  andtho'  it  can 
never  be  made  out  by  any  Faft,  that  fuch  an  Error  is 
poffible,  yet  if  a  Confeflion  will  be  any  Advantage  to 
yourCaule,  pray  take  it;  however,  I  maintain,  thatth>J^ 
Perfuafion  of  a  God  cannot  pofTibly  be  fuch ;  and  I  think' 
that  the  Afiertion  is  made  pretty  clear  already  ;  yet  to 
fatisfy  Doubts,  and  to  cut  off  all  Reply,  I  add  an  Argu- 
ment, which  has  all  the  Appearance  of  Convidion. 

There  is  a  natural  Light  in  Man's  Underilanding,  that 
never  deceives  him  ;  but  then  there  is  a  Prejudice  that  al- 
ways does;  were  we  exempt  from  this,  we  fhould  fel- 
dombe  in  the  wrong;  and  were  we  diverted  of  that,  we," 
fhould  never  be  in  the  right ;  we  cannot  throw  our  Mi- 
ftakes  on  any  in-bred  Quality  of  the  Intelleift,  for  then 
falfe  Judgments  would  be  natural  to  it,  and  fo  we  might 
take  up  with  the  Scepticks,  and  doubt  of  all  Things,  or 
rather  we  fhould  be  allured  of  this  alone,  that  we  were 
always  in  Error. 

There  are  two  Sources  of  Error,  the  one  exterior, 
which  may  be  rediic'd  to  Example,  Education^  zndSo- 
phijlry ;  thefe  exercife  a  ftrange  Empire  on  the  Under- 
ftanding,  they  impofe  upon  it  to  Admiration,  and  almoft 
force  it  into  Error  by  propofing  Obje(51:s  under  fiilfe 
Light :  Hence  it  comes,  that  Lewdnefs  in  hot  Countries, 
and  Drunkennefs  in  cold,  pafs  for  Peccadillo's,  altho'  in 
themfelves  they  are  great  Offences:  The  interior  Caufes 
are  three,  the  Sefifes,  ImagiMatiofi,  and  PaJJion,  and  any 
of  thefe  are  able  to  propole  things  in  borrowed  Colours, 
and  reprefent  them  to  the  Underftanding  quite  different 
from  themfelves;  thus  a  Star  having  been  reprelented  to 
us  from  our  Cradle  no  bigger  than  a  Candle,  we  have 
found  fome  Difficulty  to  be  difabufed,  not  being  able  to 
reconcile  the  fmall  Idea  we  take  from  our  Senfe,  to  that 
vaft  one  we  receive  from  Reafon  ;  our  Imagination  has 
been  fo  employ'd  in  Matter,  that  it  gives  even  Spirits  its 
Properties ;  we-  are  no  more  able  to  imagine  our  Souls 
without  Extenfion,  than  a  Mountain  without  a  Valley  ; 
the  Will  being  engag'd  by  Paffion,  biaffes  the  Under- 
ftanding, and  forcing  it  to  judge  true  whatever  ftands  for 
our  Advantage,  leads  us  into  a  thoufand  Errors ;  and  then 
'tis  very  hard  to  difcover  the  Miftake,  when  'tis  our 
Intereft   to  be  deceiv'd:    Now,    I  fay,    the   unlverfal 

Belief 


378        ^he  Gentleman  Infiru^ed. 

Belief  of  a  God  cannot  be  afcribed  cither  to  the  exte- 
rior Caufes  of  Error,  or  to  the  interior:  The  firft  of 
the  AiTertion  ilands  firm  on  thofe  Reafons  I  have  alrea- 
dy brought ;  the  fecond  I  prove  beyond  a  PoiTibiHty  of 
doubting. 

The  Behef  of  a  Deity  cannot  with  any  Colour  of  Rea^ 
fon  be  fuppos'd  to  flow  from  any  of  thefe  general  Ori- 
gins of  Illufion  ;  if  it  be  rather  contrary  than  conform- 
able to  them,  if  they  rather  prompt  us  to  believe  there  is 
no  God,  than  that  there  is  one  j  for  what  Error  can 
fpring  from  thofe  Caufes,  that  have  no  Proportion  to  it, 
that  rather  ftilie  than  foment  it  ?  Now,  I  appeal  to 
Atheifts  themlelves,  whether  they  owe  not  a  great  part 
of  their  criminal  Incredulity  to  Senfe,  Imagination,  and 
Corruption  of  Heart ;  they  have  been  folong  accuftom'd 
to  juggle  by  Senfe,  that  they  feem  to  have  loft  the  Fa- 
culty of  Reafoning;  they  reje6l  as  Sophiftry  or  empty 
Speculation  whatever  cannot  fall  under  Senfation  ;  they 
tell  us,  they  cannot  admit  God  to  be  theOhje6l  of  their 
Faith,  becaufe  he  cannot  be  that  of  their  Senfe;  their 
Imagination  is  loft  in  the  Survey  of  his  Eternity  and 
Immenlity,  they  cannot  frame  to  themfelves  any  toler- 
able Idea  of  his  Eiience,  nor  what  he  did,  nor  where  he 
w&s  before  the  World's  Creation;  and  then  this  Nonplus 
of  the  Imagination  puzzles  the  Underftanding,  and  fa 
they  deny  his  Being,  becaufe  they  do  not  conceive  his 
Effence,  Attributes,  and  Occupation :  In  fine,  the  taint- 
ed Inclinations  that  tyrannize  over  the  Heart,  level  all 
their  Engines  ag;-.!nft  God's  Exiftence,  becaufe  thisTruth 
curbs  their  Infolence,  and  if  it  does  not  corrett  their  Ir- 
regularity, atleaft  it  abates  their  Violence. 

Let  therefore  all  the  World,  if  you  pleafe,  for  many 
Ages  deny  \ht  Antipodes ^XtiXh&m  h&\\e\tl\\e  firjl Stars  are 
no  bigger  than  the  Flame  of  a  Taper,  or  that  the  Moon 
equals  the  Sun ;  the  very  Hypothejis  favours  me ;  thisuni- 
verfal  Miftake  aiiures  me  almoft  above  Demonftration, 
that  thofe  who  confefs  a  God  are  not  deluded :  Yor  fix 
thoufand  Years  the  Senfes  have  brought  negative  Argu- 
ments againft  the  Exiftence  of  a  Divinity.  Imagination 
has  conjur'd  up  a  hundred  Difficulties,  and  thrown  as 
many  Prejudices  in  our  way,  the  extream  Wickednefsof 
moft  Men  has  made  no  God  their  Intereft,  andithascon- 
quer'd  their  Defires,  and  corrupted  thefe  Wifhes :  Yet  in 

fpight 


'the  Gentleman  Inftni^ed,      37^ 

fplght  of  Senfe,  in  fpight  of  Imagination,  maugre  all 
the  Bribes  of  Senfuality,  the  Flattery  of  Appetite,  and 
Violence  of  Paffions,  that  always  raife  Doubts  in  the 
Face  of  Evidence,  in  the  Prefence  of  Demonftration,  the 
Belief  of  a  God  has  flood  unfhaken,  it  has  fubdu'd  the 
jnoft  obdurate,  enlighten'd  the  moft  itupid,  fcar'd  the 
moft  profligate,  and  overcome  the  moft  rebellious ;  all 
Nations,  in  all  Ages,  have  acknowledg'd  his  Being,  and 
.even  thole  who  pretend  to  be  Atheifts  cannot  clear  them- 
felves  of  Doubts;  their  Fears  are  more  certain  than  their 
Judgment,  and  they  quake  before  the  Nothing  they 
laugh  at. 

Judge  now  whether  the  Belief  of  a  God  can  be  the 
Effedt  of  Prejudice,  feeing  it  was  upon  the  very  Princi- 
ples of  Error,  and  maintain  its  Empire  over  the  Judg- 
ments of  Men,  meerly  becaufe  no  Prejudice  can  with- 
ftand  it.     I  conclude  therefore,  this  univerfal  Confent, 
this  harmonious  Concord  of  Men  in  Cuftoms  different, 
oppofite  in  Intereft,  and  almoft  contrary  the  one  to  the 
other  in  Complexion,  as  well  as  Fearures,  cannot  pro- 
csed  from  any  Thing,  but  the  Conviction  of  a  Truth 
God  breath'd  into  our  Souls  when  he  efpous'd  them  to 
our  Bodies;  he  twifted  it  with  our  Nature,  and  fo  has 
fenc'd  it  againft  theAflaultsof  Time,  Cuflom  and  In- 
clination; he  hasafi'ur'd  it  againft  the  falfe  Intelligence  of 
Senfe,  and  the  confounding  Impreflion  of  Imagination: 
You  may  as  foon  debauch  the  Sun  out  of  the  Zodiacky 
as  this  indelible  Truth  out  of  your  Heart,  or  difpute  an 
JEjtliiopian  white,  as  reafon  a  God  into  a  Chimera :  No 
Armour  is  Proof  againft  the  Point  of  this  Truth,  there  is 
no  Shelter  againft  the  Force  of  this  invincible  Argument. 
Opinionum  comment  a  debt  dies.  Naturajudicia  confirmat . 
Time  wears  out  the  Fiction  of  Opinions,  and  unmasks 
the  Falfity  of  ill-founded  Perfuafions ;  but  then  it  cor- 
roborates the  Didlates,  confirms  the  Judgments  of  Na- 
ture; and  when  a  Notion  has  ftood  the  Trial  of  all  Na- 
tions,  and  endur'd  the  Teft  of  all  Ages,  'tis  a  Sign  it 
fprings  from  Nature,  not  from  Caprice  or  lUulion. 


DIA^ 


3 S 0       The  GENTLEK4AN  Injli^uifed. 


DIALOGUE    XV. 

From  the  uaiverfal  Confent  of  Nations,,  it  follows^  that 
this  Propojitiotj,  there  is  a  God,  ca»  be  no  mare  doubt- 
ful than  this^  there  was  fuch  a  Man  as  Ccefar. 

T'heom.'SJ'  O  U  fancy,  I  fuppofe,  I  am  come  over  to 
"*-  you,  and  turn'd  a  thorough- pac'd  Convert; 
you  have  ply'd  me  fufficiently  with  Words,  but  not  at  all 
with  Reafons. 

Eufeb.  *Tiseafier  to  afperfe  Truth,  than  to  confute  it : 
When  I  began  the  Conference,  if  you  remember,  I  en- 
gag'd  my  felf  to  give  you  convincing  Proofs  of  a  God, 
but  not  Wit  to  underftand  them  :  I  have  done  my  Part, 
and  if  they  make  no  ImprefTion,  you  muft  accufe  either 
your  Incapacity  or  Obftinacy,  not  the  Weaknefs  of  the 
Argument.  A  Man  that  has  no  Eyes,  orfhuts'em,  may 
grope  in  the  dark  at  Noon-day,  and  if  he  blunders  into 
a  Precipice,  he  muftdifcharge  the  Sun,  and  lay  his  Mif- 
fortuneon  thelndifpofition  of  the  Organ,  or  the  Folly  of 
his  own  Will :  I  have  difcover'd  Truth,  and  laid  it  as 
open  as  Demonftration  will  permit,  now  you  very  grave- 
ly tell  me,  you  can't  difcern  it ;  you  may  at  the  fame 
Rate  accufe  Euclid^  and  turn  his  Demonflrations  into 
Paralogifms,  you  may  fay  Pythagoras  has  ftiam'd  human 
Reafon  with  his  famous  Difcovery,  and  that  he  was  too 
liberal  when  he  gave  a  Hecatomb  for  a  Sophifm.  I  tell 
you  again,  Ihavenotaflaulted  your  Judgment  with  Fal- 
lacy or  Sophifm,  but  with  naked  Truth :  A  Child  may 
fee  it,  and  no  Man  of  Reafon  can  deny  it;  it's  too  evident 
to  be  overlook'd,  and  too  ftrong  to  be  withflobd ;  you 
may  as  well  doubt  whether  there  was  fuch  a  Prince  as 
Cafar^  as  call  in  queftion  the  Being  of  a  Deity. 

Theo.  Hold  there :  I  no  more  doubt  of  dtfar's  Being, 
than  pf  my  own;  it's  not  in  my  Power  to  diilent  from 
either. 

Efifeb.  I  fuppofe  you  make  this  publick  Confeflion  to 
avoid  Singularity,  or  that  fome  under-hand  Defign  has  a 
greater  Stroak  in  your  Confeflion,  than  Convidion. 

I'heo. 


fhe  Gentleman  Injru£fel     3S t 

Tkeo.  Nothing  but  Evidence  draws  out  the  Confeffion, 
t  cannot  doubt  when  Demonftration  alTures  me,  and  I 
mud  waver,  if  bareConjeftures  fupport  me. 

Eufeb  Pray,  by  which  Propofuion  of  Mathematicks 
do  you  demowftrate  C<efar  was  ? 

Theo.  You  are  in  a  Vein  of  Bantering  furely;  paft  Mat- 
ters of  Fact  neither  require,  nor  are  capable  of  Mathe- 
matical Proofs,  they  are  not  to  be  made  out  by  Signs  or 
Tangents^  they  ftand  on -the  2J<?/?j- of  Authority,  and  are 
only  convey'd  to  our  Knowledge  by  Tradition:  Now  I 
fuppofe  the  joint  Confent  of  all  Men,  and  all  Ages,  is 
able  to  make  any  paft  Tranfadion  credible. 

EufeL  Your  Arithmetick  runs  too  high;  what  do  you 
talk  of  all  Men  ?  The  tenth  Part  of  Mankind  has  heard 
Icfs  of  defar^  than  of  Domingo's  Voyage  to  the  Moon : 
If  you  fend  Hue  and  Cry  after  this  great  Conqueror  into  the 
Country,  nine  Parts  of  ten  will  take  him  fooner  for  a 
Highway-man,  than  an  Emperor,  and  rather  fuppofe  he 
had  taken  a  Purfe,  than  conquer'd  the  World  :  Other 
Countries  of  Europe  are  as  little  acquainted  with  this 
Hero  as  ours :  He  is  abfolutely  loft  to  China  and  yapan ; 
his  Feats  never  fwarm  over  into  America^  and  his  Obfcu- 
rity  even  in  Afia  and  Africa  is  far  greater  than  his  Renown ; 
his  Memory  is  only  confin'd  to  Books,  it  lives  among 
Pedants  and  School- Boys. 

Iheo.  'Tistrue,  but  the  Tradition,  tho' not  phyfically 
univerfal,  is  morally  fo ;  and  this  fuffices  to  make  the 
Fa<Sl  certain. 

Eujeb.  Nay,  Sir!  I  am  abfolutely  for  you,  anddidyou 
not  believe  there  was  fuch  a  Man  as  C^Jar,  I  fhould 
perfuade  you  to  turn  Anchoret,  to  take  up  in  Foreftsj 
and  forfwear  all  human  Society  ;  for  in  Reality,  you 
will  be  as  ill  rigg'd  out  for  Converfation  as  Buffloes  or 
Buzzards  \  but  then  ifuponlefs  Grounds  you  believe 
there  has  been  fuch  a  Man  as  Cafar,  why  do  you  refufe 
to  believe  a  God  upon  greater? 

Theo.  What !  Do  you  pretend  the  Motives  that  prove 
a  God  are  more  cogent,  than  thofe  that  prove  Ctefar 
has  been? 

Eufeb.  I  do  :  For  not  a  tenth  Part  of  the  World  has 
ever  heard  of  Cafar,  and  every  Man  from  the  firft  Ori- 
gin of  Things,  I  fay,  every  Man  that  has  been  able  to 
difcaurfe,  to  liuk  together  Antecedents  and  Confequences, 

has 


38a     ^he  Gentleman  hiftruBed. 

has  confefs'd  there  is  a  fupream  Being  ;  fo  that  if  we  ap- 
peal to  Number,  and  put  the  Ifllie  of  the  Controverfy  to 
Vote,  the  Being  of  a  God  carries  the  Day:  As  there  is 
not  Proportion  between  the  Authority  thatftands  for  Cce- 

far,  and  that  which  flands  for  God  j  fo  there  can  be  no 
Companion  between  the  Certainty  of  one,  and  of  the 
other. 

"  ..Befides,  thok  who  tUteHC afar  ^as^ee»,  hadnolnte- 
teft  to  deny  it ;  they  got  no  more  by  his  Being,  than  by 
his  not  Being  ;  the  one  did  not  advance  their  Fortune, 
nor  the  other  recoil  it:  But  a  confiderable  part  .of  thofe 
who  avouch  for  a  God,  were  interefted  in  his  KoiBeingy 
they  were  Men  funk  in  Lewdnefs,  and  loft  in  Debauche- 
ry, their  Hands  were  dy'd  in  Blood,  Rapine  and  Sacri- 
lege, and  their  Hearts  defil'd  with  the  moft  crying  Abo- 
minations ;  they  wifh'd  there  were  no  God,  becaufe 
they  liv'd  as  if  there  were  none  ;  their  Intereft  voted 
him  down,  yet  their  Judgments  could  not.  The  Rack 
of  their  wounded  Confciences  told  them,  there  was  a 
God;  and  though  they  apprehended  his  Juftice,  they  had 
not  the  Boldnels  to  difown  it :  If  therefore  thofe  Men 
deferve  more  Credit  who  fpeak  againft  their  own  Inte- 
refts,  than  thofe  who  do  not,  this  fingle  Circumftance 
makes  the  Being  of  God  more  certain  than  that  of 
Cafir. 

Theo.  There  is  Excedem  and  Exceffum  ;  if  we  go  to 
polling,  you  may  perchance  gain  the  Suit,  but  if  to  Evi- 
dence, the  Caufe  is  mine.  The  Authority  of  a  few  built 
on  Evidence  weighs  ten  times  more  than  the  Authority 
of  many  deftitute  of  Reafon.  Thus  the  Cafe  ftands  be- 
tween you  and  me ;  more  witnefs  for  God,  than  for 
Cafar  ;  but  then  the  Authority  of  thofe  who  maintain  a 
God  is  fupported  by  Fancy  alone  and  Caprice. 

Eufeb.  That  is,  all  Men  efpoufed  the  Belief  of  a  God 
without  Reafon.  What !  Can  a  Man  affirm  fuch  an  ama- 
zing Impofiibility,  and  boggle  at  any  Thing?  A  wife 
Man  may  fometimes  be  ivnpos'd  on  by  fub tie  Appear- 
ances, he  may  grafp  a  Shadow  for  the  Subftance,  and 
take  counterfeit  Reafon,  as  well  as  adulterate  Coin  :  But 
to  Hiy  all  Mankind  took  up  the  Belief  of  a  God  on  a 
Frolick,  without  Reafon,  nay,  againft  the  Intereft  of  the 
greater  Part,  is  to  fuppofe  them  ftruck  at  ,a  clap  with 
the  Spirit  of  Folly  and  Madnefs  ;  'tis  to  fuppofe  them 

irrational, 


The  Gentleman  Injiru^ed.     3S3 

irrational,  and  by  Inference,  not  Men;  and  what  can 
Fancy  frame  more  prodigious,  than  that  a  Man  of  Parts 
(hould  believe  this  epidemical  Lunacy  without  any 
Ground  or  Reafon.  K Caprice  has  fent  about  this  FroHck; 
if  it  has  polled  it  away  to  every  Corner  of  the  habitable 
World ;  methinks  we  have  right  to  expeft  it  may  play 
little  Pranks  in  things  of  another  Nature.  Why  have 
the  Gentry  never  yet  flung  "Tewbhury  Muftard  Balls  into 
their  own  Houfes,  and  tofs*d  the  Frenzy  thro'  the  whole 
Nation  ?  Why  have  they  never  confpir'd  the  Ruin  of 
Vintners  by  withdrawing  their  Cuftom,  or  fupprefs'd  the 
Ifjtts  of  Court  by  compoling  Law  Suits  a  /'  amiable  ? 
Could  we  fee  Aflbciations  carry  on  thefe  petty  Froiicks, 
we  might  perchance  have  fome  Inclination  to  think  more 
univerfal  were  poflible,  but  till  you  give  me  an  Inftance, 
you  mull  pardon  my  Incredulity. 

Now  'tis  time  to  take  into  Conlideration  your  pre- 
tended Advantage:  The  Proofs  for  Ccefarh  Being  are  re- 
folv'd,  fay  you,  into  the  Evidence  of  Senfe,  thofe  for 
God's  Exillence  are  not ;  therefore  the  Authority  that 
Hands  for  C<?/^r,  exceeds  that  which  Hands  for  God,  in 
the  fame  Proportion  that  Certitude  drawn  from  the  Per- 
ceptions of  Senfe,  furpafles  the  Certitude  taken  from  any 
other  Faculty. 

F/V/?,  Suppofing  the  Evidence  which  Hands  for  Cafar 
be  greater,  'tis  falfe  Logick  to  conclude,  that  the  Evi- 
dence of  a  God,  grounded  on  the  moll  univerfal  Confent 
that  ever  was  in  the  World,  is  infuflicient  to  fecure  a 
wife  Man  from  Doubt  :  For  certainly  fomething  below 
fupream  Evidence  will  fuffice;  and  if  you  will  not  grant 
me  this,  it  evidently  follows,  you  can  be  fure  of  nothing 
.  but  what  you  fee ;  for  the  Experience  of  your  own  Eyes 
is  ten  times  more  convincing  than  that  of  another,  let 
it  be  apply'd  to  you  by  the  mod  full  Authority  that  can 
be  imagin'd. 

Secondly,  You  cannot  refufeyour  Alient  to  the  Exill- 
ence of  a  God  upon  account  that  the  univerfal  Autho- 
rity of  Mankind  is  not  founded  on  Senfation  :  For  then 
you  undermine  and  blow  up  the  Foundation  of  Atheifm^ 
and  apojiatize  from  Incredulity ;  for  cither  you  are  an 
Epicurean,  ox  Arijiotelian  A\ht\^^  id  eft,  you  believe  the 
World  was  composed  by  Chance  of  Atoms,  or  was  ab 
4Sterm:  Take  which  you  pleal'ej  if  the  firft,  pray  tell 

me. 


384     ^he  Gentleman  Injlnuied, 

me,  did  you  ever  fee  thofe  Atoms  ?  Did  you  ever  viev^ 
their  Motion?  Was  you  prefent  when  they  danc'd  the 
Hay  \  or  product  the  World  by  a  Turn  of  Baruaby  ? 
Did  at  leaft  either  Evicums  or  Democrltus  afTure  their 
Scholars  they  law  this  Scuffle?  Can  they  tell  us  the 
T^'ames  of  their  Generals;  the  Number  of  their  Squa- 
drons, or  Battalions?  How long.the Conflict  killed?  And 
upon  what  Articles  the  Peace  was  agreed  on  ?  If  the  fe- 
cond,  I  defire  to  know  what  ocular  Certainty  you  have 
of  the  World's  Eternity;  could  any  Man  be  prefent  at 
this  ftrange  Production  before  he  was,  id  eft^  could  he 
exifl  before  Eternity?  Thefe  Things  go  down  with' 
yf;^f//?i  without  chewing,  \^\yhowlexamen  \  they  believe 
'em,  tbo'  no  Body  ever  law  'cm,  and  what  is  yet  more 
admirable,  without  any  Authority  to  recommend  'em, 
nay,  in  fpite  of  Autiiority,  and  againft  the  moft  evi- 
dent Conviction  of  Reafon  ;  but  when  the  Quellion  is  to 
believe  a  God  upon  the  univerfal  Confent  of  all  Nations, 
back'd  with  all  the  Force  of  Reafon,  they  beg  our  Par- 
don, they  cannot  captivate  their  Underitanding  to  the 
Belief  of  a  thing  that  has  never  been  feen?  Is  this  to 
build  on  Principles  ?  Yet,  without  doubt,  you  treat 
Principles  as  the  Presbyterians  did  the  Government  in 
Forty-Two^  who  pretended  to  fettle  it  on  a  ftable  Bot- 
tom, yet  fairly  over-turn'd  it. 

Thirdly^  Did  you  not  tell  me,  you  requir'd  fuch  Proofs 
only  for  a  God  as  the  Matter  was  capable  of?  That  he 
mull  be  a  Fool  or  a  Madman,  that  would  not  believe 
there  was  fuch  a  Place  as  Conjimtinople^  unlefs  it  could 
be  demonltrated  by  Mathematicks ;  or  deny'd  a  God, 
becaufe  he  did  notice  him  ?  For  to  believe  the  Being  of 
Conjiantinople  upon  no  other  Terms  than  DemonJlraiioK^ 
or  of  God  upon  no  Evidence  but  that  of  Senle,  is  to 
require  a  Convidion  not  poflible;  for  God  cannot  be 
feen  by  a  corporeal  Eye,  nor  can  the  Being  of  Conjianti- 
tiopk  be  evidenced  hy  Euclid:  So  that  the  Authority  for  a 
God  cannot  be  enervated,  becaufe  it  is  notrelblv'd  into 
Senfe :  For  fuppofe  he  didexift,  and  llriv'd  to  manifefl: 
himifelf  to  Mankind,  he  never  could  expofe  his.Eilence 
to  the  Eye,  fo  that  you  muft  either  fay  fuch  a  corporeal 
Teflimony  is  not  neceflary  for  a  thorough  Convidlion  of 
his  Being,  or  that  his  Omnipotency  cannot  fufficiently 
manifeft  it  j  take  which  you  will  j  that  cuts  off  your  Re- 
treat, 


'7'he  Gentleman  InJiruBcd.     385 

treat,  and  this  plunges  you  into  the  Abj'fs  of  Abfurdity 
and  Blafphemy. 
Fuuriblv^  Though  Cafar  was  the  Objefl  of  Senfe,  this 
^  Circumftancc  cannot  poflibly  have  any  Infiuenccon  your 
BtXiei  :  This  ftands  meerly  on  the  Balis  of  Authority ; 
for  if  I  ask  you,  why  you  beheve  there  was  fuch  a  Adan 
zsCaJar"^.  You  mult  anfwer,  becaufe  Tully  and  othtis 
liv'd  and  convers'd  with  him  :  If  I  enquire  farther,  how 
you  know  they  liv'd  and  convers'd  with  him  ?  .You  muft 
reply,  becaufe  they  fay  fo  in  their  Writings :  So  that  the 
ultimate  Motive  of  your  Belief  is  their  Authority,  partly 
deriv'd  to  you  by  their  Books,  partly  by  the  concurring 
Teftimony  of  intervening  Ages;  and  this  will  appear 
more  palpably,  if  we  fuppofe  T^lly  and  the  reft  of  thole 
Authors,  who  tell  us  they  were  particularly  acquainted 
with  C^y^r,  in  reality  never  knew  him,  and  fo  nnpos'd 
on  the  next  Age,  which  propagated  the  Cheat  by  a  con- 
tinual Tradition  down  to  our  Days :  For  flill  in  this  Hy~ 
pothejis  you  would  believe  there  was  fuch  a  Man.as  defara 
Why?  Becaufe  you  have  the  fame  Authority;  fo  that 
their  feeing  dvfar,  or  not  feeing  him,  has  no  Influence 
on  your  Afcent,  their  Word  and  Credit  alone  fways  your 
Judgment. 

But,  Laftly,  I  fay  that  God  hath  been  both  feen  and 
heard,  as  much  as  a  Spirit  can  poflibly  beof  thofe  Senfes, 
and  fo  the  Authority  of  a  God  is  not  only  of  a  farther 
extent  than  that  for  Ca:far,  but  it  alfo  leans  on  Reafon  ; 
and  what  makes  moft  for  our  prefent  Purpofe,  on  the 
Evidence  and  Convidion  of  Senfe. 

'Theo.  This  indeed  is  a  hardy  Undertaking,  and  worthy 
of  fuch  a  Hero  ;  if  you  bring  it  to  a  happy  Conclulion, 
you  will  undermine  Atheifm.,  or  at  leaft  confound  it : 
But  I  doubt  of  the  Succefi',  and  I  fear  your  Enterprize 
will  vaniOi  into  Mifcarriage. 

Eufeh.  For  all  that.  Sir,  I  do  not  defpond  :  Your  pro- 
phetick  Enthufiafm  will  prove  in  the  End  as  fallible  as 
your  Reafons,  and  you  will  be  as  much  out  of  your 
Prognofticatlon,  as  your  Philofophy. 

I  will  not  here  infill  upon  all  the  Appearances  God  has 
been  pleas'd  to  make  in  this  World,  finee  he  created  it : 
I  fingle  out  one,  which  Infidelity  it  fcrif  muft  believe : 
'Tis  recorded  in  the  iQth  Chapter  of  Exodus^  and  hap- 
pen'd  tl'ieeMorithsafter  that  miraculous  Ddiveiy  of  the 

C  c  Chi\- 


3 S 5      The  Gentleman  Infjru^ed. 

Chikiren  of  Ifracl  from  the  Servitude  of  the  Egyptian-. 
I  do  not  pretend  to  impofe  this  Book  on  your  Belief,  as 
the  Word  of  God  ;  you  might   then  perchance  accufe 
me  of  your  own  Faulrj--,  and  fay  I  only  prove  the  TheJ'n  by 
beii;(2;ing  the  Qi_ie(lion  in  Debate  :  Take  it  as  a  Story,  and 
fling  it  not  among  tliC  Fables,  till  you  have  prov'd  it  one. 
When  the  Holt  of  //r^^/,  fays  MfjJ'es,  came  into  the 
Dclart  of  Si/ia^  it  cncamp'd  in  the  fame  place,  jufl  againft 
the  Mountain  ;  tlTen  God  commanded  Mofes  to  tell  the 
People,  that  within  three  Days  he  would  defcend  upon 
the  Mountain,  atid  talk  to  the  Army:  The  third  Day  the 
Clouds  began  togather,Thunder  roar'd, Lightning  flafh'd, 
and  celeflial  Trumpet  itruck  all  the  Army  with  Fear  and  | 
Amazement  ;    then  God  came  down  in  the  Shape  of 
Fire,  and  tlie  whole  Mountain  open'd  a  Scene  of  Terror ; 
the  Army  trembled,  and  all  the  jews  funk  under  the  aw- 
ing Majefty  of  their  Creator;  they  heard  his  Voice,  they 
faw  the  Flames  that  environ'd  him,  they  were  both  daz- 
zled and  frighted  with  Iiis  Glory,  and  fo  deputed  Mofes  to 
know  his  V/ill,  and  to  receive  his  Commands:  He  took 
his  Brother  Aaron^  and  Seventy-two  others,  v/ho  all  faw 
the  God  of  Ifrac! ;   he  trod  on  a  Footftool  compos'd  of 
■Sapphires  like  a  ferene  Sky.     This  is  in  Subftance  the 
Narration  of  A/'^f;,  and  the  Circumftances  of  this  glori- 
ous Apparition  :    It  could  not  be  a  Trick  of  State  to 
fright  the  Mobile  into  Obedience,  no  fubtle  Invention 
contriv'd  in  a  Clofet,  or  rcfolv'd  on  at  a  Counfel-Table ; 
here  was  no  acfting  under  Board,  or  out  of  Sight,  three 
Millions  of  A'len  were  Spedators,  and  that  they  might 
not  afterw^^rds  take  it  for  a  Dream,  or  fufpecSt  it  forlUu- 
fion,  it  continu'd  manv  Days ;  lb  that  they  had  time  for 
Examen  and  Griticifm. 

Now  I  argue  thus ;  there  was,  you  fay,  fuch  a  A'lan 
as  Cffar,  and  you  believe  it,  becaufe  that  Tradition, 
which  conveys  down  to  you  this  Truth,  is  rcfolv'd  into 
Senfe,  which  cannot  be  deceiv'd  ;  but  a  more  univerfal 
Tradition  conveys  down  to  us  the  Being  of  a  God,  and 
this  may  be  alfo  refolv'd  into  Senfe;  therefore  the  Autho- 
rity for  a  God  is  greater  than  that  for  Ctefar  ;  therefore, 
if  upon  Authority  refolv'd  into  Senfe,  you  believe  there 
.  was  fuch  a  Man  as  defar,  upon  a  more  univerfal  Autho- 
rity refolv'd  alfo  into  Senfe,  you  may  and  ought  to  believe 
there  is  a  God, 

Tho, 


71)e  GmrLEMAii  IfiJ^ru^ed.       387 

T'keo.  I  fuppofe,  if  there  be  a  God,  he  is  neither  Smoak 
nor  Fire  ;  if  then  thofe  old  Gentlemen  favv  Smoak  and 
Fire  only,  they  could  not  fee  God  3  nay,  he  is  neither 
made  of  Sapphires,  nor  falls  under  Shape  or  Figure. 

Eufeh.  What  does  this  Anfwer  prove,  but  that  Atheifts 
ufe  their  Reafon  to  abufe  it  ?  You  cry  out  for  Evidence 
of  Senle,  I  fend  you  to  Mofes  for  Satisfaction,  you  read 
a  Piece  of  the  19th  Chapter,  (hut  the  Book,  and  then 
with  great  Ccolnefs  tell  me,  the  Jfraelites  favv  not  God, 
■but  Fire  and  Smoak  ;  and  'tis  truej  but  God  was  under 
that  Fire  and  Smoak;  he  has  no  Organs,  yet  fram'd  a 
Voice ;  and  how  will  you  have  him  manifell  himfelf  to 
Senfe,  but  by  fomething  that  lies  within  the  Sphere  of 
Senfe?  Alas,  Sir,  a  Spirit  is  too  thin  to  entertain  our 
Eyes  or  Ears,  'tis  removed  out  of  their  Ken  ;  the  one 
faftens  on  Colours,  and  the  other  on  Sound,  and  both 
bring  us  Intelligence  from  Matter:  If  fuch  Evidence  will 
not  fatisfy  you,  all  I  can  fay  is,  Atheifts  are  a  ftubborn 
Generation,  and  nothing  but  Hell-Fire  will  render  them 
fupple  ;  we  may  pray  for  them  indeed,  but  can^pt  hope 
to  convert  them. 

But,  Sir,  thofe  Gentlemen  who  convers'd  withCi^^r, 
what  did  they  fee  ? 

Theo.  What  fhould  they  fee  but  Cccfar"^ 

Eufeh.  Was  Cxfar  a  Subltance,  or  a  Complex  of  Ac- 
cidents ? 

-  Theo.  You  have  left  the  Pulpit  to  fit  in  the  Chair  of 
theScorner;  becaufe  you  cannot  reafon  me  into  an  Im- 
pertinence, you  will  try  to  laugh  me  into  one.  Well, 
Cicfar  was  a  Subftance,  as  we  are. 

Eufeb.  I  fuppofe  he  was  neither  Colour  nor  Sound.   ' 

Theo.  That  is  certain. 

Eufeb.  And  pray  what  have  you  ever  feen  but  Colour  j 
or  what  have  you  ever  heard  but  Sound  r  By  your  own 
Confeflion,  therefore,  Cafar  has  neither  been  l-aen  or 
heard:  So  that  we  are  ftill  upon  pretty  equal  Terms.  I 
do  not  fay  this  Comparifon  runs  on  all  tottr,  there  may 
be  found  fome  Difparily,  but  it  will  not  invalidate  the 
Retortion  :  P'or  I  find  no  Difference,  but  that  thoie  Ac- 
cidents Civf.ir  appear'd  under,  v.'ere  natural  to  him^ 
whereas  thole  that  invcfted  the  Divinily  were  not, 

Theo.  Pray  fatisfy  a  Doubt  or  two;  the  Story  is  ftaie, 
and  being  tofs'd  about   three  thoufind  Years,  Drobably 

C;  rz  '  '        loft 


*  m 


a S 8       fhe -Gentleman  Injlni^ed. 

lofl:  nothing.  Again,  this  ftrange  Pailage  might  be  foifted 
into  the  Text  by  a  crafty  Rabbi ;  and  in  Time,  what 
Afilin'mce  have  you  the  Fadl  is  true? 
.  Etifch.  Ftrjl^  The  S'tory  is  ancient ;  true :  But  then  Anti- 
quity and  Truth  are  not  1  hope  incompatible  ;  though  Pi- 
ctures may  milVeprefent  by  Nearnefs  orDiftance,  Hiftory 
has  no  fuch  nice  Point  as  Profpedive:  If  it  had,  Atheifm 
■wou)d  lie  under  no  favourable  Circumftances,  it  would 
have  no  Play  for  it  felf,  no,  not  the  Skirmifh  of  Atoms, 
or  the  World's  eternal  Duration :  For  without  doubt, 
the  Battle  between  thefe  invifible  Legions  was  fought  be- 
fore *^(y/c;'s  Days;  and  then 'tis  pretty  clear,  Eternity  is 
of  a  ftaler  Date  than  E.xadus:  If  therefore  the  Antiquity 
of  the  Story  ftartles  your  Belief,  the  Relation  of  the 
World's  Beginning  by  the  fortuitous  Coition  of  Atoms, 
or  its  independent  Exiftence  from  Eternity  puzzles  mine  : 
'Tis  ridiculous  and  unreafonable  to  except  againft  a  Fadt 
or  Book,  meerly  becaufe  they  are  ancient ;  for  if  the 
Exception  be  receivable,  you  muft  fling  up  all  Right  to 
your  CijjJ'ar^  we  muft  fhake  Hands  with  Livy,  giving  up 
Plutarcij,  and  confine  our  Reading  as  well  as  Credit  to 
new  Almanacks  or  Gazettes. 

Again,  a  Fa6t  that  has  brav*dTime,  that  hasftood  the 
Criticifm  of  four  thoufand  Years,  and  triumph'd  over  all 
the  Examens  of  intervening  Ages,  carries  a  certain  Air  of 
Truth,  that  m,akes  Impreflion  on  the  moft  obdurate  Un- 
derftanding  ;  whereas  upftart  Fads  are  rather  examin'd 
by  Paffion  than  Reafon,  they  are  maintain'd  and  deny'd 
by  oppofite  Interefts;  both  fides  raife  a  Duft,  and  then 
in  the  Dark  'tis  hard  to  diftinguifh  Truth  from  Falfhood- 
The  very  Story  I  mention'd  has  fharpened  the  Pens  and 
exercis'd  the  Wits  of  all  Ages ;  all  thofe  Pagan  Philofo- 
phers  thatentred  the  Lifts  againft  Chriftianity,  firftftruck 
at  the  PentateHch^xhQy  aim'd  at  the  Jewip'Lzvj^  to  wound 
tha.1  o^Jefus  Chrtjl ;  but  their  Attempts  were  baulk'd, 
they  fell  in  the  Enterprize  ;  and  when  they  could  not  dis- 
prove the  Fa6l,  they  blacken'd  it,  and  afcribed  that  to 
the  Power  of  Magick,  which  could  only  be  the  EfFe6l  of 
the  Omnipotent.  You  have  the  Liberty  to  fteer  by 
their  Example,  you  may  father  this  Apparition  on  the 
Devil,  but  then  what  will  you  gain  but  Confufion  ?  For 
if  you  admit  a  Devil  direftly,  you  grant  a  God  by  Illa- 
tion i  a  Devil  and  a  God  are  in  a  manner  Correlatives. 

To 


The  Gentleman  InJlruEied,       385? 

To  the  facoftii;  if  this  Apparition  might  be  foifted  in 
by  a  crafty  Rabbi^  by  the  fame  Reafon  all  thofe  Pall'ages 
in  ancient  Authors,  where  Cafar  is  mention'd,  might  have 
been  foifted  in  alfo  ;  fo  that  if  a  bare  FoOibility  has  Force 
againft  me,  it  has  as  much  againft  you :  Belides,  if  we 
confiderthe  Care  the  Jews  took  to  avoid  fuch  Surprifes, 
we  may  be  morally  affur'd,  no  Corruption,  no  Alta'ati- 
on  could  poflibly  be  contriv'd  :  Twelve  Copies  were  ta- 
ken for  the  Twelve  Tribes,  then  every  Tribe  drew  as 
many  more,  as  there  were  particular  Synagogues  in  each 
Tribe  ;  nor  was  this  Task  committed  to  the  Care  of  pri- 
vate Copies,  but  to  Notaries,  Scribes,  and  Overfeers  ap- 
pointed by  publick  Authority  ;  when  every  Copy  was  re- 
view'd  by  the  whole  Congregation,  'twas  laid  up  in  the 
Treafury  of  the  Temple,  under  divers  Locks,  nor  was  it 
lawful  for  any  without  Commiflion  to  touch  them  :  Be- 
fides,  to  obviate  Falfifications,  the  Laws  of  the  Land  pu- 
nifh'd  with  prefent  Death  thofe  who  fhould  dare  to  add, 
to  diminifh,  alter,  or  corrupt  the  facred  Text:  What  can 
fecure  a  Book  more  againft  Corruption,  than  fo  great  a 
Circumfpedion,  fo  great  a  Caution  ?  Or  c'Sn  you  prove 
that  any  profane  Hiftorian  was  fenced  fo  ftrongly  againft 
the  Aflaults  of  Time  j  or  the  Miftakes  of  Ignorance  or 
Malice? 

To  the  third ;  I  have  all  the  Aflurance  the  FaS  is  true, 
as  the  thing  is  capable  of,  without  a  fpecial  Revelation : 
It  was  not  afted  in  Darknefs,  but  in  the  Sight  of  three 
Millions  of  Men :  This  Spectacle  mixt  with  Terror  and 
Majefty,  did  not  flafh  by,  like  a  Lightning,  but  continu- 
ed many  Days ;  fo  that  the  People  laid  not  under  a  Sur- 
prife,  but  had  time  to  call  all  things  to  a  cool  Exa- 
men :  Again,  this  Apparition  mov'd  them  to  receive  a 
Law  clog'd  with  Ceremonies,  and  fill'd  with  Precepts: 
We  may  eafily  fufpe€t  the  Prefence  of  their  Mafter  ra- 
ther forc'd  them  to  accept  it,  than  their  Inclination,  and 
that  they  fubmitted  to  the  Yoak  with  Regret,  becaufe 
theycaft  it  off  in  a  Moment.  Now  what  three  Millions 
faw  and  heard,  Mofes  committed  to  Writing  ;  then  he 
read  the  whole  Law  to  the  People,  who  fwore  to  obey 
it:  From  thefe  Spe6lators,  partly  by  written  Tradition, 
and  partly  by  oral,  we  have  received  the  Faft ;  fome 
have  defended  the  Truth  of  the  whole  Book  with  their 
Blood,  and  the  moft  learned  Men  of  the  World  with 
C  c  3  their 


3 j^o      'The  GENTLEMAN' Inflru^cd. 

their  Pens.  What  greater  Proof  can,  not  Reafon  only, 
tut  Obllinacy  require  ?  Compare  the  Certainty  you  have 
ofdefur,  with  the  Evidence  I  have  brought  for  th'S,and 
you  will  find  it  inferior:  Three  Millions"  faw  God  and 
heard  him,  not  half  that  Number  had  a  Sight  of  C  afar  ^  in 
all  Probability,  and  as  few  ever  heard  his  Voice':  The 
Authority  for  the  one,  h  at  leall  as  great,  as  that  for  the 
other  :  No  Man  had  any  Intereft  to  deny  dvfar,  a  thou- 
land  to  deny  the  Books  of  Mofes,  that  have  endeavour'd 
to  fnpprefs,  and  confute  them.  Emperors  have  pointed 
the  Pagan  Arguments  with  Swords,  Racks,  and  the  Hor- 
ror of  moil  cruel-  Torments,yet  Chriftians,without  Num- 
ber, have  rather  exposM  their  Bodies  to  the  Flames,  than 
thofe  Books  to  the  Fury  of  Executioners ;  they  chofe  ra- 
ther to  lofe  their  Lives,  than  deny  thofe  Truths  they  con- 
tain'd  :  Now  muft  not  thofe  People  be  pretty  fure  who 
prove  Truths  with  their  Blood  ?  who  defend  Fads,  not 
with  a  Syllogifm,  but  the  Torture  ;  and  pre fs  home  their 
Arguments  with  Suffering  ?  This  way  of  Difpute  per- 
chance may  not  agree  with  your  Temper,  and,  I  be- 
lieve, you  w«uld  rather  deliver  up  your  Cccfar^  than  hang 
for  him  ;  but  however,  you  may  meafure  the  Value  other 
A'len  put  on  their  Lives,  by  the  Price  you  rate  your  own 
at ;  and  you  may  conclude,  they  would  never  part  with 
them  without  good  Reafon,  and  an  urgent  Neceffity  : 
In  fine,  we  may  fafely  prefume  the  Fa6t  is  true,  becaufe 
all  Antiquity  has  thought  fo,  and  'tis  Madnefs  to  oppofe 
our  Paffion,  or  Reafon  againft  the  Reafon  of  the  Chriftian 
World. 

Theo.  You  grant  fome  have  queftion'd  thofe  Books, 
and  by  confequence  the  Fa6l  in  Controverfy  ;  but  no 
Body  has  beeii  fo  abandon'd  of  common  Senfe,  as  to  ftart 
a  Doubt  about  the  Being  of  Cxfar-^  therefore  if  a  Faift 
never  quellion'd  be  more  certain  than  one  that  has  been 
controverted,  in  fpight  of  all  your  Arguments,  'tis  more 
certain  there  was  fuch  a  Man  as  Cafar^  than  that  God  ap- 
pear'd  to  the  People  of  Ifrael. 

Eufeh.  The  queftioning  the  Facl  does  not  take  off 
from  its  Certainty ;  unlefs  the  Motives  on  which  it  ftands 
be  found  doubtful  and  weak  upon  Trial.  Is  the  PofTibi- 
lity  of  Motion  lefs  certain  becaufe  Zeno  deny'd  it  ?  Ig 
this  Principle,  quid  libei  eft  vel  nott  eft,  lefs  evident,  be- 
CTufe  fome  doting  Phiiofophers  abjur'd  it  -'  Are  you  temp- 
ted 


The  Gentleman  Injlrtiped.     3^  i 

ted  to  fay,  Snow  is  black,  hecaufe  a  Fool  affirm'd  it? 
No,  Sir  :  In  fpigiit  of  thole  filly  Coxcombs,  thefe  things 
Hand  ftill  upon  their  antient  Bottom ;  and  will,  till  Men 
pull  out  their  Eyes,  or  turn  off  their  Reafon.  If  the  Be- 
ing of  Cicj'ar  has  never  been  brought  to  Examen,  'tis  be- 
cauie  Mankind  has  no  Interell  in  him  :  Whether  he  was, 
or  was  not,  brings  no  Alteration  into  the  World  ;  things 
go  on  after  the  fame  Method  in  cither  Hypothelis :  And 
though  indeed  he  made  fome  Figure  eighteen  hundred 
Years  ago,  he  makes  none  atprefent,  but  on  the  Stage  : 
But  fliould  a  Gentleman  put  in  Claim  to  fome  Eftate  in 
Vertue  of  a  Grant  from  'Julius  Cafar^  our  Lawyers 
would  not  only  plead  Prefcription  againft  it,  but  prove  by 
the  Statutes  even  oilVilliam  the  Third^  his  famous  Ex- 
pedition into  Britanny  was  the  pure  Invention  of  Recu- 
JaMis,  Enemies  to  the  Government ;  nay,  that  the  very 
Perfon  is  Fiftion,  Impofture  and  Defign.  'Tis  more  cer- 
tain there  was  fuch  a  Man  as  Cafar,  than  that  God  ap- 
pear'd  to  the  People  of  Ifraet. 

A  Gentleman  in  fome  Diforder  fetching  up  a  great  Sigh ; 
Alas,  Sir,  faid  he  to  Eufebiu'sl  What  do  you  mean  ?  Why 
raife  you  Ghofts  from  the  other  World  to  haunt  poor 
Creatures,  and  have  no  Power  to  conjure  them  down  ? 
Muft  our  Torment  make  up  your  Diverfion  ?  Can't 
you  be  pleas'd  unlefs  we  are  frighted  ?  Nor  at  eafe  unlefs 
we  groan  upon  the  Torture  ?  The  moft  happy  Life  de- 
ferves  rather  Pity  than  Envy  ;  and  what  we  can  procure 
by  a  thoufand  Cares,  is  only  to  render  our  felves  lefs  mi- 
ferable:  Why  then  do  Divines  continually  importune  us 
with  ftrange  Difcoveries  of  another  World  ?  Why  damp 
they  our  Pieafure  with  Stories  of  Hell ;  and  terrify  our 
Imagination  with  ghaftly  Landskips  of  a  tormenting  E- 
ternity  ?  Either  prove  thefe  amazing  Tenets  fo  clearly 
that  we  cannot  deny  them,  of  promife  Silence  that  we 
jnay  not  "hear  them.  Your  Arguments  raife  Doubts,  but 
cannot  quell  them  ;  they  alarm  my  Fears,  but  have  not 
the  Power  to  diflipate  them. 

Alas !  Sir,  reply'd  Eufebius,  what  would  the  Silence 
of  Divines  avail,  unlefs  you  could  gag  Nature,  and 
filence  your  Confcience  ?  Tho'  you  flie  from  the  Com- 
merce of  Men  ;  tho'  you  mew  your  felf  up  in  Rocks  and 
Dens,  the  very  Stones  proclaim  his  Being ;  the  Winds 
whifper  it,  and  Solitude  protefts  you  are  within  God's 
C  c  4  Domi- 


3p2      The  Gentle m" AN  InfruBed, 

Dominion.  Omnes  homines  vident  Deum  j  the  very  Blind 
lee  him,  and  the  Deaf  hear  him. 

'Tis  lirange,  anfwer'd  the  Gentleman,  that  fo  many 
flafhing  Wits  in  the  Court  and  Town  fhould  overlook 
fo  long  this  Divinitv,  which  rtands  before  them.  'Muft 
they  put  out  their  Eyes  to  fee  him;  or  turn  Fools  to  find; 
him  ? 

I  doubt  not,  faid  Eufebius,  but  White-Hall  and  Kev- 
_/7;7^fc«  are  well  ftock'd  with  Wits.  I  grant  the  Town 
is  not  unprovided  -,  but  then  I  maintain  their  Blind nefs 
proves  a  God,  and  that  Infidelity  is  a  juft  Punifhment  of 
their  Crimes.  For  make  a  Survey  of  all  thofe  Wits,  and 
you  will  find  them  not  only  without  Grace,  but  almoft 
without  Confcience.  So  foon  as  their  Reafon  bloom'd, 
Ihey  proftituted  their  Innocence,  and  fhew'd  they  were 
Men  by  acting  like  Devils.  As  Alexander  counted  the 
Battles  he  fought  by  the  Wounds  he  receiv'd  ;  fo  thefe 
may  calculate  up  the  Moments  of  their  Lives  by  the 
Enormities  they  commit :  Every  A6lion  affronts  Nature, 
and  cries  aloud  for  Vengeance.  If  therefore  there  be  an 
Author  of  Nature,  is  it  not  juft  he  fliould  take  the  Caufe 
of  Nature  in  Hand,  and  revenge  the  Injury  on  thofe  that 
did  it  ?  And  what  more  terrible  Revenge  can  he  take, 
than  to  ftrike  thofe  blafphemous  Salmoneans^  thofe  im- 
pure Sardanapalui's  as  he  did  the  Sodomites^  with  the  Spi- 
rit of  Blindnefs?  PercztJJit  eos  coecitate  a  minimo  nfque  ad 
maximum:  Then  to  withdraw  the  Light  of  his  divine 
Face  from  their  Eyes,  and  fo  to  permit  them  to  walk  in 
Darknefs  and  Ignorance,  and  then  only  to  acknowledge 
their  Errors,  when  they  feel  the  Punifhment  of  their. 
Crimes .? 

Now  that  their  Infidelity  cannot  proceed  either  from 
want  of  Motives,  or  of  Wit,  'tis  pretty  evident.  They 
have  the  Confent  of  Mankind,  id  efi^  ofNature:  They 
hive  the  Confeflion  of  their  Confciences  froj?i  within, 
the  Teilimony  of  every  Creature  from  without.  Thefe 
glare  fuch  a  Light  on  the  moft  ftupid  Underftanding, 
that  they  cannot  refift  the  Force  of  the  Imprellion.  Your 
Firjl-rate  Wits  of  the  Court  examine,  you  fay,  all  thofe 
Arguments;  thev  contemplate  the  great  World,  and  the 
lefs ;  they  turnrp  every  S  one,  ranfack  every  Corner  of 
the  Univerle,  wichout  being  able  to  dilcover  any  Traces 
of  a  Deity.  What  can  you  infer,  but  that  there  is  a  God 
'  abQvej 


'The  Gentleman  InJIruBed       3^3 

above,  who  takes  an  Inventory  of  the  Anions  of  the 
Children  of  Men,  who  punifhes  their  Rapines,  their  Im- 
purities and  Blafphemieshere  by  confounding  their  Judg- 
ments, who  cafts  fuch  a  Gloom  over  their  Underftand- 
ings,  that  they  can't  fee  what  Children  dilcerni  that  they 
grope  in  Darknefs,  whilft  they  walk  in  Light,  and  call  out 
for  Proofs  of  his  Being,  whilft  they  are  lurrounded,  and 
almoft  opprel's'd  with  Demonftrations  ?  In  a  Word,  Sir, 
do  not  conclude  there  is  no  God,  becaufe  the  topping  Ge- 
nius's of  the  Court  do  not  fee  him  ;  fay  rather  there  is 
one,  becaufe  they  do  not  fee  what  all  the  World,  both 
civiliz'd  and  unciviliz'd,  fee  and  adore  ;  lay  their  Igno- 
rance is  a  juft  Punifhment  of  their  Icandalous  and  pro- 
voking Offences,  and  that  the  only  way  left  thefe  aban- 
don'd  Debauchees  to  come  to  the  Knowledge  of  a  God, 
is  to  take  off  the  Curfe  by  flying  to  Repentance. 

He  was  going  on,  but  Theumachus  interrupted  him  ; 
'tis  tirpe,  faid  he,  to  foujid  a  Retreat,  we  have  been  this 
Morning  on  hot  Service;  after  fome  Civilities  Eufebius 
left  the  Company,  and  the  next  Day  took  up  again  the 
Confererice,  which  continu'd  fome  Days. 


DIALOGUE    XVI. 

'Xhefecond  I' roof  drawn  from  the  Exijlence  oftheU^orldy 
"jjhich  by  tinq^uefitonahle  Authority  isjhewn  to  have  been 
made. 

Eufeb.T  Have  prov'd  the  Exiftence  of  a  God  from  the 
*■  innate  Charadlers  of  his  Being,  ftamp'd  on  the 
Hearts  of  Men  ;  I  come  now  to  a  fecond  Proof,  which  he 
has  laid  before  our  Eyes,  that  he  might  convince  our 
Senfes  as  well  as  our  Reafon,  and  manifeft  himfelf  by 
his  Works  to  the  incredulous,  feeing  he  cannot  appear  in 
Perfon.  We  fee  a  moft  ftately  Fabrick  call'd  the  World, 
vaft  in  Extent,  and  admirable  for  Beauty:  The  Earth  is 
llocl^'d  with  innumerable  Beafts,  the  Air  with  Birds,  the 
Sea*  with  Fifhes  ;  fome  feem  made  meerly  for  Man's 
Profit,  others  for  his  Pleafure,  and  many  for  Oftentation. 
The  Firmament  glitters  with  a  thoufand  Luminaries, 
their  Bulk  vies  with  their  Luftre,  and  their  Beauty  with 
'    "  '  both  : 


35»4     ^^^  Gentleman  Injlru^ed. 

both :  The  Sun  dazzles  us  with  his  Glory,  and  over- powers 
our  feeble  Eyes  with  an  Excels  of  Majefty ;  it's  the  grand 
Arbitrator  of  Time;  it  divides  Moments  in  to  Ages,  Years, 
Months  and  Days,  it  regulates  Seafons,  prefcribes  bounds 
to  Winter,  and  limits  to  Summer,  and  by  its  Accefs  and 
Recefs  makes  'em.  The  Moon  with  herbright  Legions  of 
Stars,  that  fpangle  the  Firmaments,  gilds  Darknefs,  and 
filvers  over  thole  Shades  of  Horror,  and  fo  turns  Night 
it  felf  into  a  Theatre  of  Pleafure:  But  what  raifes  my 
Amazement  is,  that  this  gigantick  Machine  is  compos'd 
of  almoft  infinite  Parts ;  yet  all  are  fo  artificially  con- 
triv'd,  that  one  fits  exactly  the  other ;  nay,  they  are  en- 
uow'd  with  contrary  inclinations,  they  are  always  at  va- 
riance, they  draw  into  the  Field  one  againft  the  other, 
yet  thole  particular  Feuds  hinder  not  an  univcrfal  Peace, 
nor  thole  private  Difcords  a  general  Harmony.  Now, 
Sir,  I  afk  you  from  whence  this  glorious  Piece  of  Archie 
tedturecame?  Who  laid  the  Fuundations  of  the  Earth  ? 
Who  rais'd  the  towring  Mountains,  and  hung  thofe  vaft 
refplendent  Bodies  of  the  Sun,  Moon,  and  Stars  in  thofe 
liquid  Regions  above?  Who  azur'd  the  Firmament? 
Who  enamel'd  the  Meadows  with  a  thoufand  different 
Flowers,  that  embalm  the  Air,  ravifh  the  Sky,  and  per- 
fume the  Smell  ? 

Theo.  Indeed  the  World  is  a  lovely  Fabrick,  and  the 
Contrivance  feems  admirable,  fo  that  fome  have  father'd 
the  Work  upon  an  infinite  Wifdom  :  I  confefs  this  Opi- 
nion is  more  plaufible  than  true ;  it  goes  down  with  the 
unthinking  Vulgar,  yet  Men  who  hate  to  take  things  up- 
on Truft,  who  flick  not  on  outward  Appearances,  but 
follovi^  Effedls  up  to  their  Origin,  are  of  a  difterent  Sen- 
timent. 

Some  fay  it  caus'd  it  felf;  but,  methinks,  this  is  a 
Piece  of  the  rudeft  Nonfenfe  that  ever  was  invented,  it 
makes  a  thing  adt  before  it  was,  and  gives  a  Being  before 
it  had  any  ;  nay,  it  fuppofes  a  thing  to  be,  and  not  to 
be,  the  fame  Inftant ;  and  fo  allows  of  a  Contradiction, 
which  is  to  out-fhoot  Abfurdity  it  felf. 

Others  are  inclin'd  to  Epicurpis^s  and  Dewocritus^s  Sy- 
ftem  ;  thefe  lay  the  Matter  is  eternal,  which  having  an 
infinite  Space  to  fupport  it,  began  to  fcour  about,  and 
after  a  thouland  Encounters  by  a  moft  happy  Cafualty, 
chop'd  upon  this  re2;ular  Frame :  Indeed  a  Man  nrult  be 

of 


^e  Gentleman  Injru0ed,     3^5 

Cjf  a  very  credulous  Complexion,  that  can  rwallow  this 
Folly;  'tis  to  lole  time  to  enter  upon  a  Contuiation : 
Methinks,  fometimes  we  might  lee  Books  compos'd  by 
Chance,  as  well  as  this  great  Folio  of  the  World  ;  and 
Piftures  alio  may  ftart  up  by  fprinkling  the  Colours  at 
random. 

Others,  in  fine,  maintii\'n  the  World  is  eternal  a  fe, 
without  any  other  Caufe  but  its  own  Nature;  'tis  a  ne- 
ceflary  Being,  and  independent ;  and  as  it  had  no  Begin- 
nino-,  foit  can  never  have  an  End:  'Tis  in  vain  to  run 
after  a  Caufe  dillinct  from  its  own  Nature,  it  is  its  own 
Architecftand  Work,  theone  is  the  fame  with  the  other. 
To  thefe  Philofophers  I  give  my  Approbation,  this  is  my 
Sentiment ;  you  have  liberty  to  bring  your  Exceptions 
againft  it. 

Eufeb.  I  fay  the  World  was  made  in  Time,  an  infinite 
Being  drew  it  out  of  the  State  of  pure  Poffibility,  and 
plac'd  it  in  that  of  Aftuality  :  His  Power  ftretch'd  out 
the  Heavens,  and  fpread  a  Canopy  of  Azure,  embroi- 
dered with  Stars,  over  the  Earth  :  Wifdom  contnv'd  the 
Parts,  and  with  a  ftupen^ious  Artifice  put  them  together: 
His  Goodnefs  prompted  him  to  communicate  himfelf  to 
a  Multitude  of  Creatures ;  his  Prudence  aiark'd  out  the 
Employment  of  every  Part  of  the  Creation  ;  it  affign'd 
them  their  Work,  and  appointed  them  their  Stations. 
Suppofing  there  was  a  God,  this  Account  would  be  very 
reafonable,  for  this  great  Work  would  not  exceed  the 
Skill  of  the  Workman,  infinite  in  Wifdom,  Power  and 
Goodnefs. 

Now  the  prefent  Controverfy  can  be  decided  only  by 
•tv^'o  Ways ;  cither  by  Authority  or  Reafon.  If  therefore 
Authority  Hands  by  me,  and  not  at  all  for  you  ;  if  folid 
Reafon  takes  my  Side,  and  wholly  abandons  yours;  and 
jf  befides  you  are  not  only  deferted  by  Reafon,  but  prefs'd 
by  thofe  very  Difficulties,  or  greater,  you  oppugn  me 
with,  I  hope  you  will  be  fo  juft  to  Reafon  and  your  felf, 
as  to  come  over  to  Truth,  and  to  confefs  and  adore  that 
God  you  now  deny.  Let  me  therefore  afk  you,  is  your 
own  Opinion  back'd  with  Authority  ? 

Theo.  I  confefs  the  Authority  is  not  full  nor  cogent, 
yet  all  Ages  have  furnifh'd  Men,  who  Hood  up  for  the 
World's  Eternity  :  Neither  indeed  ought  we  to  put  the 
Illue  of  the  Caufe  upon  Authority,  in  fuch  an  enrilefs 

Series 


^p6    The  Gentleman  InJInuied^ 

Series  of  Ages,  many  unforefeen  and  unavoidable  Acci- 
dents may  eafily  have  interrupted  the  Courfe  of  Tradi- 
tion, as  Plagues  and  Inundations,  which  without  doubt 
have  more  than  once  almoft  depeopled  the  World,  and 
turn'd  it  into  a  Solitude :  Befides,  want  of  Tradition  for 
the  World's  Eternity  rather  proves  it  was  eternal  than- 
not :  For  if  the  World  was  always  peopled,  there  could 
be  no  common  Spring  from  whence  the  Tradition  fhould 
hrlt  rife,  and  then  fpread  over  the  Univerfe. 

Eufeb.  I  grant  the  World's  Eternity  may  have  found 
Abetters  in  mod  Ages,  but  their  Authority  Is  infuffici- 
ent;  there  were  a  certain  kind  of  Fanatick  Philofophers 
like  our  Atheifts,  who  liv'd  on  Fancy,  and  open'd  by 
Imagination ;  they  examin'd  Faifis  by  Caprice,  and  found- 
ed their  Tenets  on  meer  Conje6lures,  but  yet  their  Opi- 
nion favours  not  yours.  For  tho'  Arijlotle  was  a  great 
Stickler  for  the  World's  Eternity,  and,  as  he  confel]es,the 
firftofall  Philofophers  that  broach'd  the  Whim  ;  yet  he 
acknowledges  it  was  made  by  God,  and  flowed  from  his 
Power,  as  Light  from  the  Sun  ;  yet  this  Hypothefis  feem'd 
fo  oppofite  to  the  receiv'd  Opinipn  of  all  Greece,  that  an 
Adion  of  Blafphemy  was  broughtinagainfthim,  Conimh. 
I.  8.  Phyfic.  c.  2.  quod  unum  Deum  docuijfet  contra  Pa- 
trios  ritus  de  [do lis  ^  multitudine  Deorum^  ^  quod  Mun- 
<ium  fempftenium  enuncinffet,  quern  initio  Temporis  con~ 
ditum  tola  Graciaputabat :  And  the  Epicureans  who  held 
the  Matter  eternal,  thought  it  far  more  confonant  to  Rea- 
fon,  to  leave  the  rare  Contrivance  and  Difpofition  of  the 
World  to  Chance,  which  finifh'd  and  put  the  lall  Hand 
to  this  admirable  Architedlure  in  Time,  than  to  afcribe 
its  Origin  to  any  inherent  Independencyj 

Si  »uUa  fuit  Genitalis  Origo 
Terr  arum  ^  Coeli,  femperq;  .eternafuere^ 
Curfupra  bellum  Thebanum  l^  fun  era  Trojte 
Non  alias  alii  quoq\  res  cecinere  Poetce. 

Thus  an  Epicurean  Poet. 

And  I  think  I  may  defy  you  to  produce  one  ancient  Phi- 
lofopher,  one  ManofSenfc  that  ever  durft  take  upon  him 
the  Defence  of  your  Tbefis ;  and  yet  we  fcarce  find  any 
other  Abfurdity  without  an  Advocate  ;  but  to  clap  Inde- 
pendency on  a  Being,  whofe  Perfe<ftions  are  coniin'd,feems 

too 


j'he  Gentleman  In/ini0ed,     35)7 

toomonftrous  an  Enterprize  to  wife  Men,  fo  contrary 
to  the  firft  Principles  of  Reafon,  that  they  durft  not  un- 
dertake it.  You  do  therefore  well  to  put  your  Caufe 
upon  Reafon,  for  you  muft  lofe  it,  if  you  ftand  to  the 
Verdidt  of  Tradition:  Indeed,  as  you  fay,  if  the  World 
had  been  eternal,  the  Memory  of  its  Eternity  might 
have  been  buried  in  an  endlefs  Series  of  Revolutions 
and  SuccelTors;  but  what  does  this  prove?  Only  what 
might  have  happen'd,  not  what  really  is  to  come  to 
pafs. 

What  you  fay  is  true,  -viz.  that  if  the  World  was  al- 
ways peopled,  there  could  not  poflibly  be  any  common 
Spring  from  whence  the  Tradition  fhould  firft  rife,  and 
therefore  no  Tradition  for  the  World's  Eternity  can  be 
expedled ;  this,  I  fay,  tho'  luppos'd  true,  can  avail  you 
nothing againft  a  pofitive  Tradition  that  the  World  was 
mvidt  and  had  a  Beginning. 

T'hio.  And  how  do  you  make  it  out? 

Enfeb.  As  pad  Matters  of  Fact  are  made  out,  viz.  by 
Hiftory  :  And  in  the  firll  place  /Iriflotle  quoted  above^ 
does  acknowledge  that  the  moft  ancient  Writers  held  the 
World  was  made,  and  thai:  Tradition  did  confirm  reo- 
plein  the  Perfuafion,  that  God  made  all  Things:  The 
Scythians  and  EgypiiaKs  were  of  this  Opinion,  the  Indians 
and  Phxmcians  concurred  with  them,  to  fay  nothing  of 
the  Grecians  who  look'd  upon  the  contrary  Opinion  as 
Innovation,  nay,  and  a  kind  of  Herefy  or  Blafphemy. 

And  if  we  take  a  turn  into  America,  if  we  enter  the 
Forefts  and  Wildernefles  of  this  vaft  Region,  we  fhali 
find  the  Peruvians  and  other  Barbaritws  of  this  Sentiment ; 
indeed  fome  had  very  extravagant  Notions  of  the  Crea- 
tion, but  what  can  be  expected  from  Men  half  turn'd 
Beafts,  but  Extravagance?  Yet  they  concurred  with  us  ia 
this,  that  God  fram'dand  modelled  the  World. 

Secondly y  The  firft  Hillorian,  and  asauthentickasever 
writ,  gives  a  long  Account  of  the  World's  Beginning  in 
Genefis.  I  do  not  intend  to  put  this  Book  upon  you  as 
divinely  infpir'd,  give  it  but  the  Credit  of  a  Htjlory^  this 
I  only  afk,  and  this  you  cannot  refufe  with  Juftice,  fee- 
ing he  has  been  eftcem'd  by  the  Jews  and  Chrijlians, 
not  only  as  a  Divine  Hiftorian  and  Legiflalor,  but  alfo  as 
it-Propbet. 

Now 


35>$        'fhe  Gentleman  lnftru5fisd(. 

Now  fuppofing  the  World  was  created,  'tis  natural 
to  think  the  firft  Man  would  leave  his  Children,  and 
thole  to  their  Pofterity  a  Tradition  of  fo  remarkable  a 
Tran^^6liow  \  nor  could  this  Conveyance  be  hard,  efpe- 
cially  when  in  the  World's  Non-agCj  three  A'len  aloncj 
Methnjltlem,  Shem,  and  Ifaac  could  carry  on  a  Tradition 
from  the  World's  Creation  almoft  to  the  Ifraelites  De- 
Icent  into  i^gyt>t. 

Again,  fuppofing  fuch  a  Tradition,  it  might  be  expeft- 
ed  the  firft  Writers  fliould  put  it  on  Record.  Now,  this 
has  happened ;  Mofes  the  firft  Hiftoriographer  has  defend- 
ed to  Particulars;  and  as  his  Narration  is  reafonable,  fo 
withal  it  carries  a  certain  Simplicity  that  perfuades.  Be- 
rofus^  Orpkcus,  Hornet  and  Tr ifm eg iji u s  foWow'd  Mofes  in 
Age,  as  alfo  in  the  Delivery  of  the  World's  Beginning  ; 
What  they  receiv'd  from  their  Predecellbrs,  they  handed 
down  to  their  Succed'ors,  and  by  this  means  the  Opinion 
that  the  World  had  a  Beginning  carries  all  before  it; 
The  whole  Body  of  Chriftians  believe  it,  the  Ma/:>ome- 
tans  and  Jevjs^  though  they  vary  from  us  in  other  Points, 
agr^withusin  this;  and  all  Nations  whoever  acknow- 
ledged a  God,  own  he  was  the  Contriver  of  this  great 
Mafter- Piece  of  Power  andWifdom. 

Now  to  go  againft  the  Tide  of  Tradition,  fo  ancient, 
fo  univerfal,  and  withal  fo  rational,  upon  no  other 
Ground  but  meer  Conjedlures,  or  bare  Poflibilities,  ib 
Raflinefs  to  excefs,  and  the  very  height  of  Folly ;  'tis  to 
prefer  the  Rcafon  of  one  Man  before  that  of  all  Alan- 
kind,  to  brand  his  whole  Species  with  the  Infamy  of  a 
fond  Credulity,  and  to  pafs  Judgment  upon  them,  that 
they  are  throughly  qualified  for  Bethlem. 

But  again,  if  fo  full  a  Report  will  not  fatisfy  you, 
you  niuft  pen  up  your  Knowledge  in  a  narrow  part  of 
the  World,  you  mult  forfvvear  not  only  all  Acquaintance 
with  paft  A6lions,  but  even  with  remote ;  and  what  is 
worfe,  you  muft  fail  below  that  Station  a  Creature  en- 
dued with  Reafon  ought  to  keep ;  For  when  Reafon 
gives  me  as  great  a  Satisfaftion  about  the  Being,  or  not 
Being  of  a  Fail,  as  Reafon  requires,  'tis  Imprudence  to 
doubt :  And  a  Man  muft  take  Pleafure  to  fret  and  dif- 
obligehisUnderftanding,  that  will  not  acquiefce  to  fuch 
an  Evidence.  Now  our  prefent  Controverfy  is  a  paft 
Matter  of  Fadt:  We  have  put  it  upon  WitneiTes:  Anti-, 

quity 


'the  Gentleman  Infiru^eL      ^^p 

quity  ftands  for  me  ;  and  all  Nations  agree  in  the  Main, 
though  they  vary  in  Ibme  Circumftances.  To  thefe  con- 
current Teftimonies  you  oppole  naked  Surmifes,  or  pure 
Poflibilities;  orelfe  yowfuhpocna  a  Braceor  two  of  Atheifts, 
or  a  Pack  of  African  and  American  Brutes,  who  are 
ic.irce  able  to  underftand^  the  very  State  of  the  Queftion, 
and  know  as  little  of  paft  Tranfadlions  as  of  thofe  that 
are  to  come.  I  now  appeal  to  your  own  Judgment,  whe- 
ther a  full  Tradition  be  not  as  good  a  Convidion,  that 
the  World  had  a  Beginning,  as  the  Nature  of  a  thing 
paft  requires?  And  whether  your  Counter- Witnefles, 
whodepofe  onConjedure,  would  biafs  an  upright  Judge 
in  any  Court  of  Judicature,  againft  a  Cloud  of  others 
Superior  both  in  Wifdom  and  Probity. 

Bcndes,  {  add  another  Circumftance  very  material, 
and  which  deferves   a  little  Refle{5tion.     If  the  World 
had  been  made  in  Time,  by  the  Power  and  Wifdom  of 
God,  we  could  not  expedl  a  more  full  Tradition  of  its 
Beginning  than  we  have :  Therefore  on  this  very  Ac- 
count we  have  all  the  Reafon  to  prefume  it  had  a  Begin- 
ning.    I  prove  it  thus ;  tirft^  It  cannot  be  imagin'd,  but 
fome  would  ftand  up  againft  it.     Mens  Judgments  are 
as  various  as  their  Faces,  and  their  Underftandings  feem 
no  lefs  bizar  than  their  Humours.     Some  deny   things, 
becaufe  every  one  believes  them.     They  love  Singularity 
in  Opinion,  as  well  as  in  Modes,  and  Vv'ill  no  more  en- 
dure a  Rival  in  Thinking,  than  in  their  Amours.  Others 
are  of  a  martial  Complexion,  they  love  to  fend  their 
Brain  upon  Expeditions,  and  are  temerarious  enough  to 
attack  Demonftration.     They  follow  Truth,  as  Con- 
ftables  do  Malefadors,  to  arreft  it,  and  rail  againft  it,  as 
the  young  Athenian  did  againft  Alcibiades^  becaufe  every 
one  applauded  him  ;  they  idolize  Wit,  but  are  ignorant 
of  its  Definition,  and  fo,  like  Dray-men,  place  it  in  clafli- 
ing  and  contradiding.     Others  fteer  their  Judgments  by 
the  Compafs  of  Intereft :  One  would  think  their  Under- 
ftandings had  truck'd  Natures  with  the  Will,  and  that  it 
had  remov'd  its  Lodgings  from  the  Head  to  the  Heart. 
Whatever  flatters  thefe  Mens  Vanity,  or  pampers  their 
Inclinations,  is  always  true;  but  if  it  frowns  upon  their 
Paflions,  or  checks  their  Liberty,  it  muft  be  falfe.   Hence 
it  comes  that  thofe  Truths  that  even  flafh  Conviftion, 
'  aiid  captivate  Reafon,  the  very  Moment  they  are  under- 

ftood 


40 o       'The  Gentleman  Ihjlru^edi 

flood,  oftentimes  find  Oppofition,  and  are  ftigmatiz'd 
with  Fallacy,  becaufe  too  clear  tobeprov'd.  One  would 
think  that  the  Partis  lefs  than  the  Whole  is  pretty  plainj 
and  that  a  Man  muft  have  a  flender  Portion  of  Wit,  not 
to  conceive  it;  yet  a  late  Mathematician  call'd  it  inQue- 
ftion,  degraded  it  from  the  Quality  of  a  Principle,  and 
threw  it  amongft  the  Fry  of  vulgar  Errors.  'Tisimpofli- 
ble  to  frame  a  Propolitionmore  clear  than  this,  It's  Im- 
pojfible  thejamepuuld  both  be,  and  not  be  at  the  fame  Time* 
Yet  if  we  believe //r.y^o//^,  fome  Philofophers  deny  itj 
and  that  no  Folly  might  want  a  Patron,  as  I  have  faid  al- 
ready, Zeno  would  not  admit  Motion.  Now  if  Men  dif- 
believefirft  Principles,  if  they  reje6l  Truth  when  it  ap- 
pears in  d'tjhabile^  andxoverlook  it  when  it  (lands  before 
thern ;  what  Wonder  they  don't  fee  it  at  a  Diftance, 
when  it  appears  by  Proxy,  and  is  conveyed  only  to  us 
by  Tradition  \  If  we  will  not  credit  our  own  Eyes,  we 
may  very  well  ilight  Authority,  for  certainly  they  are  able 
to  give  a  more  exa6t  Account  of  Things,  than  Traditi- 
on :  They  difcover  Truth  in  Perfon  ;  we  receive  not 
their  Intelligence  at  fecond-hand,  but  fee  Objedls  in 
their  proper  Colours,  without  Mafl<:  or  Varnifh.  Tho' 
therefore  the  World  was  made,  we  could  not  expe6l 
(without  a  Miracle)  a  more  univerfal  Tradition,  thanr 
we  have  of  its  Beginning. 

Secondly,  Nor  ought  the  fabulous  OpinioKS  about  the 
Creation  to  prejudice  the  Truth  of  the  Fa£l ;  forfuppofing 
it  true,  thofe  would  have  fprung  neceflarily  from  the  grois 
Ignorance  of  Barbarians:  When  a  Story  has  pad  through 
two  or  three  Hands,  how  unlike  is  it  to  the  Original  ? 
Every  one  fhapes  it  to  his  own  Inclination ;  Some  Cir- 
cumftances  are  loft,  others  added;  and  nothing  remains, 
but  the  EiTential:  If  a  Truth  be  difguifed  in  a  Day,  we 
muft  not  wonder  it  fufFers  Alteration  in  the  Space  of  'ivx. 
thoufand  Years ;  efpecially  among  thofe  Nations  who  are 
ignorant  of  Letters,  who  are  bred  in  Ignorance,  and  live 
in  Brutality,  who  know  no  more  of  Time  paft,  than 
of  foreign  Countries,  and  take  as  little  Pains  to  cultivate 
their  Underftanding,  as  their  Soil. 

Theo.  But  by  your  leave  I  could  fingle  you  out  fome 
Traditions  of  a  very  ancient  Date,  and  of  far  lefs  Con- 
fequence  than  the  World's  Creation,  that  pafs  current  . 
without  Oppofition  j    for  Example,  who  ever  denied 

there 


the  Gentleman  InJiniBed,    40 i 

there  were  fuch  Men  as  Alexander  or  Cxfar  ?  Now  it  the 
World  had  a  Beginning,  why  fhould  not  the  A4eniory  of 
io  v/onderful  a  Fact  remain  as  univerfal  as  that  of  Ccefar 
or  Alexander  ? 

Etifeb.  Ftrjl^  If  we  went  to  polUng,  I  beheve  thofe 
who  itand  for  the  World's  Creation  would  carry  it,  for 
this  is  acknowledged  by  a  hundred  Nations  that  nevet 
heard  of  thofe  two  Princes. 

Secondly^  If  none  have  endeavoured  to  out-face  the 
World,  that  there  never  were  fjch  Men,  'tis  becaul'e  the 
Conteft  was  too  iniignificant ;  and  bciides^  which  way 
fhould  a  Man  fetupon  the  Enterprize?  He  could  expedt 
no  Relief  from  Reafon.  For  alas  !  All  the  realbn  in  the 
World  can  never  fhew  they  were,  or  were  not  :  He 
could  therefore  only  have  Recourfe  to  Tradition,  and 
where  could  he  find  any  Pretence  to  fet  on  foot  fo  much 
as  an  innuendo  they  never  were  ;  unlefs  he  could  hit  up- 
on an  Expedient  to  feize  all  the  Records,  that  mention 
thofe  Emperors,  and  then  condemn  them  to  the  Fire  ? 
But  it  was  thelntereil  of  all  Atheiils  to  deny  the  World 
ever  had  a  Beginning.  Nay,  'twas  abfolutely  impoffible 
for  them  to  admit  Creation,  and  rejeS  a  Creator ;  and 
then  that  Principle,  ex  mh'ilo  nihil fit^  was  a  great  Sup- 
port, not  only  to  Atheiils,  but  Philoibphers ;  and  no 
doubt,  if  that  Principle  be  true,  the  Matter  at  lealt  may- 
be eternal.  Here  you  fee  that  Intereft  might  move  fome, 
and  apparent  Reafon  others,  to  ftand  for  the  World's 
Eternity,  but  neither  could  invite  a  Man  to  queftion  ei- 
ther Alexander  or  Cafar. 

To  fum  up  therefore  the  Force  of  my  Argument  in 
fhort :  I  fay,  our  Controverfy  muft  be  tried  either  by 
Teltimony  or  Reafon,  the  firft  is  the  proper  Court  for 
pronouncing  upon  ancient  Fadts,  and  the  moft  uncorrupt 
Tribunal.  I  have  prov'd  that  the  Torrent  of  Tradition 
runs  for  me ;  that  the  moft  antient  Writers,  as  well  as 
the  molt  recent ;  the  moft  learn'd,  as  well  as  the  moft 
pious;  the  moft polifh'd  Nations,  with  the  moft  incult, 
witnefs  forme.  Whereas  none  but  a  Pack  of  Atheifts, 
or  fome  wild  Barbarians,  or  at  moft  a  Brace  of  wliimli- 
cal  Philofophers,  famous  for  nothing  but  Singularity, 
dare  appear  in  your  Defence.  If  fuch  an  Evidence  be 
not  fufficient  to  prove  a  Fad:,  pray  tell  me  what  is  ?  If 
you  require  more,  I  muft'Conclude  you  areunreafonable  ; 

D  d  bixauie 


402      ^he  Gentleman  In  jimmied. 

becaufe  you  call  for  a  greater  Conviftion  than  the  Sub- 
jed:  will  bear,  or  can  be  expelled  without  Miracle;  and 
I  fuppofe  Miracles  would  as  little  befriend  your  Caufe  as 
Tradition. 


DIALOGUE    XVII. 

The  Atheijl  fuppojing  the  World's  Eternity^  fuppofes  an  in- 
finite Seriei  of  Generations  pojfible  ;  now  it  being  ten 
times  more  probable^  that  fuch  a  Series  is  impojjible^  he 
muji  be  guilty  of  the  higheji  hnprudence  to  venture  his 
Soul  upon  fuch  an  Uncertainty. 

'T'  H  E  World,  you  fay,  was  pcjfihle  ab  ccterno  a  fey 
•*•  therefore /V  was  ab  aterno  a  fe.  I  affirm  it  was  not 
pojfible  ab  iVterno  a  fe  \  therefore  it  was  not  ab  aterno  a  fe. 
Our  Pofitions  are  contradi6lory,  and  fo  are  our  Proofs; 
for  you  barely  aflert  and  prove  Nothing,  and  I  will  prove 
byReafon  \vhat  I  aflert. 

Theo.  Before  you  proceed,  let  me  defire  you  not  to 
meddle  with  I»fimtum.  Though  you  raife  a  hundred  Bat- 
teries againft  infinite  Succeffions,  you'll  only  go  off  with 
Laboui  and  Dillippointment.  Your  Philoiuphers  have 
undertaken  my  Defence  on  that  Side,  and  I  know  not 
how  you'll  llorm  their  Reafons,  or  level  their  Authority. 
Yet,  till  this  be  done,  there's  no  coming  at  me:  There- 
fore I  cou'nlel  you  not  to  raife  your  Battery  on  that  Side. 

Enfch.  I  confefs  tlie  Pride  of  fome  Philofophers,  arxi 
the  litigious  Humours  of  others,  have  been  kind  to  Athe- 
,  ills :  For  in  Reality,  Philofophy  is  no  more  a  Science, 
but  an  Art  of  Jugling.  Philofophers  queft  more  after 
new  Opinions  than  Tj'uth  :  And  he  is  the  Man,  not 
that  fearchesinto  the  Bowels  of  Nature,  but  that  dfelFes 
and  tricks  up  Notions  in  the  beft  Pofture  of  Defence  a- 
gainft  Oppolers ;  and  if  he  can  handfomely  embroil  a  Que- 
ftion,  or  dares  offer  Words  for  a  folid  Anfwer,  or  im- 
peach Truth  of  Sophiftry,  he  deferves  to  be  pointed  at ; 
Digito  njQ^/flrari  ^  dicitur  hie  e/i.  Thus  fome  have  ailert- 
ed  the  Poffibility  of  an  Infinity  a(fiu,  in  fpite  of  receiv'd 
Principles  that  oppofe  it.  They  fhroud  the  Weaknefs  of 
their  Reafons  under  the  Obfcurity  of  the  Thejis ;  and 

folve 


^he  Gentleman  InJIraBed,    40  j 

fblve  Difficulties  by  ftarting  greater.  You  lay  hold  on 
their  Vanity  to  fupport  your  Hyfothefis^  and  think  you 
have  made  it  clear  beyond  Debate,  by  telling  us  Philofo- 
phers  hold  the  Eternity  of  the  World  poflible  :  But  under 
Favour,  though  their  Authority  may  ftave  off  fome  Argu- 
ments from  you,  it  cannot  others :  For  though  they  hold 
God  would  create  the  World  ab  atemo,  they  deny  it 
could  be  a  fe.  If  therefore  in  one  Ofe  you  defer  fome- 
thing  to  their  Authority,  be  fo  juft  a«  to  reverence  it  in 
the  other:  Beiides,  your  vaft  Pretenders  to  Wit  will  not 
be  fobb'd  oif  with  Authority.  This  is  the  Refuge  of  Weak- 
nefs;  the  Sandluary  of  thofe,  whofe  good  Humour  mult 
compound  for  the  Shallownefsof  their  Brain.  You  are  for 
Reafon,  for  naked  Demonftration,  without  Fard  or  fu- 
cus -y  for  Evidence  that  admits  of  no  Reply  nor  Rejoin- 
der ;  therefore  Hand  to  your  Principles  before  you  ftrike 
in  with  thefe  mighty  Upholders  of  InfiKitum.  Bring  their 
Reafons  to  the  Touch-ftone ;  examine  whether  they  are 
Sterling,  or  Adulterate.  I  will  only  propofe  one  or  two 
Difficulties,  which  I  confefs  put  me  to  the  Plunge.  The 
World  you  fay  is  eternal  ? 

Theo,  I  do. 

Eufeb.  Therefore  it  was  impoffible  for  you  ever  to  have 
been  bom. 

Theo.  I  deny  the  Inference. 

Eufeb.  I  prove  it.  You  eould  not  poflibly  be  bcrn 
till  an  infinite  Number  of  Generations  was  pall  ;  but 
'tis  impoffible  for  an  infinite  Number  of  Generations  to 
pafs,  therefore  'twas  impoffible  for  you  ever  to  have  been 
born. 

Theo.  'Tis  impoffible  for  an  infinite  Number  of  Gene- 
rations to  pafs  in  an  infinite  Space  of  Time;  I  deny  your 
Minor  :  In  a  finite  Space  of  Time,  I  grant  your  Mmor^ 
and  deny  the  Confequence. 

Eufeb.  I  fubfume,  but  'tis  impoffible  for  an  infinite 
Space  of  Time  ever  to  pafs:  For  if  it  can  pafs,  it  has  an 
End,  and  by  confequence  we  find  an  infinite  with  an  End  j 
and  certainly  this  confequence  becomes  not  a  Man,  who 
avoids  the  Belief  of  a  Deity,  becaufe  Infinity  is  an  incon- 
Cf  iveable  Thing.  I  know  not  how  you  lock  upon  my 
Argument  j  but  methinks  any  Man  but  an  Atheift  would 
ftart  at  it. 

D  J  ?  Again, 


404      '^ke  Gentleman  hfiru6fe£ 

Again,  if  by  Defcent  we  may  pais  by  an  infinite  Se-^ 
ries  of  Generations,  why  not  by  Alcent  i*  methinks  'tis 
no  farther  from  the  Bottom'  of  a  Pair  of  Stairs  to  the 
Top,  than  from  rhe  Top  to  the  Bottom  :  And  I  always 
thought  the  Way  from  London  to  If'^indfor,  was  the  fame 
with  that  from /f'f»t//'^r  to  London:  Now  in  afcending 
from  you  to  your  feather,  from  him  to  your  Grandfa- 
ther, cff.  we  march  in  the  fame  Road,  we  call  in  at  the 
fame  Gentlemen.  If  therefore  by  Defcent  we  come  to 
an  end  of  our  Journey,  why  not  by  Afcent  ? 

Theo.  The  Realbn  is  evident :  For  by  afcending  you 
come  to  an  end  of  Generations,  and  ftop  at  the  firft 
Man  :  Then  the  Succeflion  of  Generations  has  notbeen 
infinite. 

Eufeh.  Right  :  But  then  it  inevitably  follows,  there 
has  not  been  an  infinite  Series  of  Generations :  Becaufe 
you  put  an  end  to  them,  they  are  at  a  full  ftop  in  your 
Perfon. 

Theo.  There  is  a  great  Difparity  between  the  two 
Cafes.  Becaule  when  you  mount  up  from  Son  to  Fa- 
ther, from  Father  to  Grandfather,  ^c.  the  Time  is  al- 
ways finite.  Now  what  wonder  that  an  Infinity  of  Ge- 
nerations can't  be  trac'd  up  to  their  Origin  in  a  finite 
Space?  But  when  you  defcend  tome,  there  has  pa  fs'd 
an  infinite  Space  of  Time  :  And  fo  one  Infinity  corre- 
fponds  to  the  other. 

Eufeb.  No  doubt,  you  have  piain'd  the  Difficulty  be- 
yond Difpute  by  your  quaint  Difparity.  But  I  would 
know  why  a  IVlan  by  afcending  cannot  ftep  from  Time 
to  Eternity,  as  well  as  by  defcending  from  Eternity  into 
Time  ?  And  then,  how  can  an  infinite  Time  pafs.? 

Theo.  Thefe  Infinities  and  Eteriiiies  are  puzzling 
Subjects,  they  out-ftretch  the  Abilities  of  our  Under- 
ftandings,  and  your  Argument  preiles  thofe  Philofophers 
who  maintain  God  could  create  the  World  ab  ceterno. 

Eufeb.  Infinities  and  Eternities  are  puzzling  Subje6ls 
indeed  ;  but  then  I  wonder  an  Atheift's  Reafon  fliould 
ftumble  at  the  Notion  of  an  infinite  Being,  and  leap  fo 
nimbly  over  apparent  Contradictions.  I  do  not  infift 
upon  my  Proof  as  a  Demonftraiion  that  there  is  a  firft 
Principle,  or  that  the  World  w:is  not  a  fe.  Perchance 
in  a  puzzling  Subject,  our  Underftanding  may  be  non- 
plus'dj  butatleaftitdemonftrates,  that  the  whole  Body 

of 


The  Gentleman  InJlruBed.      405 

©f  Atheifts  is  unreafonable  to  Folly  and  Madnefs  ;  for 
fhey  reject  God  on  Account  of  his  Infinity,  and  fome 
other  Attributes  that  they  fay  are  inconceiveable.  In 
the  mean  time,  they  are  conftrainM  to  admit  an  infinite 
and  eternal  Series  of  Generations  \  a  thing  that  not  only 
furpalles  our  Conception,  but  in  Appearance  falls  foul 
on  the  moft  evident  and  receivM  Maxims  of  Rcafon.  If 
we  muft  place  Infinity  and  Eternity  fomewhere,  I  appeal 
to  Reafon,  whether  it  be  not  more  agreeable  to  its  Di- 
ctates, to  attribute  thofe  Perfe<5lions  to  a  Being,  in 
whofe  Notion  they  neceilarily  enter,  and  imply  noother 
Difficulty,  but  what  follows  a  finite  Underftanding, 
when  it  roves  in  Infinity,  and  lofes  it  felf  in  Eternity  ; 
than  to  this  World,  which  in  its  moft  ellential  Notion  in- 
volves no  Idea  of  Eternity:  Nay,  it  cannot  beapply'd  to 
it,  without  violating  either  diredtly,  or  by  Illation,  the 
very  Principles  of  Difcourfe.  Whence  I  conclude  fome 
more  unworthy  Principle  than  Reafon  induces  Atheifts 
to  queftion  the  Exiftence  of  a  God,  becaufe  his  moft 
inconceiveable  Attributes  return  to  their  own  Hypothejis 
with  more  Violence. 

Thefe  Philofophers  Cafe,  who  think  God  might  have 
created  the  World  ab  <sterno^  is  quite  different  from 
yours  J  though  their  Opinion  be falfe,  their  Faith  is  true: 
So  that  at  worft  they  rifque  nothing  but  their  Labour  ; 
but  you  put  all  your  Hopes  on  a  weak  Bottom  :  If  my 
Arguments  be  true,  your  Soul  is  loft  ;  and  you  will  de- 
plore your  fucceffive  Eternity,  a  parte  ante^  which  has  an 
End  for  a  whole  Eternity,  a  parte  poft^  which  will  have 
none.  Lord  !  How  would  an  Atheift  crow,  how  would 
he  chirp,  if  he  could  but  anvil  out  a  Proof  fo  appa- 
rently conclufive  for  the  World's  Eternity,  as  mine  is 
againft  it  ?  We  fhould  fee  the  Bookfeller's  Stalls  in  Paul's 
Church-T'ard  hung  with  new  Demot7j}rations  aga'tnjl  the 
Exijlence  of  a  God  ;  as  they  were  fome  Years  ago  with 
Demonftrations  againji  a  Trinity.  We  fliould  fee  Copies 
in  every  Coffee-Houfe^  and  the  Beaus  bufy  in  conning  it 
over  to  make  themfelves  Mafters  of  it:  But  becaufe 
the  Proof  does  not  hit  with  their  Inclination,  it  muft  not 
work  upon  their  Underftanding.  It  falls  as  heavy  upon 
our  Philofophers,  you  fay,  as  upon  you  ;  what  then  ? 
Can  Company  change  the  Nature  of  Things  ?  If  they 
are  in  the  Wrong,  are  you  in  the  Right?  Would  you 
D  d  3  engage 


40^     ^he  Gentleman  InJiruSed, 

engage  your  Eftate  or  Life  that  my  Argument  Is  meei 
Parabg-.fm  ?  I  believe  you  would  take  fome  time  foi' 
Confideration  before  you  vcntur'd  upon  the  Bet.  Why 
then  do  you  ftake  your  Soul  ?  For  if  an  eternal  Succel- 
iion  of  Generations  be  impoflible,  the  World  was  made 
in  Time.  If  it  was  made,  there  is  a  God  ;  and  if  there 
be  one,  what  can  an  Atheift  expert  from  a  flighted  Dei- 
ty, butajuft  Chaftifement for  his  Infidelity?  The  Gon- 
fequence  is  of  Importance,  and  deferves  fome  ferious 
Thoughts. 


DIALOGUE    XVIII. 

'The  third  Proof.  "The  CharaSiers  ofWifdom  vifihle  in  the 
Frame  and  Cofijlitution  of  the  World,  demonjirate  it  is 
the  Work  of  a  vjife  Agent. 

T  Have  already  prov'd  a  God  by  the  bare  Exiftence  of 
^  the  World  ;  I  confirm  the  fame  Thefis  by  the  excellent 
Contrivance  of  it,  which  indeed  is  both  amazing  and  ra- 
vifhing.  It  can  neither  be  exprefled  by  Tongue,  nor 
drawn  out  by  Pencil :  'Tis  above  Art,  and  out  of  the 
Reach  of  E.eafon.  The  moft  fearchingGew/^.f  that  ever 
was,  has  not  been  able  to  difcover  one  Blot  in  the  large 
Volume  of  ihe  World  j  there  are  no  Errata's.  Nothing 
llept  in  as  a  rude  Effay  of  Skill ,  and  afterwards  underwent 
the  File  or  Hammer,  but  all  Things  continue  as  they 
were  from  the  Beii^i»ning  of  the  Creation. 

F'rom  this  Order  and  Regularity  'Tully  infers,  that  the 
World  was  the  Produd  of  a  wife  Agent  ;  and  brands 
thofe  with  Folly,  who  dare  deny  a  Conclufion  fo  clear, 
fo  evident :  EJJe prafiantem  aliquam  cetcrnamque  naturavn, 
eamque  fuffictendam  adorandamque  pulchritudo  mundi^or' 
doquc  rerum  coelejitum  cogit  confiieri  :  "The  Beauty  of  the 
World.,  an  exaB  Order  of  the  Heavens  demonjiraie  the 
Exijlence  of  a  noble  and  eternal  Being.,  to  whom  Men  owe 
EJleem  and  Adoration  \  nay,  hc  fticks  not  to  affirm,  that 
the  Contemplation  of  theOeconomy,  Harmony  and  Or- 
der of  the  heavenly  Bodies,  put  the  Matter  in  a  Light, 
that  leaves  no  room  for  Difpute.  Quid  pot  eft  effe  tarn 
(tpertum  tamque  j>erfpicuum,  cum  cesium  fufpicimus  coe- 

lefliaquc 


I'he  Gentleman  Injfru^ed,      407 

lejriaque  contemplati  funuts^  quam  alicjuod  ejfe  numen  pra- 
ftant'tJfimiS  mentiSy  quo  h<ec  regantur  ?  Wliat  can  be  ima- 
gin'd  more  clear,  than  that  there  is  a  moft  wife  Being, 
who  directs  and  governs  the  Fleavens? 

Now  that  a  Vein  of  Wilciom  runs  through  every  part 
of  the  World,  is  mod  evident ;  for  it  fuppofes  two  things, 
a  Defign,  and  Means  proportiou'd  to  acquire  it  ;  and 
where  ihofe  two  are  found,  Wifdom  muft  be  admitted. 
We  have  Eyes  to  fee,  and  there  are  Colours  capable  of 
being  feen.  We  have  Organs  fitted  up  for  Smell,  Tafte 
and  Feelings  and  there  are  O'ojeds  able  to  gratify  them. 
Colours,  Smells,  &c.  would  be  ufelefs,  were  there  no 
Senfes  to  receive  them  ;  and  Senles  inf.gnificant,  if  there 
was  nothing  in  Nature  to  play  upon  them  This  reci- 
procal Relation  argues  a  Defign,  and  a  choice  of  Means; 
and  who  denies  it  to  be  the  Contrivance  of  Wifdom,  is 
flenderly  provided  with  this  Virtue. 

The  Sun,  which  is  call'd  the  Father  of  Nature,  as  the 
Earth  is  term'd  the  Mother,  moves  about  us  in  fo  juft 
a  Diflance,  that  nothing  could  place  it  fo  conveniently 
but  his  Wifdom  who  aflign'd  its  Task.  Were  it  more 
remote,  the  Earth  would  congeal ;  did  it  approach,  we 
fhould  be  parcht  with  Heat,  and  fall  into  Afhes :  But 
now  we  enjoy  the  Benefit  of  its  Light,  and  the  Earth 
the  EiFe6ts  of  its  enlivening  Influence  ;  it  impregnates 
the  Womb  of  Nature  with  its  Rays,  and  attacks  Vapours 
to  pour  them  down  in  Dews  and  Showers,  that  refrefh 
the  Fields,  enliven  Flowers,  and  bring  with  them  Plen- 
ty and  Abundance ;  and  at  the  fame  time  returns  thofe 
Waters  to  the  Rivers  and  Sea,  of  whom  it  borrow'd 
them  ;  and  fo  (as  it  were)  exercifes  at  once,  an  a6t  of 
Liberality  and  Juflice. 

But  then  all  thofe  delicious  Fruits  that  charm  the  Eye, 
and  pleafe  the  Palate,  would  rather  be  admirable  than 
ufeful,  did  they  not  turn  into  the  Subftance  of  Animals ; 
and  thofe  (like  Tantalus)  would  perifli  of  Hunger  in  the 
Arms  of  Plenty,  had  they  no  Inftind  to  feed  on  them. 
But  again,  had  every  Creature  an  Inclination  to  the 
fame  Food,  one  would  ftarve  the  other;  Nature  would 
be  at  a  Nonplus  for  Provifion,  her  Granaries  would  be 
exhaufted,  her  Stock  drain'd,  and  then  Mortality  would 
follow:  But  now  Ihe  keeps  open  Table  for  all  her  Chil- 
dren, fhe  maintains  them  at  her  own  Expences;  And  tho' 
D  d  4  they 


40  8     fhe  Gentleman  Injl  rutted, 

they  neither  reap  nor  fow,  they  are  rather  overwhelm'd 
with  Plenty,  than  preiVd  with  Neceffity  :  Belides,  had 
not  the  Male  an  IncUnation  for  the  Female^  the  Species 
would  be   at  an  End  ;    and  this  Inclination  would  not 
continue  them,  unlefs  Propagation  were  made  by  it. Had 
the  Female  no  Tendernefs  for  her  young,  they  could 
not  hold  out  a  Day  ;  yet  did  not  her  Teats  fvv'ell  with 
Milk,  her  Tendernefs  could  not  prelerve  them  ;  but  thefe 
poor  Creatures  forfaken  by  their  Dam  would  be  expos'd 
to  Infult,  were  they  deftitute  of  Swiftnefs,  Craft,  Cou- 
rage, or  Arms  to  defend  themfelves,  or  annoy  the  Ag- 
grelTors.  Nature  has  provided  againft  this  Inconvenience; 
Flight  faves  fome.  Wiles  others,  and  many  difpute  their 
Lives  ;  and  when  they  are  over-power'd,  they  feldom 
fall  without  Revenge.     They  handle  their  Weapons  with 
Art,  and  fence  by  Rule  and  Method.     The  Porczipinesj^ 
like  the  Parihians,  fight  at  a  Diftance;  they  fhoot  with- 
out Bows,  or  Arquebufs  ;  and  hit  the  Mark  without  Aim. 
The  Hedge-Hog  at  the  Approach  of  Danger  marihals  it 
felf  into  Sphere;  it  calls  up  a  Retrenchment;  exped:sthe 
Enemy  behind  a  Palifade,  and  lupplies  with  Policy,  the 
Weaknefs  of  its  Forces.     The  Bull  faces  his  Adverfary. 
The  Horfe  wheels  off,  and  ufes  his  Heels,  either  to  fly, 
or  to  v/ound.     If  you  intended  to  continue  Creatures, 
could  you  invent  more  fit,  more  apt  Means?  Were  you 
Com miflary- General,  could  you  lay  up  better  Provifi- 
ons  ?  Are  you  able  to  place  their  Weapons  more  advan^ 
tageouflv  for  their  Defence  ;   or  teach  them  to  manage 
them  with  greater  Dexterity  ?  There  are  more  legible 
Charaders  of  Wifdom  and  Fore-fight  in  the  Republick  of 
Bealls,  than  in  thofe  of  Lscurgus^  Solon^  Plato^  and  Ari- 
jlotle -y  for  thefe  intended  a.  perfect  Common- wealth  ; 
they  err'd  moft  fhamefully  in  th?  Means,  and  enadted 
Laws  more  fuitablc  to  Goats  than  Men.     But  among  ir- 
rational Creatures,  as  thefe  Laws  are  inviolable,  fo  they 
are  proportioned  to  their  Natures  and  Welfare.  They  nei- 
ther err  by  Excefs  nor  Defcdl,  one  more  Rule  would  fub- 
vert  Oeconomy,  as  well  as  one  lels  ^  nothing  can  be  ad- 
ded, notinng  fubtrafted. 

I  fliall  not  enter  upon  the  Fabrick  of  their  Bodies, 
where  Wifdom  fits  on  every  Mufcle.  Let  it  fuffice,  that 
Galen  takes  Notice  in  his  Bock  de  Forma  Foetus,  that  in 
human  Bodies  ther?  are  above  600  Mufcles  ;  and  that 

every 


^he  Gentleman  Inftru^ed,    40^ 

every  one  requires  at  leaft  ten  Qualifications,  So  that 
about  thefe  fmall  Parts  alone,  no  Icfs  than  6000  Ends  are 
to  be  attended  to.  There  are  284  Bones,  and  each  has 
above  forty  Ends,  in  all  ten  Thouiand  ;  and  a  Failure  in 
any  one  of  thefe  would  caufe  a  great  Irregularity  in  the 
Body,  and  in  many  Death  and  Deftruftion. 

Now  not  to  dilate  further  upon  this  Proof,  I  appeal  to 
you,  whether  thefe  ftrange  and  admirable  Contrivances, 
thefe  natural  Tendencies  to  one  Point,  and  withal,  thefe 
Means  fo  proportionable,  do  not  cry  out,  ipfe  fecit  kos^ 
^  mm  ipji  nos  ?  We  are  neither  the  Work  of  blind  Chance, 
nor  the  Produ6l  of  fatal  Neceflity,  but  of  an  infinite 
Power  and  Wifdom.  We  cannot  call  an  Eye  upon  a 
rough  Landfkip,  but  the  very  Sight  of  it  leads  us  to  a 
Painter:  And  if  a  Tree  or  Animal  in  Effigies  conducts 
us  naturally  to  a  Hand  that  drew  them,  and  to  Wifdom 
that  contriv'd  them  ;  can  thefe  living  Originals  be  fa- 
ther'd  on  Hazard  or  Neceffity  r 

'tbea.  Thefe  things  you  mention  are  worthy  of  Obfer- 
vation  ;  they  entertain  fometimes  my  ferious  Thoughts, 
and  call  me  into  Rapts  of  Admiration  ;  but  yet  they  do 
rot  exceed  the  Force  and  Energy  of  Nature. 

Eufeb.  What  do  you  mean  by  Nature?  Is  it  an  intel- 
ligent Being;  or  void  .of  all  Senfation  and  Reafon  ? 
if  intelligent,  you  mifufe  Words  to  confound  Notions, 
you  represent  God  travefted  into  Nature:  If  it  be  depri- 
ved of  all  Knowledge,  then  you  run  to  Matter  and  Mo- 
tion: Now  thefe  two  are  uncapable  of  Wifdom,  they  can 
neither  think  nor  underftand,  they  are  without  Reafon, 
and  even  without  Senfe.  Notwithftanding  the  World 
is  inverted  with  plain  Characters  of  Wifdom,  they  are 
ftamp'd  and  engraved  on  each  part  of  the  Univerfe  : 
The  Learned  and  Ignorant,  the  Vulgar  and  the  Philo- 
fophers  are  unanimous  in  this  Point:  What  then  re- 
mains, but  that  we  draw  this  neceilary  Inference,  that 
fome  wife,  intelligent,  eternal  Being  did  raifeout  of  no- 
thing this  lovely  Fabrick,  that  he  plac'd  every  Creature 
in  its  proper  Station,  prcfix'd  its  End,  and  provided  it 
with  Inftruments  to  compleat  the  Work  Providence  has 
aflign'd  it. 

Theo.  You  know  our  Underftandings  are  very  fliort- 
lighted,  they  difcover  nothing  plainly  but  our  Ignorance; 
wherever  we  look  we  find  our  felves  encompals.'d  wifh 

Difh- 


410      7he  Gentleman  hijlni^ed. 

Difficulties;  the  moft  trifling,  the  moft  common  Obje£l» 
perplex  our  Reafon,  we  cannot  fix  aright  Notion  of 
Produdtion  J  if  we  could,  perchance  the  A'lyftery  would 
vanifh  without  any  Recourfe  to  a  firft  Caufe.  Your  lit- 
tle Tricks  of  Fafs  furprize  the  Ignorant,  who  often  af- 
cribe  to  Magick  ihofe  Operations  that  have  no  other 
Caufe  than  flight  of  Hand.  In  fine,  as  Mr, //'y^^j  takes 
Notice,  the  Multitude  deifies  what  it  cannot  comprehend. 
Ignorance  ingets  Admiration^  Admiration  Ref^ed^  Refped 
tear^  and  Fear  Religion. 

Enfeb.  lam  glid  to  fee  you  fo  low  in  your  own  Eyes 
this  Morning,  and  that  your  peremptory  and  dogmati- 
cal Humour  is  fpent;  furely  you  have  lately  made  a 
more  intimate  Acquaintance  with  human  Nature;  and  a 
fuller  Difcovery  of  the  Imperfedlions  of  our  Intellcft 
has  read  you  a  Leflbn  of  Humility.  Indeed  our  Under- 
ftandings  are  poor  and  unfurnifli'd,  they  come  into  the 
World  unfhap'd,  and  mull  be  polifhed  by  Study,  before 
they  can  give  a  tolerable  Account  of  the  moft  obvious 
Trifles  ;  and  yet,  when  this  is  done,  we  cannot  rely  on 
their  Intelligence,  for-  they  have  but  few  Prmciples  to 
fteer  by  ;  the  Grofs  of  our  Knovi'ledge  is  made  of  Illati- 
ons, which  are  beaten  out  with  great  Labour  and  Atten- 
tion ;  and  when  we  contemplate  felf  evident  Truth  at  a 
Diftance,  the  Mind  is  puzzled  at  the  View  of  fome  emer- 
ging Circumftances;  which  makes  u€  forget  or  miftake 
the  Connexion  of  the  Confequence  with  the  Premifes,  and 
then  our  Labour  is  rewarded  with  Error. 

I  wit hngly  therefore  grant,  that  I  cannot  dive  into  ab- 
ftrufe  Secrets  of  Nature.  I  neither  know  the  Myftery 
of  Generation,  nor  that  of  Corruption.  I  believe  1  am  a 
Compound  of  two  very  differtut  Ingredients,  Spirit  and 
Matter :  But  how  fuch  difproportion'd  things  keep  fo 
ftrl6l  a  Correfpondence,  I  am  as  ignorant  as  the  Child 
unborn.  Perchance  a  Philofopher  may  harangue,  and 
talk  more  plaufibly  upon  the  Matter,  than  an  Oyfter- 
woman:  But  after  all,  if  we  bring  his  elaborated  Dif- 
courfe  to  the  Teft,  we  (hall  find  nothing  but  cant 
Terms,  and  fcholaftical  Jargon.  But  what  then?  Can- 
not I  judge  that  Paul's  Church  never  made  it  felf,  before 
i  have  conn'd  over  Vitruvius  ?  Or  muft  I  know  all  the 
Rules  of  Limntng  to  be  fure  the  Signs  in  Lnndon  are  the 
Work  of  a  Painter?  Tho*  I  cannot  conceive  which  way 

the 


fhe  Gentleman  InflruBed,     411 

the  Thawes  was  turn'd,  when  the  Bridge  M-as  built,  or 
when  the  Arches  were  form'd  of  Marble,  or  Free  Stone  ; 
yet  I  am  pretty  well  convinc'd  by  the  Uniformity  and 
Contrivance  of  the  Fabrick,  that  Wifdom  and  Art  had 
a  Hand  in  the  Building:  And  I  would  laugh  at  thofe 
who  ftiould  maintain,  that  either  Fate,  Chance  or  Na- 
ture plac'd  the  Stones  in  that  regular  Form.  A  thoufand 
things  in  the  Univerfe  feem  to  me  meer  Riddles ;  yet  I 
behold  a  ftately  Machine  made  up  of  ten  Millions  of  Pie- 
ces: I  fee  Beauty,  Symmetry  and  Defign  ;  this  fuffices 
to  perfuade  a  rational  Creature  nothing  but  Wjldom  con- 
triv'd  it,  and  nothing  but  Power  put  the  Idea  in  Execu- 
tion. So  that  I  infer  from  what  1  knpw,  that  an  infinite 
Wifdom  fram'd  and  governs  the  World  j  not  from  what 
I  do  not  know, 

T'heo.  You  mufl:  not  argue  from  Works  of  Art  to  thofe 
of  Nature.  We  fee  Bridges,  Churches  and  Pidures 
made  by  the  Hands  of  Artificers,  and  therefore  we  ratio- 
nally conclude,  that  even  thofe  that  are  of  an  older 
Handing  owe  their  Origin  to  Art.  But  whofnv  the  firft 
Stone  laid  in  the  Foundation  of  the  World  ? 

Eufeb.  You  turn"your  Battery  the  wrong  Way,  and 
level  at  your  own  Hypothefis  asdiredly  as  I  could  wifh : 
Becaufe  we  fee  Pictures  under  the  Hand  of  the  Painter, 
■and  Edifices  under  thofe  of  Mafons  and  Carpenters,  we 
have  reafon  to  infer,  that  all  fuch  things  are  Effe6ls  of 
an  intelligent  /l^ent ;  but  if  fuch  Trifles  require  an'un- 
derftanding  Artificer,  I  would  know  why  the  Fabrick  of 
the  World,  compacted  of  fo  many  Parts,  fo  curioufly 
wrought,  fo  artificially  knit  together,  fliould  not  lead  us 
to  the  fame  Conclufion  ?  Have  I  right  to  afcribe  the 
raifing  of  a  wretched  Cabbin  to  Wifdom,  and  not  the 
whole  Ffame  of  the  Univerfe?  Mull  I  confefs  the  pretty 
Proportion  of  a  Leafh  of  Wheels  in  a  Watch  is  owing 
to  the  Skill  of  a  Workman  ?  And  that  the  ftupendious 
frame  of  my  Body  is  the  pure  Obje6l  of  blind  Chance, 
or  fatal  NecelTity  ?  Certainly  fuch  palpable  Abfurdities 
would  perfuade  one,  that  Senfe  and  Reafon  were  not 
made  for  Mankind  j  and  that  we  force  Nature  when  we 
pretend  to  it. 


DIA- 


412      T-^^  Gentleman  InJlruBed. 

DIALOGUE    XIX. 

The  fourth  Proof.  The  Invention  of  Arts  and  Sciences 
Jhevj  the  lyorld  /j  not  eternal-^  and  confequently  that 
It  vjas  made  by  a  powerful  Agert. 

Eufeb.'^^fE  fee  new  Arts  ftart  up  with  new  Ages, 
^'  The  World  is  now  better  provided,  not  on- 
ly with  Fences  ngainft  Necellity,  but  even  with  Sup- 
ports of  Grandeur,  than  it  was  twothouland  Years  ago. 
I'he  Difcovery  oftheChart  is  but  of  late  ftanding,  tho' 
of  great  Importance.  The  Inventions  of  Powder,  and 
cf  the  Prefs,  are  not  much  more  ancient.  Rerum  Natura 
facra  non  firnul  tradk :  Arts  follow  the  Law  of  Nature, 
they  are  brought  forth  by  Degrees,  and  are  polifh'd  by 
7^ime  and  Experience. 

Other  Arts,  as  they  are  more  netefiary  to  Mankind, 
fo  they  are  more  ancient  ;  yet  we  can  track  them  up  to 
their  Origin.  We  know  the  Inventors  of  Hufbandry  and 
Tillage,  who  traffick  on  Foot,  and  firfl:  brav'd  the 
Ocean  in  Ships.  Now  if  the  World  was  eternnl,  the 
Induftry  and  Study  of  Man  were  eternal  alfo.  How  then 
is  it  credible  that  Men  of  the  fame  Temper  with  us,  fa- 
gacious,  witty,  and  ambitious,  fhould  faunter  away  a 
whole  Eternity,  without  making  thofe  Difcoveries  we 
owe  wholly  to  the  laft  fix  thoufand  Years  ?  Was  the 
World  always  a  Child,  always  in  its  Non-age  ?  Has 
it  only  arriv'd  at  the  Years  of  Difcretion  hnce  fome  i^"^ 
Ages  ? 

Again,  the  Defire  to  perpetuate  their  Memories  runs  in 
the  Blood  of  all  Men.  We  hate  to  bury  our  Names  in  the 
Grave  with  our  Bodies,  to  lleep  in  Dull  and  Afhes,  as 
unknown  to  Pofterity,  as  we  are  to  our  Predeceflbrs : 
Nay,  fome  have  beenfo  befotted  with  the  Charms  of  Life 
at  fecond  hand,  that  becaufe  they  wanted  Virtues,  they 
prefented  Pofterity  with  their  Vices ;  and  thofe  rather  to 
be  blam'd  than  forgotten.  I  fuppofe  our  Fore-fathers 
convey'd  down  to  us  their  Inclinations,  together  with 
their  Nature  ;  and  that  none  of  their  Paflions  chang'd  in 
the  Voyage,  or  were  improved  by  Tranfplantation ;  their 
Prcpenfions  lean'd  the  fame  Way,  they  were  as  high-met- 

led. 


The  Gentleman  hjlnt^ed,       4 1 3 

led,  asiirecdy  of  vain  Applaufe  as  we : -^It  cannot  there- 
fore be  queftion'd,  but  that  Men  fo  fond  of  Glory  en- 
deavcur'd  to  glut  their  Appetite^  fome  at  the   Peril   of 
their  Live?,  and  others  of  their  Quiet.     It  catinot   be 
thought  they  either  wanted  Matter  or  Occafion :  Ambiti- 
on never  fleeps,  il  Hands  upon  the  Catch,  and  either  finds 
a  Subjcil   for  Adion,  or  makes  one.     The  Power  of  a 
Neighbour,  or  the  Weaknefs,  are  both  ftrong  Temptati- 
ons to  an  ambitious   Prince;   that  promifes  Glory,  this 
Conqueft;  and  either  draws  on  a  War.     Pray  tell  me, 
thererore,  who  were  thofc  ancient  Heroes  ?    Where  did 
they  Reign?  What   Province  did  they  wafteor  fubdue? 
Who  rais'd  the  firft  Empire  ?  Who  built  the  fecond  on  the 
Ruins  of  the  firft?  Was  not  a  whole  Eternity  able  to  pro- 
duce one  Homer,  one  Curtius^  one  Livy  ?  Did  it  never 
come  into  any  King's  Head  to  bribe  a  Pen,  or  to  buy   a 
Panegyrick  ?  Were  all  the  Wits  of  the  World  fo  ftub- 
born,  as  neither  to  be  mov'd  by  Intereft   nor  Applaufe, 
to  write  a  New's-Letter  or  Gazette?  Indeed  I  do  not 
wonder  we  have  no  exadl  Diary  of  paft  Tranfactions ; 
for    to  digeft  an  eternal  Story  into  Days,  is  a  laborious 
Ta(k,  and  requires  a  Purfe  to  buy  Materials,  as  well  as 
a  vait  Stock  of  Patience  to  em.ploy  them.     But  ftill,  me- 
thinks,  we  might  reafonably  expert  fome  F  ragments,  or 
at  leaft  the  Name  of  one  Prince.     But  alas !    Ail  th-sfe 
Worthier  lie  intcrr'd  under  the  Ruins  of  Time,  their  brave 
Exploits  fleep  with  their  Perfons,  and  their  very  Empires 
are  drown'd  in  Silence  and  Oblivion.     By  the  help  ofpro- 
phane  Records,  we  cannot  trace  Time  above  the  Thcban 
War,  zsLucretius  confefll'S ;  and  therefore  Macrcbins  con- 
cludes the  World  could  not  be  eternal.    Quis  dubitet  qiun 
mundus  recens  ^  Kovusfit^  cum  Hijioria  Grceca  bis  mil/c 
annorutn  hifloriam  vix    contiyieat  ?    Who  doubts  but  the 
World  ts  of  ajhort  ftanii:^^^  feeing  the  Grecian  Story  gives 
an  Account  only  uj  two  thoufand  Tears  ?  Perchance  you 
will  fay.  Writing  is  but  of  late  Invention  ;  and  that  all 
the  memorable  Actions  of  Antiquity  perifh'd  for  want  of 
this   happy    Means    of  conveying    them    to  Pofterity  : 
Where  are  at  leaft  the   Painters  and    Carvers?    A  Pi- 
fture.    Statue,  or  Medal  would  have  given  fome  Satisfa- 
ction ;  or  had  they  rais'd  one  Pyramid,  we  might  at  leaft 
have  an  Ailurance   all  Mankind    was   not  drunk  with 
Opitimj  and  ftupified  with  an  eternal  Lethargy:  But  af- 
ter 


414      ^^^  Gentleman  hifiruBed. 

ter  all,  'tis  ftrange  that  fo  bufy,  fo  fharp-  a  Creature  as 
Man,  during  an  infinite  Succeffion  of  Ages,  fhould  not 
Humble  upon  the  way  of  Writing,  a  tiling  fo  neceflary 
to  the  Support  of  Society,  and  withal  fo  obvious :  That 
Man  wa^  certainly  fortunate  indeed,  who  hit  upon  an  Art 
in  fome  Years,  that  had  efcaped  the  Search  of  all  Man- 
kind for  the  fpace  of  a  whole  Eternity. 

T'heo.  The  Anfwer  to  your  Proof  is  very  eafy,  tempus 
edax  rerum,  fung  the  Poet:  Time,  like  Saturn^  devours 
its  Children  :  It  confumes  its  own  Produ6lions,  and  preys 
upon  its  Offspring.  Now  if  Time  be  fuch  a  Cormorant, 
Eternity  muft  be  a  greater.  Time,  like  Diftance,  dimi- 
nifhes  Things ;  but  Eternity  fwallows  them  up,  and  re- 
moves them  beyond  the  Sphere  of  Memory.  How  ma- 
ny brave  Anions  within  thefe  thoufand  Years  have  flipt 
by  the  Pens  of  the  mod  inquifitive  Hiftorians?  They  are 
wore  out  of  Memory,  together  with  the  Heroes  thatat- 
chiev'd  them, and  lieentomb'd  in  Oblivion  and  Forgetful- 
nefs:  Nay,  Cities  not  only  decay,  but  vanifh.  Whatre- 
mains  of  that  famous  Babylon^  but  the  Name  ?  We  know 
not  what  it  was ;  and  are  ignorant  even  where  it  flood. 
And  Florus  confeffes,  that  in  his  time,  not  ov\\y  Samnium 
was  loft,  but  alfo  its  very  Ruins.  If  fome  hw  Ages  eat 
out  the  Memory  of  noble  Exploits,  and  convey  out  of 
fight  Cities,  together  with  the  Earth  they  ftood  on ;  why 
do  you  call  for  an  exacS  Regifter  of  Arts,  an  eternal  Ge- 
nealogy of  Princes,  or  an  Account  of  their  Adlions  ?  They 
are  loft  in  an  infinite  Succeffion  of  Ages  j  they  are  drown*d 
in  the  Ocean  of  Eternity. 

Etijeb,  By  what  Misfortune  ? 

Theo.  By  Deluges  and  Contlagrations. 

Etifeb.  Pray,  Sir,  let  me  aflcyou  to  what  Office  of  In- 
telligence  you  addrefs  your  felf  for  thofe  Deluges,  Con- 
flagrations and  Wars?  Upon  what  Memorials  do  you 
ground  the  Story  of  your  Prce-adamitical  Tranfadiions  ? 
To  fay  there  were  fuch  things  is  not  to  prove  it.  And 
what  you  allert  without  good  Caution,  may  be  deny'd 
with  Reafon. 

Theo.  Under  Favour,  methinks  my  Anfwer  is  very 
much  to  the  Purpofe.  It  attacks  not  your  Proof  in  the 
Rear,  but  in  the  Front ;  and  ftrikes  at  the  very  Heart 
of  it.  You  (hew  the  World  was  not  eternal  ;  becaufe 
it  is  inverted  with  all  the  Charaders  of  Novelty.     In- 

duftry, 


The  Gentleman- Injiru^ed,     415 

duftry,  you  fay,  either  improves  old  Arts,  or  invents 
new  ones.  Some  are  younger  than  we;  others  than  our 
P'athers ;  and  the  molt  ancient  have  their  Origin.  Their 
Inventors  are  recorded  in  Story,  and  come  v^nthin  the 
Memory  of  Books:  Whence  you  conchade,  the  World 
was  not  eternal ;  becaufe  thofe  Arts  mull  of  neceffity 
have  been  of  a  more  ftale  Invention.  For  hov/  can  a 
Man  imagine  that  thofe  things  fhould  lie  out  of  Sight  for 
a  whole  Eternity,  which  have  been  difcover'd  in  a  few- 
Ages  ?  To  which  1  anlwer ;  that  all  this  may  be  very  well 
reconcil'd  with  the  World's  Eternity  j  for  they  might 
have  been  found  out  an  Infinity  of  Times,  and  as  often 
loft  by  accidental  Deluges  and  Conflagrations.  Now,  if 
by  fuch  unforefeen  and  irremediable  Chances,  Arts  and 
Sciences  might  fall  into  Oblivion,  your  Argument  falls 
.  to  the  Ground,  it  cannot  fubfift;  and  it  is  of  no  Force 
to  prove  the  Non-Eternity  of  the  World. 

Eufeb.  My  Argument  is  as  well  timbred  as  ever,  and 
your  weak  Reafon  makes  me  more  in  Love  with  it : 
For  fuppofing  fuch  Accidents  might  happen,  '.  e.  were 
pofTible  ;  by  what  new  coin'd  Logick  can  you  infer  tliey 
did?  Many  things  maybe,  that  never  will  be,  and  he 
that  governs  himfelf  by  PolTibilities,  may  fear  all  things, 
and  hope  for  any  thing.  Nay,  your  PolTibilities,  as  I 
Ihevv'd  before,  like  a  two  edged  Sword,  cut  both  ways, 
they  ftand  for  each  Side  of  the  Contradiftion,  and  whillt 
they  take  both  Parts,  advantage  neither.  For  as  you 
fay  'twas  poflible  for  fuch  Accidents  to  happen,  and  there- 
fore conclude  they  did ;  fo  I  affirm  'tv;as  poffible  not  to 
happen,  therefore  infer  they  did  not.  A-ly  Aigurnent 
is  certainly  ftronger  than  yours,  for  we  find  by,,  Expe- 
rience, that  fewer  things  happen  that  are  poffible,  than 
do  not. 

But  to  clofe  with  your  Argument,  I  afk  whether  thofe 
Deluges  were  particular  or  univerfal  ?  A  particular  In- 
undation will  not  do  your  Bufinefs.  For  fuppofing  the 
Sea  fhould  break  its  Inclollire,  and  play  fuch  Pranks  in 
our  liland,  as  it  did  in  Attica-^  would  the  furviving  part 
of  the  World  replunge  into  Barbarity  and  Ignorance  ? 
Would  the  Arts  of  Writing  and  Printing  difappear  in 
France^  Spain  znd  huly^  becaufe  £»^/ii«^  lay  under  Wa- 
ter? No,  no, Sir!  The  World  would  jog  on.  Artswould 
fiourifhjuft  as  they  do,    Perchance  the  greater  Sciences 

of 


^i6     The  Gentleman  hjm^'kd. 

of  making  Pudding  and  Brawn,  which  (as  Mr.  John  Ray 
takes  Notice  in  his  Obfervations,  are  DiJ]jes  proper  to  En""- 
land)  might  fufFerby  the  Misfortune,  yet  Induftry  might 
retrieve  them,  for  without  doubt  the  Receipts  were  flip'd 
into  Flanders  with  our  Armies;  and  as  the  Dutch  taught 
us  to  befiege  Towns,  fo  certainly  we  inftruded  them  in 
the  deep  Myfteries  of  Pudding  an<i  Brawn. 

It  follows  therefore  that  thofe  Deluges  were  univerfal, 
(but  not  fupernatural  I  hope)  for  then  you  grant  the 
very  thing  we  contend  for,  viz.  a  God.  Nor  could 
they  be  natural;  becaufe,  according  to  the  prefent  Situa- 
tion of  Things,  an  univerfal  Deluge  caus'd  by  the  Force 
of  Nature  is  utterly  impoffible ;  and  I  could  eafily  de- 
monftrate  it,  did  the  Strefs  of  our  prefent  Debate  depend 
-upon  Hydrojlattcki :  But  if  I  grant  fuch  a  Deluge  natu- 
rally poffible  ;  yet  as  to  the  probability  you  are  never  the 
nearer ;  for  how  can  any  Man  in  his  Senfes  perfuade 
himfelf,  that  a  thing  is  probable,  or  likely  to  happen,  that 
has  never  fallen  out  in  an  infinite  Duration?  He  that 
can  believe  that  to  be  probable,  that  has  never  come  to 
pafs  in  an  eternal  Revolution  of  Ages,  mull  not  be  an 
Enemy  to  Credulity. 

Theo.  I  never  faid  yet,  that  an  univerfal  Inundation 
was  probable;  you  have  foilted  in  that  Word  for  your 
.  own  Advantage. 

Eufeb.  Have  you  not  told  me,  thofe  Deluges  have  come 
fo  very  near  the  Matter,  that  few  efcap'd  ?  That  they 
have  brought  Mankind  a  thoufand  times  within  an  Ace 
of  its  Ruin?  The  Waters  then  did  cover  all  the  Surface 
of  the  Earth;  except  a  fmall  Spot  of  Ground  able  to 
give  footing  to  half  a  Hundred.  Why  could  they  not 
fwell  fix  Foot  higher  ?  Who  commanded  this  furious 
Element  to  halt  in  that  critical  Point  ?  If  it  could  rife 
fo  high,  by  the  help  of  natural  Caules  ;  why  not  fome 
Foot  higher  ?  And  if  it  could ;  why  did  it  not  in  an 
Eternity  ?  Methinks  there  fliould  be  Spring-Deluges,  as 
well  as  Spring-Tides?  And  in  fuch  a  Tradl  of  Time  it 
might  once  atleaft  mount  to  the  higheft  Pitch.  In  fine. 
Sir,  I  defirc  you,  and  the  whole  Sedlof  Atheiftlcal  Phi- 
lofophers,  to  produce  one  Reafon  that  carries  the  le?ift 
Shadow  of  Probability  to  prove  the  Waters  naturally 
could  Iwell  to  the  Tops  of  t!ie  highelt  Mountains,  and 
not  cover  them;  if  they  cowld,  within  the  Compafs  of  an 

Eternity, 


the  Gentleman  Inftru^eL      4.1  f 

Eternity,  they  had  done  it :  For  it  feems  incredible,  that 
Nature  fhould  not  do  in  an  infinite  Space  whatever  lay 
within  the  Reach  of  its  Power. 

But  again,  it  feems  ftrange,  that  all  the  ingenious  Part 
of  Mankind  ftiould  be  involved  in  this  common  Ship- 
wreck, and  a  fmall  Parcel  of  illiterate,  ignorant,  unpro- 
fitable Blockheads  furvive  the  Fall  of  Nature:  For  if  a 
Hundred  only  efcap'd,  'tis  very  likely  fome  Mechanicksj 
fome  Carpenters,  fome  Plowmen,  one  at  leaft  that  could 
write  and  read,  and  probably  one  Taylor  might  be  in  this 
fortunate  Company;  Jf  fo,  they  might  propagate  their 
Arts  with  their  Blood,  and  re-people  the  World  in  a 
ifhort  Time  with  Trades,  as  well  as  with  Inhabitants. 
Now  Things  have  happen'd  quite  contrary ;  the  World, . 
tho'  ftock'd  with  People,  was  many  Years  deftitute  of 
Arts.  They  knew  .neither  the  way  of  Ploughing  nor 
Sowing ;  they  could  neither  plant  Vines,  or  prefs  Wine, 
nor  turn  Milk  into  Curds,  nor  thofe  into  Cheefe.  Men 
liv'd  on  the  meer  Bounty  of  Nature,  Water  fatisfy'd 
their  Thirft,  and  Fruit  their  Hunger  ;  and  for  want  of 
the  Poji-  Office,  every  one  did  his  own  Meflageo  Nay, 
they  had  not  the  Wit  to  cover  their  Nakednefs ;  fo 
that  God  himfelf,  according  to  Tradition,  cut  out  the 
firft  Cloaths,  and  from  this  Moment  we  may  date  the 
Company  of  Merchant-Taylors. 

I  come  to  your  Conflagrations,  which  can  only  concern 
Books ;  for  they  cannot  confume  Arts,  unlefs  firll  they 
brey  upon  Men  :  And  methinks  the  Fire  mull  have  nickt 
the  Time,  that  is,  fet  upon  all  the  Houfes  in  the  World 
together,  when  all  Mankind  was  bury'd  in  a  profound 
Sleep,  to  do  the  Feat  compleat.  Now,  I  fancy,  tho' 
Flames  fhould  ftand  upon  the  Watch  for  an  Eternity, 
they  would  never  meet  with  fo  fair  an  Occafion  to  difpatch 
our  Species  :  But  at  laft  they  have  ravag'd  Libraries, 
you  fay,  and  glutted  their  Rage  with  Memorials  and 
Records  ;  they  not  only  turn'd  Authors  themfelves  into 
Afhes,  but  all  the  Hijiorical  Didionaries,  together  wiih 
the  'Journaiis  des  Scavens  :  So  that  their  very  Names 
were  confum'd  with  the  Paper  that  preferv'd  'em,  and 
mingled  with  the  Duft  we  tread  on.  Your  Syftem  is 
too  ridiculous  to  be  examitr'd,  too  foolifh  to  be  confu- 
ted ;  Reafon  has  an  Antipathy  againll  fuch  Abfurdities ; 
?hey  are  unable  even  to  work  on  a  Madman,     There  is 

E   t  DO 


41 8      The  Gentleman  InJiruBed, 

no  queftion  but  Fire  may  mafter  Libraries,  as  well  as  pri- 
vate-Houles,  and  treat  rhem  with  as  little  Regard  as 
Wbite~Hiill\  but  this  will  not  do  your  Jobb,  to  flave 
P'hie^umenas^  we  muft  luppofe  either  that  all  the  Books 
in  the  World  where  wheedled  into  one  Magazine,  be- 
foje  the  Minc-fprung;  or  that  Fire-balls  were  caft  intOx 
all  the  Libraries  at  a  Signal  j  thefe  two  Ways  might  do 
a  gi'eat  deal  of  Execution,  and  difpatch'fome  Tun  of 
Divinity  and  Hiftory  in  a  fhort  Time  ;  and  I  conceive 
thty  are  poflible,  but  to  fulpec^l  'em  probable,  is  to  im- 
pofe  on  our  Reafon  ;  the  very  Thought  of  fuch  a  Thing 
is  a  Scandal  to  human  Nature,  but  to  believe  it.  Frenzy 
and  Madnefs. 


D  I  A  L  O  G  U  E  .  XX. 

The  fifth  Proof.     ^Tis  fjexvn  quafi  a  priore  the  IVorldvjas 
mt  eternal  a  fe. 

Eufeb.  T  Confefs  it's  more  eafy  to  deny  than  to  prove ; 
•*-  the  Afiailant  always  attacks  at  a  Difadvantage ; 
that  is  not  above  the  Performance.of  Ignorance,  or  Fol- 
ly: But  this  requires  both  Wit  and  Study.  However^ 
I  wave  your  Advantage,  and  will  draw  a  Reafon  or  two 
from  the  very  Nature  and  Conftitution  of  the  World, 
which,  I  think,  comes  near  ConVidlion,  and  makes  it 
highly  credible,  it  could  not  pofTibly  be  ab  ceterno  a  fe. 

if  it  were  eternal^  it  is  a  neceffary  and  independent 
Being ;  if  neceffary  and  independent^  it  muft  be  eternal 
a  partep  pofi.  For  as  it  depends  on  nothing  but  it  felf 
for  its  Bcin^.  it  can  dephnd  on  nothing  diftant  from  its 
felf  for  its  Confervation;  and  as  its  own  Nature  was  fuf- 
Jficient  to  give  it  Exifience^  fo  it  is  fufficient  to  continue 
it;  tlierefore  if  its  £jv/y?f«f?  -wzs  necefj'ary,  its  Continu- 
ation is  neceflary,  and  if  this  be  neceffary^  it  muft  be 
eternal  \  hence  it  follows,  that  if  the  Whole  was  eternal, 
its  Parts  muft  be  eternal ;  for  the  World  is  not  diftindt 
from  all  its  Parts :  Therefore,  if  the  World  was  eternal, 
all  its  Parts  were  eternal  alfo  a  parte  ante^  and  will  be 
io  a  parte  pofl :  But  no  Part  of  the  World  is  eternal  y 
therefore  the  Whole  is  not  eternal.    Let  us  lingle  out 

one 


^he  Gentleman  InJlruBed,    41^ 

one  Species :  'Tis  evident  Men  are  born,  and  die  ; 
therefore  'tis  evident  that  Men  were  not  a  pane  ante 
eternal. 

Theo.  I  wonder  you  will  impofe  upon  the  Compa- 
ny ;  this  is  not  to  realbn  but  to  trifle,  and  the  Proof 
has  more  Raillery  than  Reafon.  I  know  I  was  Nothing 
fixty  Years  ago,-  and  that  within  fome  time  I  fhall  re- 
turn to  my  everlailing  Home.  I  am  not  of  my  felf, 
but  the  Work  of  Nature,  and  muft  march  off  when  She 
commands  me,  nor  was  there  ever  any  eternal  Indivi- 
dual. 

Eufeh.  A  little  clearer  if  you  pleafe  ;  when  you  fay 
Man  was  eternal^  what  do  you  mean .'' 

Theom.  I  mean  the  Species. 

Eufeb.  I  underftand.  Are  you  then  turn'd  Platonick, 
and.feparate  the  Species  from  the  Individuals?    . 

"Theom.  No. 

Eufeb.  Why  then,  methinks  it  follows,  if  no  Indivi- 
dual was  a  ye-,  the  Species  was  not  «/«•,  becaufe  the  i^e- 
cies  is  indiftinft  from  all  the  Individuals. 

Theom.  You  call  in  again  at  Infinitum^  and  forgot  it 
has  no  all.  All  is  a  Chimera,  a  kind  of  philofophicai 
Bull^  not  apply'd  to  a  determinate  Number. 

Eufeb.  Indeed  Infmitttm  has  an  excellent  Situation, 
like  Cities  in  Boggs,  there  is  no  coming  at  it  ;•  but  at 
prefent  it  lies  out  of  my  way,  and  I  fhall  draw  oiF  with- 
out meddling  with  it.  But  I  muft  tell  you  I  take  a  Rid- 
dle for  a  Solution :  At  lealt  human  Species  is  eternal 
a  fe, 

'theom.  I  have  granted  it. 

Eufeb.  Why  then  it  can  never  beextindt:  For  what 
depends  of  it  felf  muft  be  eternel,  and  whatever  is  eter- 
nal a [e parte  ante.,  muft  be  fo  a  parte  poft,\  unlefs  per- 
chance the  Fancy  Ihould  take  a  Thing  tft  deftroy  its  felf, 
which  is  unlikely,  and  impofTible  to  our  Hypothefis. 
For  whatfoever  exifts  a  fe,  exifts  necejfarily  ;  but  what 
exhlfnecejfarily  afe,  muft  always  exift,  otherwife  it  will 
be  necejfary,  and  not  necejfary,  which  implies  a  flat  Con- 
tradidlion. 

Theom.  Well,  fuppofing  this  true  ;  what  do  you  in- 
fer ? 

Eufeb.  That  our  Species  is  a  Stranger  to  Eternity,  as 
well  as  its  Individualsj  and  no  more  a  fe  than  you  or 

E  e  ;»  Ij 


420     ^he  Gentleman  Injiru^ed, 

I:  For  all  thofe  Men  who  are  now  in  Being  muft  onct 
knock  off,  and  fubmit  to  the  common  Fate  of  Morta- 
lity. 

Theom.  They  muft,  this  is  a  terrible  Truth,  but  pall 
Debate  ;  methinks  I  would  purchafe  one  Dole  of  JEfcu- 
laplus'-i  immortal  Pojfet-Drink^  at  any  rate. 

Eufeb  If  they  dy'd  without  Iffue,  our  Species  would 
be  at  an  end.. 

Theory.  Moft  true  ;  if  they  made  a  Vow  of  Continence, 
and  kept  it;^  our  Race  would  be  fhort-liv'd:  But  I  have 
no  great  Apprehenfion,  that  all  Mankind  will  engage  in 
an  /IJfoctation  to  ftand  by  Chaftity  with  their  Lives  and 
Fortunes,  or  to  die  Batchelors. 

Eufeh.  It's  not  very  likely  indeed  :  So  long  as  there  is 
an  Atheift  in  the  World,  the  work  of  Propagation  will 
goon:  At  leaft  fuch  a  Refolution  is  not  impoflible,  for 
you  and  I  can  make  it,  and  there  is  the  fame  Reafon  for 
every  Man  in  the  World  :  'Tis  therefore  poflible  for  the 
whole  Species  to  perifh. 

Theom.  What  then  ? 

Eufeb.  Why  then  it  follows  by  an  evident  Illation, 
that  our  Species  is  not  afe:  For  whatever  is  afe,  muft 
of  Neceflity  be  eternal  a  parte  poft^  as  it  is  eterml  a  parte 
ante.  I'he  fame  Argument  takes  in  any  Species  now 
exiftent  j  whence  I  conclude,  that  if  no  Species  be  eter- 
nal, no  Part  of  the  World  is  eternal,  nor  by  confe- 
quence  the  Whole. 

Theom.  Not  fo  faft,  if  you  pleafe  :  You  prove  too 
much  ;  and  by  confequence  Nothing. 

Eufeb.  How  fo  ? 

The'im.  Could  not  God  (if  there  be  fuch  a  Thing) 
have  created  the  World  ab  ceterno  ? 

Eufeh.  My  Reafon  tells  me  he  could  not :  But  not  to 
engage  in  a  Maitter  foreign  to  our  Difpute,  I  grant  he 
could. 

Theom.  Let  us  then  fuppofe  he  did  create  it  nb  ceterno ; 
in  this  Cafe  our  Species  would  be  eternal  a  pane  antf. 

Eufeb.  It  would. 

Theom.  Therefore  by  your  Way  of  demonftrating,  it 
would  be  eternal  a  parte  pofi  •„  becaufe  according  to  your 
nev/  Logick,  whatever  is  eternal  one  way,  muft  be 
eternol  the  other:  Bui  I  conceive  the  \\\\o\q, Species  might 
be  ftifi?d  by  your  general  Aflbciatipn-,  even  in  ihi?  Hypo-^ 

thefts^ 


lloe  Gentleman  InftruBed,     42 1 

thefis^  as  well  as  in  the  other,  therefore  it  evidently  fol- 
lows,  that  the  Species  of  Mankind  would  be  eternul^  and  ^ 
not  eterwal, 

Eufeb.  Sir,  you  miftake  the  Force  of  my  Argument. 
I  do  not  fay,  whatever  is  eternal  a  parte  ante^  mull  be 
fo  a  parte  pcji :  But  whatever  is  eternal  a  parte  a?2te  aje^ 
mull  be  eternal  a  parte  pojl.  1  gave  you  the  Realon  juft 
now,  viz.  becaufe  whatever  exifts  a  fe  \s  ia^epoideKt, 
and  intrinjically  necejfary,  and  therefore  it's  incapable  of 
Deftru6lion ;  but  whatever  is  created,  depends  of  its 
Caufe,  to  whole  Power  alone  it  owes  its  Being  ;  and  by 
confequence  is  nothing  intrinficaily  neccjfory  :  It's  there- 
fore no  more  ftrange,  that  Things  that  are  by  Cuurtefy, 
and  exift  by  Benevolence  perifli,  than  that  Men  walk  oif, 
and  crumble  into  Dull  and  Allies, 

T'heom.  But  if  weluppofe  with /^rz/^o/Zf-,  that  God  is  a 
necejj'ary  Agent^  two  Things  naturally  follow  :  /"'V/?, 
That  our  Species  was  ab  iStento  ;  and  Secondly^  That 
it  is  necejfary :  Therefore  it  was  neceflary  ab  aterno  : 
For  in  this  Cafe  it  could  not  be  ab  aterno  ;  yet  this 
being  granted,  the  Difficulty  returns  upon  you ;  for  if 
you  fay,  our  Species  (in  this  Suppolition)  mull  be  eter- 
nal a  parte  pojl^  what  can  hinder  me  from  making  the 
fame  Reply  ?  If  you  fay,  it  may  perifh,  therefore  'tis 
true,  that  our  iS/'e-^r/Vj  may  end,  tho'  it  be  eternal  a  fe^ 
independent  and  necejfary. 

Eufeb.  You  have  call  the  Caufe  upon  a  palpable  Un- 
truth, and  beg  the  Proteflion  of  an  Abfurdity :  Howfoever 
to  combate  your  Opinion  more  fuccefsfully,  we'll  examine 
its  moll  plaufible  Pretences,  and  fee  if  we  can  difcover 
the  Weaknefs  of  them.  I  fay  then,  this  Retreat  will 
not  fecure  you :  For  till  yoxxr  Species  remains  intrinjically 
contingent^  and  has  no  other  NeceJJity  but  that  of  its 
Caufe  ;  according  to  its  own  Nature  it  may  exift  or 
not  exift :  It  has  no  Perfedlion  inherent,  that  challenges 
before  Non-Exiftence  :  So  that  if  it  be  granted,  that  it 
did  exift  neceflarily  ab  aterno,  this  NecelTity  is  meerly 
extrinfical  ;  it's  nothing  but  an  Imperfedlion  of  the 
Caufe,  no  Perfedion  of  the  Effedl  :  Now  in  this  Suppo- 
iition  our  Species  might  perifh,  becaufe  it  has  no  in- 
trinfick  Virtue  that  oppofes  its  Deftruition ;  but  if  it 
cxifts  a  fe,  then  Exiftence  is  indentified  with  its  Nature, 
and  it  can  no  more  ceafe  to  be,  than  it  could  not  be  : 

E  e  3  So 


422     ne  Gentleman  InJlruBed. 

So  that  no  Hypothejis  can  elude  an  Argument ;  where- 
fore I  conclude  it's  evident  our  Species  may  be  extin- 
.guifh'd,  therefore  it's  evident  it  cannot  be  eternal  a  fe. 
But  pray  remember  what  I  told  you  juft  new,  your  Ar- 
_  gument  owes  its  Force  to  a  palpable  Abfurdity,  and  you 
'  know  fuch  Weapons  do  fmall  Execution  :  You  fuppofc 
God  a  neceJJ^ary  Agent,  now  the  very  Suppofition  deftroys 
him  ;  for  Liberty  is  a  Perfeilion :  Seeing  therefore  God 
is  infinite  in  Perfedlion,  you  cannot  fuppofe  him  void  of 
Freedom,  without  fuppofing  him  not  infinitely  perfedl, 
and  by  eonfequence  not  God:  So  that  your  Difcourfe 
TUns  thus  ;  If  God  were  God,  and  not  God ;  //  he  created 
Tiecejfar'ily  a  Species  ab  reterno,  and  did  not  create  it ;  this 
Species  would  not  be  fub]ed  to  DeflruBion,  and  would  be 
fubjed  to  Definition :  This  \?,cornutum  argzimentum^  but 
becaufe  it  goars  with  both  Horns,  it  wounds  with  nei- 
ther. 

Again  :  If  God  lay  under  a  Neceflity  of  creating  ab 
aterno^  why  of  this  World  rather  than  of  another  ?  If 
nothing  elfe  lies  within  the  reach  of  his  Power,  a  finite 
Perfe6lion  has  drain'd  his  creative  Faculty :  His  Omni- 
fotence  is  at  a  Stop,  and  by  eonfequence  his  Infinity 
and  Being  at  an  End:  If  he  can  create  fomething  elfe, 
■what  determin'd  him  to  leave  all  other  Creatures  in  the 
State  of  Nothing,  and  to  inveft  this  World  with  Dig- 
nity of  Exiftence  ?  If  the  Determination  came  from  the 
Nature  of  the  World,  then  it  requir'd  Exillence  abetter  no^ 
and  fo  muft  have  been  ab  (Ctemo,  without  any  Obligation 
to  God  for  its  Being:  If  from  God,  than  he  is  free,  and 
the  Exiftence  of  the  World  is  the  Effeftof  his  Liberality, 
not  of  Neceflity ;  whence  it  follows,  that  every  Mo- 
ment it  lies  at  his  Mercy,  he  may  thruft  every  Individual 
into  Nothing,  with  the  fame  Freedom  and  Eafinefs  he 
drew  them  out  of  it. 

Some  Philofophers,  I  know,  make  God  a  necelTary 
jigent^  not  to  fuppofe  him  idle  ;  they  fancy  Lazinefs  be- 
comes his  Majefty  lefs  than  Neceflity,  and  becaufe  they 
cannot  aflign  him  any  other  Employment  but  Creation, 
they  infer  he  created  this  World  ab  ceterno. 

Thefe  People  come  within  an  Ace  of  the  Extravagance 
of  the  Poets,  who  to  cut  out  fome  Work  for  their  God 
J^ercury^  made  him  a  Poft;-Boy:  But  let  us  take  at  pre- 
fent  thefe  Dreams  for  Truths,  thefe  Fi6lions  for  Conten* : 

It 


T'he  Gentleman  Inftm^ed.     423 

It  follows  at  leaft  he  may  deftroy  this  World,  upon  Con- 
dition he'll  take  the  Pains  to  build  another ;  nay,  he  may 
raife  with  one  Hand,  and  pull  down  with  the  other,  for 
all  Eternity  :  For  in  this  Cafe  it  is  evident  he  cannot 
want  Employment,  and  his  Bufinefs  will  equal  his  Acti- 
vity: So  that  to  conclude  in  Spight  of  the  Proteilion.of 
AbVurdity  it  felf,  you  mult  confefs,  that  every  Species 
that  exilb  is  fubjett  to  Deitrudlion,  and  therefore  not 
afe. 

Theom.  Tho'  no  Species  be  eternal,  Matter  may  be 
eternal. 

EufeL  What  if  it  be  ? 

Theom.  U  it  be,  thefe  different  Species  Vv^hich  grace  the 
World,  might  fpring  out  of  the  firft  Fruitfulneis  of  the 
Earth,  which  certainly  was  more  prolifick  fome  Ages  ago 
than  at  prefent. 

Eufeh.  Ho,  Sir!  We  are  out  of  our  way,  and  juft  fal- 
len on  the  Confines  of  Democratif/n.  The  lad  Moment 
the  World  was  Ens  a  /?,  and  now  by  the  Virtue  of  fome 
rare  Adventure,  it's  transform'd  miO'AnEns per  Accdens. 
Seeing  you  are  in  a  Fit  of  Fi6lion,  make  ufe  of  Fancy 
before  it  cool,  and  fay  Men  are  hatcht  in  Ovens  like 
Chickens  in  Egypt.,  or  that  Beafts  fpring  from  Muck, 
and  Men  from  Parfly-Beds.  I  am  almoft  afham'd  to 
confute  Abfurdities,  fo  grofs  at  firft  Sight,  fo  palpable, 
that  no  Difcourfe  can  make  them  more  apparent ;  W.'iat 
would  the  World  fay,  if  you  advance  this  Opinion  in 
Print  ?  They  ought  to  look  upon  you  as  mad  or  foolifh, 
if  they  would  do  you  Right:  But  I  admit  the  wond'rous 
Fecundity  of  the  Earth,  and  ask  you  how  it  comes  to 
pafs  the  Species  of  Animals  are  not  eternal  ?  For  either 
the  Earth  poflefs'd  this  prolifick  Quality  ab  aterno^  or  it 
did  not }  if  it  did  not,  by  what  happy  Chance  did  it 
come  by  it?  If  from  it  felf,  it  muft  be  eternal ;  if  from 
another,  you  admit  a  diftindl  Agent,  and  fo  our  Contro- 
verfy  is  at  an  End:  If  it  did  pollefs  this  prolifick  Virtue 
ab  aterno,  then  it  produc'd  all  things  ab  ccterno  (for 
I  fuppofe  Matter  is  a  necefTary  Agent :)  But  if  this  Vir- 
tue be  eternal,  mcthinks  it  fhould  ftill  remain,  and 
then  we  might  have  the  Satisfaftion  fometimes  to  breed 
Horfes  out'of  Quagmires,  or  reap  good  Crops  of  Men. 
If  this  producing  Quality  falls  with  Age,  why  is  it  not 
quite  extindl?    Why  does  the  Earth  bring  forth  any 

E  e  4  thing  ? 


4^4      ^^^  Gentleman  Injlru^ed. 

thing  ?  An  inexhauftible  Virtue  will  run  upon  the  Lees  \f^ 
the  Space  of  an  Eternity,  and  end  in  Sterility.  Thus  yoy 
fee  your  felf  at  a  Lofs,  tho'  xVLatter  be  eternal ;  the  more 
you  evade  a  firft  Agent  diftinft  from  the  World,  the 
more  you  encounter  him,  and  you  have  nothing  left  but 
the  Liberty  of  being  a  Deift  or  a  Fool. 

But  to  give  full  Satisfadlion,  I  offer  you  a  Reafon  or 
two,  which  feem  to  conclude,  the  very  Matter  cannot 
be  eternal  a/?.  Firft,  'tis  evident,  of  all  Beings  Matter 
comes  the  neareft  to  Nothing,  it  has  fcarce  any  other 
Perfe6lion,  than  that  of  hzre  Ex f/iefjce,  'uspura  poten- 
tial a  meer  Capacity:  Now  upon  what  Right  does  this 
abjedl  Thing  challenge  the  glorious  Attribute  of  J^fetty 
and  Eterritty  ?  Before  we  put  it  in  PolTeffion  of  fuch  tran- 
icendent  Titles,  both  Reafon  and  Juftice  command  us 
to  examine  its  Pretenfions :  On  account  of  Perfe6lion, 
It  can  put  in  no  Claim,  for  the  moft  vile  Infedls  that 
creep  in  Mire,  and  fpring  from  Corruption,  lock  up  a 
greater  Treafure  of  Perfedlions  in  an  Eye  alone,  than  are 
diftus'd  thro'  the  whole  Mafs  of  Matter:  If  therefore 
iieither  thefe,  nor  even  Man  himfelf  dares  afpire  to  /»- 
dependence  and  Eternity^  why  fhpuld  Matter?  To  ad- 
judge it  thefe  incommunicable  Predicates  on  Account  of 
Imperfeftion,  is  very  extraordinary :  Indeed  fuch  a  Sen- 
tence may  argue  Compaffion  or  good  Nature  in  a  Judge, 
but  not  one  Grain  of  Juftice :  Is  Beggary  a  Title  to 
Greatnefs ;  or  Peafantry  to  Nobility  ?  Becaufe  I  am  born 
a  Scavenger,  muft  I  challenge  a  Place  at  the  Council 
Table ;  or  fue  for  a  Dukedom,  becaufe  my  Family 
wants  a  Coat  of  Arms  ?  Is  it  not  as  ridiculous  to  dignify  . 
Matter  •tyith  Afeky,  becaufe  it  borders  upon  Nothing,  as 
to  make  it  independent^  becaufe  it  cannot  exift  without 
fome  Form  ? 

Theom,  It's  right.  Independence  is  neither  founded  on 
Imperfedion,  nor  Perfedtion,  but  on  its  Nature. 

Eufeb.  What  do  you  mean  ?  Is  not  Afcity  a  Perfe- 
6lion  ? 

Theom.  Yes, 

Enfeb.  Therefore  the  Exigence  of  Afeity  founded  in 
Matter  muft  be  a  Perfection ;  for  certainly  to  claim  a 
Perfedlion  as  a  Debt,  not  a  Gift,  is  one ;  but  how  dp 
you  know  this  Exigence  is  founded  on  the  Nature  of 
Matter  ?  A  Gentleman's  Word  will  not  pafs  current  a- 

mong;il 


The  Gentleman  Injiru^ied.      42^ 

mong][l  Philofophers,  as  it  does  amongit  Taylors  and 
Vintners :  They  require  Caution,  thole  ipfe  dixit  Days 
expir'd  with  old  Pythagoras^  and  according  to  the  pre- 
fent  Conftitution  of  Mankind,  will  not  revive  in  our 
Time :  Tell  me  then,  by  what  myfterious  Light  have 
you  difcovered,  that  Afeity  is  entail'd  on  Matter,  that 
it's  a  Branch  of  Birth-Right  ?  I  conceive  an  Afiertion  may 
be  prov'd  two  ways,  either  by  Authority  or  Reafon  ; 
could  you  fubpoen a  a  Brace  of  eternal  Witnefles,  they 
might  go  far  to  the  clearing  the  Point  in  Contrcverfy, 
but  there  are  few  of  that  Stamp  in  the  Nation;  they  are 
as  rare  as  a  reafonable  Atheift:  Seeing  therefore  Witneiles 
cannot  relieve  you,  you  muft  retreat  to  Reafon  j  regale 
us,  I  befeech  you,  with  a  Demonftration. 

Theom.  We  find  by  Experience,  that  Matter  is  not 
liable  to  Corruption ;  tho'  Compounds  rife  and  fall,  it 
ftands  immoveable  ;  it  neither  lofes  any  thing  by  Time, 
nor  gains :  There  was  no  more  a  thoufand  Years  ago 
than  to  Day,  nor  will  there  be  lefs  in  future  Ages,  than 
at  prefent,  it  therefore  will  be  eternal^  and  if  it  will  be 
eternal^  it  has  been  ab  (Cterno. 

Eufeb.  You  prove  well,  that  as  Matter  cannot  be 
corrupted,  fo  it  cannot  be  generated,  and  by  confequence 
will  be  eternal;  fo  far  you  are  in  the  Right:  But  then 
it  does  not  follow  it  wasay^  akaterm^  becaufe  it  might 
have  been  created  ;  for  the  Impoffibility  of  Creation  can- 
not be  inferr'd  from  any  true  Principle :  Nay,  I  have 
prov'd  already,  that  Matter  could  not  be  a  fe^  fo  that 
your  Argument  falls  to  the  Ground,  and  without  any 
Prejudice  to  the  force  of  my  Proof. 

Secondly^  IfMatter  be  f-^-j  a/^,  zndeternal,  necejfary, 
and  independent  Being,  it  is  adus  purus,  i.  e.  it  had  no 
Capacity  to  receive  any  more  Perfections,  than  thofe  it 
poflefs'd  ah  ceterno  ;  for  there  is  no  Reafon  why  it  fhould 
poflefs  one  more  than  another:  Therefore  ab  ceterno^  it 
either  poflefs'd  no  Perfe6tion,  which  deftroys  the  Hypo- 
thefis,  or  all:  If  it  had  a//,  it  cannot  receive  any  more; 
therefore  if  it  be  eternal  afe^  necejfary  and  independent^  it 
js  aSlus  purui^  incapable  of  any  further  Perfedtion. 

Again,  if  it  be  necejfary  and  independent,  it  cannot 
lofe  any  Perfedion  it  had  ab  ceterno -^  becaufe,  if  it  could, 
ttiat  might  be,  and  might  not  be,  and  by  confequence 
would  not  be  intrinfically  neceflTary ;   befides,  as  it  de- 
pends 


426      ^he  Gentleman  In/ini^ed. 

pends  on  its  felf  alone  for  its  Being,  fo  nothing  diftindt 
can  poDibly  deftroy  it. 

Hence  it  follovv's,  that  whatever  is  eternal  afe,  -necef- 
firy  zwd.  'mdependeMt,  mud  be  unalterable  ;  for  all  Change 
IS  a  JVIotion,  either  from  a  greater  Perfedion  to  a  iefs,  or 
from  a  Iefs  to  a  greater,  or  at  lead  to  an  equal:  Seeing 
therefore  an  eierfiul,  neceff'ary  and  independent  Being  is 
aduf  purus,  uncapable  either  of  acquiring  or  lofingany 
Perfection,  it  muft  be  unalterable. 

Hence  it  follows,  that  Matter  cannot  be  eternal^  ne- 
cejfary  znd  independent :  Firll,  becaufe  it  is  an  incom- 
pleat  Being,  and  has  a  natural  Tendency  to  Forms;  'tis, 
as  f  may  fay,  out  of  its  Element,  in  a  State  of  Violence 
and  Longing,  until  it  compafles  a  perfect  Body,  and 
cannot  naturally  exifl:  without  the  a6lual  Exercife  of  that 
Office  :  To  be  therefore  a  Part  is  one  of  Matter's  Per- 
fedlions,  becaufe  nothing  can  naturally  defire,  what  is 
rot  a  natural  Perfection  :  Now  I  have  prov'd  already 
that  no  perfect  Species  could  be  eternal,  therefore  Matter 
did  acquire  fome  new  Pcrfe6tion  when  thofe  Species  be- 
gan, "which  it  had  not  before  i  hence  it  follows,  that 
Matter  is  milhcr  a^us  purus.,  nor  unalterable,  becaufe 
in  time  it  acquir'd  a  Perfection  which  it  had  not  ab  ceterno^ 
and  by  confequence  is  not  a  fe,  neceJJ'nry  and  independent ; 
therefore  it  was  created  by  an  All-powerful  Agent,  which 
we  call  God. 

Theom.  We  are  bemir'd  in  AriflotWs  Materia  prima, 
and  llipt  into  the  Syftem  of  fubftantial  Forms:  You  would 
fcare  me  with  old  Peripateticifm,  and  put  oft'  obfolete 
Dreams  for  Demonftration  :  That  counterfeit  Coin  is 
call'd  in,  and  only  goes  cui rent  at  Salamanca  in  Spain, 
where  Antiquity  has  the  fame  Charms  as  Novelty  has 
with  us:  They  Itick  to  old  Opinions,  as  they  do  to  old 
Fafliions,  and  will  no  more  part  with  Arijhtle,  than  the 
Chinefe  with  their  Beards :  But  we  have  degraded  the  Sta- 
girite.  -To  fwear  in  verba  Magiftri^  is  an  Incroachment 
upon  our  Liberty  ;  in  fine,  Sir,  Materia  prima  is  an 
empty  Name,  and  fubftantial  Forms  a  groundlefs  Inven- 
tion ;  and  your  Demonftration  is  void  of  all  Force,  be- 
caufe it  relies  on  Fiction  and  Vifion. 

Eufeb.  I  neither  declare  for  Arijlotle  nor  Gajfendus, 
nor  have  a  greater  Inclination  for  Des  Cartes,  than  the 
Chyatijh :  My  Proof  runs  thro'  any  Hypothefis,  and  is 

calcu- 


'fhe  Gentleman  InJiruBed,      ^iy 

calculated  up  for  all  Syftems.  Tell  me  your  Opinion, 
that  I  may  model  my  Argument,  and  point  it  againft 
your  Evafion, 

T'heom.  What  we  call  Matter^  is  nothing  but  a  complex 
of  various  fimple  Bodies  ab  atemo  ;  they  by  an  innate 
Quality  fcoLir  about,  and  by  a  mutual  Concourfe  frsme 
thofe  Compounds  that  ftock  the  Univerfe:  The  Visrje- 
ty  only  coniilts  in  the  Diverfity  of  Combinations:  When 
fuch  a  Number  o^ hot,  dry,  and  maift  Atoms  cling  toge- 
ther, upftartsa //or/^i  the  fame  may  be  fa  id  of  Mixis: 
They  differ  meerly  accidentally,  and  have  no  other  Form 
(if  I  may  fay  fo)  than  xYitTeleity  of  the  Mixture ;  hence 
it  comes,  that  Matter  is  not  fubjed  to  Changes,  and 
is  only  capable  of  a  new  extrinfick  Perfedlion  :  Beiides 
thofe  Atoms  being  perfeil  in  them.felves,  have  no  Bent 
or  Inclination  to  compound;  They  areas  content  in  a 
State  of  Separation,  asof  Compofition  ;  and  as  wiilingly 
form  a  Worm  as  2.  Monarch  :  Tho'  therefore  vy^^f/V/  were 
not  al>  ceterno  afcy  Matter  enjoin'd  all  its  natural  Perfec- 
tions ab  a!erKOy  and  is  withal  unchangeable,  unlefs  you 
call  a  new  Situation,  Alteration,  er'r.  So  that  you  mufl 
forge  a  new  Demonflration,  if  you  intend  to  argue  Mat- 
ter out  of  Afelty. 

Ezifeb.  I  fuppofe  you  do  not  expe(n:  a  Confutation  of 
your  Syltem,  it  lies  at  prefent  quite  out  of  my  Way, 
and  can  be  no  Part  of  my  Tafk  :  I  difcharge  my  Duty, 
if  I  fhew,  that  the  Atorrafiical  Hypothejis  does  not  wea- 
ken the  Force  of  my  Realon :  Notwithftanding  I  muft  tell 
you,  a  wife  Man  will  not  eafily  believe,  that  dull  and 
dead  Atoms  are  able  to  frame  a  living  Creature :  For 
certainly  Life  is  fomething  more  than  the  bare  Motion 
of  hot,  moiji,  and  dry  Atoms,  and  an  Atheift  mufl  have 
as  mean  an  Opinion  of  himfelf  as  of  God,  before  he  can 
ailert,  that  the  only  Diftindion  betvv'een  him  and  anln- 
fedl,  lies  in  the  Difference  of  the  Mixture :  Methinks, 
fuch  an  Opinion  might  difpofe  him  to  Modefty :  Nay,  of 
all  Men,  he  fhould  be  the  leaft  prefuming,  who  acknow- 
ledges fuch  a  bafe  Extraction,  and  puts  no  other  Diffe- 
rence between  him  and  a  Brute,  than  between /Ik e  Ho l- 
land  ^ndScotch  Cloth  :  Yet, upon  Experiment,  thefe  are 
the  great  Pretenders  of  Mankind,  who  while  they  con- 
fefs  themfelves  fo  near  ally'd  to  Beafts,  adore  their  Ex- 
cellencies, and  fall  down  before  Cahet,  as  the  Jews  did 

in 


428       ^he  Gentleman  Inflru^ed, 

in  theWildernefs :  Indeed  he  that  wants  Leifure  or  Capa^^ 
city  to  examine  his  Nature,  or  perfuades  himfelf  his 
better  Part  is  immortal,  may  grow  vain  upon  a  kind 
Prefumption,  or  the  real  Convidion  of  fuch  a  towering 
Perfeclion  ;  but  for  a  Man  to  be  proud,  who  pretends  to 
demonftrate  his  own  Bafenefs,  is  httle  lefs  than  Frenzy  ; 
Now  pray  attend.  Atoms,  you  lay,  have  an  intimate 
Principle  of  Motion  ;  Nature,  as  we  find  by  Experience, 
always  works  feme  End,  therefore  that  Motion  of  the 
Atoms'  has  fome  End  ;  we  cannot  difcover  the  Ends 
better  than  by  the  EfFeits,  the  EtFedls  are  Compounds, 
therefore  the  End  of  that  Motion  inherent  in  the  Mat- 
ter is  Compound ;  hence  it  follows,  that  adtually  tocon- 
Ititute  a  compos'd  Body,  is  a  Perfe6lion  of  the  Matter, 
becaufe  it  is  a  Po'Teflion  of  the  End,  to  which  Nature 
inclines  it  ;  but  it  did  not  poflefs  this  End  ab  ccterno^ 
therefore  ab  <eterno  it  wanted  fome  Perfedlion,  of  which 
it  was  capable;  therefore  'tis  alterable,  and  by  confe- 
quence  not  eternal  afe^  befides  if  it  had  not  all  the  Per- 
fections ab  ceterno^  it  poflefles  them  in  Time,  it  had  no 
Perfe6lions  ab  ceterno  \  becaufe  there  is  no  Reafon  why  it 
fhould  have  one,  and  not  all  others  of  which  it  is  capa- 
ble. Wherefore  I  conclude  it  was  not  ab  ccicrno  a  fe, 
neither  will  it  avail  you  to  reply,  thefe  Perfed:ions  are 
accidental  ;  fii^Ji,  becaufe  ens  a  fe  can  have  no  accidental 
Perfedlion,  for  whatever  it  has  is  neceifary  andindentify'd 
with  its  Nature;  znd  fee ofidly,  becaufe  it  isa^uspnrtis^ 
as  I  faid  before. 

'Theom.  This  is  ridiculous  toExcefs !  What  if  a  Ball  of 
Wax  was  a  fe,  could  I  not  mould  it  into  a  Cube,  not 
melt  it  down?  You  return  a  Paradox  for  an  Anfwer. 

Eufeb.  You  muft  not  wonder  if  one  Abfurdity  begets 
another,  a  ridiculous  confequence  flows  from  a  ridicu- 
lous Antecedent;  and  one  Paradox  is  the  beft  Proof  of 
another.  To  exped:  Reafon  from  Nonfenfe,  is  to  gape 
after  Impoffibilities.  If  you  fuppofe  a  Sphere  of  Wax 
eternal  a  fe,  either  that  Figure  was  neceflary,  or  it  was 
not ;  if  it  was  not,  who  call  it  into  that  Form  ?  Why  was 
it  a  Sphere  rather  than  a  Cube  ?  If  it  owes  the  Deter- 
mination to  fome  exterior  Principle,  then  the  Wax  was 
not  a  fe,  becaufe  the  Figure  was  not :  If  that  Figure  was 
neceflary,  the  Nature  of  the  Wax  requir'd  it ;  if  the  Na- 
ture of  the  Wax  requir'd  it,  it  can  be  deftroy'd  no  more 

than 


ne  Gentleman  InJIrucfed,     425^ 

than  the  Nature  :  But  if  you  fuppofe  that  Sphere  a  fe, 
the  Nature  of  the  Wax  cannot  pcffibly  be  deftroy'd, 
therefore  neither  can  the  Figure  ;  indeed  that  Wax  would 
be  very  ftubborn,  but  Impoflibilities  are  an  inflexible 
Generation,  and  can  no  more  be  brought  over  to  Rea- 
fon,  than  Atheifts.  The  World  therefore  is  not  eternal 
afe,  nor  any  Part  of  it;  whence  it  remains,  that  a  moft 
powerful  Author  drew  it  out  of  Nothing,  to  whom  we 
owe  our  Being  and  Converfation,  and  by  confequence 
Homage. 

Theom.  Is  this  all  you  have  to  fay  to  the  Point  ? 

Eufeb.  I  could  enlarge  on  the  Matter  ;  but  for  the 
prefent,  I  leave  the  Arguments  to  your  Confideration. 
We  lie  under  a  Dilemma ;  if  they  hold  good,  they  will 
ftand  Upon  Record  againft  you;  "if  not,  againfl  me; 
which  I  fuppofe  will  be  no  unacceptable  Revenge.  You 
will  have  the  Satisfaction  of  laughing  at  the  Vanity  of 
the  Attempt,  and  of  applauding  your  Abilities  into  the 
Bargain. 


DIALOGUE   XXI. 

Thefixth  Proof.  Tho'*  there  were  a  GoD,  he  cannot  con- 
vince thofe  Atheifts  of  his  Beings  vjho  refufe  AJfent  to 
the  foregoing  Proofs. 

Eufeh.T  Have  worfted  you  in  the  Judgment  of  Autho- 
^  rity,  and  have  difpatch'd  Part  of  your  Excep- 
tions: We  are  come  to  the  laft  Tribunal  ofReafon,  and 
if  I  have  the  good  Fortune  to  foil  you  here,  our  Suit  is  at 
an  End  ;  and  certainly  I  have  ail  the  Grounds  in  the 
World  to  hope  a  favourable  Iflue,  for  Reafon  never  re- 
verfesthe  Sentence  of  univerfal  Tradition,  when  back'd 
with  a  hundred  Reafons. 

In  the  firft  Place ;  you  cannot  admit  the  World  to  be 
eternal  afe,  without  ftriking  upon  a  manifeft  Abfurdity  ; 
now  Abfurdities  cannot  poflibly  flow  from  Truth ;  they 
are  the  Children  of  Falfhood,  and  the  Offspring  of  Error. 

Theom.  If  you  can  fhew  that  the  Hypothejis  of  the 
World's  Eternity  leads  to  any  thing  that  claflies  with  Rea- 
fon, or  borders  upon  Error,  without  doubt  I  lie  at  your 

Mercy : 


430      ne  Gentleman  InJiruBed, 

Mercy  :  The  Confequence  takes  after  the  Antecedenti 
and  'tis  impoirible  for  that  to  be  ridiculous,  without  this 
be  erroneous. 

EHJ''eh.  You  have  granted,  That  if  there  be  a  God,  he 
can  manifell  his  Being  to  Men,  by  fome  fenfible  Effedof 
his  Omnipotence. 

Theom.  I  have,  and  a  Man  mull:  take  Pleafurein  Folly, 
and  dote  on  Contradictions,  bfefore  he  can  deny  a  Truth 
fo  evident :  For  to  confefs  an  omnipotent  Being,  and  to 
refufehim  the  Povi^er  of  manifefting  himfelf  by  fome  ex- 
terior Sign  to  a  Creature  who  is  furnifh'd  with  Senfes, 
and  endow'd  with  Reafon,  is  a  flat  Contradiction. 

Eufeb.  I  arn  glad  to  hear  fo  ingenious  a  Confeflion  : 
Fray  therefore  take  Notice ;  if  God  intended  to  difco- 
ver  himfelf  by  an  exterior  Sign,  he  would  chufe  fome 
ftately  Work  worthy  of  his  Power,  and  fui^table  to  his 
Grandeur. 

Thcom.  He  would. 

Enfeb.  Let  us  then  fuppofe  for  fome  Moments,  that 
you  and  I  flept  in  our  Beds  of  pure  Poffibility ;  that  we 
are  now,  what  we  were  a  thoufand  Years  ago,  very  No- 
things. Let  us  fuppofe  befides,  that  all  things  elfe  fall  in- 
to the  fame  State  of  Impotence  ;  that  an  infinite  Being 
exifts  alone,  and  refolves  to  communicate  his  Perfections 
to  fome  Creatures,  and  to  manifeft  himfelf  to  Man,  the 
moft  perfect  Piece  of  his  Power.  Immediately  one  Fiat 
calls  a  glorious  Fabrick  from  an  eternal  Nothings  uniform 
in  Variety,  and  various  in  Uniformity  :  A  Creature  dig- 
nified with  Reafon,  fet  off  with  Senfes,  and  enrich'd  with 
a  hundred  noble  Qualities,  marches  at  the  Head  of  this 
new-born  Multitude  :  He  admires  at  the  ftately  Archi- 
tecture of  the  infant  World,  the  multiplicity  of  Parts,  the 
ftupendious  Contrivance  and  Harmony  of  the  whole : 
Can  he,  or  his  Pofterity  by  the  Force  of  Reafon  come  to 
the  Knov/ledge  of  the  Deity  that  made  it?  According  to 
your  Principles  they  cannot :  For  tho'  we  fuppofe  this 
new-fram'd  World  a  thoufand  Times  more  perfeCt  than 
that  we  live  in,  they  may  conclude  it  Was  eternal,  as  now 
you  do,  and  they  have  a  better  Plea,  becaule  we  fup- 
pofe it  more  perfeCt.  'Tis  true,  the  firft  Man  knows  he 
is  not  eternal,  but  of  what  Standing  the  World  is,  or 
how  it  comes  to  be,  is  a  Myftery :  He  may  afcribe  his 
good  Luck  to  Chance  or  his  own  Nature,  as  well  as  you; 

but 


but  if  we  come  to  his  Defcendants,  they  will  be  at  a 
puzzle  for  the  Original  of  their  G-enealogy :  They  can 
arrive  at  the  Knowledge  of  it,  either  by  Tradition  or 
Reafon ;  and  if  by  either,  or  both  thefe  Means  they  can 
be  afcertain'd  they  had  a  Beginning,  why  are  not  you 
aflur'd  we  had  one?  For  which  way  fnall  they  meet  with 
a  more  diftulive  Tradition,  or  more  pregnant  Arguments 
than  we  have  for  the  Beginning  of  this  World?  If  the 
Structure  of  the  nev;-fuppos'd  World  be  admirable  to 
Amazement,  that  of  the  old  is  furprizing:  If  there  ap- 
pear in  the  Conftitution  of  that,  as  many  Characters  of 
Wifdom  and  Power,  as  Parts,  the  very  Blind  may  read 
as  many  in  the  Frame  of  this ;  that  may  open  us  a  Per- 
fpedtive  of  Miracles,  and  this  unfolds  a  Scene  of  Won- 
ders :  If  therefore  in  fpight  of  Tradition  and  Reafon,  in 
fpight  of  the  moft  vifible  Charaders  of  Wifdom  and 
Power;  in  fine,  maugre  as  many  Wonders  as  there  are 
Objects  without  us,  or  Veins,  Mufcles  and  Arteries 
within  us,  Atheiits  deny  this  World  had  any  other  Author 
than  its  own  Neceflity  and  Independency  ;  why  may  not 
the  Atheiits  of  the  new  World  elude  the  Force  of  Tradi- 
tion and  Reafon  by  your  wretched  Evafion  ?  They  may 
certainly  entrench  themfelves  in  the  Hypothejis  of  Eter- 
nity, and  out-face,  by  your  Example,  downright  De- 
monftration. 

Theom,  Tho'  indeed  thefe  new  Gentlemen  would  be 
at  a  Nonplus^  as  well  as  we;  and  1  believe  that  would 
vie  Incredulity  with  this,  yet  God  might  manifeft  him- 
felf  many  Ways :  Firfi^  By  infufing  into  all  Men  as:  clear 
a  Convidlion  of  his  Being,  as  we  have  of  the  firft  Prin- 
ciples of  Reafon  :  Secondly,  By  teaching  them  fome  De- 
monftration,  that  he  created  the  V/orld,  v;hich  lie;?  out 
of  Sight:  hndThirdly,  By  divine  Revelation.  Thefe 
Methods  are  very  feafible,  and  I  fancy  would  do  the 
Bufinefs. 

Eufeb.  Firft,  All  thofe  Ways  are  fupernatural :  Now 
*tis  very  ftrange  that  Omnipotence  fhould  want  Pow.sr  to 
frame  a  Work  capable  to  point  out  to  a  rational  Creature 
its  divine  Contriver,  without  the  Affiftance  of  Miracles: 
But  again,  tho'  God  fhould  infufe  into  all  thofe  Inhabi- 
tants of  the  new  World,  as  clear  a  Knowledge  of  their 
Origin,  as  of  the  firft  Principles,  do  you  think  ;ill  De- 
bates would  vanifh  at  the  Approach  of  that    glaring 

Light  ? 


43 ^      The  Gentleman  hifiru^ed. 

Light  ?  Have  not  Men  deny'd  the  Truth  of  thefe  great 
Principles  in  fpite  of  Convi6lion,  altho'  they  had  no 
other  Temptation  to  be  foolifh,  but  the  Pleafure  of  con- 
tradidting  ?  And  why  fliould  you  expeft  in  your  Cafe  a 
more  reafonable  Procedure  ?  Efpecially  when  the  omni- 
potent Motives  of  Lewdnefs  andEpicurifm,  that  debauch 
your  Underilanding,  would  corrupt  and  bribe  theirs :  For 
they  may  oppofe  againft  Demonftration  thefe  Arguments 
which  fupport  your  Obftinacy,  and  buoy  up  your  Infi- 
delity. I  cannot  conceive  how  it  is  poffible  for  an  infi- 
nite Mercy,  and  an  infinite  Juftice  to  meet  in  the  fame 
Subje6l,  how  Juftice  can  pardon,  or  Mercy  puniflij 
therefore,  there  is  no  fuch  Thing. 

To  fay  fomething  can  be  made  of  nothing,  is  to  crofs 
upon  Reafon  ;  to  build  new  Principles  upon  the  Ruin  of 
the  old,  and  by  confequence  to  break  down  the  Inclo- 
I'urc  between  Sophiftry  and  Demonftration,  Truth  and 
Falfhood  ;  therefore  the  H'^orld  was  not  created:  Nay, 
'twas  poffible  to  h^  ab  aterno,  therefore/'^  was.  What 
Evidence  can  befecure  from  the  Attempts  of  thefe  Ar- 
guments 't  They  dare  attack  Euclid^  and  huff  ^pollqnitii: 
U  refoluce  Denials  pafs  content  for  Proofs,  and  foffibi- 
lities  for  Demonftratlons,  we  pafs  all  things  on  Cour- 
tefy.  A  Man  that  dares  look  a  Fool  in  the  Face,  may 
do  ftrange  Execution ;  he  may  deny  us  into  Nothing, 
and  by  dhe  fly  Turn  of  a  Poffibility  demonftrate  us  out 
of  Being. 

Theom.  Nay,  a  Man  that  is  refolv'd  to  pufh  Folly 
home,  may  puzzle  a  fix  form  Philofopher,  yet  the  De- 
feat of  the  one,  will  prove  more  glorious  than  the  Vidlo- 
ry  of  the  other  ;  but  then  I  thought  Evidence  carried  all 
before  it,  and  captivated  more  Underftandings  than  the 
Grand  Seignior  has  enflav'd  Chriftians. 

Eufeb.  Evidence  indeed  is  generally  victorious,  but 
oftentimes  'tis  over-match'd  :  A  Man  feconded  by  Preju- 
dice or  Intereft,  ftands  immoveable ;  you  muft  change 
his  Circumftances  before  he  will  alter  his  Opinion :  His 
Underftanding  never  changes  Sides,  unlefs  Intereft  mar- 
ches offfirft;  but  when  this  wheels  about,  that  follows 
through  a  thoufand  Errors.  The  Sun  has  Beams  enough, 
not  only  to  fill,  but  even  to  dazzle  a  well-difpos'd  Eye; 
but  if  a  Film  crofies  the  Pupil,  or  a  Catarait  interpofes 
between  the  Cryftal,  in  fpight  of  Light  the  Organ  re- 
mains' 


T'he  Gentleman  Inflru^ed,    433 

imains  in  Obfcurity,  and  the  Patient  finds  the  Effe<^s  of 
Night,  and  the  Horror  of  Darknefs  at  Adid-day  :  Thus 
Ihe  Caufe  ftands  with  the  Underftanding.  I  grant  thofe 
People  we  talk  of  would  have  Proofs  fufficient  to  content 
a  well-difpofed  Underftanding,  and  fo  have  you  ;  but 
if  they  are  haunted  with  the  Spirit  of  Difpute  and  Ob- 
ftinacy,  if  Intereft  ftands  againft  Creation  and  God,  the 
Intelledl  falls  prefently  into  Diforder,  Mifts  arife,  and 
Fumes  interpofe  ;  and  when  'tis  thus  difmounted.  Evi- 
dence by  a  kind  oi  Antiparijiajis  produces  Obftinacy,  not 
Convifftion,  and  rather  hardens  the  Heart  than  foftens 
the  Brain. 

Your  fecond  Means  is  expos'd  to  the  fame  Exceptions: 
I  do  not  queftion  hut  God  can  draw  a  Legion  of  Demcn- 
ftrations  from  the  Conllitution  of  the  World  to  evince 
he  made  it,  which  are  not  within  the  reach  of  our 
Knowledge:  Yet  if  the  new-found  World  Atheifts  are 
of  the  fame  Temper  with  thofe  of  our  Horizon,  they  will 
difpute  their  Ground,  and  never  furrender,  till  the  Fire 
of  Hell  ads  upon  Seni'e,  and  fo  conveys  Truth  into 
the  Underftanding  by  eternal  Sufferings :  For  as  you  (a- 
gainft  the  common  Vote  of  Mankind,  againft  the  plain 
Conviftion  of  Reafon)caft  Creation  out  of  Doors,  both 
as  neediefs  and  impolTible,  what  hinders  them  from  fol- 
lowing your  Foot-fteps,  and  oppoling  to  all  Demonftra- 
tions  thefe  groundlefs  Conjedtures,  that  fupport  your  in- 
credulity ?  If  you  fay  a  Man  that  dares  fly  in  the  Face 
of  Evidence  is  a  Monfter,  that  he  ought  rather  to  be  caned 
than  argu'd  into  Reafon,  you  are  in  the  right ;  but  thefe 
Monfters  over- run  the  World,  they  are  grown  fo  com- 
mon, that  they  rather  pleafe  than  aftonilh ;  for  now  an 
inflexible  Obftinacy,  and  a  mighty  Wit  are  become  fy- 
nonimous,  and  'tis  tar  more  warrantable  und  modifh  to 
ftand  clofe  to  Intereft,  than  [o  yield  to  the  Force  of 
Reafon. 

I  cannot  guefs  why  PveVclation  fliould  prove  mors 
effedtual'than  Demon'ftraiion;  thefe  inward  Lights  are 
always  accompany'd  with  fome  '^Abfurdity  j  and  though 
they  illuminate,  they  leave  us  in  the  dark  :  An  unwary 
Man  miay  eafily  be  deluded,  he  may  miftake  Tempta- 
tion for  Infpiration,  and  tlic  Voice  of  God  ibr  the  Spirit 
of  Fornication.  We  remember  yet  what  mad  Pranks 
our  Fathers  law  the  laft  Age,  whea-People  rebell'd  by 

F  f  Uivii.Qf 


434     ^^^  Gentleman  Injlru^ei. 

divine  Impulfe,  and  executed  their  Prince  on  a  Scaffold 
by  Revelatfon  ;    when  they  bled   their   Fellow-Subjeds 
Purfes,  and  then  their  Veins,  by  the  Command  of  the 
Spirit ;  when  they  tranlgrefs'd  God's  Laws  by  Providence, 
and  thofe  of  Nature  by  Infpiration:  And  asMen  fanati- 
cally inclin'd,  take  every  Impulfe  of  PafTion  for  divine  Re- 
velation ;  fo  they  who  love  Libertinifm  look  upon  Reve- 
lation it  I'elf  as  an  IlJuhon,   they  wiil  admit  of  nothing 
Divine,  but  Senfuality,  they  examine  Truth  by  the  Stan- 
dard of  Pleafure,  and  whatever  baulks  Appetite  is  Spleen 
and   Vifion  :    One   would  think  the  Revelation  of  the   • 
World's  Creation  made  fo  many  thoufand  Years  ago  to 
Mofes^  is  certain  almoil  to  Evidence;  it  has  undergone, 
the  Exanien  oT  Ages,  and  the  Cr/z/f/jw  of  obftlnate  In- 
credulity, it  has  triumph'd  over  Ignorance, conquer'd  Ma- 
lice, and  {l;!am'd  thofe  it  could  not  convince ;  I  do  not  fee- 
how  a  particular  Revelation  can  be  more  perfualive  than 
that  which  has  been  put  a  thoufand  times  to  the  Teft  % 
nor  how  this  can  force  an  Underitanding  againft  the  Biafs 
of  Intereft,  that  will  not  come  over  to  the  other :  For 
ftill  you  may  run  to  your  old  Retrenchment,  The  World' 
was  pojjible  ab  ceterno,   therefore  it  was  ab  aterno;  id  eft ^ 
you  may  take  begging  the  Queftion  for  Proving,  and 
Impudence  for  Reafon. 

Theo.  What  think  you,  if  God  (hould  take  you  and 
me  by  the  Hair,  as  you  fancy  an  Angel  did  Habcikkuk^ 
and  pod  us  away  to  the  imaginary  Spaces  above  the  Em- 
pyreum  ?  If  hefhould  appear  in  Majcfty,  and  regale  our 
Sight  with  a  Scene  of  Creation  ? 

Eufeb.  Why,  I  think  you  would  be  amazed,  but  not 
convinc'd  ;  you  mounted  an  Atheill,  and  would  return 
one. 

Theo.  That's  ftrange! 

Eufeb.  'Tis  fo  indeed  ;  3'et  not  more  ftrange,  than  that 
after  fo  rpany  Proofs  of  a  Divinity,  you  remain  in  Infi- 
delity :  For  if  God  did  appear,  he  muft  borrow  fome  fen- 
fible  Shape  ;  human  Eyes  are  too  feeble  to  gaze  upon  a 
Spirit :  The  Glory  of  a  Divinity  dazzles  them  ;  they 
fink  under  the  Splendor  of  the  Omnipotent.  Now,  he 
has  appear'd  already  under  the  Form  of  Fire  and  Smoak 
•  to  a  whole  Army,  not  able  to  bear  his  Majefty,  and  this 
Appearance  is  made  fo  credible,  that  he  who  will  not  be- 
lieve fo  many  thoufand  Eyes,  mull  be  a  Fool  to  believe 

two :- 


The  Gentleman  Itiftru^ed,     43^ 

two  :  Again,  how  do  you  know  but  this  World  eter- 
nally floated  (like  a  fwimming  Ifland)  in  the  vail  Ocean 
of  thofe  imaginary  Spaces ;  and  by  a  lucky  PufF  ot 
Chance,  or  Storm  of  Atoms,  was  wafted  over  to  you  in 
the  Nick  of  Time  ?  Thefe  Cafualties  are,  I  hope,  pof- 
fible  :  Bcfides,  that  unlucky  Principle,  ex  nihilo  nihil  fit^ 
might  gravel  your  Underftanding  above,  as  now  it  does 
below,  for  Situation  makes  no  Alteration  in  Truth  or 
Falfliood  ;  if  it  be  evident  here,  it  will  be  evident  there  ; 
and  if  it  appear  Sophiftry  in  the  new  World,  why  fhould 
it  pafs  for  Demonftration  in  the  old  ?  But  if  this  fhould 
chance  to  work  upon  you,  your  Fellow-Atheifts  would 
be  where  they  are,  unlefs  God  fhould  f^U  upon  new 
Creations,  and  cure  their  Infidelity  by  condefcending  to 
their  Pride,  and  fatisfying  their  Curiofity  :  But  then  you 
Vv'ould  condemn  him  to  a  Drudgery  more  infupportable 
than  that  of  looking  after  Hies.  He  muft,  it  feems. 
Work,  if  not  for  his  Living,  at  leaft  for  Adoralion  :  He 
inuft  fawn  on  Atheitls  to  deferve  their  Protedion,  and 
ferve  an  Apprenticefhip  to  be  acknowledg'd  for  their 
Mafter. 


DIALOGUE    XXIL 

The  rnoft  pluTiJible   Exceptions    of  Atheijli   againjh  the 
IVurliCs  Creation  are  refuted. 

Eufb.T  Have  done  with  my  Arguments,  which  muft 
-*-  be  very  fatisfaaory,  unlels  you  can  invalidate 
them  by  urgent  Reafons,  and  prove  by  Evidence  a  priori ^ 
or  at  leaft  from  the  very  Nature  and  Conftitution  of  the 
World,  that  it  was  impollible  to  be  made:  Favour  ms 
therefore  with  a  flwrt  Lift  of  your  Reaibns,  range  them, 
if  you  pleafe,  in  Rank  and  File,  draw  them  up  to  the 
belt  Advantage,  and  make  the  moft  of  them  ;  yet  I  fancy, 
when  all  is  done,  you  muft  eftablKh  the  World's  Eternity 
by  begging  heartily,  not  by  proving  it 5  and  if  I  ftay, 
till  you  evince  it  by  Realbn,  the  World  may  have  an 
End,  before  you  prove  iiaaard  or  Neceffity  give  it  » 
Beginning. 

F  f  1  Thio. 


436      The  Gentleman  hJruBed, 

T'heo.  In  the  firft  place ;  we  cannot  give  the  World 
a  Befiinning  without  forcing  Realbn,  and  impofmg  on 
our  Underftanding.  This  Dodrine  muft  be  fupported 
on  the  Ruins  of  firlt  Principles,  and  whofoever  abets 
it  muft  abjure  thofe  great  Truths,  that  Mankind  avows 
to  be  the  Standard  and  Meafure  of  all  others.  Ex  mhilo 
nihil  fit  is  the  common  Voice  of  Nature;  'tis  too  clear 
to  be  prov'd ;  it  (hines  on  the  Underftanding,  as  the  Sun 
does  on  our  Eyes;  and  we  can  as  foon  find  Night  at 
Mid-day,  as  Fallacy  in  the  Axiom  ;  yet  if  we  admit 
Crcaiion,  we  muft  daPn  out  this  Principle,  and  by  the 
fr.me  Authority  cafheer  all  others,  and  then,  as  blind 
Men,  we  fhall  walk  in  the  dark,  we  fhall  difcourfe 
Vv'ithout  Rule,  argue  without  Reafon,  and,  like  the  Dog 
in  the  Fable,  chop  at  the  Shadow  for  the  Subftance,  /'.  e. 
we  Ihall  miftake  Falftiood  for  Truth,  and  Error  for  De- 
monftration. 

Secondly^  'Tis  an  undoubted  Maxim  in  Philofophy, 
that  to  boulfter  up  an  Opinion,  we  muft  not  multiply 
things  without  Neceffity,  Non  funt  muh'tplicanda  anted 
fine  Neccjfitate.  Now  there  is  no  need  to  forge  an  infinite 
Being,  for  the  World  might  be  of  it  felf  ab  aterno :  The 
moft  fubtle  Logician  in  the  World  can  never  make  it 
appear  that  the  Hypothefis  implies  a  Contradi6lion  in 
T'ermints^  or  even  by  Inference.  To  what  purpofe  do 
we  entangle  our  felves  in  Difficulties  ?  Why  do  we  frame 
an  omnipotent,  wife,  and  juft  Creator,  with  a  thoufand 
other  pompous  Titles,  both  unintelligible  and  frightful? 
Have  Fears  and  Apprehenfions  fuch  ravifhing  Charms? 
Cannot  our  Underftandings  be  pleas'd  unlefs  they  are 
aoMpL-is'd  ?  Nor  be  fatisfied  unlels  we  hang  them  on  the 
Tenters? 

Thirdly,  A  thoufand  Parts  of  the  Univerfe  feem  not 
only  fuperfluous,  but  noxious:  They  are  too  vile  even 
to  make  a  Shew,  and  are  only  fit  to  increafe  the  Num- 
ber of  Creatures,  fo  that  they  reach  not  the  Quality  of 
Mutes,  that  ferve,  at  leaft,  for  Pomp  and  Oftentation: 
Yet  were  they  barely  without  Employment,  without 
Station  or  Defign,  I  would  let  them  lie  quiet  in  the  State 
ofldlenefs;  but  alas,  they  were  Executioners  by  Nature, 
•as  well  as  OiHcc,  and  enter  into  the  World  to  plague  it : 
For  F^xample,  if  there  were  a  God,  can  you  imagine  he 
would  fo  far  abafe  his  Power,  or  proftitute  his  Wifdom, 

as 


the  G^tirtlUAta  InfiruBeJ.     437. 

35  to  produce  Lice  and  Fleas  ?  That  he  would  foii4  his 
Fingers  with  Toadi ;  or  condemn  his  Omnipotence  to 
dig  F/ies  out  of  Dunghills?  MethinJcs  it  would  iuit  bet- 
ter with  three  grand  Attributesof  a  Deity,  Power^  Wif- 
dom  and  Goodnefs^  to  clear  the  World  of  thefe  Plagues, 
than  to  ftock  it:  Plagues  I  call  them,  for  their  very  End 
is  Mifchief;  fome  torment  a  Mar,  o  hers  kill  him,  and 
the  lead  troublefomemoleft  him.  You  know,  Sir,  what 
a  Figure  Domhian  makes  in  Story,  for  his  unbefeeming 
Diverfions;  if  it  be  beneath  a  Mm  to  flay  Vermin,  'tis 
certainly  below  God  to  make  them.  Had  I  an  Inclina- 
tion to  believe  the  World  was  made,  I  would  turn  Ma- 
nichieayi^  and  rather  admit  two  firft  Principles  than  one  : 
Now  if  thefe  Infeds  were  not  created,  why  /hould  I  ad- 
mit a  creating  Principle  of  any  thing  elfe?  Come,  Sir, 
let  us  fay  rather,  all  things  were  of  themfelves,  than 
vote  God  the  Drudgery  of  making  them.  They  are  be- 
low the  Care  of  an  infinite  Majcfty,  and  the  Power  of 
the  Omnipotent.  I  am  perfuaded  'tis  lefs  irrational  to 
deny  a  God,  than  to  aflign  him  the  moft  fordid  Employ- 
ments ;  firft,  of  producing  Lice,  Fleas  and  Toads ^  and 
then  of  conferving  them.  I  have  many  other  Excepti- 
ons againft  your  Opinion;  but  thefe  fufiice  to  difcaid  it 
even  of  Probability. 

Eufeb.  You  have  propos'd  your  Difficulties,  I  will 
return  an  Anfwer.  To  the  Firjl,  indeed  a  Man  cannot 
perfuade  himfelf  the  World  was  the  Produdl  of  Necef- 
fity  or  Chance,  without  atfronting  Reafon,  and  tricking 
his  underftanding  :  To  ally  thofe  infinite  Perfections  of 
Eternity  and  independence  with  the  Vilenefs  of  creeping 
Infedis,  is  to  bring  to  one  Centre,  Extreams  that  can  never 
meet:  'Tis  toraife  Vermin  above  their  Level,  and  pull 
down  thofe  vaft  Perfedtions  below  theirs:  'Tis  to  inveft 
Toads  and  Fro^s  with  the  Appurtenances  of  the  Divinity, 
and  tocloath  'em,  like  the  Davj  in  the  Fable,  with  gaudy 
Plumes  that  belong  to  another:  Kut  when  we  make 
God  Author  of  the  World,  we  ftumble  upon  no  Ablur- 
dity  ;  for  iho'  the  World  be  a  ftately  Work,  yet  I  con- 
ceive it  neither  furpafles  the  Power  nor  the  Skill  of  a 
molt  powerful  and  moft  wife  Artift.  Omnipotence  has 
certainly  an  excellent  Knack  at  making,  and  an  infinite 
Wifdom  at  contriving.  Seeing  therefore  the  Perfeftion  of 
t'he  Work  is  not  above  the  Abilities  of  the  Archited,  we 
F  f  3  do 


43^      I'he  Gentleman  Injiru^ed, 

do  not  on  this  Account  trAnfgrefs  any  known  Principle 
if  we  afcribe  it  to  him. 

Indeed,  by  admitting  Creation,  I  banifh  your  ex  mhilo 
fiihil  fit,  from  the  Number  of  Principles;  but  1  do  not 
at  all  intrench  upon  Nature,  nor  encroach  upon  the  Pre- 
rogative of  theUnderitandingby  out-lawing  it :  'Tis  guil- 
ty of  Intrufion,  and  holds  the  Jlace  by  the  favour  of  Ig- 
norance :  Thofe  People  who  firft  principled  it,  were  with- 
out Principles  thenifelves,  they  knew  not  the  Extent  of 
Omnipotence,  nor  invaded  its  Privileges.  An  omnipotent 
Power  can  do  any  thing  that  is  poflible,  ».  e.  that  implies 
not  a  Contradiftion :  Shew  me, if  you  can,a  Contradiction 
that  an  All-poiuerful  Being  Jbould  make  fomethiy!^  without 
the  Helpofpreviou-f  MiUter  ;  if  you  cannot,  your  Principle 
is  juftly  degraded  :  Nor  will  other  Maxims  be  involv'd  in 
itsdiigrace;  they'll  keep  their  Poft  in  fpight  of  Oppofiti- 
on,  and  receive  fubmiflion  from  Reafon,  where-e'er  they 
meet  it:  But  if  you  fuffer  your  A'laxim  to  be  reftrain'd, 
and  not  let  it  ramble  into  the  other  World,  I'll  embrace  it 
with  open  Arms,  zsOcellus  and  Arijiotle  did  :  Yet  in  this 
Cafe  it  will  lignify  no  more  than  that  all  natural  Gene- 
rations fuppofe  a  Subjedt ;  and  in  this  Senfe  I  fay  of  your 
Principle,  what  one  faid  of  Euclid's  firft  Demonftration  ; 
They  were  fo  plain,  that  an  Jfs  could  not  mifs  them  :  In  a 
"Word,  ex  fjihilo  nihil  fit.    Nature  can  give  Being  and 
Life  to  no  new  Productions,  unlcfs  {he  has  a  Subject  to 
work  on :  In  this  Point  flie  has  no  Prerogative  above  a 
Carver,  tho'  in  the  other  fhe  hr  exceeds,   for  her  Works 
are  more  fine  and  delicate  ;  flie  giv(  sLife,  the  other's  Skill 
ftops  at  Figure  :  But  if  we  look  upon  God,  your  Principle 
-is  out  of  Doors;  he  cannot  only  work  on  Matter,  but 
make  it:  This  argues,  you'll  iay,  an  Excels  of  Power ; 
'tis  true,  but  yet  it  does  not  out  ftretch  Omnipotence. 

To  the  Second,  I  anfwer,  your  Argument  faulters  in 
every  Part  ;  it  proves  too  much,  and  by  confcquence  juft 
nothing:  It  ftands  for  either  fide  of  the  Contradiftion, 
and  therefore  fupports  neither.  Eor  as  you  argue  thus, 
'TlL'cis  pr.'ffiblefor  the  World  to  exifi  ofit  jelj\  therefore  we 
twuji  Kot  father  it  upon  any  fiuper-.or  Agent :  So  by  the  fam.e 
Logick  I  may  conclude,  that  either  all  the  Materials, 
that  compofeL5»^f»,rang'd  themfclvesin  that  fine  Order 
we  fee  them,  or  that  Chance  and  Hazard  blunder'd  up- 
on it,  becaufe  either  way  is  poflible :  Nay,  methinks  your 

Argumenc 


^e  Gentleman  InflruBed.     45^ 

Argument  pleads  for  any  Abfurdity  :  'Tis  poffible  for 
Stones  to  Ipeak,  therefore  for  ought  we  know  they  do, 
when  they  are  alone,  and  if  they  keep  Silence  in  our  Com- 
pany, 'tis  out  of  the  fame  Policy  Baboons  v/ere  mule  in 
America^  (as  the  Indians  told  the  Spa»iards,)  viz.  to  avoid 
their  Cruelty.  'Tis  poffible  for  an  excellent  Watch  to 
ftart  up  from  a  cafual  Combination  of  Atoms  ;  let  us 
therefore  out-law  'Tompion,zr\A  tranfport  the  whole  Com- 
pany of  Watch-makers  into  FirgwtaXo  plant  Tobacco -^ 
their  Art  is  fuperttuous  in  E'l^land,  as  well  as  their  Per- 
fons,  lince  PofJibility  has  fet  up  Shop,  Watches  will  pour 
in  upon  us  by  thoufands,  we  make  take  them  up  as  the 
Jews  did  Quails,  and  when  we  have  made  our  own  Pro- 
viiion,  pleaiure  a  Friend  with  half  a  Dozen. 

Theo.  You  are  in  a  Vein  of  Pleafantry,  but  Arguments 
are  feldom  laught  out  of  Countenance.  If  Poffibility  be  a 
weak  Proof,  Mirth  is  a  feeble  Solution. 

Eufeb.  You  wrong  me.  Sir,  I  am  as  feriousas  the  Mat- 
ter will  bear,  and  if  my  Difcourfe  has  any  thing  of  Mirth, 
you  are  beholden  to  the  Subjeft  for  the  Diverlion.  A 
Buffoon  under  a  grave  Difguife,  may  be  miftaken  for  a 
venerable  Alderman,  but  when  he  is  cas'd,  the  Alderman 
retires  to  make  room  for  Scaramouch.  To  treat  Foole- 
ries with  Refpe6f,  is  to  mifplace  Ceremony;  and  not  to 
lay  them  open,  is  but  a  Degree  from  abetting  them. 

Theo.  If  Contempt  can  baffle  an  Argument,  the  moft 
ftrift  Demonftrations  are  not  fecure:  By  your  leave,  Sir, 
you  either  miftake  the  Strefs  of  my  Reafon,  or  fling  in  a 
handful  of  piquant  Railleries  to  evade  it:  Pray  attend; 
from  this  Antecedent,  'Twas  pojfible  for  the  World  to  be  ab 
aterno  a  fe.,  this  Inference  follows,  therefore  it  did  exijl : 
For  if  the  World  was  poffible  ab  ceterno^  'tis  a  neceflary 
and  independent  Being;  but  'tis  evident  that  a  neceflary 
and  independent  Being  is  eternal,  therefore  if  the  World 
were  poffible  air  aterm^  'tis  manifeft  it  did  exift  a  fe  ab 
<eterm  ;  and  therefore,  all  Recourfe'to  a  Deity  is  vain 
and  fuperfiuous.  What  Abfurdity  can  be  found  in  fo 
plain  a  Difcourfe,  but  that  a  Man  of  Wit  did  not  coni- 
prehend  it  ? 

Eufeb.  Your  Arguments  with  thefe  Amendments  is  ftill 
defecflive ;  it  proves  not  at  all  the  Queftion,  but  impu- 
dently begs  it.     For  it  amounts  to  this,  that  the  World 
was  ab  A-ternOy  therefore  it  was  ab  aterm.     If  you  intend 
F  f  4  .  to 


440      ^^^  Gentleman  Inflru^ed, 

to  make  any  thing  of  your  Enthymem^  prove  firft  the  An- 
tecedent, and  then  we  will  confider  what  is  to  be  done, 
■with  the  Confequence.  Now  I  have  already  prov'd  the. 
World  could  not  poflibly  exift<3^  icterno  (as  you  fuppofe), 
without  any  other  Proof  than  a  bare  AHertion.  in  the 
mean  time,  methinks  this  Arguiijcnt  proves  as  forcibly 
the  Contradidlion  of  your  Thejis ;  'twas  not  pojfiblefor  the 
World  to  exifl  oj  itj'elf  ab  jeterno,  therefore  it  did  not. 
You  will  put  nie  without  doubt  to  the  Proof  of  the  Ante- 
cedent, and  with  Reafon  ;  for  till  that  be  eftablifh'd,  no- 
thing can  be  concluded:  But  then  the  fame  Talk  lies  on 
your  Hands,  and  till  you  have  evinc'd  that  "'twas  fojjible 
for  the  World  to  exifl  of  ttfclf  ab  ?eterno,  your  Conclufi- 
on  muft  lie  dormant. 

To  the  third  I  anfwer:  To  pronounce  on  Things  at 
random,  either  marks  a  great  Pride,  or  a  fuperlative  Igno- 
rance: You  cannot  judge  which  Springs  are  ufeful  in  a 
Watch,  which  are  fuperfluous,  unlefs  you  comprehend 
the  Frame  of  that  artificial  Fabrick  ;  and  certainly  you 
would  conclude  very  ill,  that  I'uch  a  Wheel  was  needlefs, 
becaufe  you  did  not  underlland  its  Office-  The  World 
is  a  curious  Engine  compos'd  of  ten  Millions  of  fecret 
Springs,  do  you  know  the  Nature  of  each?  If  you  do 
not,  pray  diiledl  them,  and  expofe  the  Anatomy  to  our 
Contemplation?  If  you  do,  you  are  unfit  to  fit  on  the 
Bench;  your  Sentence  is  both  rafh  and  erroneous,  and 
you  deferve  to  ftand  at  the  Bar  for  having  difgrac'd  the 
Tribunal.  You  muft  remember  this  Axiom  of  St.  77:^0- 
ynas^  PerfeSal>ofiitas  in  rebus  creatis,  non  mveniretnr^  nifi 
ejfet  or  do  Bonitatis^  "The  Perfedion  (f  Creatures  would  be 
defeSiive^  if  there  were  no  Degrees^  no  Order  of  Perfecli- 
on  :  We  fhould  tarnifh  the  Luftre,  and  impair  the  Beau- 
ty of  the  Univerfe,  if  we  diminifli'd  the  Multitude,  or 
temper'dtheDifproportion  of  fo  many  Things,  that  by  a 
moll  admirable  Diflention,  and  a  moft  concording  Dif- 
cord  confpire  to  thi Grace  and  Harmony  of  the  whole; 
Had  you  been  call'd  to  Counfel  by  the  Maker  of  the 
World,  you  v/ould  haveperfuaded  him  to  frame  it  all  of 
Gold  or  Diamonds;  as  that  unskilful  Painter,  who  not 
being  able  to  copy  out  the  charming  Features  of  Heller, 
hid  them  together  with  his  Ignorance  under  an  embroi- 
dered Manteau,  and  fo  inftead  of  a  fair  Woman,  drew  no- 
thing but  fliining  Drapery.     No  Creature  is  fuperfluous, 

that. 


\ 


Th  Gentleman  Inftmfkd.     441 

that  can  proclaim  its  great  Mailer's  Glory  and  Majcily ; 
this  is  a  noble  Employment,  worthy  of  the  Seraphins, 
yet  not  above  the  Capacity  of  Flies  and  Spiders.     Vile 
Inledts  are  quickned  by  the  Almighty,  and  nothing  but- 
an  Omnipotent  Hand  can  frame  them:    The  Power  of 
your  AlexunJcrs  and  C'vfars  was  never  able  to  breathe 
Life  into  a  Worm  :  The  onepillag'd  the  Eri/i  indeed,  and 
welter'd  in  Blood  and  Slaughter  of  Innocents ;  the  other, 
like  a  Temipeft,  fwept  all  the  IFefi  before  him ;  yet  after 
they  had  butcher'd  a  JVIillion  of  Men,  they  were  not  able 
to  give  Life  to  a  Caterpillar:    Belides,    how  dare  you 
term  thefe  poor  Creatures  idle,  of  whom  God  makes  ufe 
to  confound  the  Pride  of  Atheifts,  and  to  read  continual 
LefTons  of  Humility  to  all  Men  ?  Thefe  Gentlemen  are 
incredulous,  becaufe  they  over-rate  their  Parts:  they  fup- 
pofe,  if  there  were  a  God,    their   piercing  Wits  would 
make  ftrange  Difcoveries;  and  becaufe  the  Majefty  of  a 
Deity  dazzles  their  battilh  Eye- fight,  they  rather  chufe  to 
plunge  into  Fidelity,  than  to  acknov^'ledge  their  Igno- 
rance: To  cure  this  infolent  Frenzy,  God  has  flung  thefe 
puny  Creatures  in  your  Way;  he  bids  you  examine  the 
fine  Contexture  of  each  Part  if  you  can,  the  Ufe  of  every 
Mufcle,  the  Nature  of  their  Souls,  and  of  all  thole  hidden 
Springs  that  caufe  Life   and  Motion ;   and   when  you 
have  learnt  this  /I,  B,  C,  it  will  be  time  enough  to  afcend 
to  more  fublime  Contemplation,    Now,  Sir,  neither  you, 
nor  the  greateft  Philofopher  that  ever  breath'd,  can  give  a 
tolerable  Account  of  the  moft    defpicable  Infed:    You 
knowneitheritsNature,  nor  half  its  Properties:  You  areas 
ill  inform'd  of  its  Caufes,  as  of  its  Effedls;  and  the  va- 
rious Syftems  of  Generation  and  Corruption  are  but  fo 
jnanyDerrionftrations  of  God's  Power,  and  Man's  Weak- 
nefs.     So  that  God  lays  before  you  thefe  Vermin  as  a  Re- 
medy againft  Pride,  and  what  is  more,  againll  Atheifm: 
He  blunts  thofe  Darts  you  level  againft  him  by  interpo- 
fing  Flies  and   Lice;    he  difarms  your  Infolence,  and 
ftrikcs  out  of  your  Hands  thofe  Arguments  you  employ 
againft  him.     I  cannot,  fay  you,  comprehend  God  ;  an 
infinite  Being  paffes  my  Conception  ;  therefore  there  is  no 
fuch  Thing :  You  might  as  well  infer,  that  all  you  fee  is 
nothing  but  a  Scene  of  Fallacy  and  Illufion  ;  that  you 
and  I  are  meer  Fantafms  and  Spedlres,  the  Product  of 
Imagination  j  for  there  is  not  one  lingle  thing  in  the 

whole 


44  2      T-^^  G  E  N  T  L  E  M  A  N  InJfruBed. 

whole  Mafs  of  Creation,  you  comprehend.  Your  Un- 
derftanding  falls  under  the  Weight  of  a  Straw,  you  can- 
not tell  whether  it  has  Parts  or  no  Parts,  before  the  Di- 
vifion  ;  you  know  neither  the  Nature  of  a  Stone,  nor  the 
Properties  of  a  Worm  ;  you  are  a  Stranger  even  in  your 
own  Hoiife,  though  yoii  think,  fpeak,  and  move; 
Thoughts,  Speech  a;id  Motion  puzzle  you  ;  we  have  Af- 
furance  indeed  there  is  fuch  Things,  hut  if  we  pre  Is  the 
Inquiry  a  little  farther,  we  mull  expeft  Imall  Satisfatfti^ 
on.  What  iMan,  who  finds  his  Undei (landing  pos'd  by 
fuch  ordinary  and  trivial  Inftances,  who  flags  under  the 
Confideration  of  al  moll  nothing,  will  be  fo  bold,  and  at 
the  fame  time  fo  fooliQi,  as  to  quellion  God's  Exiflence, 
becaule  he  cannot  comprehend  it  ?  Now,  though  all  thofe 
things  you  are  pleas'd  to  call  idle,  had  no  other  End,  but 
to  gravel  the  great  Pretenders  to  Omnifcience,  to  con- 
found their  Pride,  and  to  heal  their  unreafonable  Incredu- 
lity by  lndu6lion,  they  would  render  very  good  Service 
both  to  their  deluded  Fellow- Creatures,  and  to  their  Om- 
nipotent Creator. 

Befides,  we  have  a  particular  Tendernefs,  as  well  as 
Value  for  our  Bodies ;  we  rack  our  Thoughts,  and  even 
torment  our  Confcience  to  pleafe  them  ;  they  muft  be 
pamper'dat  the  Expenceof  our  Souls,  tho'  they  burn  for 
the  Debauch  hereafter.  To  cure  this  raging  Tranfport, 
God  applies  a  loathfome,  but  fovereign  Remedy  :  He 
fliews  us  what  our  idoliz'd  Bodies  are  by  the  Infection  of 
Lice^  li'^orms,  ^nd  Toads  they  produce;  and  oftentimes 
this  humbling  Spedlacle  of  Mortality  frights  us  more  ef- 
feftually  to  our  Duty,  than  the  Profpe£l  of  the  torment- 
ing Inftruments  of  Fire  and  Brimftone,  Darknefsand  De- 
fpair.  Did  thefe  poor  Gentlemen,  who  whine  away  at  a 
Female's  Feet  their  Happinefs,  Money  and  Souls  too,  but 
ferioufly  conlider,  that  theObjedl  of  their  Worlhip  muft 
pnce  become  Food  to  thofe  vile  Creatures  you  both  con- 
temn and  abhor;  that  thofe  Eyes  they  admire  to  Adora- 
tion, will  o-nce  fet  in  Dull,  and  be  drown'd  in  Putrefadli- 
pn  ;  that  thofe  Cheeks,  that  Frenzy  lliles  the  feat  of  the 
Graces^  will  be  transform'd,  not  only  into  the  Throne, 
buteven  into  the  Nature  o^Toads^lVorms,  and  Serpents ; 
did  ihey,  I  fay,  but  confider  thefe  obvious, -but  moving 
Truths,  they  wouldremovetheirAffedions  to  thofe  noble 
Objeds,  and  then  they  would  confefs  Vermin  is  more 
ufeful  than  they  imagin'd.  Again, 


ithe  Gentleman  JnJlruBed.    443 

Again,  all  thefe  Creatures  have  many  ufeful  Properties 
we  know,  and  mor.e  we  know  not:  Lice^  Snails  and 
j^'^orwi  are  Remedies  for  IbmeDileaies,  and  I  liave  been 
acquaintedwith  thofe  who  admir'd  a  Ragout  of  Maggots. 
If  Toads  and  I'^i per s  are  poilbnous,  they  alio  afford  Antir 
dotes  againll  Poifon;  and  if  fometimes  they  kill,  they  as 
often  fave.  A  Soup  of  Fipers  is  a  Medicine  both  mo- 
difliand  wholfome;  it  fweetens  the  Blood,  and  infpirits 
it.  Certainly  Things  endowed  with  fuch  excellent  Qua- 
lities, are  neither  luperfluous  nor  idle:  No,  no!  I'hey 
both  benefit  the  World,  and  adorn  it.  Ujhs,  fays  St.  jIh- 
Jiifi,  Lib.  II.  de  Civ.  Cap.  22.  it  a  artifex  magnus  in 
magnis  eft.,  ut  minor  mom  Jit  in  par  vis.,  qu<e  parva  nonfua 
granditate  qucc  nulla  eft.,  fed  artificis  fapientia  metienda 
e(i^  God  is  fo  great  a  Workman  in  great  Things,  that 
he  is  not  lefs  in  fmallones ;  they  are  not  to  be  meafured  by 
their  Greatnefs,  becaufe  they  have  none,  but  by  the 
V/ifdom  of  the  Artift. 

In  fine,  to  conclude  with  William  Bifhop  of  Parisy 
Nafcitur  aranea  cum  lege.,  libra  ^  lucerna.  God  has  in- 
ftruded  all  Creatures  in  every  Point  of  their  Duty:  The 
very  Spider  brings  into  the  World  its  Rules,  Book  and 
Torch,  and  knows  its  Lellbn  as  foon  as  'tis  able  to  learn  it. 
At  the  firft  Signal  of  the  Omnipotent,  they  all  fall  to 
Work:  The  B^e  makes- innocent  Inrodes  upon  Flowers, 
^^Silk-worm  fpins  out  its  own  Entrails,  and  weaves  Roy- 
al Robes  for  Princes,  the  Fifh  fport  in  the  Waters,  the 
Beafts  of  Service  expert  the  Commands  of  their  Mailers, 
and  fmall  Seeds,  tho'  dead,  give  Life  to  Trees,  which 
bring  Men  both  Pleafure  and  Profit.  Nothing  is  idle  ; 
nothing  refractory  in  the  World  but  Men,  who  abufe  their 
Liberty  to  their  Shame,  and  mifpend  the  precious  Mo- 
ments of  their  Lives  to  their  eternal  Ruin. 

From  the  Superfluities  of  Infedts  you  ftepover  to  their 
Viienels,  and  indeed,  if  the  firft  Fault  were  prov'd  home, 
I  would  fay  guilty  to  the  other.  For  certainly  a  thing 
too  inconfiderable  to  fill  any  Office  iq  the  vaft  Empire  of 
the  Univerfe,  muft  be  meanly  provided  with  Abilities. 
I  fuppofe,  Sir,  your  Apprehenfion  takes  thejuftMeafure 
of  things,  that  it  never  over-flouriflies  Objcfts,  but  agrees 
exadlly  with  the  Pattern:.  Your  Judgment  is  fquar'd 
by  the  Model  in  the  Apprehenfion,  and  if  this  be  exa6l, 
that  cannot  well  be  miitaken.    Now  I  have  heard  Gold 

{hines 


444      ^^^  Gentleman  Inftru^ed. 

fhinesveryglorioufly  on  your  Head,  and  that  you  fancy 
Diamonds  fparkle  more  in  your  Cabinet,  than  in  that  of 
Xhe g'CQ^l Mogul :  Thefe  things  you  judge  neither  below 
your  Care,  nor  your  Efteem ;  and  fhould  I  venture  to 
call  them  a  bafe  Lumber,  vile  Minerals,  or  childifh 
Trifles,  you  would  fufpedt  my  Prudence :  Yet  all  the 
Diamonds  of  the  Golcund'ian  Alines^  all  the  O^r  of  Potoji 
falls  fliort  ofthe  Perfedion  of  the  vileft  Animal  Gold 
may  fhine,  but  cannot  breathe ;  Diamonds  may  glitter, 
but  cannot  move;  an  Infedl  crawls  in  a  more  elevated 
Sphere ;  it  lives,  and  this  fole  Prerogative  is  above  the 
Reach  and  Capacity  of  Metal;  indeed  thefe  things  are 
handfomly  varniflied  ;  and  'tis  the  Colour  alone  that 
juftifies  your  Efteem,  and  makes  fome  Atonement  for 
your  Dotage.  If  therefore  you  have  not  quite  forfaken 
Reafon,  either  efteem  Gold  or  Jewels  lefs,  or  Infefts 
more;  if  thofe  are  vile,  you  muft  think  of  a  new  World 
to  exprefs  the  Bafenefs  of  the  other. 

I  cannot  difmifs  this  Argument,  till  I  have  brought  the 
Epicurean  Part  of  it  to  examen.  'Tis  below  the  Majefty 
of  God,  you  fay,  to  extend  his  Care  to  the  Direction 
and  Confervationof  fuch defpicable  Creatures;  and  then 
very  philofophically  you  infer  he  does  not ;  but  becaufe 
this  does  not  ferve  your  Turn,  you  advance  a  Step,  and 
tell  us,  they  may  as  well  come  into  the  World  without 
his  Help,  as  continue  without  it. 

Your  Argument  is  built  on  a  falfe  Hypothefis\  there 
is  no  Creature  defpicable  in  the  whole  Univerfe  but  the 
proud  Atheift,  who  thinks  fo.  Hearken  to  Ariftotle^  who 
faw  as  far  into  Nature  as  any  of  our  Libertines,  lib.  i. 
de  Partu  Antmcil.  cap.  j". '  Viltorum  antmaVtum  rationem 
propenfionemq\  puerili jaflidto [prev'tffe digmtm nequaquam 
e/i,  cum  nulla  Jit  res  Natur^v,  i»  qua  non  mirandum  aU- 
qitid  tnditum  haheatur  :  T'o  flight  the  0  economy  and  Per - 
fedion  ofthe  mofl  impzrfed  Animal  is  childijh,  feeing  there 
iS  nothing  in  Mature  fo  minute  and  iuconfiderable^  that 
has  not  fome  Qualities  worthy  of  Admiration.  The  Vilenefs 
of  the  molt  abjedt  Worm  confifts  not  in  the  Perfefton  it 
poflefles,  but  in  thofe  it  wants:  'Tis  relatively  fo;  and  in 
this  Scnfe,  every  limited  Being  is  fuperlatively  vile,  if 
compar'd  with  the  boundlefs  Perfedlion  of  the  Creator. 
But  if  we  confider  them  in  themfelves,  they  participate 
fome  faint  Rays  of  Divine  Perfedions ;    they  are  the 

Effects 


3%e Gentleman  InftruBeL     44^ 

EfFeflsof  his  Power,  and  Objects  of  his  Love;  for  had 
their  Natures  no  SimiHtude  with  the  Perfeftions  of  God, 
he  could  not  have  produc'd  them  j  and  did  he  not  love 
them,  he  would  not :  Now  to  make  them  worthy  both 
of  his  Power  and  Love,  and  not  of  his  Care,  is  ridicu- 
lous and  impious.     Indeed  did  we  travefty  Go'd  into  a 
Shepherd,  as  the  Poets  did  /Ipollo  ;  did  we  fuppofehe  left 
his  Godhead  in   Heaven,    to  feed  Flocks  on  Earth,  or 
that  he  took  up  his  Habitation  with  Pifmires,  or  lodg'd 
in  Dunghills  with  Worms,  your  Objedtion  would  appear 
reafonable ;  but  we  muft  cafi  ofF  ihefe  Anthropomorphite 
Principles,     To  ad  on  Earth,  he  needs  not  abandon  Hea- 
ven ;  nor  difpatch  Courtiers  to  intimate  his  Orders,  or 
Deputies  to  execute  'em ;  he  is  as  necelfarily  in  all  Places, 
as  in  all  Times:  He  created  all  Things  without  Labour, 
and  conferves  them  without  Solicitude.     The  Manage- 
ment of  the  World  neither  takes  one  grain  from  his  Hap- 
pinefs,  nor  adds  one;  he  is  as  much  at  Leifure  fi nee  its 
Creation  as  before  ;  and  though  he  be  without  Emharafs^ 
he  is  never  idle.     Belides,  though  we  cannot  dabble  in 
Pitch  without  being  defil'd,  that  Aphorifm  of  the  wife 
Man  concerns   not  him  ;  he  fhines  in  Mire,  glitters  in 
Dirt,  and  like  the  Sun  gilds  corrupted  Carcafles,  without 
being  tainted  or  fullied,     I  therefore  conclude  your  Phi- 
lofophy  is  of  the  fame  Piece  with  your  Divinity,  and 
both  are  drawn  from  the  Original  of  Epicures :  They 
are  too  foolifh,  methinks,  to  trepan  a  wife  Man,  and  too 
blafphemous  to  engage  a  good  Man  ;  and  indeed  lam  half 
perfuaded  you  laugh  at  his  Syftem  in  your  Heart,  tho' 
you  applaud  it  in  Publick,  and  would   eaiily  defert  his 
Belief,  if  you  could  enjoy,  without  Remorle,  the  Bene- 
fit of  condefcending  Moralities. 

T/}eo.  Come,  Sir,  you  have  harangu'd  enough  upon 
this  Subjeft ;  methinks  the  Chamber  begins  to  fmell  of 
Vermin,  we  have  been  upon  an  uncleanly  Topick:  To 
difcourfe  of  IVorms^  Tuads  and  Maggots  looks  like  tread- 
ing Eels  out  of  Mud ;  they  are  unphilofophical  Employ- 
ments, and  we  will  commit  the  farther  Difcuffion  of 
the  Poet  to  a  Committee  of  CoU-finden,  or  a  Club  of 
Rake-k«nneh, 


D  I  A- 


44^     ^^^  Gentleman  Inftni^ei, 

DIALOGUE    XXIII. 

'The  feventh  Proof.     The  palpable  Abfurdities  which  fol- 
I'rw  from  no  God,  demowjtrate  there  is  one. 

Eufeu.  T  Omit  many  other  Arguments  that  plead  moft 
■*-  powerfully  for  a  God ;  in  this  Number  we 
may  place  Miracles  and  Prophefies.  If  ever  there  were 
a  Miracle,  all  the  Atheift's  fine  Hypothefes  fall  to  the 
Ground,  all  the  Leaves  in-/-/^/»^r  Foreft  will  not  be  able 
to  hide  the  Folly  of  his  Incredulity ;  for  if  ever  a  dead 
Man  has  been  brought  back  to  Life,  it  mull  have  been 
done  by  a  Power  above  the  Energy  of  natural  Caufes : 
To  revive  a  dead  Man,  is  as  hard  as  to  infufe  Life  into 
Marble,  and  I  think  all  the  Abilities  of  Nature  can  never 
reach  this  Operation.  Now  that  fuch  Miracles  have  been' 
wrought  in  the  World,  may  be  made  out  by  as  plain  Evi- 
dence, as  the  Nature  of  paft  Matters  of  Fadt  require, 
/.  e.  by  unq  11  eft  ion  able  Authority,  and  more  can  neither 
rationally  be  expefted  nor  defired. 

Again,  to  foretel  Things  that  depend  merely  upon  the 
Exercile  of  our  Free-will,  is  a  manifeft  Argument  of  a 
God ;  for  an  Underftanding  that  can  forefee  what  will 
happen,  by  the  fame  Ferfpicacity  muft  l^now  what  has 
happen'd,  and  a  fortiori^  whatever  does  actually  happen, 
and  by  confequence  whatever  can  be  known.  Now 
fuch  a  vaft  Extent  of  Knowledge  can  only  fuit  with  a 
Being  infinitely  perfed,  at  leaft  far  fuperior  to  Man  t 
For  as  Pindar  takes  Notice,  Ad  ftitura  cxcutiuntmentes 
humanx.  Future  Events  lie  out  of  the  Sphere  of  human 
Under jlandtngi :  We  lee  nothing  but  Obfcurity  and  Dark- 
nefs  before  us  ;  we  cannot  tell  what  Changes,  what  Re- 
volutions of  Defigns  may  be  made  in  our  Breafts  before 
to  Morrow,  much  Icfs  what  other  Men  will  fay  or  do  a 
hundred  Years  hence  Whence  the  Latins  call  foretel- 
ling of  Things,  D'tvinatio^  as  if  it  was  the  peculiar  Pri- 
vilege of  the  Divinity:  And  the  Prophet  Ifiiahb'xds  the 
Gods  of  the  Heathens  prove  their  Title  to  Worfhip  by 
Prophecy.  Enuactate  quce  Ventura  funt  in  futmum^  ^ 
fciemus  quia  Dii  eftis  vos. 

Now 


'7%e  Gentleman  InflruBed,      447 

Now  it  is  clear  beyond  DiDpute,  that  Men  have  fore- 
told future  Events  with  all  their  Circumftances ;  which 
they  could  not  do"  by  the  Force  of  human  Wit  and  Indu- 
ftry:  Therefore,  they-rcceiv'd  the  Faculty  from  another 
who  can  dive  into  Futurities,  and  difcover  all  the  Wind- 
ings and  MaaMders  of  the  Hearts  of  Men  to  come,  as 
well  as  of  thole  who  are,  and  have  been.     I  will  cull 
out  two  or  three  Prophecies  of  a  hundred  which  may  be 
found  in  our  Scripture,  and  defire  you  to  fpend  a  cool 
and   impartial  Thought  upon  them.     i.  Reg.  cap.  xiii. 
whilft  "Jeroboam  facrific'd  on  an  -Altar  to  Baal.^  a  Prophet 
cry'd  out,  Altare,  Ahare.,  biCC  dicit  Domiym^^  ecce  hiius 
nufcctur  dcmui  David,  Jofias  Nomine.,  ^  Immolabit  Juper 
te  Sace'rdotes  excelforum.,  qui  niujc  im  te  thinfa  fucccKduKt^ 
^  ojj'a  hom'mum  in  te  incendiint.     This  happen'd  exaftly 
361  Years  after:    The  Prophet  Ifiiah^  c.  41.  foretells  the 
Empire  of  Cyrus  and  his  Name  200  Years  before  he  was 
born.  Daniel  the  Subverfion  of  the  ChaldiCan  Monarchy, 
the  Grandeur  of  the  Mediun,  Perjian.,  GrecuiK  and  Roman 
Empires;    nay,  he  defcends  to  particular  Accidents,  fo 
that  he  feems  rather  to  compile  a  Story   of  pall,  than  a 
Prophecy  of  future  Tranili.dions ;  yet  the  Event  runs  e- 
ven  with  his  Predidion,  'tis  true  to  a  Letter,  and  ihere- 
fore  to  Admiration.     Now  this  alone  wounds  Atheiim 
mortally,  and  ftabs  its  grand  Principle,  There  is  no  God. 
For  this  Difcourfe  is  mod  certain,  Nothing  in  Nature  is 
able   to  forejee  things  which  depend  mserly  upon  the  Free- 
Will of  Mai7.,a'/!dvjill happen  fjYiie  Ages  after  :  But^tii  cer- 
tain that  Men  haue   futefecn  things  that  depended  on  the 
tree-Wtll  of  Man.,  and  did  happen  fever al  Ages  afttr  they 
were  for eio Id, therefore,  there  ts  an  tntcUigei'it  Being  above 
'  Nature.     You  can  only  evade  the  Force  of  the  Argument 
by  denying   the  Matter  of  Fadt ;  but   when  you  ftrike 
upon  an  evident  Abfurdity,  and  muft  call  in  all  Records, 
there  is    not  any  Story  in  the  World  more  authentick, 
than  that  of  the  Scripture :   Now  to  disbelieve  all  Hiftory 
out  of  Fear  of  being  impos'd  on,  is  to  play  tlieFool  wiih 
Caution,  and  to   ftretch    Wearincfs    into  Stupidity.     I 
intend  not  to  defcant  on  thofe  two  Proofs,  nor  to  draw 
them  up  to  their  full  Advantage  ;  confront  them  at  leifure, 
with  Hiftory  both  facred  and  proi'ane ;  compare  the  Text 
with  Events,  pufh  on  the  Examen  not  only  to  Exadlnefs, 
bttt  to  the  Extremity  of  Critidftii,  only  jftop  v/ithin  the 

Terms 


44S       fhe  Gentleman* Inftru^ed. 

Terms  of  Reafon,  and  exped:  no  greater  Evidence  than 
Things  pad  will  bear:  Do  not  firft  pafs  Sentence,  and 
then  examine  Evidences,  firft  condemn,  and  then  inquire 
into  the  Merits  of  the  Caufe,  and  I  am  confident  you 
will  confefs,  Things  have  been  both  done  and  foretold, 
that  come  not  within  the  Reach  of  Nature ;  and  therefore 
you  will  be  oblig'd  to  acknowledge  there  is  fomething 
that  commands  Nature,  and  calls  thofe  things,  that  are 
not,  by  their  Name,   as  well  as  thofe  that  are. 

Theo.  I  will  take  into  Confideration  your  Propofals 
in  due  Time;  but  pray  read  us  the  Regifter  of  Abfur- 
dilies:  This  is  your  prefent  Task,  and  1  am  impatient 
to  hear  it. 

Eufeh.  I  (hall  open  my  Indidment  with  an  Accufation 
able  to  make  a  Man's  Earb  tingle,  notwithftanding  your 
Tenets  are  guilty  of  the  Impeachment.  There  is  no  God, 
you  fay,  no  Providence  to  watch  over  the  Children  of 
Men,  no  Goodnefs  to  reward  Virtue,  no  Juftice  to 
punifli  Vice  ;  hope  of  a  future  Blifs  is  but  a-pleafing  Ima- 
gination, Fear  of  Torments  but  a  vain  Bugbear  invented 
by  Melancholy,  and  improv'd  by  Cuftom  ;  does  not 
this  accurs'd  Dodrineopen  the  Gate  to  Pride,  Arrogance 
and  Tyranny  ?  Does  it  not  let  in  upon  us  Perfidioufnefs, 
Perjury,  and  Sacrilege?  Does  it  not  in\'ite  Mankind  to 
turn  off  Shame;  to  calliier  Modefty;  to  plunge  into  the 
Mire  of  Lafcivioufnefs;  and  in  fiiort,  to  break  off' all 
Commerce,  all  Correfpondence  with  Neiglibours.  Friends 
and  Relations  ?  Now  can  any  thing  be  imagined  more 
abiurd,  than  to  father  fuch  horrid,  iuch  univerfal  Cor- 
ruptions on  the  firit  greateft  and  fupream  Truth  ?  This 
all  Atheifts  do.  For  as  the  prime  V^erity  (if  there  be  a 
God)  is.  There  is  aGod^  who  rules,  diieds  and  govern? 
the  Univerfe  ;  fo  if  tJiere  be  none,  thatrnuft  be  degraded, 
and  this  fubftituted  in  its  Place,  There  is  ku  God  who  rules, 
diredls,  and  governs  the  Univerfe  ;  but  this  Truth  will 
extinguifli  Fear,  and  flifle  Reverence;  it  lets  loofe  the 
whole  Crowd  of  Paflions,  and  expofes  the  World  to  Pil- 
lage and  Rapine ;  for  Men  void  of  Fear,  are  void  of  Re- 
ftraint,  and  fo  iet  up  Appetite  for  the  Standard  of  all 
their  Adions. 

Secondly^  It  will  follow,  that  a  Falfhood,  an  ImpofTibi- 
lity,  a  meer  Chimera,  is  the  Caufe  of  Religion,  of  Ju- 
ftice, Temperance,  and  Modcfty  j  that  it  is  the  Founda- 
tion 


^he  Gentleman  XnJlnSe^,    443^ 

tzpn  of  Peace,  Concord,  and  the  very  Bafis  thatfupports 
all  well-ordered  Common  wealths;  for  the  Perfuafion  of 
a  Deity,  the  Fear  of  his  Anger,  and  Hope  of  his  Mercy 
awe  Men  more  than  civil  Rewards  or  Punifhments. 
Now  is  it  not  down-right  Madnefs,  to  think,  that  a  Chi- 
mera, a  meer  Fidion,  that  has  no  Being,  but  in  fome 
deluded  Brain,  fhould  countenance  Virtue  and  perfuade 
it?  Should  difcountenance  Vice,  and  load  it  with  Shame 
and  Infamy ;  whereas  the  prime  Truth  in  the  Atheifts 
Catechifm,  There  is  no  God,  leads  Men  into  all  Abomi- 
nations, 

Thirdh,  It  will  follow,  that  Wifdomftifles  Virtue,  and 
Error  cheriflies  it ;  for  if  there  be  no  God,  it's  Error  and 
Folly  to  treheve  there  is  one,  'tis  a  Piece  of  Wifdom  to 
flandup  and  proteft  againft  a  Forgery,  fo  prejudicial  to 
Truth,  Reafon,  and  Senfuality  :  It's  a  Piece  of  Wifdom 
to  maintain  that  Truth,  and  Wifdom  arc  Plagues,  not 
only  to  particular  Men,  but  even  to  Societies;  that  they 
drcwn  Kingdoms  in  Deluges  of  Corruption,  and  cutoff 
the  Bands  of  Unity,  that  knit  the  Parts  together;  that 
they  muil  be  clapt  under  the  Hatches,  and  condemn'd 
to  Darknefs  and  Confinement,  as  Traitors  to  Humanity, 
and  Rebels  to  Government.'  But  then  on  the  other  Side, 
it  follows,  that  Error  and  Ignorance  fupport  Commerce, 
maintain  TranquiUity,  and  enliven  Society ;  that  they  are 
to  be  promoted  as  the  Source  and  Oiigin  of  all  Good^ 
that  they  enlighten  the  Underftanding,  polifh  the  Willj, 
and  not  only  render  People  wife,  but  good. 

Fourthly^  That  all  thofe  Heroes  who  have  been  fa- 
mous, either  for  Learning  or  Piety,  were  wretchedly  ,mi- 
ilaken  in  a  thing  of  the  highell  Concern ;  They  felE 
down  before  an  airy  Statue  of  God,  forg'd  in  the  Brain, 
ftruck  out  of  Error,  and  fliap'd  by  Vifion,  Cuftom  and 
Education:  Whilft  Men,  unprovided  of  Wit,  deftitute 
of  Confcience,  of  profligate  Lives,  and  of  worfe  Princi- 
ples, burthenfome  to  their  Countries,  and  fcandalous  to 
their  very  Species,  unravel  the  Truth,  and  urimask  the 
grand  Impofture;  Before  a  Man  can  believe  fo  potent  an 
Abfurdity,  he  mull  turn  oft"  Reaibn,  and  conclude,  that 
the  worft  of  Men  were  the  beft  -,  the  moft  illiterate,  the 
moft  wife ;  and  thofe  who  have  ever  juftly  been  elteera'd 
Monfters,  tJiecn'y  Ornaments  of  our  Kind. 

G  z  ^^%» 


450       T^he  Gentleman  Infru^ed, 

Ftfthh'^  That  to  pay  tiomage  and  Obedience  to  God, 
to  fear  Puniflimcnt,  or  hope  for  Reward,  are  foolifli  and 
vain  Actions,  and  wholly  oppolite  to  Realbn  :  For  to  re- 
vere, worihip,  and  tremble  at  a  Chimera,  is  both  childifli 
and  ridiculous.  It's  unrealbnable  and  impious  into  the 
B.irgain:  U  therefore  God  fits  on  the  fame  Level  with  an 
ImpoffiSiUty,  if  he  has  no  other  Being,  than  what  a  de- 
luded Underllanding  is  pieafcd  to  give  him,  he  is  no 
more  to  be  valued,  than  all  thofe  impoflible  Combinati- 
ons that  are  fpawn'd  by  Fancy,  and  cravil  in  the  Ima- 
gination. 

Sxthly^  That  Impiciy,  Sacrilege  and  Blafphemy  are 
hudable  Actions,  and   agreeable  to  the  moil  inviolable 
Diftates  of  Reafon.  For  if  rhere  be  no  God,  all  the  Acti- 
ons that  fly  in  his  Face, .that  attack  his  imaginary  and 
ufurp'd  Grandeur  are  good:  FirJ},  Becaufe  they  are  pub- 
lick  Proteftcitions  of  a  Truth,  viz.  T'hatthereis  a  God. 
And,  Setondl'j.,  Becaufe  they  arc  efficacious  Means  to  dif- 
abufe  Mankind,  and  to  withdraw  it  from  the  erroneous 
Perfualions  of  a  Deity  and  Providence.  Pray,  Sir,  tell  me, 
are  not  thefemoildifmal  Confequences?  Are  they  not  able 
to  chill  the  Blood,  and  tocaft  Humanity  into  Convulfions? 
They  cannot  be  thought  on  without  Horror,  nor  believ'd 
without  Fury.  Had  I  a  Hand  in  the  Government,  or  any 
Power  witJv  the  Commons,  I  would  bring  all  the  Abettors 
of  thofe  lewd  Tenets  within  the  Statutes  of  Treafon.  They 
tend  direftly  to  the  Subverfion  of  Order  and  Difcipline. 
When  Men  believe  fo  loole  Principles,  their  Aftions  can- 
notbe  regular.  Nothing  but  want  of  Occafions  to  be  Vil- 
iaina  can  plead  for  their  Honelly:  Impotence  alone  is  the 
guard  of  their  Innocence,  and  of  their  Neighbour's  Safety, 
Thio.  You  are  frnart  upon  Aiheiils,  and  methinks  in- 
tend to  hedor  them  into  Religion,  rather  than  convince 
them.     But,  Sir,  a  little  Reafon  goes  farther  than  much 
Satyr,  they  are  Men  of  Mettle,  and  dare  look  a  Rhodo- 
montade  in  ilic  Face:  They  will  not  be  frighted  out  of 
iheir  Opinion  with  Buckram  Inveftive. 

Eufeb.  Did  you  fee  a  Rafcal  ready  to  fet  Fire  to  your 
Houfe,  or  a  Bravo  making  at  your  Breaft  with  a  drawn 
Sword,  in  fuch  Exigencies  you  would  lay  afide  Forma- 
lity and  Ceremony:  And  I  fuppofe  fuch  extraordinary 
Circumllances  would  eafily  juftify  a  little  Smartnefs. 
This  is  our  prefent  Cafe.    By  denying  a  Deity,  you  pull 

up 


^he  Gentleman  Inftru^ed,     451 

tip  all  Reftraint,  you  let  loofe  the  whole  Kennel  of  Vices? 
and  hollow  in  Pride,  Rapine  and  Cruelty  to  worry  -wsi 
you  do  not  only  lop  off  the  Branclx^s  of  Subordination 
and  Government,  but  tear  thcra  up  by  the  Roots,  and  un- 
dermine the  very  Foundation  of  Society:  We  cannot  car- 
ry on  any  Commerce,  nor  live  in  any  Corporation,  with^ 
out  trufting  fometimes  our  Neighbour:  For  it  is  impoffi- 
ble  to  make  all  Matters  fo  fucc,  as  to  leave  nothing  to 
Honefty  and  Honour.  Truft  is  the  Ground,  the  Balis 
and  firft  Principle  of  Commerce;  without  this,  we  mult 
ftand  at  Defiance  with  all  the  World,  and  place  Security 
in  our  Power  alone  Now  if  there  be  no  Superior  to 
awe  us,  no  Principle  within  us  that  points  out  Good  ancf 
Evil,  it's  abiurd  and  loolilh  to  truft  any  Man;  for  there 
is  no  Ground  for  fuch  a  Confidence  in  your  Hypothejisy 
nothing  that  can  perfuade  a  Man  to  facrifice  his  Interelt 
to  Truth  and  Juftice. 

For  if  ther^  be  no  God,  Man  is  his  own  Law,  and  there- 
fore can  offend  no  Body  but  himfelf ;  nay,  nor  can  he 
offend  himfelf;  for  if  he  be  fupream,  whatever  he  does  is 
right.  Let  him  contrive  Plots  againft  Church  and  State  j 
let  him  worry  the  Innocent,  or  prey  upon  the  Poor,  he  re- 
mains loyal,  tho'  plung'd  in  Treafons ;  ipotlefs,  tho'  dipt 
in  Blood;  and  without  Sin,  though  loaded  with  Crimes. 
Now  fuch  Dodrinc  muft  of  neceffity  unhinge  Society, 
and  turn  Kingdoms  into  Heaps  of  Rubbifh,  and  Piles  of 
Confufion  ;  for  it  withdraws  all  thofe  Props  that  fuftain 
Obedience,  and  breaks  thofe  Bands  that  cement  Unity. 
A  Man  muft  be  made  of  Ice  not  to  exprefs  fome  Concern 
at  the  Approach  of  fo  threatning  a  Danger. 

Theo.  Of  what  Danger  ? 

Eufeb.  Of  our  Lives  and  Fortunes;  for  nothing  can  fe- 
cure  them  but  the  Impotence  of  Atheifts.  We  areout- 
law'd  by  your  Principles  already,  and  fhould  quickly  be 
clap'd  on  the  Gallows  did  your  Power  correfpond  with 
your  Intentions,  at  leaft  to  your  Maxims.  But  your  Forces 
are  diipers'd,  they  are  canton'd  in  Taverns  and  Bawdy- 
Houfes,  and  it's  hard  to  draw  them  into  a  Body ;  fo  that 
the  Government  ftands,  becaufe  you  want  ftrength  to  over- 
turn it:  Weenjoy  Liberty,  becaufe  you  cannot  enflave  us; 
and  our  Eftates,  becaufe  you  dare  not  invade  them. 

Theo.  Theie  are  refledling  Hints,  and  rather  plead  for 

Incivility  than  a  God  ^  i  had  rather  connive  at  the  Affront 

G  g  2  than 


452      7y^^  Gektleman  In  fir  tidied, 

than  revenue  it,  and  attribute  it  rather  to  Heat  than  Ad- 
v^rltnce. 

Eufeb.  Under  Favour,  Sir,  tho'  your  Tenets  raife  my 
Indignation,  I  think  they  delcrve  it;  yet  Palfion  has  not 
dimm'd  my  Underftanding;;  I  fpeakwiih  Reflcdion;  and 
if  my  Diicourfe  dilpleafe  you,  thank  your  Principles  for  the 
Mortification.  I  fay  aguin,  if  there  be  no  God,  Man  has 
noSaperiof;  if  he  has  no  Superior,  he  can  be  iubjedt 
to  no  I,aw  ;  he  can  neither  do  well  nor  ill ;  for  Good 
and  Evil  are  relative  Denominations,  and  fuppofe  a  Law 
that  prohibits  the  one,  and  either  commands  or  couniels 
the  other;  it  he  can  Ao  no  ill,  and  is  perfuaded  of  this 
impeccable  Prerogative,  why  (hall  he  not  glut  his  Ambi- 
tion with  Treafons  and  Murders;  his  Avarice  with  Ra- 
pines; and  his  Incontinence  with  his  Proftitutions? 
Thefe  Adtions  fit  Very  eafy  on  Confcience;  they  fpawn 
on  Senfe,  and  charm  Nature;  n.iy,  according  to  your 
gr.md  Maxim,  .they  djferve  the  Name  of  Virtues,  as  well 
as  Obedience,  JiUlice,  or  Chaltity,  and  are  moreeafily 
p  adl  s'd  thanf^rborn:  indeed,  tho'  you  be  neither  under 
the  Rcllraint  of  Natural  Laws  nor  Divine,  Civil  Laws 
may  fright  you  fometimes  from  the  Praftice  ;  for  Atheifts 
of  all  Men  dote  on  their  Skin,  they  love  not  to  make  a 
publick  Intrado  into  the  Old  BaiJy,  nor  to  be  carted  in 
Ceremony  to  Hide-Park-Comer.  i3ut  then  what  Govern- 
ment can  be  fecure,  when  Subjeib  obey  meerly  for  want 
of  an  Opportunity  to  rebel?  And  are  only  innocent  when 
Intereft  forbids  them  to  be  guilty  ? 

Theo.  This  is  an  odious  Su^ieft,  pray  let  us  ftep  over 
it;  I  am  afraid  you  will  turn  Evidence,  if  PalTion  carries 
you  a  little  farther,  and  I  may  be  put  to  the  Exigence  of 
folving  Difficulties  at  the  Bar.  I  will  now  return  an  An- 
fwer  to  your  moft  material  0!)je6tion.  You  fay,  if  there 
be  no  God,  that  Juftice,  Temperance,  Modefly,  and  O- 
bedience  flow  from  a  meer  Chimera  ;  that  Fidion,  Im- 
polture  and  Falfhood  fupport  Society  ;  this  you  llorm  at, 
and  throw  it  among  the  firft  Clafs  of  Abfurdities:  But 
pray  refled,  that  Ignorance  and  Policy  at  Rome  and  A- 
thens  fet  up  a  Multiplicity  of  Gods,  they  carv'd  Idols  of 
all  Sizes,  and  of  all  Creatures  ;  they  perfuaded  the  Vul- 
gar that  their  mute  Statues  punifh'd  Vice,  and  reward- 
ed Vinue.  This  Impofture  cheated  many  into  Juftice, 
Chaility  and  Obedience.    You  cannot  deny  but  Deifts 

were 


The  Gentleman  Inflru^ed,       453 

were  imaginary,  that  they  were  as  void  of  Senfe,  as  of 
Realbn,  and  were  lb  far  from  being  able  either 'to  protedt 
their  Profelytes,  orchaftifc  their  Enemies,  that  they  could 
not  defend  theniftlves.  In  fine,  Sir,  they  were  Nothr/ig^ 
vet  tbefe  Nijtk\ngs^i\\Q{tChimeY  a  s  fcar'd  People  into  tb.eir 
l)uty,  and  aw'd  them  into  heroick  Flights  of  Morality. 
Vi  the  Perfualion  of  a  God,  (tho'  there  be  no  fuch  Thing) 
works  the  fame  Effedts,  where  lies  the  Abfurdity  ?  if 
Falfhood,  two  thoufand  Years  ago,  gull'd  People  into 
Submiffion,  and  wheedled  them  into  Virtue,  it  may  play 
over  again  the  fame  Game  in  our  Age  ;  we  are  liable  to 
Ignorance,  as  well  as  the  Athenians  or  Romans,  and  what 
either  quicken'd  their  Hopes,  or  enliven'd  their  Fears, 
may  make  ImprefTion  upon  ours. 

Eufeb.  I  confefs  that  the  Perfuafionof  the  antient  Pa- 
gans was  erroneous,  and  falfe  in  paiticular,  but  not  in 
general :  l^iey  acknowledg'd  a  Deity  who  look'd  into 
Human  Affairs,  and  who  would  once  exaft  a  ftrid  Ac- 
count of  their  moft  minute  Actions;  fo  far  they  were 
right ;  but  then  when  they  applied  this  Notion  of  a  God 
to  Stocks  or  Stones,  to  wicked  IVIen  or  accurfed  Dxinons, 
they  deviated  from  Truth :  The  Principle  therefore  of 
the'fe  Men  was  true,  viz.  A  God:  But  the  Application  of 
it  to  'Jupiter,  Man  or  Fenas  w?iS  erroneous;  for  thefe 
were  Perfons  of  moft  profligate  Morals :  The  firfl,  an  A- 
dulterer,  the  fecond,  a  Murtherer,  and  the  third,  a  moll 
impudent  Harlot.  So  that  neither  the  Attributes  of  a  Di- 
vinity, nor  the  Management  of  the  World,  nor  the  Ven- 
geance of  ill  Actions,  nor  the  Reward  of  good  ones  be- 
long'd  to  them.  Now  when  A'len  abftain'd  from  Immo- 
rality out  of  Fear  of  offending  God,  or  pradlis'd  Virtue 
out  of  Defire  to  pleafe  him  ;  tliey  were  not  mov'd  by  this 
Perfuafion,  that  there  was  a  (Lipream  Being,  who  hated 
ill,  and  lov'd  good ;  and  v/ould  punifli  that,  and  reward 
this ;  which  univerfal  Perfualion  is  moft  true  ;  and  Vir- 
tue that  ftands  on  this  Principle,  has  no  Chimera  to  fup- 
port  it:  Indeed  they  clap  the  Divinity  on  Men,  inverted 
Devils  with  its  great  Prercgatfves,  and  wo:fhip'd  t  o.'e 
Gods  of  their  own  Inftitution  ;  and  fo  blunder'd  about 
the  particular  Subje6l  of  Adoration,  notwithftanding  they 
retain'd  the  Notion  of  a  Deity  able  to  chaftife  the  wicked, 
and  fo  had  a  kind  of  true  Foundation  of  political  and 
moral  -Virtue ;  But  if  there  be  no  God,  or  if  he  mews 
G  g  3  .  himfelf 


454      *The  Gentleman  InJiruBe3, 

himfelf up  in  Heaven,  without  entring  into  our  Concerns, 
the  very  Foundation  of  all  Probity,  all  Subordination  is 
falfe  and  fiditious,  and  by  confequence,  all  Truft,  Com- 
merce, Piety  and  Society  are  fultain'd  by  Impofture  and 
Forgery,  which  is  an  Opinion  fo  unkind  to  our  very  Na- 
ture, and  fo  irrational,  that  no  Man  can  abett  it  without 
Folly  and  Madnefs. 

A  Gentleman  of  the  Company  interrupted  Eufebius. 
Sir,  foid  he,  I  confefsyour  Arguments  have  Force;  they 
are  rational,  and  a  Man  muft  be  very  hard  to  pleafe  that 
will  not  relifh  them.  But  unlefs  our  Souls  are  immortal, 
what  Reafon  have  Men  either  to  love  his  Goodnefs,  or 
to  fear  his  Severity  ?  His  Blefling  muft  flop  with  our 
Breath,  and  his  Curfes  cannot  overtake  us  in  Eternity: 
For  if  Death  robs  us  of  Life  and  Being,  all  our  Hopes 
and  Fears  are  at  a  iland:  They  difappear  with  our  laft 
Sigh,  and  vaniOi  into  nothing.  So  that  the  Do6trine  of 
a  God  is  notfufficient  alone  to  reform  Mankind,  and  all 
Religion  may  be  regarded  as  ufelefs,  or  flung  among  the 
Ceremonies  Divines  term  Diaphora  ;  for  if  my  Soul  be 
mortal,  future  Rewards  are  impofTible,  as  well  as  Tor- 
ments: Why  then  fhould  I  court  Virtue  at  the  Expence 
of  prefent  Satisfadion?  Orwithftand  Appetite  with  the 
Forfeiture  of  Pleafurc  ?  Why  fhould  I  bridle  Luft,  or 
prefcribe  Bounds  to  my  Ambition,  if  neither  Conti- 
nence be  regarded,  nor  Pride  humbled  ?  For  my  part  I 
own  ingenuoufly,  I  fhall  make  the  beft  ufe  of  Time,  till 
I  am  fure  there  is  an  Eternity.  I  fliall  trim  up  my  Houfe 
of  Clay>  and  lay  out  my  Stock  on  Reparations :  My  Paf- 
fions  fhall  live  at  Difcretion,  and  range  without  Con- 
troul. 

If  my  Arguments  convince  you  that  there  is  a  God, 
replied  Enfebius,  you  cannot  quertion  the  Immortality 
of  the  Soul.  God  and  the  immortality  of  the  Soul 
are  Correlatives,  and  whatever  Proof  makes  for  the  one, 
eftabliflics  the  other:  For  as  I  hinted  above,  if  there 
be  a  God,  he  is  juft,  and  therefore  crowns  Virtue,  and'S 
revenges  Vice:  Now  it  is  evident  that  the  Jull  often- 
times in  this  Life  receive  no  Reward,  and  the  Impi- 
ous no  Puniftment ;  therefore  they  mud  receive  it  in  the 
rext;  therefore  our  Souls  muft  not  die  viiih  our  Bodies; 
therefore  they  are  immortal.  Again,  if  our  Souls  are 
immortal,  there  is  a  God.  For  fuppofing  this  noble  Pre- 
rogative, 


The  Gentleman  Injirufied.     455 

rogative,  which  way  did  the  Soul  come  by  it,  but  b}^  the 
Goodnelsand  Power  of  an  infinite  Agent?  It  (an  neiiher 
be  the  Eftcft  of  Matter  nor  Motion  ;  thefe  Things  ara 
below  the  Lerel  of  a  Spirit,  they  have  neither  Life  nor 
Knowledge  ;  how  can  they  infufe  into  anoihcr  thofePer- 
fedlions  that  are  Strangers  to  them felves?  Did  cur  Souls 
Ileal  a  Being  from  all  Eternity  ?  Where  were  they  before 
they  enter'd  our  Bodies?  Who  order'd  my  Soul  to  take 
PoUefTion  of  my  Body  rather  than  of  another?  Or  where 
did  it  hover  before  it  found  the  Settlement  ?  I  fuppofe 
'Pythagorai's  M'^tempfycojis  is  groAvn  out  of  Faftiion  in  Eu- 
rope^ we  fend  Souls  no  more  on  Expediiions  of  Knight- 
Errantry  ;  they  fcorn  to  take  up  with  Swine,  or  to  lodge 
with  Camels  and  Elephants.  If  therefore  they  are  im- 
moi'tal  Spirits,  you  cannot  avoid  a  Creator;  neither 
Hazard,  Alotion,  or  Matter  can  give  us  a  good  Account 
of  their  Origin. 

Eufebius  defired  another  Meeting  the  next  Day,  to  put 
an  end  to  the  Conference.  One  Seffion,  faid  he,  addref- 
finghimfelf  to  the  Company,  will  compleat  the  Work, 
and  I  defire  your  Prefence  ;  I  will  only  draw  up  in  fhort 
the  Sum  of  our  Difpute,  that  you  may  at  one  View  fee 
the  Strengthof  my  Proofs,  and  the  Weaknefsof  my  Ad- 
verfaries:  And  then,  "Theomachus^  if  (in  fpite  of  Light) 
you  refolve  to  remain  in  Darknefs,  (after  1  have  detected 
your  Errors)  I'll  pity  your  Obftinacy.  The  Company 
accepted  of  the  Appointment,  and  fo  broke  up.  But  'I'heo- 
machus,  after  mature  Deliberation,  thought  beft  to  wave 
the  Interview;  he  had  been  too  often  foil'd  to  venture 
another  Pufh:  Befides,  he  perceiv'd  that  fome  of  the 
Gentlemen  began  to  waver :  The  Reafons  of  Eufebius 
had  done  Execution  ;  altho*  indeed  none  had  declar'd 
for  Religion,  many  approv'd  it;  fo  that  he  fear'd  ano-' 
ther  Coni'erence,  with  a  fhort  Exhortation  might  de- 
tach fome,  and  weaken  his  Party.  And  if  the  Succcfs 
of  the  Controvcrfy  fhould  be  put  to  Vote,  he  forefaw 
nothing  but  Shame  for  hirnfelf,  and  Vidory  for  his  An- 
tagonift:  But  the  Matter  being  not  determined  (faid  he 
to  one  of  his  Intimates)  like  thofe  who  have  a  Suit  de- 
pending, M'e  may  both  pretend  Right,  and  fo  we  fhall 
part  Stakes.  But  to  withdraw  handfomly,  he  fent  £»- 
febius  this  Letter. 

G  g  4  SIR, 


45<^      The  Gentleman  InfnSect, 

SIR, 

/Am  forry  Necejfity  bus  forced  me  to  difappowt  you  to  Mor- 
row',  a'fi  unforefeen  Affair  requires  my  /Ihfence  from 
jTowk  ;  V/j  i>oth  impurta'/it  and prejfitig^  fu  that  I  cannot  re- 
tar(i  my  Departure  one  Day  without  great  Prejudice  to  my 
Concerns^  and  Danger  to  a  Relation.  I  therefore  dijengage 
my  l^ord,  andprefume  you  will  excufe  and  pardon  my  Inci- 
vility :  U^hen  I  have  rid  my  Hands  of  this  troublefome 
Accident, 

You  may  command,  SIR, 

Yours. 

Eufehfus  read  the  true  Defign  of  Theomachus  under  his 
falfe  Pretence;  and  eafily  perceiv'd  he  retir'd  to  avoid 
both  Convidlion  and  Confulion,  and  indeed  it's  hard  to 
determine  which  he  dreaded  molt.  For  he  was  jealous 
of  his  Honour  to  Phrenzy,  and  obftinate  in  Infidelity  to 
Madnefs.  Notwithftanding£»/^^/^<j  next  Morning  met 
the  other  Gentlemen  at  the  Rendezvous,  who  were  con- 
cern'd  at  the  fudden  Retreat  of  their  Hero,  yet  fome  ex- 
cus'd,tho* others  blam'd  him.  E^z/f^/a/ addrefling  him- 
felf  to  the  Company,  fpoke  to  this  Purpofe. 

The  Comlujion  of  the  Conference. 

Gentlemen, 

W£  meet  to  Day  tofinifh  theDifpute;  and  I  thought 
the  Controverfy  alio,  but  the  unexpeded  Retreat, 
(I  would  fay  Flight)  of  'Theomachus  has  baffled  my  Hopes. 
Had  he  not  fufpeded  the  Juftice  of  his  Caufe,  why  did 
he  fo  fliamefully  defert  it?  I  had  no  Defign  on  his  Ho- 
nour, but  on  his  Impiety.  I  fhould  have  difclaim'd  the 
Glory  of  Conquefl,  had  he  but  acknowledged  his  Defeat, 
and  abjur'd  an  Error,  that  \A'ill  at  lafl  ruin  him,  and  thofe 
who  inconliderately  abett  it.  Nay,  an  humble  Confcfli- 
on  of  the  Truth  had  fecur'd  his  Reputation  from  Oblo- 
quy; the  Blemifli  had  fallen  on  the  Caufe,  not  on  his 
Wit ;  but  the  Glory  of  SubmiHion  to  the  Truth  had  been 
wholly  imputed  to  his  Candour  and  the  Sincerity  of  his 
Teniper.     People  had  throwii  the  Reproach  of  Atheifm, 

rather 


^e  Gentleman  InJlruBfd,     45^ 

rather  on  the  Milinformation  of  his  Underftanding,  than 
on  the  Perverlenefs  of  his  Will,  fo  that  he  could  only 
fear  to  be  efteem'd  more  unfortunate  than  criminal :  But 
this  ungenteel  Flight  lays  him  open  to  the  iieverity  of 
Cenfure,    and  all  underltanding  Alen   muft    neceflarily 
conclude,  he  wanted  Abilities  todefend  a  bad  Caufc,  and 
Confcience  to  difown  it.     But  I'll  leave  him  tohimfclf, 
and  where  can  he  be  more  unealy,  than  in  his  own  Com- 
pany ?  Though  he  be  without  a  God,    he  is  not  without 
Fear,  and  who  can  fleep  feture  that  harbours  llich  a  Fury  ? 
Atheifts  (like  the  China  JManJarini)  are  waited  on  by 
Hangmen  that  punifh  their  own  Delirquencies :    'i'hey 
can  never  avoid  the  Arreft  and  Execution  of  their  Con- 
fciences ;  tho'  they  make  a  Sport  of  God,  and  a  Diveriion 
of  Crimes  in  publick,  they  are  more  ferious  in  private; 
which  is  a  fhrewd  Sign  their  Atheil'm  is  imaginary,  tho' 
their  Impiety  be  real.     A  God^  or  no  God^  Gentlemen,  is 
an  important  Queftion  ;  andthofewho  incline  to  theA^^- 
gative,  would  do  well  toexamineit  Vv'ith  Care,  with  Study, 
with  Coolnefs  and  Impartiality,  before  they  come  to  a 
iihal  Refolution.    When  the  AtheniaKs  heard  of  the  Death 
of  their  mortal  Enemy  Philip  the  Macedonian,  they  were 
prefently  for  manifeftingtheir  Joy  by  fome publick  Scene 
of  Jollitry  :  Rut  a  Fellow  among  the  Crowd  bid  \m  firji 
be  fure  he  was  dead,  left  one  day  thev  might  find  him 
alive  by  the  Severity  of  his  Revenge.     I'he  A  theift  of  all 
Men  (hould  follow  this  wholfom,  this  prudent  Advice  ; 
and  nothing  but  a  ftridl  Demonftration  can  fecure  him : 
For  all  the  plaulible  Sophifms  in  the  World  will  never 
refcue  him  from  Danger  ;  nor  by  Confequencehis  Electi- 
on from  Folly:  for  fo  long  as  he  is  not  demonftratively 
fecure  there  is  no  Deity,  for  any  thing  he  knows  there 
is  one  ;  and  if  there  be,  he  will  certainly  feel   the  Exi- 
gence of  that  dreadful  Majefty  hedeny'd,  by  the  Rigour 
of  his  Juftice:  It's  therefore, our  Intereft  to  believe  there 
is  a  God,  and  to  fquare  our  Aftions  by  this  Belief;  for 
we  can  be  no  Lofers  by  Credulity ;  but  may  be  undone 
eternally    by  Infidelity:    Indeed   the  Atheift  is  fenfible 
enough  his  Cafe  is  defperate,  if  there  be  a  God,  and  if 
one  may  believe  him,  wifhes  nothing  more,  than  that  it 
were  in  his  Power  to  credit  his  Being  :  But,  fays  he,  this 
is  the  proper  Work  of  Demonftration :   Evidence  alone 
fettles  the  Judgment,  of  which  I  am  wholly  unfurnifli'd : 

But 


4i8     7he  Gentleman  Injiru^ed, 

But  this  is  a  Blindnefs  rather  than  an  Excufe:  A  petty 
Artifice  to  excite  CompafTion,  or  to  hide  FolJy  and  Mad- 
nefs  under  tlie  Drefs  of  Sincerity.  If  they  expe6t  Ma- 
thematical Evidence,  they  will  die  Atheifts,  for  fuch 
Convidlion  is  impoffible  ;  and  they  that  will  only  fubmit 
to  Proofs  of  which  the  Matter  is  uncapable,  fhould  ra- 
ther purge  than  difpute;  He  is  fitter  for  Phyfick  than 
Reafon,  and  1  would  counfel  him  to  (have  and  air  his 
Brain. 

Now  let  me  defire  you,  Gentlemen,  by  all  that  is  dear, 
to  take  this  Matter  into  Confideration,  it  deJerves  Time, 
Thought  and  Rclleftion.  The  QueJlion  is,  Whether 
there  be  a  God  who  eternally  rewards  Virtue,  and  eter- 
nally punifhes  Vice  ?  What  can  be  more  important,  than 
to  be  well  inform'd  on  which  Side  of  the  Contradiftion 
Truth  lies  ?  If  in  the  next  World  there  be  no  high  Court 
of  Juftice,  no  Judge,  no  Account  taken  either  of  Good 
or  Evil ;  why  fhould  Men  force  Appetite,  ftorm  Incli- 
nation, or**bridle  Defire  ?  Why  fhould  they  forego  the 
Enjoyments  of  this  Life,  and  fell  a  prefent  Satisfaftion 
for  a  vain  Expectation  of  a  future  Felicity? 

But  then,  if  there  be  a  God,  Atheifts  are  in  ill  Circuft- 
ftancesi  they  muft  take  Leave  of  Life  and  Pleafure  toge- 
ther, and  give  a  fad  Farewel'to  Delights.  Their  laft 
Breath  extinguifhes  Joy,  and  kindles  a  Flame  not  to 
confume,  but  to  torment  them  eternally.  Their  Mu- 
fick  will  End  in  Tears,  their  Pleafure  in  Repentance,  and 
their  Repentance  in  Defpair.  It's  a  doleful  Cataftro- 
phe  to  be  dragg'd  from  a  Palace  into  a  Dungeon,  and 
from  the  Embraces  of  a  Dal'tlah  into  thofe  of  everlafting 
Flames.  What  Man  in  his  Senfes  would  take  the  moft 
glittering,  and  moft  gaudy  Happinefs  in  the  World,  to- 
gether with  fuch  a  dreadful  Re\'erfion  of  Torments  ?  Yet 
if  there  be  Scientia  in  Excelfs^  Knowledge  and  Juftice 
above,  (that  is  a  God)  the  Infidel  Atheift  will  burn  be- 
low, and  feel  the  juft  Revenge  of  that  powerful  Majefty 
he  fo  obftinately  denied. 

Now,  Gentlemen,  the  Matter  ftanding  thus,  withdraw 
from  Hurry  and  Paflion,  take  off" all  Affedlion  from  the 
prefent ;  divorce  wholly  from  this  World,  till  you  are 
fure  there  is  no  fuch  thing  as  another.  Argue  with 
your  felvcs  thus:  I  believe  /  ^w  hivftilly  begotten,  I  he- 
Ikve  I  amhapiz'dy  and  never  doubted  of  either:  Yet  I 

have 


T'be  Gentleman  InJfruBed.      45^ 

have  the  bare  Teftimony  of  my  Mother  for  the  Truth 
of  the  firft,  and  perchance  the  fole  Authority  of  a  Parfon, 
or  a  Midwife  for  the  Bchef  of  the  fecond.  But  all  Nati- 
ons tell  me  there  is  a  God  as  well  as  Ages :  Why  there- 
fore fhall  the  Word  of  one  Woman,  or  of  one  Man,  not 
only  fway,  but  fix  'and  fettle  my  Juds^ment  in  thofe 
Cafes,  and  not  the  joint  Teftimony  of  all  Men  in  this  ? 
I  cannot  contemplate  the  petty  Springs  of  a  Watch,  or 
the  rude  Contrivance  of  a  Cabbin,  but  prefently  the 
Sight  leads  me  naturally  to  an  Artificer.  I  cannot  pof- 
libly  afcribe  the  Frame  of  either  to  blind  Chance,  or  fatal 
Neceffity  ;  and  though  I  fool  my  Underftanding,  and  en- 
clave my  Reafon  in  a  thoufand  Occafions,  in  this  I  can- 
not. They  difobey  the  moft  prcffing  Commands  of  the 
Will,  they  pronounce  boldly  in  fpite  of  Practice  and  In- 
clination, that  fomeHand  put  the  Wheels  together,  and 
rais'd  the  Cottage. 

The  moft  ill-Ihap'd  Animal  in  the  World,  the  moft  def- 
picable  Leaf  are  more  finely  contriv'd  than  all  the  Ma- 
chines that  ever  Art  invented.  If  therefore  the  petty 
F?4brick  of  a  Watch,  the  unpolifli'd  Frame  of  a  poor 
Cottage  convince  me  they  were  made  by  the  Hand  of  an 
Artificer,  muft  I  not  confefs  this  Majeftick  Pile  of  the 
World,  fo  vaft,  fo  various,  fo  ftupendious,  was  firft  con- 
triv'd by  the  Wlfdom,  and  then  created  by  the  Power  of  a 
moft  perfedl  Agent  ?  If  a  lefs  Motive  fways  my  Judg- 
ment, a  greater  may  ;  and  if  my  Aflent  be  both  firm  and 
prudent  in  one  Cafe,  certainly  it  cannot  be  unftable  and 
imprudent  in  the  other.  A  Child  may  make  thefe  Re- 
flexions; they  are  eafy,  obvious,  and  convincing:  Rea- 
fon therefore  and  Intereft  plead  ftrongly  againft  Atheifm, 
and  you  cannot  abett  it  without  betraying  both. 

Proftrate  (I  befeech  you)  your  felves  with  bended 
Knees  and  bleeding  Hearts  before  the  Throne  of  that 
dread  Majefty  you  have  fo  often  provok'd  by  your  Im- 
morality, and  ab|^r'd  by  your  Infidelity.  Obftinacy 
enflames  his  Juftice,  but  Tears  extinguifh  it.  It's  in 
your  Power  either  to  try  the  Weight  of  his  Anger,  or 
the  Sweetnefs  of  his  Mercy :  But  if  Atheifm  waits  on 
you  to  his  Tribunal,  you  muftexpecl  nothing  but  Dam- 
nation. God's  Greatnels  will  fright  you,  his  Power  will 
difarm  you,  and  his  Juftice  eternally  torment  you.  In 
fpite  of  Bravado's,  Conciencfe  will  not  o'nly  ad  the  Part 

of 


4<5o     ^he  Gentleman  InfruBed. 

of  an  Accufer,  but  of  an  Executioner  alfo.  Ii  will  re- 
venge with  Intereft  thofe  Rapes  and  Violences  you  have 
committed  againft  it  here',  and  turn  thole  kmd  Admoni- 
tions you  receiv'd  v.'iih  Raillery  into  io  many  Inllruments 
of  I'uuifliment. 

Gentlemen,  dare  you  put  thefe  things  to  a  venture? 
Will  you  live  in  I-nridelity  as  unconcernedly  as  if  all  the 
Terrors  of  another  World  were  only  frightful  Dreams  of 
Men  awake;  or  meer  Productions  of  a  feverifli  and dif- 
compos'd  Brain?  Certainly  I  have  made  the  Exiftence  of 
a  God  too  clear  to  be  thought  Fancy  or  Vifion.  And 
then  I  expe6t  Prudence  will  not  permit  you  to  think  it 
a  Matter  not  to  be  regarded,  whether  you  are  eternally 
happy  or  miferable. 

At  lead  if  you  are  refolv'd  to  play  in  this  Life,  and  to 
weep  in  the  other,  decoy  not  unwary  Gentlemen  into  fo 
mad  a  Refolution:  Their  Pains  will  not  eafe  yours.  If 
you  plot  againft  their  Purfe,  have  no  Defign  upon  their 
Religion.  Scoff  theni  not  out  of  their  Cr^W,  iho' you 
wheedle  them  out  of  their  Eftates;  when  you  have  fwept 
away  their  prefent  Stock,  force  them  not  to  niake  over 
their  Title  to  Heaven.  You  can  gain  nothing  by  their 
Lofs  -,  for  the  fame  time  you  rally  them  out  of  Heaven, 
you  jeftyour  felves  into  ilell. 

Belides,  were  the  Exiftence  of  a  God,  the  Truth  of 
Religion  doubtful,  yet  they  fliould  be  thought  on  with 
Serioufnefs,  and  fpoken  of  with  Reverence ;  for  People 
put  a  great  Strefson  both.  They  look  upon  the  Belief 
of  a  Deity,  and  the  Pratlice  of  Religion  here  as  necefla- 
ry  for  their  Happinefs  hereafter.  They  acknowledge  it 
is  not  only  their  Duty,  but  alfo  tneir  Intereft  to  believe 
a  God,  and  to  worfliip  him.  Mcthinks  therefore  it's  a 
Breach  of  Civility,  and  a  failure  in  fUeeding;  it's  an 
Affront  to  Chriftians  as  well  as  to  their  Maker  to  turn 
the  C3bjedl:  of  their  Adoration  into  Sport  and  Diverfion, 
and  their  Expedation  into  Romance:  So  that  you  can- 
not be  prophane  without  being  Clowns.  Pray  therefore 
(at  leaft  for  your  Reputation's  fikc)  employ  your  Wits 
and  Tongues  on  a  more  credible  Subjedl.  Certainly 
Wit  is  not  grown  lb  facrilegious,  as  not  to  be  pleas'd 
without  polluting  holy  Things.  A  Man  may  be  civil 
without  Blafphemy,  and  lay  in  a  very  f:ar  Pretenfion  to 
Ingenuity,  without  being  guilty  of  Profanenefs. 

To 


fhe  Gentleman  Infrufhd.     ^6i 

To  draw  towards  an  End ;  if  you  intend  to  fenrch 
Truth  with  Serenity  and  Candour,  take  leave  of  Di  cile- 
ry, preach  not  down  God,  Religion  and  Sobriety,  but 
treat  with  Refpedl  thofe  things  Mankind  reveres,  for  Men 
leldom  honour  what  they  ridicule;  much  lefs  M'ill  they 
proltrate  thernfelvvs  to  what  they  burlefque.  Shake  off 
therefore  this  buffooning  Humour,  and  v,  hen  the  Tongue 
is  brought  under  Dilcipline,  the  Heart  will  throw  off 
all  the  Lets  of  Prejudice  and  Pailion  j  and  then  the  Un- 
derftanding  difengr'g'<d  from  Violence,  will  eafily  fub- 
mit  to  the  Force  of  thofe  Reafons  I  have  laid  before 
you. 

But  if  you  run  on  in  a  lewd  Vein  of  Drollery  and  Im- 
piety, the  moft  perfuafive  Arguments  in  the  World  wdl 
never  work  upon  you;  you'll  certainly  fport  your  felves 
into  Damnation,  and  link  down  laughing  into  Hell. 
But  then  thole  Flames  that  confume  Mirth,  will  awake 
Defpair.  You'll  begin  to  be  both  ferious  and  wife, 
when  'twill  be  too  late  to  be  fo.  Oh,  how  foolifli, 
how  imprudent  is  it  to  deny  a  Deity  in  this  World,  and 
to  believe  one  in  the  other!  To  live  Atheills  in  London^ 
and  Theifts  in  Hell ! 


The  End  of  the  fecond  Part, 


THE 

Gentleman  In/imSted, 

In  the  Way  of 

Converfation,  Entertainment  of  Friends, 
Management  of  his  Eftate,  Company- 
Keeping,  Travelling,  &c. 

WIT  H 

REFLECTIONS 

ON     SOME 

Modern  Pradtitioners  of  Law. 

A  S    A  L  S  O 

An    E   S  S  A  Y 

U  P  O  N     T  K  E 

Immortality  of  the  Soul. 

^  Part     III.  ^ 

LONDON: 
Printed  in  the  Year   1752, 


THE 

PUBLISHER 

T  O    T  H  E 

Young  NociLiLY  and  Gentlemen 
o  F 

ENGLAND. 

Gentlemen, 

rn  E  former  Two  Parts  of  the  Gentleman  In- 
ftrudled,  have  been  fo  kindly  received  by  the  No- 
bility^ that  L  prefume  to  recommend  the  Third 
alfo^  to  the  Favour  of  their  Proteftion.  Books 
make  their  Fortune^  as  well  as  younger  Broth^rs^ 
i>y  the  Credit  of  great  Patrons  ;  they  are  unable  to  break 
through  the  Oppoficron  of  Criticifm,  Without  the  fupport 
of  Author tty,  and  fo  are  fuppofed  guilty^  becaufe  no  Body 
ivill  fland  up  in  their  Defence  \  jor  at  prefent,  Prejudice 
and  Cenfure  run  high^  and^  what  is  -worfe,  out  of  their 
proper  Channel.  Good  Books  generally  meet  With  Re^ 
f  roach.,  and  bad  as  often  with  Approbation.  IVe  fquare 
cur  'Judgments  by  our  Condu^^,  fo  that  it^s  odds  thofe 
JMen  who  declare  for  Vice  will  never  reltjh  a  LeHure  of 
Morality.  I\[o,  no.,  when  a  Book  condemns  our  Behavf 
our.,  we  take  the  Freedom,  by  way  of  Reprizals,  to  con- 
demn it -^  as  if  it  were  lawful^  with  Mr .  Hobhs,  to  COn- 
troul  Reafon,  when  Reafon  takes  the  Liberty  to  controul 
us. 

/  therefore  expeSl  that  hiber tines  and  Debauchees  will 
take  Check  at  the  Freedom  ofthefe  Papers.^  as  well  as  at 
the  Subje£l ;  and  that  poffibly  they  may  difcharge  a  Volly 
<jf  Reproachi.s  upon  the  Author  ;  for  in  a  hurry.,  Pajfton 
rnijiakes  a  Friend  for  a  Foe,  and  falls  as  foul  on  thofe  who 
H  h  come 


44^ 


The  Publisher  to 


come  to  our  Refcue^  as  on  thofe  Vjho  intend  our  Ruin ;  hut 
the  beft  on  it  is^the  Force  vftkeir  Weapons  anfwcrs  not  the 
flrength  of  their  Malice  \  for  alas,  a  Jeji  makes  a  vjeak 
Thrujl,  and  a  Sarcafm  a  weaker  j  and  fober  Men  feld'jm 
condemn  a  Book^  becatife  Libertines  burlefque  it^  for  ths 
Opinion  of  fuch  Judges  is  always  fufpeded  of  Partiality^ 
randfo  neither  be  a  Credit  to  a  Caufe,  nor  a  great  Misfot' 
tune. 

-  ^  M'^ho  commijfions  this,  Eufebi.us,  faid  a  Sparky  to  tutor 
all Mayjktnd'i  To  la/h  our  Failures  ?  To  expofe  our  Perfons 
to  Reproach  and  Infamy'^  Muji  he  pendant  it  over  his  Bet- 
ters, and  revile  Quality  at  Difcretion'i  Has  he  not  firipfi 
^s  of  our  Robes,  and  Jb own  us  in  Dijhabile  to  the  Rah" 
hie  ?  Firfl  to  render  us  cheap  and  defpicable^  and  then  to 
entertain  the  Publick  at  our  Expences  ?  Though  we  are 
iewd,  why  mufi  we  appear  little  ?  Though  we  forfeit  our 
Innocence,  we  have  right  to  Refpe^ ;  the  Gentleman 
wants  Breeding,  and  his  Perfon  JJoould  be  brought  to  Pe~ 
fiance  as  well  as  his  Pen. 

IVhy,  good  Sir,  all  this  Heat,  faid  I,  I  counfel  you  to 
Jiifie  your  Refentment,  unlefs  you  can  difarm  this  pretend^ 
ed  Adverfary,  confute  his  Evidence,  or  deny  the  Charge  ; 
for  after  all,  tho''  People  abandon  Virtue,  few  have  the 
Impudence  to  burlefque  it  ;  its  Inter  eft  is  not  quite  funk ; 
Confcience  and  Shame  have  not  lofl  all  Footing  ;  and  tho' 
it  be  not  uncreditable  to  commit  an  ill  Adion,  it^s  infa- 
wious,  at  leajl,  to  defend  it.  If  the  Gentleman's  Charity 
challenges  not  Thanks,  I  am  fur e  it  deferves  not  reviling  j 
it  Jhould  firike  out  fume  Sparks  of  Repentance,  and  not 
kindle  blames  of  Anger :  He  tells  'vou,youpoJi  on  to  Dam- 
nation, and  dejlres  y  ou  to  flop  :  Is  it  fuch  an  Incivility 
to  inter poje  ?  Did  we  fee  a  blind  Man  upon  the  Brink  of 
a  Precipice^  Jhould  we  not  admonijh  him  of  the  Danger ^^ 
andfpeed  to  his  AJfiftance  ? 

Toung  Gentlemen,  hoodwinkt  by  Pajfion,  andfafcinated 
hy  the  bewitching  Blandifhrnents  of fenfual  Pleafures ,  take 
jtot  only  the  mofi  eafy,  but  the  jjjortefi  Road  to  endlefs  Tor- 
ments ;  he  cries  out  llop,  and  you  que/iion  his  Commijfion, 
and  formalize  upon  the  Legality  of  his  Proceeding;  your 
Danger,  dear  Sir,  on  the  one  Side,  and  Charity  on  the 
other,  are  his  Warrant ;  nay,  and  the  Principles  of  that 
Religion  you  proJiitHte  to  Lewdnefs^  are  his  jujiification 
end  PrQtedion, 

Indetd 


the  Young  Nobilitv,  Bfc, 

Indeed  he  has  drawn  fome  difproportioned  Chamber s^ 
hut  the  Fault  lies  not  in  the  Painter^  but  in  the  Original  \ 
the  Gentleman  had  no  Intention  to  proz'oke  any  Matt''s 
Refentment^  or  to  expofe  his  Perfon  ;  he  hath  bleKided  a 
thoufaiid  different  Faces  together^  fo  that  this  Confufioti 
of  Features  and  Complexions  will  conceal  the  Originals. 
In  port ^  Sir,  I  couivfel  you  rather  to  mend  than  to  jlorm'i 
if  you  will  nut  apply  the  Remedy^  thank  at  leaji  the  Gen^ 
tleman  that  prefents  it. 

But  however  J  the  Spark  would  come  to  no  'Terms  of/lc- 
commodation  with  Eufebius,  he  would  pofl  him  up  for  a 
Pedantf  and  pronounce  him  a  prefummg  Coxcomb  in  all 
Places^  and  all  Company  :  'Thus  this  poor  Man  overlook''d 
nothing  in  Ill-nature,  or  worfe  Manners,  and  jirain  d  his 
Kefentmenti  to  all  the  Heights  of  Folly  and  Madnefs  ;  htif 
he  fancied  in  Eufebius'j  Character  he  faw  his  oivn  ;  and 
fo  to  clear  his  Complexion^  and  brighten  his  Features,  he 
would  break  the  Glafs,  as  if  the  Deformity  lay  in  the  Me- 
dium, and  not  in  his  Face, 

Thus  fome  People  attack  GcdUnefs  under  every  Form, 
they  give  Virtue  no  Quarter,  and  Vice  no  Difturbance  ; 
they  have  bani/h'd  Goodncfs  from  Pr^Sice,  and  wtll  not 
fuffer  It  to  appear  even  upon  Paper  :  Mo,  no,  Conjcience 
muft  have  no  Retreat,  and  God  no  IVorfJjip.  Certainly  in 
thefe  Mens  Opinions,  Hell  is  a  Place  of  Diverjion,  and 
Heaven  of  Torments. 

hut.  Gentlemen,  I  hope  the  fober  Part  of  you  will  re- 
ceive this  Prefent  with  more  Civility,  and  If  you  cannot 
refolve  to  imitate  the  Pattern^  I  am  confident  you  will 
at  leafi  commend  it.  I  have  mingled  his  Ailions  with  his 
Precfpts,  and  fo  have  at  the  fame  time  thrown  before  you 
a  Scheme  (f  his  Practice,  and  an  Effay  of  his  Ducttments  ; 
you  will  at  one  View  fee  what  he  did,  and  read  what  hd 
taught ;  and  then  we  mufi  conclude.  Gentlemen  are  far 
gone  in  IVickednefs^  if  both  Reafon  and  Example  are 
finable  to  recover  them. 

The  way  to  Virtue  by  Precept,  fays  Seneca,  //  long,  by 
C.X ample  jh or t ;  this  affects  more  fir ongly  than  Speculati- 
on -y  it  enlivens  our  Spirits,  and  prepares  them  for  ASiion\ 
the  ProfpeSl  of  hazardous  Enterprises  oftentimes  damps 
Courage,  and  difpirits  Bravery  it  felf;  but  when  we  fee 
Men  undertake  it  with  Valour,  and  come  off  with  Succefs^ 
We  envy  the  Hero,  and  applaud  the  Adiun  ;  we  then  con- 
Hh  7.  dude 


4^8  The  Publisher,  &Ci' 

elude  thai  things  arefenfible  that  feem  imp ojfible^  and  that 
oftent'tmes  the  ijery  Difficulty  lies  more  in  the  Fancy  than 
in  the  Attempt. 

FU'jh  and  Blood  paint  Virtue  in  a  frightful  Drefs,  and 
the  Duties  of  a  Chrijiian  in  the  Garb  of  a  tury  ;  they  feem 
Mopjiers  to  the  Nobtlity^  more  fit  to  be  gazed  on  than 
pradifed^  and  rather  fcare  than  invite.  Eufebius /^^j  <^//^ 
covered  the  Impoflure^  and  unmask'd  the  Artifice  ;  he  has 
convinced  the  ti^orld  by  Practice,  that  Virtue  has  nothing 
hideous  but  a  falfe  Vizor ^  and  that  the  Duties  of  a  Chri- 
jiian. are  no  Nufance  \  that  our  Makernever  intended  to 
bind  us  up  to  dtfadvantage^  nor  to  turn  our  Duty  into 
our  Misfortune.  "The  Office  of  a  Chrijiian  in  this  great 
Man  interfered  not  with  that  of  a  Gentleman  \  his  Beha- 
viour was  handfome^  and  his  Carriage  religious  ;  he  kept 
up  a  continual  Correfpondence  with  God,  zuithout  break- 
ing off  all  Commerce  with  Men.  In  a  Word.,  he  lived 
both  a  Gentleman  and  a  Saint ;  loved  by  mejl,  and  ad- 
mired by  alL 


THE 


[  4'^9  1 


THE 


Gentleman  Inftru^ed,  &c. 


Part  III. 

DIALOGUE    I, 
TouKg  Gentlemen  are  d'tjfuaded  from  a  'Town  Life. 

TH  O'  the  Difpute  was  over,  the  Controverfy 
went  on.  Theomachus  was  indeed  too  weak 
to  keep  his  Ground,  but  too  Itubborn  to  ask 
Qiiarter.  He  durft  not  boaft  of  Vidory,  and  would 
not  acknowledge  his  Defeat  ;  fo  that  in  conclufion  he 
was  wiUing  to  draw  Stakes,  and  confefs'd  that  both 
maintain'd  their  Poll  with  equal  Refolution.  In  fine, 
(faid  he  with  a  Smile)  Eufebius  and  I  fought  here,  as 
our  Allies  and  French  at  Luzara :  Both  are  Conquerors, 
and  both  overcome.  I  give  him  leave  to  clap  his  Wings, 
if  he'll  permit  me  to  crow. 

Neander  was  prefent  at  the  Difpute,  and  by  good  For- 
tune in  the  Company,  when  Tioeomachus  bolted  out  this 
Rhodomontade.  His  Confidence  was  extraordinary,  and 
his  Air  unulually  pretending.  Paffion  flufh'd  in  Neander\ 
Face,  and  almoll  broke  out  at  his  Tongue.  He  had  no 
mind  to  renew  the  Combat ;  for  he  knew  Atheifli  ever 
return  Smiles  for  Reafon,  and  keep  their  Ground  rather 
by  dint  of  Forehead  than  Argument.  However,  not  to 
t'efFer  him  to  be  pleafant  without  Check  j  I  perceive,  faid 


4^0       ^he  Gentleman  Injlru^ed. 

he,  you  have  run  in  a  Circle,  taken  many  Steps,  but  rid 
no  Ground  ;  you  are  jull  where  you  were  in  fetting  out ; 
becaufe,  for  onght  you  know^  there  may  be  a  God^  an4 
then  you  a  Madman  by  Demonftration. 

I  have  told  you,  reply'd  T'heomachus^  God  is  an  airy 
Being,  the  Child  of  Fancy,  and  Spawn  of  Imagination, 
a  Bugbear  to  awe  Fools,  and  fright  Children  ;  and  if  Eu~ 
febius  has  hedored  much  on  this  Subjeft,  he  has  proved 
little.  For,  Sir,  I  diftinguifli  between  Flourifli  and  Ar- 
gument ;  between  ftarcht  Cant,  and  fol-d  Reafon. 

It  may  be  fo,  anfwer'd  Nea:-ider^  but  if  his  ±ieafon 
for  a  God  comes  not  up  to  Evidence,  yours  for  no  God 
(by  your  own  Gonfeffion)  falls  fhort  of  Demonftration, 
For  in  a  Word,  Sir,  Ws  a  drawn  Battle.  It's  therefore 
no  lefs  probable  there  is  a  God.  than  that  there  is  none; 
and  by  confequence  you  mult  commence  Fool,  to  remain 
an  Atheifl. 

'Theomachtis  was  pincht  for  an  Anfwer,  and  therefore 
he  retreated  to  the  lall  Retrenchment  of  baffled  Libertines^ 
Raillery  and  Satyr.  For  you  mull  know  thefe  Gentle- 
men bite  when  they  cannot  fpeak  to  the  purpofe,  and 
laugh  down  thofe  Arguments  they  cannot  reafon  out  of 
Countenance. 

YourLogick,  young  Man,  faidhc,isas  callow  as  your 
Ghin,  and  your  Underftanding  as  foft  as  your  Beard. 
Leave  Philofophy  to  thum  the  Grammar^  rub  over  Pro- 
pria qua  Maribus,  before  you  venture  on  Divinity ;  your 
Intellect  is  pen-feathered,  too  weak-wing'd  to  ibar  fo 
high  :  A  Dog  or  a  Racer  are  more  proper  Entertainment 
for  your  Age,  than  God.  And  I  preiunie  you  are  more 
able  to  judge  of  Wine,  than  of  Theological  Niceties. 

Nay,  faid  Meander,  if  Age  be  the  Standard  of  Senfe, 
and  Arguments  are  meafured  not  by  Mood  and  Figure, 
but  Beards  then  certainly  all  the  Advantage  lies  on  your 
lide;  but  under  Favour,  Sir,  Beards  and  Reafon  go  not 
always  together.  Age  is  not  the  Meafure  of  Truth  and 
jfalfbiood.  Threefcore  may  be  in  the  wrong,  and  Twen- 
ty in  the  right :  Fling  therefore  Years  out  of  the  Qiiefti- 
'QXi^  and  come  up  clofe  to  the  Point.  But  Tbeomachus 
thought  fit  to  drop  the  Controverfy,  and  withdrew,  while 
the  Way  lay  open  for  a  Retreat.  The  Difficulty  pincht, 
and  he  had  no  colourable  Anfwer  in  refervc.  And  there- 
fore being  in  no  condition  to  withftand  his  Adverlary,  he 

took 


^he  Gentleman  Inftru^ed,      47 1 

took  the  Liberty  to  contemn  him.  And  indeed,  this  petty 
Policy  is  a  wonderful  Relief  to  a  finking  Courage.  It 
ja)'sa  Varnifh  of  Generofity  on  Cowardice;,  and  gives 
Fear  the  Colour  of  Good-nature. 

7'heomachus  was  no  more  iox  dravjn  Batiles,  he  faw,  that 
by  drawing  Stakes,  he  fliould  lofe  the  Sett.  And  therefore 
(to  cry  up  his  Party,  and  his  expiring  Credit)  he  pro- 
.claim'd  himfelf  Conqueror,  and  his  Adverfary  defeated. 
Enfebius^  faid  he,  is  flipt  into  the  Country  to  air  his 
Brains,  and  to  throw  off  the  Chagrine  that  always  dif- 
•compores  routed  Generals.  He  dares  not  keep  the  Field, 
but  cantons  his  fcatter'd  Forces  in  Villages. 

Etifebius  indeed  had  bid  adieu  to  the  Town,  with  a 
Refolution  never  to  return.  He  was  fick  of  Company, 
and  more  of  thofe  Follies  he  could  neither  endure,  nor 
corred.  He  could  not  without  Indignation  behold  Chri-^ 
ftians  lead  the  Lives  of  Pagans,  and  prophane  the  beft  Re- 
ligion with  the  fouleft  Crimes.  JVhat  Pleafure,  faid  he, 
cafi  a  Chrijiian  take  in  a  place  where  Vice  rides  in  'Triumph^ 
andVirtue groans  in  a  Dungeon;  where  Goodnefs  lies  un- 
der Contempt^  and  Irregularity  receives  Afplaufe  ;  where 
the  bejl  Adions  are  lampoon'd^  and  the  worft  de'fied"^. 

Neander  rid  over  to  his  Houfe,  five  Miles  only  diftant 
from  the  Town.  Heinform'd  him  ofTheomachui'sCom^ 
portment  fincehis  Retreat;  with  what  an  Air  of  Confi- 
dence he  proclaim'd  his  Vi6lory:  That  the  Cabal  began 
to  hold  up  their  Heads  and  crow:  Thzt  Atheifm  h^id  al- 
moft  recovered  of  its  Wound,  and  began  to  walk  Abroad: 
That  his  Prefence  might  ftop  the  Evil  his  Abfence  would 
give  Opportunity  to  fpread:  That  Theomachus  would 
withdraw  at  his  Arrival,  and  carry  his  Poifon  and  Impu- 
dence into  the  Country. 

Alas !  reply'd  Eufebms^  Dear  Neander^  you  are  unac- 
quainted v/ith  the  Temper  of  Atheijls.  It's  eafy  to  con- 
found 'em,  but  almoll  impoflible  to  convert  'em  ;  their 
Difeafe  lies  in  the  Heart,  not  in  the  Head.  Their  Mif- 
fortune  takes  its  Rife  from  Obflinacy,  not  Ignorance. 
And  how  can  you  reafon  a  Man  out  of  Infidelity,  who 
refolyes  to  remain  in  it,  againft  Reafon?  Libertinifm, 
Neander^  is  a  bewitching  Thing,  when  it  gets  the  Afcen- 
dant;  'twill  improve  Ignorance  for  an  Excufe  of  Free- 
dom ;  cad  Confcience  into  a  Lethargy,  and  bribe  the 
Vnderftanding  againft  our  own  Intereft.    In  a  Word^ 

H  h  4  it's 


4^ a      'The  Gentleman  Infiru0ed. 

it's  a  Sin  feldom  forgiven  in  this  World,  and  never  in  the 
other. 

Atheifm,  replied  Neander^  is  not  the  oniy  Vice  of  the 
Town,  other  Sins  feem  free  of  the  City,  and  Men  en- 
deavour to  dilate  the  Malignity,  and  to  keep  the  Difor- 
der  in  countenance.  If  People  have  the  face  to  preach 
up  Ungodlinefs  iri  Difcourfe,  and  Fradice  plant  both  a- 
gainfl  it^  good  Counfel,  back'd  by  Example,  may  do  as 
much  Execution  upon  Vice,  as  bad  upon  Virtue.  In  the 
next  World,  indeed,  Men's  Wills  are  either  fixt  in  Good 
or  Evil,  but  in  this  they  may  pafs  from  one  Extream  to 
the  other.  Beiides,  all  are  not  fo  charm'd  vv'ith  Sin,  as  to 
perfuade  themfelves  it  deferves  no  Punifhment,  nor  fo 
put  of  Conceit  of  Virtue  as  to  difcard  it  of  all  Reward  : 
Their  Misfortune  fprings  rather  from  Weaknefs  than  Ma- 
lice; from  youthful  Heat,  than  from  Infidelity.  Time 
will  cool  their  Blood,  and  Inftruilion  may  inform  their 
tlnderftanding ;  and  when  this  is  difabus'd,  the  Will  fhakes 
off  the  Enchantment. 

What  can  Advice,  faid  Eufebius,  fignify  to  thofe  who 
are  always  more  prepared  to  curfe,  or  ridicule  the  Advifer, 
than  to  pradtife  the  Counfel  ^.  To  thofe  who  are  unman'd 
by  Eifeminacies,  and  even  nailed  to  ill  Habits  ?  They 
are  without  Confcience,  without  Principles,  how  will 
you  come  at  ihetn.''  You  may  almoft  as  foon  preach 
dovyn  a  Hurricane,  or  declaim  Tempell  into  a  Calm,  as 
counfel  a  bad  Man  into  a  good  one.  Whilft  we  frame 
ill  Notions  of  the  future  State,  our  Lives  will  hardly  be 
regular.  What  hope  of  Recovery  when  the  Patient  dotes 
on  the  Difeafe,  when  he  flies  in  the  f^ace  of  the  Doiior, 
and  fufpedls  every  Cordial  to  be  a  Dofe  of  Arfenick  or 
Ratsbane?  In  a  Word,  the  Malignity  of  the  Fever  works 
up  toMadnefs;  arid^  like  fome  Bedlams,  they  fuppofe 
■themfelves  the  Wifdom  of  the  Nation. 

I  fuppofe,  indeed,  that  all  who  throw  up  their  Inno- 
cence, and  pawn  Heaven  for  Pleafure,  have  not  quite 
iaken  leave  of  Religion,  or  difmifs'd  Principles ;  but  they 
have  Mofcs  and  the  Prophets^  Paftors  and  Teachers:  I  am 
3iot  Curate-General,  nor  intend  to  interfere  withanothet's 
Fun6tion :  Thofe  who  tend  the  Sick  are  often  ftruck  with 
the  Infeftion,  and  the  Dodor  that  cures  his  Patienc 
ibmelinies  dies  of  his  Diftemper. 

What! 


^e  Gentleman  InJlruBed.      47 3 

What!  faid  Neander  with  a  Smile,  you  are  on  Guard 
againft  the  Infedlionof  theTown:  Surely  you  have  cut- 
iiv'd  Temptation.  Age  has  fo  congeal'd  your  Blood,  that 
nothing  but  a  C^r//Z«2(2;-^/(?f/^  is  able  to  thaw  it.  Neither 
the  World  nor  Devil  can  work  up  thy  Humours  to  Irre-? 
gularity.  Thy  Paflions,  like  Serpents  in  a  Froft,  drop 
their  Venom  ;  they  move  Avithout  Vigour,  and  almolt 
y/ithout  Life  :  They  are  fo  far  from  capering,  that  like 
Criminals  in  Tramels,  they  can  fcarce  ftand.  To  have 
one  Foot  in  the  Grave,  and  the  other  in  the  Brothel  is 
unufual.  Few  Men,  like  JEina^  burn  within,  when  they 
are  Snow  without.  A  white  Head  and  a  glowing  Heart 
feldom  meet. 

No  Man,  reply'd  Eufebitis^  is  fecure,  and  therefore  all 
fhould  ftand  upon  the  Qzii  va  la.  Age,  indeed,  is  Ids 
expos'd  than  Youth,  but  it's  not  above  Danger;  and  I 
have  known  fome  carry  their  Diforders  on  to  fourfcore. 
They  fpurred  on  Nature  jaded  by  Age,  and  rid  dov/n 
by  a  long  Courfe  of  Excelfes,  till  it  funk  under  the  Bur- 
then, and  went  off  the  Stage  both  with  Shame  and  Sin, 
Icorn'd  by  Men,  and  tormented  by  the  Omnipotent. 

It's  therefore  our  Duty  to  withdraw  from  ill  Example, 
and  not  to  come  within  light  of  Occafions.  Like  the  Ba- 
filisk,  they  kill  with  their  very  Sight,  and  the  Poifon  is  too 
quick  for  a  Remedy,  Fly  therefore,  dear  Neander^  the 
Town  ;  Temptation  feconded  by  Youth,  and  fliarpencd 
by  Idlenefs,  will  be  too  hard  for  Precept.  Lot  found 
Safety  in  the  Country,  and  his  Wife  Death  for  looking 
back  upon  the  unfortunate  City.  God  has  left  this  fad 
Example  for  a  Caveat  to  Pofterity,  to  have  any  Com- 
merce with  Sinners,  left  by  Converlation  we  efpoufe 
their  Crimes,  and  partake  of  their  Punifliment. 

And  indeed  when  young  People  fix  in  Town,  they  glean 
up  its  Vices,  and  continue  the  Pradice,  till  their  Eitates 
founder,  and  their  Bodies  fink  under  the  Weight  of  their 
Diforders.  Unthinking  Creatures !  They  fport  in  the 
Camp  of  their  Enemiics;  Danger  furrounds  them,  and 
what  is  worfe,  either  unfeen  or  unrcguarded.  Temptati- 
on ailaulfs  them  not  with  the  Violence  of  an  Enemy,  but 
the  Carelles  of  a  Friend.  This  throws  them  off  their 
Guard,  difarms  Cautions,  and  gives  them  up  to  the  Go- 
vernment of  Carelefnefs,  fo  that  they  furrender  without 
Kefiljance,  and  figh  in  Fetters  before  they  dream,  of  an 

Enemy. 


474     ^^^  Gentleman  hiJlruBed. 

Enemy.  Nay,  one  would  think  they  loft  their  Wits  with 
their  Liberty,  and  commenc'd  Fools  the  fame  Moment 
they  become  Slaves.  For  they  fancy  themfelves  the  only 
free  Subjects  in  the  Nation,  becaufe  they  are  not  coop'd 
up  between  four  Walls ;  and  dote  on  their  Captivity, 
becaufe  they  hedtor  in  Taverns,  and  rattle  in  gilt  Coachej^ 
But,  alas!  thefe  pleafing  Fancies,  are  the  EfTeft  of  a 
dozing  Opiate  of  the  Devil's  Malice,  not  of  his  Kind- 
nefs :  He  regales  his  Friends,  as  the  Indians  do  their 
Slaves,  meerly  to  prepare  them  for  Slaughter. 

Now  thefe  Men  turned  into  Senfe,  are  unqualified  for 
good  Counfel,  you  may  as  foon  reafon  a  Swine  out  of 
the  Mire,  as  thefe  into  Sobriety  and  Temperance.  They'll 
.carry  on  their  Brutalities  in  fpight  of  all  their  Sermons  they 
hear,  and  make  over  the  Lord's-Day  to  the  Devil. 

We  have  indeed  Committees  for  the  Improvement  of 
Piety,  as  well  as  for  that  of  Trade.  And  fo  have  made 
Provifions  for  the  Intereft  of  God,  no  lefs  than  for  that 
of  the  Nation.  But,  alas  I  If  our  Cenfors  deferve  Cen- 
fure,  Reformation  will  be  at  a  ftand ;  their  Example  will 
do  more  Execution  on  Vice  than  their  Office :  And  their 
Pradlice  would  carry  on  more  heartily  the  Intereft  of 
Virtue,  than  their  Commiffion.  A  Man  that  flings  his 
Eftate  into  a  Mifs's  Lap,  will  not  be  fined  out  of  her 
Company  with  forty  Shillings ;  and  he  who  leaps  over 
the  Laws  of  God,  will  fcarce  boggle  at  Ads  of  Parlia- 
incnt. 

In  fine,  Neander^  our  Town  Sparks  are  a  monftrous 
Generation,  a  kind  of  Centaur,  half  Man,  and  half 
Beaft.  They  have  the  Shape  of  the  Firft,  and  all  the 
Brutality  of  the  Second  ;  they  follow  the  Stream  of  In- 
clination like  Beafts;  they  chop  at  any  thing  that  grati- 
fies Senfe.  But  then  they  fwitch  on  Nature,  and  here 
they  leave  the  Beaft  to  play  the  Hend.  Immortal  Spi- 
rits feem  tied  to  all  the  infamous  Impreflions  of  Flefli  and 
Blood,  and  bind  themfelves  Slaves  to  the  Devil  in  this 
Life,  for  Pleafure  in  Hand,  and  eternal  Torments  in 
Rcverfion. 

Had  you  a  Vote  in  the  Houfe,  or  a  Place  at  the  Board, 
fald  Neaader^  you  would  be  for  a  Proclamation  to  clear 
the  Tov/n  of  all  the  young  Gallants  above  Fifteen,  and 
under  Thirty, 

When 


The  Gentleman  InflniBed.     47^ 

When  a  Gentleman's  Bufinefs,  reply'd  Eufehius,  lies 
in  Town,  I  would  not  have  him  take  Coach  for  the 
Country.  For  at  fuch  a  Diftance  things  would  not  go 
on  kindly.  The  Man  and  his  Bufinefs,  like  Man  and 
Wife,  muft  live  together :  Separate  Dwellings,  require  a 
feparate  Maintenance.  Now  when  we  double  Expences, 
Accounts  feldom  run  even  :  Thofe  who  have  Offices  at 
Wbite-Hall,  may  take  up  Lodgings  in  SprtKg-Gardcn  or 
Pallmall;  who  intend  to  build  a  Fortune  upon  the  haw^ 
may  take  up  in  the  Inns  of  Court :  And  if  they  are  for 
Trade,  they  may  pack  off  to  Ifapping  or  Cheapjide. 

But,  I  confefs,  I  would  not  have  thofe  come  nearer 
than  Hampjled  or  Hounflovj- Heathy  who  have  no  other 
Bufinefs  than  Diverfion  ;  for  they  will  certainly  idle  away 
their  Time,  Mortgage  their  Souls  to  the  Devil,  and  their 
Eftates  to  Mifles,  Vintners,  and  Lawyers. 

Idlenefs,  dear  Neander^  is  a  dangerous  Difeafe  under 
all  the  Elevations;  but  it's  mortal  at  London.  It's  not 
only  the  Mother,  but  theMiftrefs  of  Vice.  Mtihayij,  enin^ 
rnalhtam  docuH  otiofitas^  Eccluf,  Chap,  xliii.  A  Manthac 
has  nothing  ta  do,  has  Leifure  to  do  any  thing:  FJe  lies 
open  to  all  Temptations,  and  what  is  worfe,  is  unprepar 
red  for  a  Defence  ;  like  a  difmantled  Town,  he  falls  intq  . 
the  Hands  of  the  firft  Invader. 

Indeed  at  his  firft  Arrival  Bufinefs  flows  in  upon  him  : 
One  would  think  he  fat  at  the  Helm,  and  lleered  the 
weighty  Concerns  of  the  Englijh  Monarchy.  The  firft 
Secretary  of  State  is  in  a  lefs  Hurry  on  Poft-Days,  and 
fends  about  fewer  Difpatches.  For  you  muft  know  he 
Subpoena's  SsmpJlreJJ^es .^Taylors ^  Barbers^  and  Coachmak- 
ers,  to  appear  at  his  Levee ;  one  v/ould  fancy  this  hetc- 
rogenious  Junfto  took  into  Confideration  ardua  liegn's 
Negotia,  they  play  at  pro  and  con  with  fuch  Heat  and 
Commotion.  Now  all  thisNoife  is  nothing  but  a  learned 
Debate  upon  the  Modes  of  the  Town,  and  an  advanta- 
geous Mixture  of  Colours.  He  is  for  Delicacy  and  Exail- 
nefs  of  Fancy,  for  nothing  tawdry  and  mechanick,  flaunt- 
ing or  ill  matcht.AndDodtors  are  divided  upon  the  Point ; 
but  all  agree  to  bubble  the  Squire.  For  it's  a  kind  of  Po- 
jltiL'trr/n  among  the  Beaus,  that  nothing  is  modifh  that 
is  not  dear;  nay,  the  Goodnefs  even  of  Snuff  rifes  v.'ith 
the  Price,  and  Tobacco  at  five  Guineas  the  Pound,  is 
twenty  Times  belter  than  the  fame  at  a  Crown. 

I  knev^ 


47 (^     The  Gentleman  InJiruBed. 

I  knew  a  Spark  that  fat  a  whole  Morning  in  a  clofe 
Committee  with  a  Barber :  Now  this  mighty  Confukation 
was  about  a  Perriwig.  He  (hew'dhim  Twenty,  but  one 
was  too  long,  another  too  fliort;  this  too  full,  that  too 
thin:  At  laft.  Sirrah^  fays  the  Yoiingfler,  make  me  a 
fmart  IVig^  a  fmart  one^  ye  Dog.  The  Fellow  bled  him- 
ielf;  he  had  heard,  of  a  fmart  Nag,  a  fmart  Man,  ^c. 
but  a  fm.nrt  Wig  was  Ctwefe  to  the  Tradefman.  How- 
ever nothing  would  pleafe  his  Worfliip,  b[itfmari  Shoes, 
fmart  Hats.,  and  fmari  C r av.it s:  Within  two  Days  he  had 
z  fmart  li^ig.,  v/ith  a  fmart  Price  in  the  Box.  The  Truth 
is,  he  had  been  bred  up  with  the  Groom,  and  tranfplanted 
the  Stable-dialed  into  the  Dreffing-room. 

Was  he  a  Gentleman,  faid  Meander  ?  A  Gentleman,  an- 
fwer'd  Eiifebius  ;  yes,  of  a  Family  more  ancient  than  the 
Norma-a  or  Saxon  Conqueft :  He  was  of  the  LaFooli  of  the 
North,  allied  to  the  eldeft  Branch  of  the  La  Fools  ofEJfex. 

Now  let  us  fuppofe  his  Equipage  compleat,  and  his 
Grand  Concern  over  ;  his  next  Bufinefs  is  to  confute ^'o^'s 
Aphorifm,  Man  is  born  to  Labour.  No,  he  is  a  thing 
made  meerly  for  Sport  and  Pleafure ;  he  fancies  God  has 
affign'd  him  no  other  Employment  than  to  live  at  Ran- 
dom, without  Law,  without  Reftraint.  And  altho'  God 
h'as  given  every  part  of  the  Creation  a  convenient  Poft, 
he  feems  a  Mute  placed  in  view  meerly  for  Light  and 
Parade.  You  muft  not  therefore  wonder  1  attempt  not 
to  define  his  Calling,  feeing  he  will  not  pretend  to  any. 

One  weighty  Affair  calls  upon  him  every  Morning, 
viz.  hovj  hepallfaunter  away  the  Day.  This  is  a  moot 
Point,  and  requires  Plodding  and  Application  ;  and  indeed 
he  dwells  upon  the  Subject  till  a  confiderable  part  of  the 
Day  is  pad,  before  he  can  take  a  final  Refolution  how  to 
pafs  it.  Nay,  with  lefs  Pains,  he  might  have  employ'd 
the  whole  E)ay  well,  than  in  the  very  Deliberation  of 
fpending  it  ill. 

For  pray  imagine  not  the  Practice  of  any  Chriftian  Vir- 
tue falls  under  Debate,  where  he  fliall  hear  Prayers,  or 
where  a  Sermoti.  Alas !  Thofe  Duties  lie  below  the  Sphere 
of  a  Gentleman  who  pretends  to  the  Garb  and  Freedom 
of  the  Town  ;  he  might  have  difcharg'd  them  in  his 
Country  Parifli,  without  the  Expence  of  a  flaunting  Equi- 
"pr.ge,  or  the  Fatigue  of  a  tedious  Journey.  And  you 
fiiay  take  this  for  a  Principle,  that  Devotion  never  coach'd 
•    "  a  young 


The  Gentleman  InJlrtiBed^      477 

a  young  Man  to  Town,  nor  gave  him  a  Surfeit  of  the 
Country.  Liberty,  Pleafure,  and  downright  Debauche- 
ry allure  him  thiiher;  thefe  command  him,  as  God  did 
Abraham^  to  forlake  Houfe  and  Relations  to  turn  Tenant, 
though  he  was  Lord  and  Proprietor  in  the  Country. 

The  Morning  is  divided  between  th^  Pillow  and  the 
Toilet,  and  this  is  the  moft  important  as  well  as  the 
moll  innocent  Employment  of  the  Day.  The  Folly  is 
much  greater  than  the  Sin :  For  what  can  be  more  foolifli 
than  for  a  Man  to  efpoufe  the  Weaknefs  of  a  Woman  ? 
To  take  Pains  to  be  laught  at?  To  drain  his  Pocket  to 
make  himfelf  cheap  and  ridiculous?  However,  you  may 
with  more  Eafe  harangue  a  Peacock  out  of  his  Brains, 
than  a  Town- Spark  out  of  his  Gaudry  :  He  will  appear 
in  Print,  and  convince  the  World  that  Finery  and  Folly 
are  near  allied. 

And  now  his  Friends  crowd  in  to  give  him  the  bon 
jour,  thefe  are  a  kind  of  parrie  hleiu,  that  marode  upon 
new  Comers,  with  CommifTion  from  Indigence  andNe- 
ceffity.  They  have  rioted  away  their  Confcience,  met 
and  diced  away  their  Eftates,  and  now  graze  upon  the 
Common.  Their  Honefty  runs  lower  than  their  Pockets, 
and  their  Confidence  over-fhoots  Impudence.  Their 
Crimes  are  as  publick  as  their  Debts,  and.  their  Religion 
keeps  pace  with  their  Morals ;  they  fcorn  to  fling  even  ri 
Varnifh  over  the  fouleft  Diforders,  and  will  not  go  to  the 
/Expence  of  civil  Hypocrily.  In  fine,  they  are  a  Blemifh 
to  their  Family,  aNufance  to  the  Town,  and  a  Scandal 
to  Converfation. 

Thefe  Sparks,  like  the  Steward  in  the  Gofpel,  cannot 
dig,  and  will  nut  beg ;  and  altho'  Adam  was  condemned 
to  live  by  the  Sweat  of  his  Brows,  they  refolve  to  make 
a  Figure  by  that  of  their  Confcience.  At  the  finl  Sight  of 
a  raw  Gentleman,  they  fly  at  him  like  a  Vulture  at  the 
Quarry,  and  for  the  fame  end  alfo,  to  pray  firft  upon  his 
Virtue,  then  upon  his  Money  j  how  many  Nets  do  they 
lay  to  enfnare  the  Squire,  and  knave  themfelves?  They 
ply  him  with  Viiits,  ftudy  his  Temper,  and  ftrike  in 
with  his  Inclination.  They  fvvear  his  Wit  is  without 
Parallel ;  his  Behaviour  above  Imitation ;  that  a  js  ne 
fcay  qiioy  runs  through  every  Motion,  which  charms  and 
artonifhes.  In  fine,  that  he  is  the  very  Top  of  his  Species. 
The  poor  Gentleman,  unprailifed  in  the  Dialcdt  of  the 

Town, 


47^       ^he  Gentleman  Injiru^e^. 

Town,  takes  thefe  Compliments  for  Content ;  he  fuppc^ 
fes  himfelf  in  Yorkpire^  where  the  Tongue  and  the  Heart- 
go  together,  where  Thought  and  Words  look  the  fame 
Way.  Now  this  City-incenfe  fends  out  a  moft  grateful 
Flavour,  but  it  is  too  ftrong  for  a  Country  Brain.  It 
turns  his  Head,  and  fmoaks  him  out  of  Senfe  and  Rea- 
fon;  he  fancies  himfelf  a  Cubit  higher;  he  walks  in  the 
Clouds,  and  values  himfelf  not  by  the  Pound,  but,  like 
Diamonds,  by  the  CaraSi. 

In  a  Word,  he  flings  himfelf  into  their  Arms,  and  gives 
liimfelf  up  to  their  Diredtion.  And  then  you  may  be 
fure  he  meet.s  with  the  Fate  of  the  Sheep  in  the  Fable, 
•who  difmifs  the  Dogs  to  graze  under  the  Prote6lion  of 
the  Wolves;  for  a  Libertine  is  a  Devil  once  removed, 
or  at  leaft  his  Deputy;  nay,  he  is  ten  times  more  mif- 
chievous  by  Proxy,  than  in  Perfon.  People  of  themfelves 
are  prone  enough  to  Lazinefs,  Lewdnefs,  and  Extrava- 
gance, but  thefe  add  Biafs  to  Nature ;  they  provoke 
Paflion  by  Precept,  and  whet  Appetite  by  the  Charms  of 
Glory  and  Reputation  ;  they  fchool  him  out  of  all  the 
Revelations  in  the  Gofpel,  and  debauch  him  in  Principle 
and  Pradice;  for  Scepticks  have  faint  Notions  of  God, 
and  confequently  none  of  Confcience  ;  they  have  no 
Relifh  of  Virtue,  and  lie  under  no  moral  Reftraints  from 
Hope  or  Fear :  So  that  they  have  nothing  to  do,  but  to 
indulge  their  Inclinations,  to  gratify  Senfe,  to  fill  their 
Pockets  with  one  Hand,  and  to  empty  them  with  the 
other.  Now  to  take  in  a  Gentleman's  Money,  you  muft 
firft  beat  down  all  Principles  of  Morality,  you  mufl: 
draw  a  Scheme  of  Gentility  by  the  Rules  of  Epicure ; 
and  if  you  can  perfuade  him  he  is  only  free  of  the 
Tov>?n,  when  he  has  dii'charged  Confcience,  and  fent 
back  Religion  into  the  Country,  you  may  rook  him  out 
of  his  Eftate  with  the  fame  Facility  you  have  raked  him 
into  Debauchery. 

For  this  reafon  they  take  care  to  inform  him  of  all  the 
Embelhftiments  of  a  Town-Gentleman,  without  any 
mention  of  the  Duties  of  a  Chriiiian.  They  tell  him,  that 
Wit  is  the  belt  Quarter  in  a  Gentleman's  Efcutcheon,  and 
that  he  mult  bid  fair  for  a  Place  among  theVertuofo*Sy  but 
that  Profanenefs  is  the  (horteft  Cut  to  this  Preferment, 
and  the  belt  Standard  of  Senfe  and  Breeding,  id  eji, 
his  Wit  mull  be  as  wretched  as  his  Manners.    When. 

he 


The  Gentleman  Inflni^ed.     47^ 

he  is  pinch'd  for  a  Reafon,  he  muft  bolt  out  a  Jeft  ;  that 
fits  well  enough  on  a  Pedant,  ?/'/i  on  a  Gentleman,  provi- 
ded it  be  tipt  with  Impudence,  and  pointed  with  Boldnefs; 
that  he  muft  beware  of  that  vulgar  Error  He lig!o»,  be- 
caufe  It  cramps  Freedom,  palls  the  Spirits,  and  coops  up 
Liberty  in  llr.iit  Compafs ;  that  he  muft  be  fure  to  be  out 
of  the  Reach  of  Scruples,  and  above  the  Follies  of  Re- 
morfe.  Now  fiich  Principles,  driven  on  by  Example, 
eafily  lead  him  intoExcefles;  and  thefe  help  on  the  Belief 
of  the  Doftrine ;  fo  that  by  a  kind  of  -mutual  Priority, 
the  one  ferves  for  a  Vehicle  to  the  other. 

Indeed,  at  the  beginning.  Debauchery  lies  hard  upon 
his  Stomach ;  he  pukes,  and  is  crop-lick  ;  but  Pra6tice 
and  Wine  carry  off  the  Diftemper,  and  then  the  Soul 
becomes  cafe-hardened  ;  he  is  fo  far  from  blufning  at 
his  Diforders,  that  he  thinks  Ambition  a  Reputation  for 
Debauchery  ;  he  charges  himfelf  with  falfe  Impieties, 
and  ufurps  Wickedneiles  he  is  only  guilty  of  by  his 
Boafting. 

And  now  being  flefht  in  Sin,  he  bounds  from  one  Dif- 
order  to  another,  and  turns  not  only  a  Day,  but  the 
"Whole  Year  into  a  mad  fort  of  BacckanaUa.  Other 
Trades  have  fome  Weeks  of  a  Vacation,  but  his  go  on 
the  very  Sundays ;  an^l  generally  his  Profanenefs  rifes  v/ith 
the  Holinefs  of  the  Day.  His  firft  Jaunt  is  to  a  Treating- 
houfe;  here  he  trefpaiTes  upon  all  the  Rules  of  Tem.pe- 
rance  and  Sobriety ;  he  over-charges  his  Stomach  with 
Ragoufts,  and  his  Head  with  Wine  ;  Appetite  runs  away 
with  Reafon,  Senfuality  with  Shame,  and  he  fancies  he 
only  drinks  like  a  Man,  when  he  finks  into  the  Beaft. 
Men  (hould  eat  and  drink  to  live,  but  he  inverts  the  Pri- 
mitive Inftitution,  and  feems  only  to  live  for  the  Satis- 
fa6lion  of  his  Palate:  He  would  never  die,  yet  plungesin- 
to  Exceiles,  as  if  Life  v/ere  a  Bunhen  ;  for  he  is  never 
well  till  he  falls  fick  of  a  Surfeit,  and  almoft  out  of  his 
Wits,  till  he  has  drowned  them  in  Claret. 

From  the  Table  he  removes  to  Play,  and  leaves  the 
Glafs  to  handle  the  Dice ;  when  a  Gentleman  has  drunk 
away  his  Reafon,  he  generally  flings  his  Money  after  it; 
for  he  cannot  jultify  himfelf  to  the  Fafhion,  nor  keep  up 
to  the  Character,  unlels  his  Purfebe  as  light  as  his  Head  ; 
and  he  is  haunted  by  a  Brig-ade  of  Sharpers  who  ply  at 
his  Pocket,  and  give  no  more  Quarter  to  his  Guineas, 

than 


4S0  .    The  Gentleman  Injirufied. 

than  to  their  own  Confcience.  They  cruife  upon  Gen- 
tlemen like  Parties  in  Flanders  upon  Paflengers.  Poverty 
and  Luxury  feal  their  Commiflion  ;  and  what  they  feize 
by  one  Crime,  they  throw  away  by  another.  One  would 
take  them  for  Croepis's  by  their  Expences,  and  for  Cut- 
purfes  by  their  Filching. 

At  firll  they  fufFer  him  to  win  to  invite  him  to  lofe, 
and  by  good  Luck  decoy  him  into  bad  ;  but  then  the 
Wind  chops  into  another  Corner ;  Fortune  fumbits  to 
Cogging,  and  the  Deceit  over-reaches  Play.  A  thoufand 
Curfcs  fly  after  Good-luck,  but  are  unable  to  recal  it,  fa 
that  at  once  he  is  bankrupted  of  Patience,  Money  and 
Grace;  however  he  will  not  fit  down  with  his  Lofs,  he 
fuppofes  Fortune  continues  never  long  in  the  fame  Hu- 
mour; that  if  file  frowns  to  Day,  flie  muft  fmile  to 
Morrow  :  Away  then  he  goes  to  a  fecond  Rendezvous, 
but  alas,  the  Defire  of  retrieving  his  Lolles,  only  ferves 
to  enhance  them  :  He  feldom  difcovers  the  Deceit,  till 
nothing  is  left  to  be  cheated  of;  nor  even  fufpeds  Over- 
reaching, till  Caution  comes  too  late. 

By  this  time  he  has  diced  himfelf  fober,  and  the  Fumes 
of  Chagrin  have  mafteied  thofe  of  Wine.  Nothing  but 
a  Comedy  can  difpel  the  Glooms  that  rife  from  an  empty 
Pocket.  Av/ay  then  they  drive  to  the  Theatre ;  and  here 
Vice  attacks  him  by  the  Eyes  and  the  Ears  too  ;  he  fees 
almoft  the  very  fecret  Myfteries  of  the  Stews,  and  hears 
all  the  Blafphemies  of  the  Damned  ;  here  Lewdnefs  is 
fpoken,  not  in  double  Entendres^  but  plain  Englijh  ;  there 
are  Paraphrafeand  Comment  upon  the  Text,  and  Folly 
isflicwn  without  Caution  or  Referve. 

Comedy,  they  fay,  was  defign'd  by  Pagan  Athens  to 
inftru6l  Youth,  and  to  teach  the  Bafenefs  of  Vice  by  its 
Punifliment :  But  in  Chriftian  London  it  tends  diredly 
to  debauch  People  all  manner  of  ways;  For  this  reafon 
good  Men  are  lafli'd,  and  ill  rewarded  ;  Virtue  appears 
in  Sackcloth,  and  Vice  in  Embroidery ;  Rakes  go  ofF 
with  Succefs,  and  fober  Men  with  Difappointment ; 
the  Devil  and  the  Poet  chop  upon  the  fame  Favourite, 
and  his  Fortune  ahvays  rifes  with  his  Lewdnefs.  Nay, 
thofe  of  the  beft  Quality  in  the  Play  are  always  the 
worft  Chriftians ;  they  glitter  in  Equipage,  and  are 
dignified  with  Efcutcheon,  and  often  with  Patent  to  ena- 
ble Vice:  To  perfuade  People  that  the  BIsmiflics  of  Hu- 
man 


'fhe  Gentleman  InJiruBed,      4S1 

man  Nature  make  up  its  Perfe6lion,  and  that  Gentle- 
men and  Reprobates  are  made  of  the  fame  Metal.  Now 
who  can  be  good  under  fuch  ftrong  Provocations  to  Evil? 
Who  will  pretend  to  Regularity,  when  they  muft  blufti 
for  their  Refolution  ;  and  cannot  avoid  Reproach  un- 
It'i.'i  they  deferve  it?  Believe  me,  Neander^  when  a 
Gentleman  is  pinch'd  with  this  dangerous  Dilemma,  / 
muft  either  forfeit  my  Charaiher  or  my  Innocence  •,  it's 
odds  he  will  rather  drop  this  than  put  that  to  a  venture; 
for  it  goes  hard  when  one  muft  turn  lewd  as  it  were  in 
his  own  Defence,  and  can  expedl  no  Quarter,  unlefs  he 
hangs  out  the  Colours  of  Libertinifm  and  Irreligion, 
and  boafts  of  thofe  Crimes  he  is  only  guilty  of  in  Ap- 
pearance. 

Now  though  fuch  hideous  Flights  of  Profanenefs,  fuch 
Heights  of  Obfcenity,  and  Strains  of  Religion  fhould  be 
all  Penance  and  Mortification  to  Chriftians,  yet  they  are 
not  only  permitted,  but  applauded  by  the  Nobility  of 
both  Sexes,  and  the  Standard  of  their  Approbation  is  of- 
ten the  Indecency  of  the  Poem  :  Nothing  is  fuppofed 
foft,  unlefs  it  be  rotten  ;  and  all  thofe  Pieces  are  damned 
by  theSpe£lators,  that  damn  not  the  Audience.  When 
the  moft  flaming  Impieties  are  thus  received  with  Tranf- 
port  on  the  Stage,  are  they  not  ftamp'd  as  it  were  with 
publick  Authority  ?  And  when  the  worft  A6tions  are 
moft  efteemed,  who  will  boggle  at  the  Pradlice  that 
brings  both  Credit  and  Pleafure?  It's  certain  the  Charms 
of  the  Theatre  are  no  lefs  transforming  than  thofe  of 
Cercesy  it  enchants  Men  out  of  their  Species,  they  leave 
iheir  Reafon  behind  them,  and  carry  Brutality  to  their 
Lodgings ;  it  deftroys  all  Principles  of  Religion  and  Mo- 
rality ;  it  countenances  Atheifm,  and  places  the  Glory 
of  Gentlemen,  in  the  Infamy  of  Pluman  Nature ;  it 
fullies  the  Imagination,  boils  up  the  Humours,  and  fires 
the  Palfions ;  and  when  it  has  thus  ftarted  the  Game, 
Flefli  and  Blood  pampered  by  high-feeding,  and  fupplied 
with  Money,  will  follow  the  Chace  ;  and  you  may  take 
it  for  granted  that  London  is  better  (I  mean  worle)  ftock'd 
with  Thais's  thzx\  Lncreiia's  YoUth  and  Coin  make  pro- 
ftitute  Women,  as  well  as  debauch'd  Men,  and  the 
Play-Houfe  ferves  not  only  for  a  School  to  Proftitution, 
but  for  a  Nurfery  alio  to  the  Stews ;  nay,  and  fome- 
times  to  Bethlem. 

I  i  Now 


482,      TheG^virL'S.UkHi  lnfru0ed. 

Now  when  a  young  Gentleman  is  drench'd  in  Brutality; 
when  criminal  Amours  take  the  Afcendant,  he  is  undone 
to  all  Intent  and  Purpofe  ;  for  when  Love  flies  high,  Rea- 
fon  runs  low  ;  and  whofoever  has  made  over  his  Heart 
to  a  Mifs,  feldora  keeps  his  Wits ;  he  lies  open  to  all  the 
Aflaults  of  Artifice  and  Avarice,  and  his  Soul  becomes 
as  beftial  as  his  Pleafures,  he  can  think  of  nothing  that 
is  generous  or  manly.  So  that  in  Conclufion,  he  has  no 
more  of  the  Man,  than  of  the  Chriltian. 

To  comprehend  all  in  a  little ;  a  Town-  Spark  is  a  kind 
of  Cor/«/^/«»«  Brafs ;  this  is  a  Mixture  of  all  Metals,  and 
he  a  Compound  of  all  Diforders ;  he  h  a  little  Anti- 
chrift,  Homo  pec cati,  a  Man  of  Six ;  and  this,  like  the 
Devil  in  the  Gofpel,  is  call'd  Legion  ;  he  plies  between 
the  Tavern  and  the  Play-Houfe,  and  then  turns  off  to  the 
Groom-Porters^  or  the  Stews  ;  in  one  place  he  drops  his 
Wits,  in  the  other  his  Money,  and  every  w  here  his  Inno- 
cence. So  that  the  Devil  lodges  moftly  in  his  Pocket, 
and  always  in  his  Soul,  ije  has  the  Shape  of  a  Man, 
and  all  the  Inclinations  of  Beafts ;  his  Study  is  to  flufh 
the  moll  agreeable  Objedls  of  Senfe,  and  his  whole  Sa- 
tisfadtion  to  enjoy  'em  ;  he  ftands  not  upon  the  Niceties  of 
Decency,  nor  formalizes  upon  the  Notions  of  Good  and 
Evil.  Pleafure  is  the  Rule,  as  well  as  the  End  of  his 
Adlions;  and  although  he  be  unable  to  fatisfyone  Piiflion, 
he  endeavours  to  glut  them  all.  When  he  can  devife  no 
new  Crime,  he  entertains  his  Thoughts  on  the  Ideas  of 
pad  Diverlions,  and  fo  debauches  his  very  Memory,  as 
well  as  his  Will,  and  commits  imaginary  Sins,  which, 
unrepented,  will  be  revenged  with  real  Torments. 

I  confefs,  faid  Neander^  if  the  Orit^inal  holds  up  to 
this  Copy,  a  Town-Spark  has  more  of  the  Monller  than 
of  the  Man;  and  I  would  no  more  come  within  the 
Air  of  the  City,  than  of  a  Peft-Houfe.  But  certainly 
you  over-flourifh  upon  an  ill  Subjedt,  and  paint  'em  in 
more  difadvantageous  Colours  than  Nature  made  'em, 
fuch  Creatures  are  found  in  Fancy  only,  not  in  Life ;  and 
I  believe  Satyr  has  drawn  fome  black  Stroaks  upon 
Pradtice.  Without  doubt  young  Gentlemen  are  not  all 
Saints ;  nor  arc  they  all  Fiends ;  fome  may  live  better, 
and  others  worfe. 

Indeed,  Ncander^  replied  Eufehius^  I  have  drawn  the 
young  Men  of  the  Town  in  worfe  Colours  than  Na- 
ture 


'I'he  Gentleman  InJiruBed.    483 

ture  made  'em,  but  not  fo  bad  as  they  have  made  them- 
felves.  Call  a  tranfient  Glance  on  thofe  of  your  Acquain- 
tance, and  you  will  confels  our  Age  fwarms  with  Borbo- 
rites,  as  well  as  the  preceding,,  who  rowl  in  Mire,  like 
Swine,  of  the  moft  hideous  Senfualities ;  having  fhaken 
oft"  the  Yoke  of  Obedience  to  Parents,  they  break  through 
the  Commandments  of  God.  Scorn  all  Guides,  but  Te- 
merity ;  all  Law,  but  the  Liberty  to  follow  every  Im- 
pulfe  of  PafTion ;  all  Labour,  but  that  of  the  Devil,  to 
plunge  themfelves  into  eternal  Flames,  and  others  with 
'em,  that  they  may  find  Companions  in  Punifhment,  as  » 
well  as  in  Plcafurt, 

But  pray,  what  is  this  to  the  Town  ?  anfwered  Nean- 
der  :  In  fpight  of  Provocation  to  Evil,  Men  may  live 
with  Regularity  in  the  very  Liberties  of  the  City;  if 
therefore  they  deviate  from  their  Duty,  leave  the  Fault  at 
their  own  Door,  and  charge  not  the  Town  with  their 
Extravagances.  I  grant.  Temptations  are  frequent,  and 
often  violent ;  but  then  thefe  polifh  Virtue,  as  Fire  pu- 
rifies Gold.  Virtue,  till  it  be  brought  to  the  Touch-ftone, 
has  often  more  Luftre  than  Solidity,  and  all  its  Value 
hangs  on  the  Surface.  But  when  it  Hands  its  Ground  in 
fpight  of  Provocation,  and  bears  up  againft  the  Torrent 
of  Flefh  and  Blood,  it  then  appears  like  the  Sun  in  its 
Meridian,  in  Pomp  and  Glory. 

Without  doubt,  fa  id  Eufehius,  London  Air  has  no  In- 
fluence on  Man's  Free-will ;  it  lays  under  noReftraint,  no 
fatal  Neceflity.  Man  is  Mafter  of  his  Choice,  in  one 
Place  as  well  as  in  another ;  but  what  avails  a  Power  to 
live  v/ell,  with  a  Will  to  live  ill  ?  A  Man  muft  lie  under 
the  irrevocable  Sentence  of  Damnation  to  fin  merely  for 
Sin's  fake.  Such  a  llrain  of  Aialice  is  above  the  reach  of 
the  moft  daring  Debauchee:  Intereft,  Ambition,  and 
criminal  Pleafures,  are  the  great  Incentives  to  Vice,  thefe 
rouze  Appetite,  enliven  tl',e  Paffions,  and  then  fubdue 
the  Will.  Now  where  do  thefe  Temptations  take  up 
their  Lodgings,  but  in  the  Town  ?  Here  they  are  let  off 
with  all  the  Charms  of  State  and  Grandeur ;  and  then,  be- 
fides,  they  perfecute  Youth,  not  with  Frowns,  but  Smiles, 
and  kill  with  Kindnefs. 

But  ycu  tell  me,  Temptation  poliflies  Virtue,  anddi- 
ftinguifhts  Sterling  from  Artifice  and  Appearance.  Great 
and  Good !  why  don't  you  take  a  turn  in  a  Peft-houfe,  to 

J  i  2  trv 


4 84      ^he  Gentleman  InftruHecl. 

try  the  Strength  of  yourConftitution,  or  in  an  Hofpffal 
to  Air  your  Lungs  ?  By  all  means ;  young  Men  {hould 
ftep  into  a  Brothel  to  refine  their  Chaftity,  and  into  a 
Tavern  to  praftife  Temperance  and  Sobriety.  Dear  Sir, 
the  Way  to  fecure  Virtue,  is  not  to  expofe  it ;  come  not 
within  Sight  of  Temptation:  It's  a  fhort  Paflage  from 
being  provoked  to  Evil,  and  doing  it :  Fear  is  a  better 
Guardian  of  Piety  than  Confidence,  and  more  Men  have 
forfeited  it  by  Temerity  than  Caution. 

But  certainly,  Hiid  Neander^  London  is  not  compofed 
of  T'averns,  Brothels^  and  Theatres.  Gentlemen  may 
vifit  more  regular  Places,  and  fling  away  their  Time  on 
Diverfions  lels  dangerous  and  more  innocent. 

Yes,  reply'd  Eufebius,  they  may  vifit  a  hundred  and 
thirty  Churches,  and  I  allure  you  this  Jaunt  vvould  take 
much  Time  oft'  their  Hands ;  but  alas  !  their  Bufinels  lies 
not  within  Sight  of  a  Chapel;  they  may  alfo  cry  about 
th^  ^ixttis  Save-alls  ^u^Charcoal^  or  tug  at  an  Oar  be- 
tween Temple- Bar  znd  IVhiie-Hall.  Or,  in  fine,  they 
may  fleer  by  the  Compafs  of  Sir  S —  Z>—  who  drove 
every  Day  in  a  ftately  Equipage  to  all  the  Toy-fliops  be- 
tween Piccadilly  and  the  Royal-Excbunge  ;  he  viewed 
every  Thing,  but  bought  nothing.  The  Gentleman  would 
not  do  worfe,  but  could  not  frame  any  Paftime  better ; 
without  doubt  he  play'd  the  Fool,  but  not  the  Rake; 
he  toy'd  away  his  Time,  yet  kept  his  Money  with  his 
Innocence;  his  Soul  was  little,  though  his  Birth  was 
great,  and  his  Inclinations  childifh  at  Threefcore. .  How- 
ever, it's  better' to  trifle,  than  to  debauch  away  Time, 
and  to  be  a  Coxcomb,  than  a  Reprobate.  But  fuch  a 
Humorift  is  a  Phxfiix^  the  Binh  and  Wonder  of  an 
Age ;  a  Pair  feklom  meets  in  a  Kingdom,  and  never  iu 
one  City. 

You  take  Things  by  the  wrong  Handle,  faid  Nca»der^ 
and  reprcfent  them  at  aDifadvantage:  If  the  Sun,  unin- 
fluenced by  inferior  Bodies,  has  ibine  Spots,  what  won- 
der a  Town-Life  be  waited  on  by  fome  Inconveniences  ? 
I  grant  many  Diverfions  are  not  innocent,  yet  all  are 
not  criminal.  For  Example  ;  what  Harm  in  taking  the 
frefh  Air  in //y^^-P^r^?  And  then  in  driving  to  a  Con- 
fort  of  Mufick  ?  Thefe  Entertainments  are  genteel,  they 
unbend  the  Mind,  refrefli  the  Body,  gratify  the  Senfes, 
and  have  noDefign  upon  Virtue. 

I  be- 


fhe  Gentleman  Injir tiffed.    485 

I  believe,  anfwer'd  Eufebiur,  the  A\r  of  Hyiie- Park  is 
more  whollbme  than  that  of  Cheafjide  j  and  that  a 
mouthful  now  and  then  may  be  as  good  for  the  Stomach 
as  a  Vomit ;  but  then  1  am  perfuaded  a  Dofe  of  Country 
Air  would  clear  the  Lungs,  and  carry  oft'the  Smoak  from 
the  Thorax,  with  lefs  Expence  and  Danger.  But  do  you 
think,  Neander^  the  Bt'^«x  and  Belles  have  no  other  Bu- 
fmefs  there,  than  to  take  in  a  Cargo  of  frelh  Air?  alas! 
this  is  only  the  Pretence,  their  Defign  is  worle  complexi- 
oned  ;  thefe  appear  in  the  Height  of  Pomp  and  Equipage ; 
and  care  is  taken  to  fet  oft'  their  Charms  with  all  the  Ad- 
vantage of  Fan  and  Artifice  ;  they  fmother  the  Defedls  of 
Nature  under  a  varnifh  of  Silk,  and  plain  the  Furrows, 
Time  has  funk  in  their  Faces,  with  Pomatums ;  the  Ring 
is  a  kind  of  Noah's  Ark  ;  they  are,  Seven  ui^clean  Crea* 
tures^  for  two  clean.  Ladies  of  Honour  ride  Pall-mall^ 
with  thofe  of  Pleafure;  and  you  will  fcarce  diftinguifh 
them  but  by  their  Equipage  j  for  you  mull  know,  a  Mifs 
out-glitters  my  Lady ;  flie  runs  away  with  the  Wives 
Jewels,  as  well  as  with  the  Hufband's  Heart,  and  com- 
mands his  Purfe  with  no  lefs  Empire  than  his  Perlbn. 

Now  pray,  Neander^  tell  me,  is  here  no  Danger  for  a 
young  Man,  who  is  haunted  by  Paflion,  and  leaves  think- 
ing at  Home  ?  May  not  Love  fly  from  one  Coach  into 
another  ?  And  may  not  an  Intrigue  begun  in  Publick  be 
improved  in  Private  to  Proftitution  ?  In  a  Conflux  of 
both  Sexes,  many  meet  upon  ill  Defigns;  and  when 
fomeare  difpofed  to  fell  Pleafure,  and  others  to  purchafe 
it,  they  feldom  difagree  upon  the  Price  j  in  a  word,  I  do 
not  fay  a  Turn  in  the  Park  is  criminal,  yet  oftentimes 
it's  unfafe. 

Though  I  rank  not  the  Love  of  Mufick  among  the 
Signs  of  Predeftination,  yet  I  am  no  Enemy  to  the  Sci- 
ence. I  am  not  even  for  banifhing  it  the  Churches.  Me- 
thinks  an  Organ  well  touch'd  gives  a  Majefty  to  the  Du- 
ties of  Religion,  and  rouzes  up  the  mofl  drowfy  Spirit 
to  Devotion.  1  am  not  for  turning  Inflrumental  Mufick 
out  of  civil  Converfation  j  nor  do  I  think  with  PlatOy 
that  the  V'toUn  or  Harf  have  fuch  an  Influence  on  the 
Government,  that  one  String  more  would  untune  the 
Common-wealth.  I  believe  ihe  Ephori of  Laced^tmon  had 
little  Bufinefs  on  their  Hands,  when  they  Hinted  the  Lute- 
Itrings,  and  that  the  Senate  deferved  rather  to  be  laugh'd 

lis  at 


486      fhe  Gentleman  Injira^e^, 

at  for  feizing  the  Fiddle,  than  Timotheus  to  be  blamed  for 
exceeding  the  publick  Allowance. 

However,  it's  certain  airy  Mufick  raifes  fportive  Hu- 
mours, and  tunes  the  Spirito  to  Diverfion  \  it  awakens 
Paflion,  warms  the  Blood,  animates  Fancy,  and  opens  it 
to  Pleafure.  Indeed  it's  not  directly  vicious ;  yet  how  far 
it  may  contribute  to  Vice,  thofe  who  haunt  thofe  Places 
are  the  moft  competent  Judges ;  but  the  vocal  Mufick  is 
lewd  to  Scandal,  and  irreligious  to  Excefs ;  here  you 
have  Lewdn^ils  in  F»//>,  crowded  in  a  Couplet^  and  an 
Iliad  of  Mifchief  in  a  Nut-pell. 

The  Subje6l is  always  profane  or  amorous;  and  both 
to  the  Height  of  the  Poet's  Fancy;  it's  better  in  Rhime 
and  Metre  to  help  the  Memory  of  the  Audience;  it's 
garnifli'd  with  Wit  to  make  a  deep  Impreffion  on  the  In- 
tel'ed;  fo  that  here  is  Arfenick  thrown  into  Ratsbane, 
Poifon  upon  Poifon  ;  and  befides  an  airy  Tune  and  a  fine 
Voice  ferve  for  a  Vehicle  ;  they  gild  the  Dofe,  take  off 
the  Unpalalablenefs  of  the  Potion,  and  infufe  Pleafure 
and  Tranfport ;  when  Lewdnefs  is  work'd  up  with  Verfe 
and  Mufick,  the  Mifchief  riles;  ihefe  drive  it  ftronger 
upon  Fancy  and  Pra6lice. 

But  if  it' be  performed  by  a  Woman,  it's  then  Poifon 
thrice  boiled,  mortal  and  fudden  :  It  attacks  not  Virtue 
by  Siege  and  Approaches,  but,  like  Gun-powder,  blows 
it  up  in  a  Moment ;  it's  downright  Provocation  ;  for  tho* 
fhe  feems  to  venp  the  Poet's  Thoughts,  fne  warbles  out 
her  own,  and  covers  her  Amours  under  the  fabulous 
Names  of  Claris  and  Sylvia.  A  Wonian  that  courts  in 
Mufick,  folliclts  in  good  earned,  and  is  cither  fome  Spark's 
Conqueft  already,  or  intends  to  make  one.  Il*s  odds, 
that  fhe  who  fings  ill  Things,  will  do  worfe;  nov.'  when 
the  Inclination  is  engaged  by  a  fine  Voice,  and  melting 
Notes;  when  the  Words  recommend  the  Bufinels  of 
Lewdnefs,  and  the  Sex  pleads  for  it,  whether  Paffion  be 
not  like  to  get  the  better  of  Duty,  I  leave,  Neaacler^  to 
your  Confiderafion 

But  certainly.  Sir,  replied  Neauder.^  Vice  is  not  in  {o 
flourifhing,  nor  Virtue  in  fo  finking  a  Condition  as  you 
\^'ouId  perfuade  me  ;  who  would  not.think  by  your  Dif- 
courfe,  that  Licentioufnefs  and  Impiety  had  called  in  the 
City  Charter,  and  by  a  Quo  Warranto^  diverted  the  Mayor 

and 


7he  Gentleman  hiflruBed.     487. 

and  Aldermen  of  the  Government,  to  invade  it  them- 
felves?  You  draw  a  Picflure  of  London  in  as  black  Co- 
lours, as  the  Scripture  paints  Sodom  and  Gomorrah.^  and 
reprefent  the  Inhabitants  Sinners  befur'e  the  Lord^  from 
the  highefl  to  the  loivejl ;  but  for  all  that  a  Gentleman 
may  find  Ibber  and  civil  Company  ;  and  I  am  acquainted 
with  Perlbns  of  Chara6ler,  who  make  a  Confcience  of 
doing  a  bad  Thing. 

I  met  once,  faid  Eufebius,  a  poor  Fellow  poring  on  a 
Book;  well  Tow?,  faid  I  I  what  Book  hail  thou  there? 
the  Bibte^  Mailer,  reply'd  Tom.  The  Bible^  faid  I !  it's 
a  good  Book.  There  is,  no  doubt,  fober  and  civil  Com- 
pany in  Town,  here  and  there  ^  if  a  body  could  but  find  it  ; 
but  badfo  prodigioufly  over-tops  it  bo±  in  Number  and 
Quality,  that  there  is  no  coming  at  it  j  like  Gold  in  the 
Mine,  it  mull  be  found  by  Sweat  and  Labour ;  and 
then  too,  you  muft  remove  a  Tun  of  L)uft  for  one 
Ounce  of  Oar. 

I  believe  alfo  with  Tow,  that  here  and  there  a  Body  may 
find  a  Confcience  ;  but  then  you  mull  be  at  the  Charge 
of  a  Hue  and  Cry,  or  fend  the  Conllable  with  a  Warrant 
upon  the  Expedition  ;  for  Confcience  of  late,  like  Deb- 
tors, Iculks  in  the  dark,  or  walks  the  Streets  incognito  ; 
and  then  when  you  have  arrefted  it  in  Her  Majelly's 
Name,  a  Man  knows  not  v/hat  to  make  of  it ;  it  Hands 
at  Trifles,  and  breaks  through  Enormities;  llrains  at  a 

Flea,  and  fwallows  a  Camel.     T H took  check 

at  a  Companion  for  linging  a  harmlefs  Air  upon  the 
Lord's-day:  Fye^fye  !  I  will  not  fujfer,  faid  he,  ?^(?  Sab- 
bath to  be  thus  prophaned  in  my  Prefence.  Yet  the  next 
Sunday  this  very  Confcience  invited  the  Sabbath-breaker 
to  a  Brothel.  ThiS  Gentleman  had  a  Confcience,  no 
doubt,  butfomethingin  Diforder:  One  would  have  ta- 
ken him  for  an  African  Negro^  who  places  Beauty  in 
Blacknefs,  and  Deformity  in  a  clear  Complexion.  A 
gay  Humour,  in  his  Opinion,  v/as  a  capital  Crime,  and 
Fornication  an  innocent  Diverfion.  The  Town  and 
Liberties  fwarm  with  this  Breed  of  Gonfciences ;  they 
are  bought  at  eafy  Rates ;  nay,  are  become  both  a  Drug 
and  a  Nulfance  to  Commerce  and  Society. 

I  have,  indeed,  drawn  London  in  black  Colours  ;  but 
methinks  the  Copy  nicks  the  Original ;  and  if  it  refefn- 
bles  Sodom ^  who  can  help  it  3  the  Fault  lies  in  the  Like- 

I  i  4  nefs 


488     The  Gentleman  InJiruM. 

nefs  of  their  Faces,  not  in  the  Painter,  Indeed,  I  fear, 
a  PortapoUs  and  a  London  Beau  are  of  the  fame  Alloy; 
true  to  Flefh  and  Blood,  but  falfe  to  Sobriety  and  Good- 
nefs.  And  then  for  ihe  Belles,  they  are  call  in  the  fame 
Mould.  Vanity,  Balls,  and  DrefTing,  run  away  with  the 
P<a/(?yr/»^  Ladies  Thoughts,  and  do  not  they  monopolize 
our  LoKido,/  Ladies  time?  In  fine,  the  foreign  Vices  of 
both  Sexes  thrive  in  our  Climate ;  and  if  Syria  has  fet 
us  a  Pattern,  London  out-does  the  Original.  You  will 
tell  me  London  is  a  reformed  City,  how  then  dare  I  com- 
pare the  Exceflesofa  Chriftian  People,  with  the  hideous 
Diforders  oi,Paga»s  ?  Is  not  this  to  fet  Idolatry  above  the 
Worfhip  of  the  true  God,  and  the  Slaves  of  Beelzebub 
above  the  Children  oijefus  Chrift  ?  By  no  means ;  our 
Belief  is  excellent,  but  our  Manners  rtark  nought;  and 
this  is  the  RicWle,  that  Men  fliould  profefs  Chrift,  and 
difown  his  Maxims ;  reverence  his  Perfon,  and  defpife 
his  Commands:  This  is  in  fome  meafure  a  forty-two 
Diftin6lion,  when  Men  honoured  and  fought  for  the 
King  againft  the  Tyranny  of  C^^r/^j  iS'/z/iari;,  and  broke 
the  fundamental  Laws  of  the  Nation  to  maintain  them. 

Our  Nation  is  a  Babel  of  Religions,  and  the  City  a 
Pantheon :  We  have  trick'd  up  Chriftianity  in  all  Dref- 
fes,  and  modelled  it  to  the  Fancy  of  French  and  Engl'jb 
Fanaticifm.  One  would  think  we  were  upon  the  Difco- 
very  of  new  Paflages  into  Heaven,  as  well  as  into  the 
South  and  T'iriarean  Seas,  or  that  each  Man  refolved  to 
leave  the  High-road,  to  fteal  in  at  a  Bye-lane. 

Now  when  forty  Religions  Inug  under  the  Protection 
of  the  Law,  few  are  really  believed  ;  for  where  Reve- 
lation is  queftioned.  Practice  will  of  Courfe  be  brought 
to  the  Bar,  an^thcn  it's  odJs,  thofe  Principles  that  fa- 
vour Nature,  ^will  get  the  Advantage  over  thofe  that  re- 
ftrain  ity  Tho',  therefore  London  be  a  rcform'd  City,  a 
Latitude  of  "F^itj;!:  draws  after  it  a  grea-ter  of  Principles  ; 
and  when  thefe  are  rotten,  how  fliall  our  Behaviour  be 
found  ? 

Well,  faid  Neandcr,  but  fuppofe  our  Privy-Council 
thinks fit.to  barfifh,  by  Proclamation,  young  Gentlemen 
twenty  Miles  from  the  Town,  will  they  remove  out  of 
th'e  Reach  of  Vice,  and  ftand  clear  of  thofe  Diforders  that 
wait  on  a  City  Life  ?  I  fancy  Vice  is  a  Weed  that  over- 
runs Villages  as  well  as  Towns ;  and^.a  Man  who   re- 

*'  folves 


fhe  Gentleman  Injlru^ed.     48^ 

folves  to  regale  Appetite,  may  feaft  it  in  Northumberland; 
nay,  and  at  ^  cheaper  Rate  too.  Now  a  low-feafon'd 
Pleafure  that  coftsbut  a  Crown,  rehfhes  better,  and  rai- 
fes  a  more  agreeable  Senfation  on  the  Organ,  than  a  high- 
fpice-d  Satisfaction  that  coft  twenty  ;  and  then  for  God's 
fake,  what  Buiinefs  have  unfettled  Gentlemen  on  their 
Hands  in  their  Father's  Houfes?  Do  they  not  faunter 
away  their  Lives  in  Kennels  and  Stables  j  and  run  them- 
felves  down  in  the  Chace  of  Hares  and  Foxa  ?  So  that 
living  among  Peafants  and  Beafts,  they  put  on  the  Beha- 
viour of  thofe,  and  all  the  Brutality  of  thefe;  and  thus 
become  half  Man,  halfBeaft:  For,  in  a  Word,  a  Coun- 
try-Gentleman is  a  Compound  of  much  Pride,  and  little 
Merit,  a  Sultan  in  a  fmall  Parifh,  a  Tyrant  in  Bttfto^  and 
a  Clown  at  length  ;  he  eats  much,  but  drinks  more, 
March  Beer  is  his  NeBar^  and  powder'd  Beef  \\\^Ambro- 
fium,  and  when  he  has  lain  fome  Neighbours  on  their 
Backs  at  the  Barrel's-head,  he  (hines  in  the  Top  of  his 
Glory. 

You  miftake  me,  Meander^  replied  Eufehius,  Lazinels 
and  Plenty  live  in  Hamblets,  as  well  as  Cities,  and  Vice 
always  makes  a  part  of  their  Retinue  ;  there  is  no  Sanc- 
tuary on  this  Side  the  Moon  againft  Diibrders;  no  Sin 
is  a  Prerogative  only  granted  to  Heaven  ;  and  tho'  Grace 
and  Caution  may  preferve  us  from  Guilt,  they  don't  from 
Danger. 

But  however  this  Plague  rages  more  in  Town  than  in 
the  Country,  and  carries  off  more  there  in  one  Parifh  in  a 
Week,  than  here  in  a  whole  Country  in  a  Twelve-month. 
Temptations  Ibllicit,  but  bad  Cojupany  fpurs  on  to 
Wickednefs.  If  in  the  Country  Debauchery  be  fome- 
times  pradtifed,  in  Towns  it's  openly  profeis'd  ;  here  are 
Schools  and  Academies  of  this  Black  Art^  tho'  not  by 
Licence,  yet  at  leaft  by  Connivance.  Procurelles  receive 
Stipends,  and  Gentlemen  give  Procreation  Money  as  well 
for  their  Pleafures,  as  their  Play :  In  fhort,  Wickednefs 
is  brought  to  Method,  Principle,  and  Demonftration  ;  and 
I  fancy  we  Avail  take  up  again  our  Anceftors  Trunk- 
breeches,  before  we  lay  down  thisdeteftable  Science.  Let 
us  fuppofe  a  Country-Gentleman  is  fomething  toofeverc 
upon  harmlefs  Animals ;  is  it  not  more  pardonable  to 
rundown  a  Hare,  than  an  Eftate?  To  worry  a  Fox,  than 
Confcience  ?  Take  Things  by  the  worll  handle,  and  you 

may 


45>o       fhe  Gentleman  InftruM. 

may  fay  he  rides,  hunts,  (hoots,  and  faunters  away  his 
Life:  But  a  Town-Spark  whores,  blafphemes,  drinks, 
dices  away  Health,  Eftate,  and  Soul  into  the  Bargain.  The 
Diverfion  of  thofe  are  mean,  of  thefe  vicious  and  criminal. 
Thofe  might  live  better,  and  thefe  cannot  worfe.  This 
being  fo,  the  Dilbrders  of  the  former  come  not  within 
view  of  thofe  of  the  iatter;  thole  fpend  their  time  like 
Keepers,  thefe  like  Fiends.  Thofe  fall  below  the  level 
of  Gentlemen,  and  thefe  of  Chriftians. 

What  Remedy  ?  fays  Neander  ;  More  Caution  and 
lefs  Ill-nature  in  Parents,  anfwer'd  Eufebius.  Had  they 
more  Care  of  their  Children,  thefe  might  have  more  Senfe 
of  their  Duty.  There  would  be  lels  Idlenefs  in  the 
World,  and  confequently  lei's  Vice.  Let  them  apply  be- 
times their  younger  Sons  to  Ibme  honed  Calling,  that 
they  may  beat  out  of  Induftry  and  Labour  a  handfome 
Livelihood-  This  will  employ  their  Thoughts,  and  their 
Time,  and  keep  Temptation  at  a  Diftance.  A  iMan  that 
has  honeft  Bufmefs  on  his  Hands,  i'eldom  harbours  difho- 
neft  Deiigns  in  his  Heart:  Belides,  it  fecures  his  riper 
Years.  Nobility  alone,  as  the  World  goes,  is  a  flender 
Inheritance.  Good  Blood  muil  have  good  Coin  to  ap> 
pear  fignificant,  and  make  a  Figure.  A  Gentleman  that 
lives  by  his  Wits  muft  turn  off  Confcience,  and  will 
take  leave  of  Religion.  An  Annuity  of  fifty  Pounds /j^-r 
Anmim  finks  quickly  to  the  Lees.  An  unlucky  Throw  of 
the  Dice  fets  it  a- tilt.  And  then  a  Mifer's  Stipend  calls 
him  at  leail  two  Years  behind-hand.  Poverty  hangs 
heavy  on  all  Men;  it  difpiriis  Courage,  tempts  Virtue, 
and  dares  a  Man  to  be  wicked ;  it  caffs  him  into  De- 
fpair.  Now  a  Gentleman  cannot  poiTibly  fall  into  a 
worfe  Difeafe.  For  it  deads  all  Thoughts  of  Birth,  Ho- 
nour, and  Virtue,  and  forces  him  either  to  turn  Pad  on 
the  Road,  or  Sharper  in  Tov/n;  and  then  he  ends  his 
Days  by  the  Sword,  or  the  Halter. 

Parents  muft  lettle  the  Heir  betimes:  And  it's  more 
advifeable  to  do  it  a  Year  too  foon,  than  a  Month  too 
late.  The  Care  of  a  Family  will  take  up  a  great  Part  of 
his  Time,  and  of  his  Thoughts.  And  when  they  are 
tied  to  Bufinefs,  they  will  fcarce  be  at  Leifure  to  purfue 
criminal  Pleafures.  Generally  our  Heart  and  our  Con- 
cerns lodge  in  the  fame  Apartment,  and  when  thefe  lie 
at  Home,  that  feldom  ftirs  Abroad. 

r.  J, 


^he Gentleman  Inftru5fed,     45) i 

T".  y.  was  a  young  Gentleman  of  great  Expe6laticn. 
His  Eftate  equall'd  his  Birth,  and  his  Endowments  both. 
Nature  had  join'd  a  graceful  Prefence  to  an  extraordi- 
nary Wit.  So  that  it  was  hard  to  determine,  whether 
he  ftood  more  obliged  to  Providence  for  the  Symmetry 
of  his  Body,  or  the  Ornaments  of  his  Soul.  He  was 
paft  one  and  twenty,  and  I  ufed  all  my  Intereft  with  his 
Father  to  fettle  him.  I  told  him,  in  all  Probability,  his 
Son  would  prove  like  the  Prophet's  Figs,  either  verygaod, 
or  very  bad^  that  his  Complexion  promifed  nothing  ordi- 
nary. For  he  had  great  PafTions,  tho'  his  Education  chain'd 
'em:  And  if  they  got  loofe,  they  would  drive  him  upon 
the  greateft  Extravagances.  A  Match  of  10,000/.  was 
propos'd ;  and  nothing  remained  to  conclude  it,  but  a 
Settlement  of  500  /.  fer  Annum  in  prefent  upon  the  young 
Gentleman  his  Son.  But  the  very  word  Settlement  threw 
the  old  Gentleman  ofFthe  Hinges,  and  fcar'd  him  into  all 
the  Poftures  of  Impatience;  fuch  Scenes  of  Extravagance 
are  feldom  feen  in  Bethlem.  Never  Man  in  his  Wits 
better  topt  the  Frenfies  of  a  Madman.  He  was  one  of 
thofe  who  rave  after  Money,  when  they  have  leaft  ufe 
for  it  ;  and  furnifh  their  Pockets  with  great  Viaticums^ 
when  they  are  almoft  at  their  Journey's  end.  I  thought 
he  was  within  an  Ace  of  playing  the  Defperado^  like 
Ap'tc'tus  the  Roman,  who  dabbed  himfelf  with  thirty  thou- 
fard  Pounds  in  Cafh,  out  of  an  Apprehenfion  of  dying 
in  Poverty,  and  thus  not  to  die  a  Beggar,  expir'd  like  a 
Madman.  He  was  deaf  to  Advice,  and  Paflion  had  quite 
mafter'd  Reafon.  He  flill  fuppofed  the  fame  Pen  that 
lign'd  the  (Conveyance,  would  write  his  Execution ;  that 
Life  and  Money  would  go  together. 

The  young  Squire  talked  both  of  his  Miftrefs  and  his 
Money,  took  check,  and  over-a6ted  the  very  Extrava- 
gances of  hi")  Father.  He  fpurr'd  to  London,  and  left  a 
thoufand  Curfes  behind  him.  Here  he  ftruck  up  with 
Sharpers^  Scourers,  and  Alfatians.  And  to  compleat  his 
Misfortune,  made  Acquaintance  with  the  Players.  He 
bounded  from  bad  to  worle,  till  he  finifhed  a  Courfe  of 
Debauchery,  and  undid  himfelf  to  revenge  his  Father's 
Unkindnefs. 

The  old  Gentleman  feem'd  unconcern'd  at  his  Son's 
Misbehaviour,  and  comforted  himfelf  with  good  Wives 
Proverbs,  An  untoward  Childy  faid  he,  will  make  a  brave 

Man-, 


4^2      7he  Gentleman  Inftru^ed. 

Man ;  he  will  take  up  when  he  has  fovj^d  his  wild  Oats. 
But  alas,  he  took  up  only  Money ^  Blajphemies,  Lewdnefs., 
and  Irreitgion  :  And  all  thole  accurs'd  Principles  that  ftu- 
pify  Confcience,  and  give  Liberty  to  Appetite.  I  had  the 
Fortune  to  meet  this  unhappy  Gentleman.  Gloominefs 
methought  fat  on  his  Face,  and  Difcontent  appear'd  in 
every  Motion.  I  fuppofe  Confcience  made  fome  Etforts 
to  refcue  him,  and  that  a  kind  Remonftrance  might  lec- 
ture him  into  his  Duty.  But  no;  he  was  too  far  gone 
for  a  Cure.  Vice  had  got  the  Afcendant,  and  twilled  it 
felfwith  his  Nature.  He  feem'd  rather  fond  than  aflia- 
med  of  his  Excefles,  and  almoll  grown  proud  of  his  Mif- 
behaviour.  The  Caufe  of  his  Melancholly  lay  in  his 
Pocket.  He  had  bajjetted  away  his  Money,  and  his 
good  Humour;  and  as  his  Debts  fwell'd,  his  Credit 
funk,  and  the  Apprebenfions  of  Bailiff's  and  Catch- poles 
dafh'd  all  his  Sweets  with  Gall  and  Wormwood. 

In  fine,  flefh'd  in  Debauchery,  he  was  paft  Recovery : 
So  that  he  run  on  in  the  broad  Way,  till  a  Stab  ftop'd 
his  Career,  to  begin  a  longer  Courfe  of  Torn^ents.  Now 
had  his  Father  been  kinder,  he  might  have  lived  a  fine 
Gentleman,  and  died  a  pious  Chriftian.  But  the  old 
Man's  Avarice  difcarded  him  of  all  the  Sentiments  of  a 
Parent.  To  fave  a  Penny,  be  expofed  his  Son,  and  fo 
ruin'd  him  eternally,  to  gratify  a  Caprice. 

Well,  faid  Neander,  this  Cruelty  of  the  Father  fbould 
fland  upon  Record  as  a  perpetual  Caveat  to  Parents,  and 
the  unfortunate  End  of  the  Son  fhould  fcare  young 
Gentlemen  from  a  hair-brain'd  Pafiion,  debauch'd  Com- 
pany, and  a  Town  Life.  It's  a  BlefTmg  to  reap  Inftruc- 
tion  from  another's  Misfortune ;  but  it's  a  fevere  Pu- 
nifhment  to  teach  Pofterity  by  our  own.  You  have  con- 
vinc'd  me,  dear  Eufebius,  of  the  Danger  of  a  Town-Life; 
and  I  will  not  run  into  the  Arms  of  Temptation.  We 
are  not  feciire  when  we  fly  the  Occalion,  much  lefs 
when  we  court  'em. 

I  applaud  your  Refolution,  reply'd  Eufebius^  Temp- 
tations will  certainly  be  too  hard  for  good  Counfel,  and 
Incentives  to  Vice  for  Exhortation  to  Virtue.  If  you 
intend  to  fly  Sin,  retire  from  Danger.  A  pious  Refolu- 
tion is  feldom  Proof  againft  a  ftrong  Invitation  to  Evil. 
Neander  ftaid  fome  Months  with  Eufebius ;  he  had  fuch 
■^  Refnedl  for  his  Perfon,  fuch  a  Veneration  for  his  Virtue, 

that 


T^e  Gentleman  Infru^ed,     45^3 

that  nothing  was  able  to  wean  him  from  his  Gonverfa- 
tion,  but  a  peremptory  Command  of  his  Father  to  re- 
turn Home. 


DIALOGUE    II. 

Eow  Eufebius    beha-ved  himfelf  in  the  ManagemsHt  of 
his  Eftate. 

TpUfehius  had  been  train'd  up  in  the  Court  and  Camp  ; 
^-^  yet  he  efpous'd  the  Vices  of  neither:  He  remember'd 
the  Covenant  he  had  made  in  the  Font  of  Baptifm  with 
his  Saviour;  that  there  he  renounced  all  Amity  with  the 
World,  and  promis'd  to  comply  with  all  the  Maxims  of 
the  Gofpel.  He  endeavour'd  therefore  to  keep  up  to  the 
Height  of  the  Engagement,  and  poftpon'd  all  temporal 
Pretenfions  to  thofe  of  Eternity.  A  Senfe  of  his  Duty  to 
his  King  and  Country,  fix'd  him  in  both  thefe  Stations, 
not  a  View  of  Intereft  or  Glory.  And  he  has  been  often 
heard  to  fay,  That  thofe  who  are  Slaves  to  Moy7ey ^command 
Confcienve^  and  fcorn  to  truckle  to  the  vulgar  Notions  of 
Good  and  Evil.  So  that  an  interefted  Man  throws  off 
Honefty,  when  he  takes  up  the  defire  of  Wealth;  and  is 
as  far  from  being  a  trufty  Minifter  to  his  Prince,  as  a 
faithful  Servant  to  his  Mafter,  In  every  Poft  he  beha- 
ved himfelf  with  that  Uprightnefs  and  Vigilance,  nay, 
and  Succels  alfo,  that  all  confefs'd  his  Merits  anfwer'd 
his  Station  ;  but  he  never  courted  any  Recompence,  be- 
iides  the  Satisfadion  of  having  difcharg'd  his  Duty.  His 
Ambition  w^s  to  delerve  Preferment,  not  by  Placets  to 
extort  it ;  nor  was  he  ever  heard  to  murmur  (when  put 
by)  that  Favour  over-top'd  Merit,  or  that  Recommenda- 
tions took  Place  of  long  Service.  At  the  Revolution  he 
withdrew  from  Rulinels,  and  could  never  be  perfuaded 
to  llrike  in  with  the  new  Government. 

Having  retreated  from  the  Noile  and  Hurry  of  the 
Town,  he  began  to  coniider  the  Inftability  of  human 
Things,  and  concluded  that  worldly  Happlnefs  is  preca- 
rious, and  ftands  not  only  upon  a  Precipice,  but  upon 
Ice  too,  altho'  it's  a  difficult  Point  to  prevail  with  a  great 
Man,  and   to  depend  on  his  Grandeur,  or  to  perfuade 

him 


45>4     ^^^  Gentleman  InflruBed, 

him  his  Station  is  flippery,  or  that  the  Babel  he  hasrais*d 
will  fink  into  Dull,  and  bury  him  under  the  Ruins.  If 
Princes  fall,  faid  he,  where  fhall  Subjedls  find  fure 
footing  ?  If  we  are  unfafe,  furrounded  with  Guards, 
what  Security  without  them?  If  Friends  turn  treache- 
rous, who  dare  we  trull?  If  Relations  betray  us,  where 
mull  we  expe6l  Fidelity  ?  All  this  World  can  give,  may 
be  taken  away  ;  fo  that  the  moft  wealthy,  the  moft  dig- 
nify'd  Man  upon  Earth  has  this  only  Advantage  above  the 
Peafant,  that  in  a  Moment  he  may  tumble  lower,  and 
confequently  be  more  miferable.  For  certainly  he  is  lefs 
unhappy  whom  Fortune  never  favour'd,  than  himfhehas 
forfaken.  Why  then  do  we  unpeople  Provinces  to  glut 
our  Ambition,  and  raife  Cities  to  build  proud  Palaces  up- 
on their  Ruins  ?  Why  do  we  unbowel  the  Earth  to  feaft 
our  Avarice,  and  fweat  under  Ground  to  purchafe  Cares 
and  Difcontent  above  it  ?  For  who  has  moll  to  lofe,  has 
always  moft  to  fear.  The  higheft  Station  puts  no  Bounds 
to  an  ambitious  Spirit,  nor  the  vafteft  Treafures  to  a  co- 
vetous one.  'Whtn  Alexander  had  even  gotten  all,  he  de- 
iired  fomething  more.  His  Willies  fwell'd  with  his  Con- 
queft,  and  his  Pride  march'd  farther  than  his  Armies.  His 
Treafures  were  immenfe,  but  his  Prodigality  was  grea- 
ter, and  his  Wants  lurpafs'd  both.  Money  never  makes 
a  Man  rich ;  the  more  he  has,  the  more  he  covets.  He 
is  not  poor  that  has  enough,  but  he  who  poflefles  Milli- 
ons, if  he  defires  more. 

Seeing  therefore  Inconftancy^ Cares ^  Dijfat'tsfudion^  and 
either  Emptinefs  or  a  Surfeit  waits  upon  fublunary  En- 
joyments, why  do  we  place  our  Happinefs  folow  ?  And 
court  Vexation  of  Spirit  for  our  fupream  Felicity  ?  God 
has  feated  our  true  Enjoyments  above  the  Smoak  of  this 
inferior  World,  and  out  of  the  Reach  of  Cafualties.  In 
vain  therefore  we  \\eary  our  felves  in  the  purfuit  of  real 
Satisfadlion  here,  that  is  only  to  be  found  hereafter. 

This  Conlideration  fo  wean'd  Etifebius  from  the  Love  of 
the  World,  that  he  flung  up  all  Pretenfions  to  future  Ad- 
vancements, and  refolv'd  to  lay  out  his  Time  upon  the 
Purchafe  of  a  happy  Eternity.  He  kept  his  Word,  for 
immediately  he  withdrew  into  the  Country,  and  allied 
all  the  Qualities  of  a  Gentleman,  fo  handfomely  with  the 
Duties  of  a  Chriftian,  that  it  was  hard  to  judge  whether 
his  Behaviour  was  more  genteel,  or  more  religious.    He 

was 


^he  Gentleman  Inftru^ed.     45)3 

was  wont  to  fay,  Thofe  lie  under  a  Mijiake,  vjho  fancy 
Virtue  is  an  Enemy  to  good  Breeding  ;  that  a  Man  r/iuji 
turn  off  Civility  to  commence  a  Saint^  and  disband  from 
the  Society  of  Men,  to  keep  a  Correfpondence  with  God. 
iVo,  »o,  continued  he,  Chrijiiantty  makes  Men  honeji  in- 
deed, but  not  Clowns  ;  it  forbids  Grimace,  but  not  Sin- 
cerity \  it  puts  a  Mean  between  Fuppijhnefs  and  Ruflicity, 
and  forbids  to  Jhew  no  Breeding  by  affeding  to  Jhew  too 
much.  Virtue  fmooths  the  Brow  as  well  as  the  Confciencey 
and  knows  to  temper  innocent  Mirth  with  a  feafonable  Ke- 
fervednefs.  So  that  we  may  keep  up  to  the  Height  of  our 
Duty  to  God,  without  dropping  our  Obligation  to  Neigh- 
bourhood and  Society. 

Eufebius  divided  the  Day  between  Devotion,  Bufinefs, 
and  innocei7t  Diverlions ;  or  rather  he  devoted  it  entirely 
to  God  ;  becaufe  he  raifed  to  a  fupernatural  End  the 
moft  indifferent  Adlions,  and  never  withdrew  his  Thoughts 
from  his  Creator,  even  in  the  Government  of  his  Fami- 
ly, or  Heat  of  his  Recreations.  So  foon  as  he  was  up, 
he  retired  into  his  Clofet,  and  pafs'd  an  Hour  either  in 
Prayer,  or  the  reading  of  good  Books.  And  he  took 
fuch  a  Pleafure  in  them,  that  he  renounced  all  unprofit- 
able and  profane  Ledures,  in  which  fo  many  Perfons 
employ  their  Time  to  avoid  Idlenefs ,  by  an  Idlenefs  no 
lefs  vain,  and  often  more  dangerous. 

He  could  not  endure  the  ridiculous  Affedlations  of  ma- 
ny Gentlemen,  that  is  not  only  pafs'd  into  a  Cuftom,  but 
almoft  into  a  Law,  v.'ho  fuppofe  the  leaft  inlight  into 
their  Concerns  forfeits  their  Patent,  and  throws  'em  be- 
low the  level  of  Quality  j  that  it's  a  Mark  of  Peafantry 
to  balance  their  Incomes  with  their  Expences;  or  to  take 
Notice  whether  their  Revenues  will  keep  touch  with 
their  Piodis.dity.  One  would  think  Gentlemen  took 
Mr.  Dr\iten\  Satyr  in  Don  Sebajiian  for  a  Panegyrick, 
who  allows  'em  ftill  Pockets,  and  empty  Heads  ;  great 
Rftates  in  Luud^  and  none  in  Wit. 

Erifebius  thought  it  no  more  below  the  Station  of  a 
Gentleman,  to  take  Care  ofanEftate,  than  to  pofl'efs one. 
He  I'ufpected  not  the  Fidelity  of  his  Steward,  yet  he 
thought  it  againft  the  Laws  of  Prudence  to  trufthimtoo 
far ;  for  he  knew  Men  are  feldom  careful  of  others  Con- 
cerns, when  thry  are  negligent  in  their  own  :  That  it's  a 
dangerous  Experiment,  to  put  even  Honefty  it  felf  to  the 

Trial. 


49 6     The  Gentleman  InfjruBe^. 

Trial.  For  alas,  it's  odds,  that  a  Servant  will  cheat  witlr-* 
out  Scruple,  when  he  can  without  Difcovery.  He  there- 
fore every  Week  call'd  his  Steward  to  Account,  view'd 
the  Regifters,  and  balanc'd  his  Receipts  with  his  Expen- 
ces.  And  thus  he  kept  within  Compafs,  and  lived  hand- 
fomely  upon  his  own,  not  upon  the  Sweat  of  poor  Shop- 
keepers and  Labourers.  For  he  look'd  on  the  taking 
upon  Credit,  as  a  Blur  to  a  Gentleman's  Reputation. 
And  he  ufed  to  fay.  To  run  deep  in  Merchant's  Books^  if 
an  infallible  Symptom  of  a  Jinking  E(i at e^  or  a  loft  Confci- 
ence.  For  who  will  run  upon  Tick  that  has  Money 
in  Hand  I  Or,  who  intends  to  pay  his  Debts  that  has 
Credit  to  Contrad  them,  and  no  Fund  to  quit  Scores  ? 

He  therefore  modell'd  his  Family  to  his  Eltate,  not  to 
his  Quality,  and  his  Equipage  to  his  Purfe,  not  to  his  Ti- 
tle. For  neither  Patent  nor  Coronets  arc  a  Proteftion  to 
Injuftice.  And  certainly  he  is  guilty  of  this  Crime,  who 
contrails  Debts  he  knows  himfelf  unable  to  conceal  : 
Indeed  it's  a  Gentleman's  Pradtice,  and  fo  is  the  Breach 
of  all  God's  Commands :  But  alas.  Quality  can't  fandti- 
fy  an  ill  A6lion,  nor  unhallow  a  good  one. 

Eufebius  could  not  endure  to  enter  his  Name  in  Mer- 
chant's Books;  he  would  therefore  rather  defer  a  Pur- 
chafe,  than  take  it  upon  Truft.  He  compared  Debtors 
to  the  Man  in  the  Gofpel,  pollefs'd  by  a  Legion  of  De- 
vils ;  when  one  goes  out,  a  hundred  return  to  torment 
him.  The  thought  of  a  Bailiff  throws  'em  into  Fits ; 
and  the  fight  of  a  Creditor,  like  the  Eye  of  a  Balilisk, 
ftrikes  'em  dead  with  Apprehenfion:  So  that  they  fear 
the  Light,  and  like  Owls  and  Bats  range  in  Darknefs  and 
Obfcurity  ;  they  confine  themfelvcs  out  of  Fear  of  being 
confined,  and  commit  themfelves  clofe  Prifoners  to  their 
Lodgings,  not  to  bemew'd  up  in  a  Dungeon.  In  a  word, 
they  lead  the  Lives  of  Criminals,  fear  every  Man,  are 
fcorn'd  by  all,  and  pitied  by  none ;  and  too  often,  in  fpite 
of  Caution,  they  too  took  up  in  a  Jail,  and  there  die  un- 
regarded, like  Rats,  behind  the  Hangings. 

One  Day  a  young  Gentleman  gave  Eufebius  a  Vifit.  He 
was  one  of  thofe  who  place  all  their  Concerns  in  this 
World,  without  a  regard  to  the  other.  An  extravagant 
Admirer  of  Life,  and  yet  feem'd  to  be  tired  of  it.  He 
lived  fo  faft,  that  he  out-lived  a  Year  in  one  Day;  and 
one  would  have  thought  his  only  Bufinefs  was  to  poll  to 

his 


fhe  Gentleman  InJlruBed,    45)7 

ibis  Grave.     He  had  a  handfome  Eftate,  but  too  fmall  for 

his  Prodigality  ;  it  anfwer'd  the  Dignity  of  a  Knight,  but 
his  Expences  kept  Pace  with  thofe  of  a  Duke  j  fo  that  in 
a  few  Years  it  run  upon  the  Lees,  and  his  Credit  funk 
with  his  Fortune.  -^  Creditor  found  him  out,  and  with 
Submiffion  demanded  of  his  Worfhip  the  Payment  of  a 
Debt ;  but  he  had  been  fo  often  haunted  by  fuch  Spirits, 
that  he  had  theknack  o^  laying,  as  well  as  raifing  them. 
For  he  was  lavifhing  of  Promifes,  though  fparing  in  the 
Performance,  and  always  gave  great  Hopes,  but  nevet 
Money. 

Well,  fays  Eufebins^  when  he  had  difmifi'd  the  Manj 
may  I  enquire  into  the  Fellow's  Bufmefs,  I  fuppofe  he 
forgot  his  Diftance,  and  pafs'd  the  Bounds  of  Civility  ; 
for-  you  feem'd  in  a  ferment,  and  difrhifs'd  him  with 
Warmth  and  Expoftulation. 

The  Rafcal,  anfwer'd  the  Spark,  duns  me  for  a  Debt 
of  ten  Years  ftanding  j  as  if  I  enter*d  his  Books  only 
Yefterday. 

Nay,  faid  Eufebius^  With  a  fmile,  that's  infufFerable. 
What  ?  To  bail  a  Gentleman  for  an  old  Debt  isunhand- 
fome,  and  affronting  too.  For,  what  was  Paflion  given 
us,  but  to  let  loofe  upon  fo  provoking  Occafions?  Thofe 
kogues  fhouldbe  muzzled,  and  bound  up  to  their  good 
JBehaviour  :  Belides,  the  Sum  perchance  isincbnfiderable.  | 

A  Trifle,  reply'd  the  Gentleman,  not  above  a  hun- 
dred Pounds,  the  Price  of  a  Winter  and  Summer  Suit. 

My  Mind  gave  me,  faid  Enfebhti,  the  Fellow  was  d 
Taylor ;  his  Gate  and  Impudence proclaim'd  his  Profef- 
fion.  A  Varlet  without  Breeding,  without  Confcience,  or 
good  Nature^  thus  to  way-lay  a  Gentleman;  to  break  iri 
upon  his  Retiremeuit,  to  (hirk  into  an  Audience;  nay, and 
come  upon  fo  unwelconic  an  Errand,  argues  fmall  Refpe(ft 
for  Quality,  and  lefs  Behaviour.  And  then,  where  is 
the  Rafcal's  Ccnfcience  to  demand  a  Debt  of  ten  Y'ears 
ftanding  ?  A  Taylor's  Right  wears  out  with  his  Merchan- 
dize. And  when  a  Gentleman  throws  ofFhis  Cloaths, 
he  makes  over  the  Obligation  of  Payment  to  his  ^^Z^^;  ^^ 
Chambre.  A  Taylor  ftiould  no  more  think'  of  afking  a 
Debt,  than  a  Gentleman  of  paying  it.  But,  dear  Sir, 
Raillery  apart.  Can  time  prefcribe  againft  Juftice  ?  Mull 
a  Man  forfeit  his  Right,  becaufe  you  fling  up  your  Inno- 
cence ?  Or  is  it  a  lefs  Impudence  to  rcfufea  jull  Payment, 

K  k  tb»B 


45)S     ^he  Gentleman  Inftm^ecf, 

than*  to  Ibllicititr  Believe  me,  Sir,  he  is  not  to  blame 
who  afks  his  due,  but  he  who  compels  him.  And  it's 
left  becoming  to  live  at  free  Quarter  upon  Merchants 
and  Tradefnien,  than  to  demand  Satisfaction  for  the 
Grievance. 

Vou  remember,  I  prefume,  that't)nce  upon  a  Time,  a 
Daw  ofgreatFamily,  but  fmall  Revenues,  had  a  Month's 
Mind  to  be  fine.  He  was  low  in  Cafh,  but  flufh  of  Cre- 
dit ;  and  fo  took  up  on  Tick  a  gaudy  Equipage.  He 
lorded  it  among  his  Neighbours  j  and  forgetting  his  Pe- 
digree, pretended  Alliance  to  the  Bird  of  Paradife.  But 
rn  the  Height  of  his  Profperity  his  Creditors  attack'dhim  ; 
and  being  unable  to  return  either  Money  or  Security, 
they  ftrip'd  him  of  his  Bravery,  and  turn'd  him  into  the 
Woods,  ifi  pitris  naturalibus.  And  then  all  thofe  Syco- 
phants, that  fawn'd  upon  his  Fortune,  laugh'd  at  his  Fol- 
ly, and  turn'd  Sir  Johft  Daw  into  phin  Jack;  nay,  and 
threw  him  among  the  Roots  for  his  Punifhment. 

There  needs  no  Key  to  the  Fable.  The  Application' 
fits  on  the  Surface.  Nay,  our  Sparks  have  been  at  the 
charge  of  turning  it  into  real  Story,  and  fo  are  fad  In- 
ilances  both  of  the  Bird's  Pride  on  the  one  fide,  and 
Folly  on  the  other,  and  though  they  barter  not  their  Qua- 
lity, they  are  ftrip'd  of  its  Support ;  and  then  they  knock 
ofl'  naked  of  Ornament,  and  confequently  of  regard. 
For  Nobility,  without  Cafh,  makes  but  a  lean  Figure  ; 
one  Ounce  of  Gold  weighs  forty  Coats  of  Arms.  Tho' 
the  Blood  of  a  Hero  rowls  in  your  Veins,  if  Chink  has 
forfaken  your  Pocket,  you  muft  fliear  oft"  to  Rooks  for  a 
Maintenance  ;  for  Regard  rifes  and  falls  by  the  fecret  In- 
fluence of  Metal. 

Pray,  Sir,  a  Paraphrafe  if  you  pleafe,  reply*d  the  Gen- 
tleman, on  the  Parable ;  for,  I  confefs,  I  am  unable  to 
fee  through  it,  unlefs  you  intend  by  a  fly  Itinuetido  to 
condemn  me  to  the  Trade  of  Purfe-taking  on  the  King's 
Highway.  Under  Favour,  faid  Eufehius,  it's  not  my  Pro- 
vince to  fetany  Man  his  Tafk ;  but  I  am  a  kind  of  Figure- 
flinger,  and  pretend  to  tell  young  Mens  Fortunes,  not  in- 
deed by  the  help  of  the  black  Art,  but  by  their  own  Con- 
du(5l.  You  take  upon  Truft  with  both  Hands,  and  pay  with 
neither ;  you  wade  up  to  the  Chin  in  Taylor's  Books ;  you 
fink  over  Head  and  Ears  in  Vintners;  card  away  500/. 
in  a  Night,  and  fling  into  a  Mifs's  Lap  1 000  /.  maintain 

one 


'J^he  Gentleman  tiiftruBed^    4p^ 

one  Family  in  the  Country,  another  in  the  Town.  You 
jreceive  2000/.  per  Annum,  and  difburfe  Five.  Now 
Where  mull  this  Prodigality  end,  but  in  Poverty,  Con- 
tempt, and  Dclpair  ?  And  when  a  Gentleman  is  waited 
on  by  three  fuch  Attendants,  he  is  equip'd  for  any  Prac- 
tice. Neceflity  is  a  bad  Counfellor,  andDeipair  a  worfej 
and  I  can  afTure  you,  they  have  fet  fome  Gentlemen  up* 
on  unwarrantable  Enterprizes :  For  when  they  have  no 
Fund  to  live  on,  they  muft  live  by  their  Wits,  and  then 
they  are  forc'd  to  caft  up  their  Accounts  at  Old  Baily^s^ 
and  to  pay  the  Reckoning  at  Hyde-Park  Corner. 

Young  Gentlemen  muft  live  up  to  their  Birth,  faid 
the  Gentleman. 

Provided,  anfwered  Enfeblus,  their  Purfe  runs  even 
with  their  Quality.  For  otherwife  Title  muft  ftoop  to 
Revenues,  and  Figure  muft  (brink  to  Neceflity.  It's  ill 
Hufbandry  to  glitter  in  Equipage,  like  a  Prince,  for  a 
Twelve-monthj  and  then  to  fneak  into  a  Corner  with  a 
folitary  Lacquey,  down  at  Heels,  and  out  at  Elbows ;  to 
turn  off  from  a  Guinea  Ordinary  to  the  Bafket,  or  to 
ftand  obliged  for  a  Meal,  to  the  Courtefy  of  Relations  all 
your  Life  after.  But  this  is  not  our  Cafe  neither.  Few 
Gentlemen  break  their  Eftates  by  ftretching  them  to 
their  Birth,  but  beyond  it,  A  Squire  will  vie  Prodiga- 
lity with  a  Lord,  and  a  Knight  with  a  Duke.  Now,  alas! 
how  can  two  Thoufand/'er  Annum  hold  out  with  Ten  ? 
It  muft  jade  and  founder  in  a  (hort  time,  and  lay  its  Maf- 
ter  like  a  tired  Tit  in  the  Mire. 

But  fijppofe  thefe  Misfortunes  wait  not  upon  you, 
where  is  Confcience  ? 

Nays  reply'd  the  Gentleman,  in  good  Hands  I  aflure 
you.  For  certainly,  Confcience  may  be  well,  though 
my  Eftate  be  fick.  I  may  balance  Accounts  with  Godj 
though  I  am  behind  Hand  with  my  Neighbour. 

Not  foeafily  neither,  faid  Eii[ebms.  For  when  a  Gen- 
tleman takes  upon  Credit^  Confcience  enters  Bond  fof 
the  Payment ;  and  if  the  Eftate  cannot  anfwer  the  In- 
cumbrance, that  will  be  uneafy;  Pray,  Sir,  continued 
Eufebius,  is  there  no  fuch  Law  as,  Tboujhalt  not  fteali 

Without  doubt,  anfwer'd  N.  N. 
,   And  does  this  Precept    take  in,  faid  Eufebj/iSy  only 
Pads  and  Cut-purfes  ? 

kki  It 


joo      'fhe  Gentleman  In  jimmied. 

It  forbids,  faid  N.N.  all  ads  of  Injuftice  ;  nay,  and 
reftrains  Defires.  It's  ill  even  to  covet  an  ill  Thing; 
and  he  who  defigns  to  over-reach  his  Neighbour,  tranf- 
grefies  the  Law,  as  well  as  he  who  deceives  him. 

Your  Cafuiftry,  reply'd  Eufebuis,  is  found  and  or- 
thodox, but  not  your  Pradice.  P^or  do  you  not  force 
poor  Creatures  to  change  their  Labour  into  a  continual 
Attendance;  to  faunteraway  their  Time  in  an  Anti- 
Chamher,  and  then  to  return  home  M'ith  empty  Promi- 
fes?  Nay,  and  it's  often  taken  for  a  Civility  not  to  be 
aflionted  ;  and  for  Payment  in  part,  not  to  be  deny'd 
(with  a  God  damn  ye)  for  the  whole.  Now  when  a  Cre- 
ditor muft  be  eternally  upon  the  Trol  to  come  up  to  his 
Debtor,  and  ply  at  all  the  Coffee- Houfes  for  Intelligence 
of  his  Haunts,  the  Irons  cool  at  Home,  Trade  links, 
Wo;k  is  at  a  (land,  and  a  Bankrupt  treads  upon  hia 
Heels.  For  how  fhall  a  Merchant  pay  his  Debts,  who 
receives  none  ?  Now,  Sir,  here  is  lucrnm  ceffans  on  the 
one  Hand,  and  damnum  emergens  on  the  other,  and  in 
the  Sight  of  God  you  ftand  refponfible  for  both  :  They 
will  be  put  to  your  Accounts,  and  you  muft  either  re- 
pair them  here,  or  fuffer  for  them  hereafter. 

For  God's  fake,  Sir,  faid  N.  N.  who  bids  thofe  Raf- 
cals  run  upon  the  Hunt,  and  trace  my  Motions ;  nay, 
and  break  my  Head,' with  importunate  Sollicitations  ? 
Muft  I  anfwer  for  their  Folly,  and  pay  for  their  Extra- 
vagance r  Let  them  keep  within  Doors,  and  carry  on 
their  Trade,  I  will  not  intermeddle  in  their  Concerns. 

That  is,  Sir,  reply'd  Eufebius^  if  they  will  fit  down 
with  their  Lofs,  you  are  fatisfy'd  ;  if  they  will  take  your 
Honour  for  their  Security,  and  crofs  Scores  for  Promifes, 
or  be  content  with  a  Lacquey  with  a  Cudgel  for  Pay- 
mafter,  I  eafily  believe  you.  If  all  the  Creditors  in  the 
Nation  will  vouchfafe  to  burn  their  Regifters,  Spend- 
thrifts will  be  at  the  Expence  of  the  Execution,  and  ap- 
plaud their  Generofity.  And  if  they  pleafe  to  give  in 
good  Security  never  to  importune  you  with  unpleafant 
Vifits,  you  will  fecure  them  of  Non-payment. 

I  fancy  you  are  got  into  a  Vein  of  Drollery.  But  the 
Mifchief  is,  with  fome  People  a  Jeft  improves  into  an 
Argument,  and  Raillery  grows  up  in  to  Reafon.  But  de- 
ceive not  your  felf ;  thofe  who  put  off'  Payment  with 
dilatory  PretenceSj  not  only  bid  their  Creditors  negle<5t 

their 


fhe  Gentleman  Inftru^ed,      50 y 

their  Trade  and  Family,  but  force  them  :  For  without 
Irnpoftunity  nothing  is  done.  They  muft  beg  for  their 
due,  as  hard  as  for  an  Alms;  and  fpend  more  Time  in 
recovering  their  Money,  than  in  earning  it.  Ii'saseafy 
to  dig  the  Oar  out  of  the  Mines  of  Poioft,  as  to  impor- 
tune a  Debt  out  of  the  Pocket  of  a  Prodigal. 

But  if  a  poor  Trade fman  by  fuch  an  Injuftice  chance 
to  go  down  in  the  World,  to  fuffer  a  Seizure  of  his 
Goods,  orhisPerfon,  you  mull  Account  for  the  Da- 
mages alfo.  For  you  are  theCaufeof  his  Misfortune, 
and  by  confequence  muft  anfwer  for  it. 

To  be  plain,  faid  N.  N.  my  Eftate  lies  Sick  of  a 
Confumption  ;  the  Dice  have  prey'd  upon  its  Vitals  ; 
and  Riot  has  brought  it  fo  low,  that  I  fearic's  nowpaft 
Recovery.  I  cannot  cancel  pall  Scores  without  throw- 
ing my  felf  into  a  Neceflity  of  drawing  in  my  Retinue, 
or  living  upon  Courtefy.  Now  either  Way  expofes  my 
Reputation  to  the  publick  Obloquy,  and  my  Perfon  ra- 
ther to  Raillery  than  Compaflion.  For  Misfortune  in 
our  Age  is  a  Jell  of  it  felf,  and  a  little  Fooling  upon  the 
Subjecft  makes  bad  Gircumllances  infupportable.  When  a 
Coat  is  Thread-bare,  how  eafy  is  it  to  pick  a  Hole  ? 
When  a  Man  can  fcarce  keep  his  Head  above  Water,  a 
fmall  Weight  plunges  him  to  the  bottom.  Though  he 
may  llruggle  zgz'm^one  Commiuimus^  a  Lea fli  will  cer- 
tainly fink  him  in  a  Dungeon ;  and  thefe  Furies  feldom 
appear  fingle.  I  confefs  my  Inclination  leans  not  towards 
the  Kwg^s-BeKcb,  or  the  Marjhalfea.  I  am  for  a  free 
Air,  and  hate  to  lie  at  the  Mercy  of  a  Turnkey. 

It's  more  eafy,  anfwer'd  Eufebius^  to  commit,  than 
to  excufe  an  Injuftice.  Eftate  Difeafes,  like  thofe  of  the 
Body,  muft  be  cured  by  a  flender  Diet.  Riot  and  High- 
fare  enforce  the  Fever,  enflame  the  Blood,  and  breed  ill 
Humours.  And  I  have  known  fome  Eftates  brought  back 
from  the  laft  Agony  to  a  perfedl  State  of  Health  and  Vi- 
gour, by  a  (hort  Pittance  of  Barley-Broth.  I  perfuade 
you  to  make  a  Trial  of  the  Recipe^  enter  into  a  Courfe 
of  Phyfick.  But  then,  as  you  hope  for  Benefit,  come 
not  within  the  Smoak  of  the  Town  ;  the  Remedy  requires 
thefrefli  Airof  the  Campaign,  Retirement  and  Solitude. 
To  fpeak  plain,  retrench  Expences,  difmifs  Equipages, 
reform  Attendants,  referve  one  fourth  Part  of  your  Re- 
venues for  Subfiftence,  and  three  for  Creditors.     Five 

K  k  3  hundred 


50^     ^The  Gentleman  InJiraBed, 

hundred /(er  Annum  well  managed,  will  go  farther  than 
two  thoufand  ill.  And  altho-  the  Sum  anlwcrs  not  the 
Extravagances  of  a  Town  Debauchee,  it  will  keep  touch 
with  the  Occalion  of  a  fober  Gentleman.  For  I  can  af- 
fureyou,  Birth  is  notfo  expenlive  as  Prodigality;  Gra- 
vity of  Behaviour  and  Moderation  fet  it  off,  and  give  it 
a  finer  Luftre  than  all  the  coftly  Trappings  of  Pomp, 
Equipage,  and  Riot. 

But  People  will  laugh,  if  you  fhrink  your  Figure,  pack 
up  for  the  Country,  and  Hint  Expences?  Suppofe  they 
do;  to  ftifle  their  Mirth,  will  you  pawn  an  Eftate?  And 
play  the  Fool  to  buy  off  their.Fooling?  Will  you  rather 
ftand  their  Scorn  than  their  Merriment  ?  And  be  defpi- 
fed  in  Poverty,  than  rally'd  in  a  comfortable  Fortune? 
Retrieve  your  Eftate,  and  Credit  will  rife  in  Proportion  ; 
he  never  wants  Regard,  who  is  ftock'd  with  Money;  nor 
he  Contempt,  who  is  unfurnifh'd. 

Sparing  and  Parfimony  lead  not  to  Newgate^  or  the 
JitMg*i-Bench\  but  Prodigality,  Gaming,  Wine,  and 
Miilcs:  Creditors  will  bear  more  Years  with  Men,  who 
take  lure  Meafures  to  pay  their  Debts,  than  Days  with 
thofe  who  increafe  them. 

But  methinks  Confcience  and  Duty  fliould  take  place 
of  all  temporal  Views.  A  Chriftian  that  believes  there: 
is  a  Hell  to  punifh  Injuftice,  {hould  not  make  himfelf 
miferable  beyond  Redemption,  upon  a  groundlefs  Forfei- 
ture of  Reputation.  For  on  my  Word,  dear  Sir,  Credit 
in  the  next  World  is  no  Protection ;  when  once  Injuftice 
has  plunged  you  into  Flames,  the  Reputation  oi  Alexan- 
der will  not  bail  yqu. 

Now,  as  I  faid  before,  it's  a  heavy  Injuftice  to  pay 
Merchants  only  with  empty  Promifes,  and  yet  more 
heavy  to  return  for  Ware,  Curfes,  and  Imprecations. 
For  to  be  free  with  you,  Sir,  Gentlemen  that  difcharge 
their  Debts  with  fuch  adulterate  Coin,  enhance  the  reck- 
oning, and  commence  Thieves  and  Robbers.  Indeed 
they  play  not  at  fmall  Game  upon  the  King's  Highway, 
nor  take  aPurfe  with  a  Piftol  in  their  Hand,  anda£)aw» 
ye  deliver  in  their  Mouths.  They  have  more  concern 
for  their  Skin,  than  to  embark  in  an  Enterprize  that 
leads  to  a  Halter.  But,  however,  tho'  they  endanger  not 
their  Necks,  they  ftab  their  Confcience  ;  and  if  they 
ftand  clear  of  the  Infamy  of  Padding,  they  avoid  not  the 

Gv'.Ut. 


^he  Gentleman  InftruBed.    jo 3  ■ 

Guilt.     For  to  refufe  Payment  is  no  Icfs  an  Injuftice  be- 
fore God,  than  to  plunder  on  the  Highway. 

God  forbid  I  fhould  refufe  Payment,  faid  N.  N.  But 
alas,  I  am  in  no  Condition.  My  Debts  run  high,  and 
my  Eftate  low ;  Taxes  fweep  away  one  part,  my  Family 
another ;  and  when  prefent  Expences  exceed  Receipts, 
how  fliall  I  crofsout  thepaft? 

Under  favour,  faid  Eufebius^  you  refufe  by  your 
Condu6l,  though  not  by  your  Words,  and  that  is  more 
fignificant,  nor  lefs  criminal.  You  rattle  in  a  Coach 
and  Six  ;  glitter  in  Embroidery  ;  hedtor  in  Taverns,  and 
ileep  upon  the  Dice.  You  take  up  at  Intereft,  and  yet 
pay  none.  Is  not  this  the  ftraight  way  to  beggar  your 
felf  firft,  and  then  all  you  deal  with  ?  For  is  not  fuch  a 
Mifmanagement  the  High-road  to  Beggary ;  and  confe- 
'i^uently  does  it  not  lead  you  into  an  Impoffibility  of  pay- 
ing ?  If  you  refufe  not  Payment,  apply  due  Means,  lef- 
fen  Charges,  and  ftint  Prodigality  to  meer  NecelTaries  : 
This  is  your  Intereft  as  well  as  Duty.  And  it  no  lefs 
concerns  your  Eftate  than  your  Soul.  For  in  a  Word,  I 
muft  repeat  it,  without  Reparation  of  Damages,  there  is 
no  Salvation.  Who  wilfully  leaves  this  World  in  Debt, 
muft  pay  it  in  the  other ;  and  tho'  he  eludes  the  Profe- 
■cution  of  Creditors  here,  he  cannot  avoid  the  Juftice  of 
the  Almighty  hereafter. 

The  Gentleman  heard  goodCounfel,  and  was  within 
an  Ace  of  following  it.  He  faw  his  Eftate  lie  at  Stake, 
•together  with  his  Soul,  and  that  he  ported  on  to  Beggary 
and  Damnation.  He  confefs'd  Eufebius''s  Advice  was 
the  moft  fecure,  tho'  the  lefs  palatable;  and  good  Huf- 
bandry  might  retrieve  his  finking  Fortune,  and  furnifti 
Supplies  for  Ufe  and  Payment.  But  on  a  fudden,  for- 
footh,  he  would  turn  Politician,  and  play'd  the  Fool  out 
of  a  Principle  of  Wifdom.  The  Matter  calls,  faid  he, 
for  Deliberation  and  Thought ;  Repentance  treads^n  the 
Heels  of  quick  Refolutions;  pray  give  me  leave  to  paufe 
before  I  leap  from  one  Extream  to  the  other. 

He  took  Leave  o^Eufebius^  and  pofted  to  Town,  and 
with  the  fame  Speed  to  his  Ruin.  For  here  Prodigality 
began  his  Misfortune,  and  illCounfel  compleated  it.  He 
fubpcena'd  a  J«»c?o;ofdefperate  Debauchees  to  his  Lodg- 
ings ;  he  open'd  the  State  of  his  Concerns,  and  the  Advice 
of  Eufebius,    But  he  might  as  well  have  flown  for  Sanc- 

K  k  4  tuary 


S 


504     The  Gentleman  Inftnio^ed, 

tuary  into  a  Den  of  AJfaJJins^  or  fecui'd  his  Purfe  in  t!ie 
Hands  of  a  Highwayman,  or  learn'd  the  Way  to  Para- 
dife  from  the  Devil  himfelf,  as  expeft  whollbme  Advice 
from  thofe  who  follow  the  worlt,  and  place  Interell  be- 
fore Confcience.  Thefe  Harfia  had  given  a, helping 
Hand  to  the  Gentleman's  Miofortune,  and  thruft  him 
blindfold  upon  the  Brink  of  the  Precipice.  They  gain'd 
by  his  Lollys,  and  drain'd  his  Purfe  at  Play  to  fill  their 
own  J  fo  that  to  counfel  Parfimony,  was  to  plead  againft 
themfelves,  and  dam  up  the  Channel  that  fupplied  their 
Debaucheries  with  Nourifliment. 

What  Wonder  therefore  their  Advice  was  as  contrary 
to  £»/e^/aj's,  as  their  Defigns?  Defperate  Remedies,  fay 
they,  are  only  to  be  apply'd  in  defperate  Difeafes.  Who 
will  lop  olfan  Arm  or  a  Leg  for  a  Pimple?  Or  drink 
JInUmony  for  a  Tertian  ?  When  there  is  no  Cure,  fome- 
thing  may  be  ventur'd ;  but  when  there  is  no  Danger, 
take  not  a  Bowl  of  Ratsbane  for  a  Prefervative.  Your 
Ellate,  Sir,  isencumber'd,  but  not  fpent ;  it  runs  low, 
but  I  fuppofe  Merchant's  Regiftersare  not  like  ?nchaHt- 
ed  Circles,  when  once  you  are  in,  there  is  no  ftepping 
out.  One  lucky  Chance  at  Dice  will  refcue  all,  and 
make  Scores  even.  Fortune  has  indeed  frown*d  upon 
you,  fhe  will  begin  to  fmile.  She  is  a  Female,  fond  of 
Change,  unaccuftomM  to  Conftancy;  and  when  fhe  hr^s 
thrown  off  her  Spleen  and  Ill-nature,  (heover-fetsa  Man 
with  Kindnef^and  Courtfhip.  T.  IV.  was  brought  to  a 
folitary  Guinea ;  but  then  good  Luck  veer'd  about  into 
the  right  Corner,  and  this  fingle  Piece  fetch'd  back  twen- 
ty Thoufand  ;  fo  that  he  had  never  foar'd  fo  high,  had 
li3  not  fell  fo  low,  nor  efcap'd  his  Ruin,  had  he  not  come 
io  near  it. 

This  Remedy  was  indeed  more  dangerous  than  the 
Difeafe,  and  as  mort;il  toEllate-diftempers,  as  Poifon  to 
thofe  of  the  Body.  However,  they  ftole  upon  his  blind 
Side;  fothat  he  furrenderM  not  only  vvithout  Refiftance, 
but  even  with  Pleafure  and  Tranfport.  Gaming  was  his 
predominant  Paflion,  and  this  ealily  reconcil'd  his  Pa- 
late to  the  Prefcription  j  nay,  and  turn'd  the  Medicine 
into  a  Regale.  You  have  nick'd,  faid  he,  the  Point. 
He  that  cures  dLsjoivited  Eftates  by  Recreation,  and  con- 
feys  Health  thro'  Pleafure,  is  a  Surgeon  in  good  earned. 
He  falls  then  to  Gaming  ;  but,  alas,  cQgg'd  Dice  wcce 
■  ■  too 


The  Gentleman  Infru^ed,       505 

too  hard  for  good  Luck ;  and  Fortune,  that  turn'd  tail 
before,  now  jquite  deferted  him.  His  Bags  droop'd,  and 
his  Credit  hung  the  Wings ;  his  Money  was  flown^  and 
though  his  Lands  changed  not  their  place,  they  went  over 
to  othej"  Landlords.  All  his  Companions,  like  Rats  in  a 
Storm,  abandon'd  the  finking  Veilel,  and  he  found  hinifelf 
in  a  Jail,  before  he  dream'd  of  a  Bailiff.  Here  this  un- 
fortunate Gentleman  fees  his  pall  trrors,  but  no  way 
to  correct  'em.  Loft  Grace  may  be  recover'd  by  Tears, 
but  not  Eftates.  We  may  weep  our  felves  into  Heaven, 
not  into  a  Fortune,  nor- out  of  Confinement.  Hemea- 
fures  a  great  Length,  that  vaults  from  abundance  into 
Poverty.  The  fall  dafhes  in  pieces  not  only  the  profpeft, 
but  the  very  hope  of  a  return.  Nothing  rem<ains  but  the 
fenfe  of  the  prefent  Calamity,  and  the  remembrance  of  a 
paft  Felicity.  So  that,  like  the  damn'd,  they  are  tor- 
mented with  the  Pain  of  Lofs,  as  well  as  with  that  of 
Senfe;  and  the  Ghoft  of  their  darling  Pleafures,  revive 
meerly  to  perform  the  Office  of  Executioners.  But  did 
thefe  poor  Gentlemen  underftand  this  obvious  Piece  of 
Chymiftry,  to'tranfmute  Neceffity  into  Virtue,  to  bear 
with  refignation  to  Providence,  the  Misfortune,  Folly,  and 
Sin  have  dfawn  upon  them,  I  would  pronounce  them 
happy  in  their  Misfortune  ;  but,  alas,  they  rather  rage 
than  repent,  deplore  their  Reftraint  without  dropping 
one  Tear  for  their  Debauches,  the  caufe  of  it ;  and  fo  in 
the  end  they  ftep  from  one  Dungeon  to  a  worfe,  from  a 
temporal  Confinement,  to  an  eternal  one.  This  is  the 
end  of  thofe  who  receive  Favours  without  Thankfgiving, 
and  Punifhment  without  Humiliation  j  that  neither  praife 
God  for  his  Mercies,  nor  pray  to  him  under  his  Judg- 
{nents. 

How  Eufebius  behaved  himfelfto  his  Domejlich. 

Tho'  Eufebius  retired  from  the  Town,  he  intended  not 
to  turn  Hermit^  not  to  disband  from  Society  and  Con- 
verfation.  He  was  no  publick  Enemy,  like  Timon  to  his 
Species,  nor  a  Friend  to  Sournefs  and  Ill-nature.  He 
knew  the  Life  of  a  Chriftian  might  ftand  with  that  of  a 
Gentleman  ;  that  he  might  comply  with  all  the  Duties 
of  Religion,  without  ftepping  below  his  Station.  He 
therefore  kept  up  an  Equipage,  rather  genteel  than  great ; 

it 


50(5       The  Gentleman  Injlmf^ed, 

it  anfwer'd  his  Quality,  and  was  proportion'd  to  hisRcr 
venues.  So  that  he  neither  incumbeVd  his  Eftate  with 
unfeafonable  Expences,  nor  better'd  it  by  a  fordid  Par- 
fimony.  He  was  content  with  his  prefent  Fortune,  and 
neither  delired  to  be  greater,  nor  fear'd  much  to  be  lefs. 
For  indeed  he  was  too  low  for  Envy,  and  yet  too  high 
for  Contempt. 

I. 
He  rather  behav'd  himfelf  to  his  menial  Servants  like 
a  Father  than  a  Mafter  ;  and  always  treated  'em  as  free- 
born  Subjedls,  not  Slaves.  He  could  not  endure  the  Con- 
duit of  thofe  Gentlemen,  who  (hew  lefs  concern  for 
a  poor  Domellick,  than  a  Beaft  of  Burthen,  and  let  him  ' 
live  a  Brute  without  Religion  or  Inftrudion,  fo  he  car- 
ries on  their  Bufinefs,  and  works  himfelf  down  to  fupport 
their  Riot.  He  was  fenfible  the  difference  even  between 
a  Prince  and  a  Peafant  lies  in  Fortune,  not  in  Nature  ; 
that  their  Pretenfions  in  the  next  World  are  equal ;  and 
that  even  in  this,  a  Slave  in  the  Sight  of  God  thatprafti- 
fes  Virtue,  is  more  noble  than  an  Emperor  over-grown 
with  Sin.  He  thought  therefore  himfelf  obliged  in  Duty 
and  Confcience  to  take  care  of  their  Souls,  as  well  as  of 
their  Bodies;  to  allow  Inttruftions as  well  as  Food,  and 
to  accompany  their  Wages  with  an  Addition  of  good 
Counfel. 

For  this  purpofe  he  entertain'd  a  Chaplain,  whofe  Bufi- 
nefs was  only  to  inftru6t  the  Family,  to  inftil  the  Princi- 
ples of  Chriftianity  into  the  Hearts  of  his  Domefticks ; 
to  train  them  up  in  Virtue,  withdraw  'em  from  Vice,  and 
to  bring  'em  into  Acquaintance  with  their  Duty ;  which 
is  feldom  known,  and  more  feldom  pradtifed  by  thisfer- 
vile  Rank  of  Men.  What  Religion  are  you  of,  faid  a  Lady 
of  my  Acquaintance  to  her  Maid  ?  Religion,  forfoothy 
anfwer'd  the  poor  Creature,  is  for  Gentlefolks.  She 
fuppofed  Drudgery  was  the  End  of  her  Creation;  that 
Expedtation  of  future  Happinefs  lay  out  of  her  Way. 
And  thus  Ihe  liv'd  in  Chrijlendom  like  a  Barbarian  in  the 
Wilds  of /fw^rfV<?,  without  Hope  of  a  future  Reward,  or 
-Fear  of  Funifhment.  Hence  Gentlemen*s  Families  ferve 
too  often  for  Nurferies  to  Newgate,  and  the  Stews.  For 
their  Dependants  being  brought  up  in  Idlenefs  on  the  one 
Hand,  and  Licenlioufncfs  on  the  other,  when  difmifs'd, 

they 


i 


fke Gentleman  InftruM,     50 7 

they  know  not  where  to  retire ;  And  fo  the  Maids  live 
Proftitutes,  and  the  Men  die  Thieves  and  Robbers. 
Whereas  did  they  train  up  their  Domeflicks  in  Chriftian 
Principles,  and  inure  them  To  the  Practice,  they  would 
prove  more  ufeful  even  to  the  Management  of  their  tem- 
poral Concerns,  and  lefs  burthenfome  to  tlie  State. 

For  certainly  a  Man  that  has  no  Principle  of  Religion, 
has  lels  of  Morality.  Few  People  are  juft,  that  have  no 
Reafon  to  be  fo,  and  many  Invitations  to  Treachery  and 
Deceit.  With  what  Security  therefore  can  a  Mafter  em- 
ploy thofe  in  Bufmefs,  who  only  change  the  Difcovery 
of  a  Theft  with  the  Sin,  and  vary  the  Fa6l,  like  thc^La- 
(edemonians,  into  a  Virtue  ?  Alas,  Infidelky  will  baffle 
Caution,  and  over- reaching  will  beat  out  more  Plots,  than 
an  Argus  can  difcover.  Who  has  a  Confcience  needs  no 
Spies,  and  who  has  none  will  out- wit  a  hundred. 

3- 

Eufebius  would  never  admit  a  Debauchee  into  his  Ser- 
vice.    He  thought  no  Man  would  be  faithful  to  his  Ma- 
fter, who  was  a  Traitor  to  his  God ;  much  lefs  careful 
of  another's  Concerns,  who  was  forgetful  of  his  own.  Be- 
lides.  Vice  is  difFulive,  and  fpreads  by  Commerce  like  the 
Plague.     One  wicked  Perfon  throws  the  Contagion  a- 
mong  a  thoufand,  and  it's  odds  fome  will  take  it  up; 
and  when  once  it  gains  upon  a  Family,  it  feldom  flops, 
till  thelnfedtion  becomes  epidemical,  and  the  Dillemper 
incurable.     So  that  he  always  examin'd  more  narrowly 
a  Servant's  Behaviour  than  his  Abilities ;  and  oftentimes 
a  good  Life  atoned  for  unexperience.     Clumfinefs,  faid 
he,  may  be  polifli'd  by  civil  Converfation,  and  Skill  may 
be  improved  by  Pradlice,  but  vitious  Habits  feldom  wear 
off:  They  are  too  ftubborn  for  Inftrudlion,  and  Proof 
to  Homily,  and  good  Counfel. 

4. 
When  he  was  forc'd  to  reprehend,  he  avoided  Heat, 
and  never  flew  out  into  Strains  of  Indecency.  He  knew 
that  Anger  was  ungovernable  and  clamorous;  and  as 
unfit  to  give,  as  to  take  Advice.  It  drowns  Reafon  by 
Noife  and  Tumult,  and  feldom  pronounces  a  juft  Sentence, 
but  when  it  intends  an  unjuft  one:  It  throws  a  Man  off 
his  Guard,  and  even  below  his  Dignity,  and  betrays  thofe 
Weaknefl'es  we  Ihould  blufh  to  own  upon  the  Torture. 
Hence  he  ufed  to  fay,  that  a  cholerick  Corredtion  was 

feldom 


joS      The  Gentleman  InfiruBeL 

feldom  well  taken ;  that  it  rather  irritated,  than  heal'd; 
-and  ftruck  out  Relentment,  not  Sorrow.  Wherefore  his 
Words  were  as  mild  as  his  Countenance;  and  the  Sedate- 
nelsofliis  Geilure  anfwer'd  the  Swectnefsof  his  Language. 
Nothing  opprobtious  pafs'd  his  Lips,  nothing  tempeftu- 
ous,  nothing  unbcieeming  the  Mouth  of  a  Gentleman, 
or  the  Ears  of  a  Chriftian.  In  fine,  his  Reprimands  tailed 
always  ftronger  of  Honey  than  of  Gall  ;  and  they  were 
receiv'd  by  fome  with  Repentance,  by  all  with  Patience, 
and  by  none  with  Indignation. 

Some  Gentlemen  of  his  Acquaintance  took  the  liberty 
to  tell  him,  that  his  Mildnefs  would  foon  meet  with  Con- 
tempt, and  his  Affability  with  Scorn;  that  thefe  under- 
rate Mortals  are  as  incapable  to  be  moved  by  Kindnefs, 
as  to  practice  it ;  that  a  Cane  mends  more  Faults  in  a 
Qi^iarter,  than  dogmatizing  in  a  Twelve-mouth  ;  and  that 
nothing  afFeds  their  Will,  but  what  lies  heavy  upon  their 
Senfe.  But  thofe  Sparks  talk  juft  as  they  aded,  and 
only  difapprov'd  Euj'eb'mi's  Method  by  commending  their 
own.  However,  an  Ljnlucky  Accident  admonifli'd  one  of 
thefe  Cenfors  of  his  Miftake,  and  convinced  him  ad  bo- 
minem^  that  Roughnefs  is  not  always  in  Seafon,  and  that 
Blows  rather  provoke,  than  awe  an  inferior,  and  fooner 
Hir  up  Difobedience  than  RefpeiSl. 

By  chance  poor  Dick  reaching  the  Oil  to  his  Mafter, 
liquor'd  his  Wig,  and  the  Over-fight  fpread  to  the  Borders 
of  a  new  ^\x\ia.4a-mode.  The  poor  Fellow  fufFer'd  the 
Rack  in  the  very  Accident,  and  expired  the  Guilt  of  the 
Offence  in  the  very  Commiflion :  But  \\\Q.Squtre^  who  was 
extreamly  fmitten  with  Drapery,and  rated  the  Ornaments 
of  his  Back,  above  all  the  Embellifhments  of  his  Brain, 
broke  out  into  all  the  Indecencies  of  Language  and  Ge- 
ilure. He  firll  damned  poor  Dtck  to  the  l:*it  of  Hell ; 
then  Son-of  a-whor'd  him  to  all  Intents  and  Purpofes ; 
mid,  in  fine,  bedaub'd  him  with  all  the  unbefeeming 
Tropes  of  Bilimfgate  and  the  Bear-garden.  The  very 
Knowledge  of  fuch  mean  ftuft"mif-befeems  a  Gentleman  j 
but  tlie  fpcaking  it  degrades  him,  recalls  his  Patent,  and 
breaks  hi.'  Efcutcheon,  Dick  begg'd  his  Pardon,  but  Rage 
got  the  afcendant  over  Monfieur's  Reafon,  and  Fury 
would  not  hearken  to  any  Articles  of  Accommodation. 
The  Spark  flew  from  the  Table,  the  Oil  had  fired  the 
Brain,  and  purfued  Dick  with  a  Cane  in  his  Hand,  and 
'  ■  ,  Oaths 


7%e  Gentle Ti4 AN  InJfruBed,      ^op 

Oaths  in  his  Mouth  :  The  poor  Wretch  would  have 
compounded  for  a  Limb ;  but  when  he  faw  noway  open 
for  a  Retreat,  he  fac'd  about:  The  Cane  had  beat  out  all 
Refpedt,  and  Sclf-prefervation  took  place  of  Duty  and 
Obedience.  He  returned  with  Ulury  the  Blows  he  had 
received.  In  fine,  the  Man  mafter'd  the  Mafter ;  and 
plain  Dick  over-top'd  Kighe  li^orpipjul.  The  Company 
Itep'd  in  between  \  fome  ftared^  and  others  rail'd,  and 
all  laugh'd  at  the  Comedy.  After  Dinner,  Eufehius  took 
the  Gentleman  alide,  and  minded  him  of  his  Extrava- 
gance. 

I  fuppofe.  Sir,  faid  he,  you  have  drop'd  your  for- 
mer Opinion.  That  an  high  Hand,  and  an  imperious 
Brow,  keep  Servants  to  their  Duty.  The  belt  way  to  per- 
fuade  them  to  obey  with  Refpedt,  is  to  command  with 
Moderation.  Judge  firft  of  Faults  before  you  punifh 
them,  and  never  fwell  a  Fly  into  an  Elephant.  You  muft 
wink  at  forac  Offences,  laugh  at  others,  and  chaftife  all 
with  Calmnefs  and  Charity  :  Put  a  difference  between  a 
Chance  and  a  deliberate  Adlion.  Treat  not  an  innocent 
Over-fight,  and  a  malicious  Treafon  with  the  fame  Seve- 
rity :  Proportion  the  Pain  to  the  Fault  ;  and  fo  when  the 
Offence  is  trivial,  take  care  the  Punifhment  be  not  exor- 
bitant. When  a  Servant  deferves  a  Cane,  it's  time  to 
difmifs  him ;  and  it's  more  honourable  to  turn  him  off, 
than  to  Hoop  to  the  Function  of  a  Town  Beadle.  In  a 
Word,  Sir,  remember,  that  to  engage  with  an  Equal  is 
dangerous,  with  a  Superior  foolifh,  and  with  an  Inferi- 
or contemptible. 

Eufel/ius's  Conduft  won  all  his  Domefticks ;  not  only 
their  Hands,  but  alfo  their  Hearts  lay  at  his  Devotion  : 
They  carry'd  on  his  Intereft  with  as  much  Eagernefs,  as 
if  they  promoted  their  own  :  They  refpedled  him  as  a 
Mafter,  and  loved  him  as  an  indulgent  Father.  And 
the  fear  of  difpleafing  him  kept  them  more  within  the 
compafs  of  their  Duty,  than  the  apprehenfion  of  Punifh- 
ment; and  they  rather  defir'd  to  feel  his  Anger,  than  to 
deferve  it. 

6. 

Swearing  and  Blafpheming  are  comprehenfive  Vices; 
and  if  Cuftom  had   the  fecret  of  Tranfmutation,   like 
Chymifts,  they  would  challenge  a  place  among  the  Vir- 
tues. 


510     fhe  Gentleman  Injiru^ect, 

tues.  Chriftians  who  are  forbid  to  fwear  by  any  things 
aflume  liberty  of  fwearing  by  all  things  :  One  would 
think  the  Breach  of  the  Precept,  was  the  only  defign  they 
aim'd  at ;  and  Difobedience  to  God's  Commands,  their 
only  Diverlion.  Gentlemen,  without  doubt,  firft  brought 
this  hellifh  Dialedl  into  Faftiion,  and  Servants  who  are 
their  Betters,  have  improv'd  it. 

Great  Gentlemen's  Families  have  laid  down  the  Lan- 
guage of  their  Country,  to  take  up  that  of  the  damn'd  ; 
and  it's  hard  to  determine,  whether  thofe  Mailers,  who 
permit  fuch  hideous  Expreffions,  are  more  guilty  than 
thofe  who  fpeak  them. 

Eufebius  could  not  endure  this  execrable  Jargon.  It 
four'd  his  Blood,  and  made  his  Hearing  a  Burthen.-  A 
thoufand  good  Qualities  in  a  Servant,  made  no  Atone- 
ment, in  his  Opinion,  for  this  only  bad  one ;  and  though 
he  pitied  thofe  Failures,  that  favour'd  of  Weaknefs,  he 
never  gave  quarter  toblafpheming:  Others  Vices^  faid  he^ 
make  buld  vjith  God^s  Commands^  this  out-rages  his  very 
Perj'on  ;  is  adds  Infult  to  Difobedience^  and  Contempt  to 
Abtij'e :  It's  a  Symptom  of  no  Religion.  For  who  will  revile 
the  very  Being  he  adores  ?  Or  rally  and  worjhip  the  fame 
Objed  ?  And  then  what  RefpeB  can  a  Mafter  exped  frovn 
him  that  turns  upon  his  Creator^  and  flies  in  the  Face  of  the 
Omnipotent  ^  In  fine,  continued  he,  they  are  Nufances  to 
human  Nature,  and  deferve  rather  to  be  profecuted  as 
publick  Enemies  to  our  Species,  than  to  be  entertain'd  as 
Domefticks.  He  endeavour'd  to  reclaim  them  by  Re- 
proof and  Exhortation ;  but  when  he  faw  no  Amend- 
ment, he  difmifs'd  *em  without  delay.  No  Interceflion  of 
Friends,  or  Profped:  of  Intereft,  could  perfuade  him  to 
harbour  thefe  declar'd  Enemies  of  the  Almighty.  They 
affront  the  virtuous,  debauch  the  unwary,  and  are  both 
a  Scandal  and  Grievance  to  the  Family  they  hve  in.  Re- 
bels C5  God  fhould  be  barr'd  of  Protedlion,  no  lefs  than 
Tnaitors  to  their  Prince.  To  receive  the  guilty,  is  to 
countenance  their  Crime,  as  really  in  one  Cafe  as  in  the 
other. 

Had  Gentlemen  a  due  regatd  for  the  Honour  of  God, 
id  efi^  were  they  Chriftians  in  good  earneft,  thcfei 
wretched  Liberties  of  their  Servants  would  ftop  their 
Blood,  and  make  them  fweat  with  a  Difguftand  Horrour ; 
they  would  difcard  thefe  puny  Giants  who  dare  defy  the 

Omni- 


The  Gentleman  InJiruM.    51 1 

Omnipotent,  and  invoke  his  Name  to  burlefque  his  Juf- 
tice  ;  they  would  clear  their  Families  of  all  thefe  Rakes 
that  infed  the  Air  they  breathe,  and  the  Earth  they  walk 
on :  That  by  a  ftrange  Metamorphofe,  turn  the  Dwel- 
lings of  Men  into  the  Habitation  of  Devils ;  and  the 
Torments  of  the  damned  into  the  Diverfion  of  the  Living : 
For  I  can  allure  you,   Gentlemens  Houfes  are  too  of- 
ten a  lively  Pifture  of  Hell  j  there  you  will  fee   all  the 
Lewdnefs  of  Hell,  and  here  all  the  Language  of  that 
curfed  Region,  with  only  this  difference,  that  thofe  un- 
happy Creatures  below  blafpheme  God,  of  whom  they 
hopenoAfecy,  and  thefe  above  lampoon  him,  of  whom 
they  expeft  Pardon.     Nay,  here  are  Devils  alfo  ;  not  in- 
deed by  Nature,  but  Pradlice,  and  almoll  every  thing  be- 
fides  Brimftone  and  Defpair.  Would  Gentlemen  reform 
this  unbefeeming  Dialed,  Servants  would  call  it  off;  but 
when  it  is  fpoke  in   the  Parlour,    it's  taken  up  in  the 
Kitchen,  it  walks  into  the  Stables,  and  fteals  into  all  the 
fervile  Offices  of  the  Houfe.    For  Servants  wear  their 
Mailer's  Vices,  as  well  as  their  Livery,  and  copy  their 
A6lions,to  purchafe  their  Favour:  In  that,  curling,  fwear- 
ing,  and  indeed  all  Vice  is  degrading ;  but  when  it  gets 
into  great  Houfes,  when  Nobility  abets  it,  and  Quality 
gives  it  Countenance  and  Entertainment,  it  changes  Com- 
plexion, and  becomes  modifh  and  creditable.     And  this 
is  the  reafon  Imprecations  and  Oaths  are  fo  far  frequent 
among  us ;  for  an  innocent  Over- light,  we  fend  a  Servant 
to  the  Devil,  and  call  down  upon  him  all  the  Difeafes, 
all  the  Plagues  of  this  World,  and  the  next.     Oaths  are  • 
us'd  by  all  Perfons,  and  to  compleat  the  Impiety  on  all 
Occafions,  we  court  and  quarrel  in  this  Language:    We 
exprefs  our  Kindnefs  and  Averfion,ourJoy  and  our  Grief 
in  the  fame  Terms.     Succefs  is  waited  on  by  Oaths,  as 
well  as  Difappointments ;  and  they  fet  off  Temper  as 
well  as  Paffion.     In  fine,  they  run  through  all  our  Dif- 
courfe  ;  they  ftand   up  in  the  room  of  Senfe  ;  and  one 
would  think  we  were  furnifli'd  with  no  other  Rhetorick 
or  Reafon,  His  Care  wrought  good  Effeds  in  the  Fami- 
ly, and  his  Example  better ;  fwearing  was  an  unknown 
Language,  as  well  as  Ribaldry  j  and  all  thofe  Vices  which 
Jiover  about  great  Mens  Palaces  found  no  Entertainment, 
no  Admittance  in  his.     When  there  arofe  any  Conteft  be- 
tween his  Domefticks,  he  took  Cognizance  of  it  himfelf, 

and 


512       ne  Gentleman  InflruShd, 

and  compos'd  all  Differences  with  the  Equity  of  a  Judge, 
and  the  Charity  of  a  Father.  No  Body  refus'd  to  ftand 
to  his  Arbitration,  becaufelhey  were  fure  Partiality  would 
have  no  Hand  in  the  Judgment ;  but  that  unbiafs'd  either 
by  Averfion  or  Kindnefs,  he  examin'd  the  Caufe  without 
taking  Notice  of  the  Perfons.  And  indeed  his  Conduft 
fpread  fuch  a  Reputation  abroad  of  his  Equity  and  Wif- 
dom,  that  his  Neighbours  put  their  Concerns  inhisHands^ 
and  rather  appeal'd  to  his  Arbitration,  than  to  the  Law, 
that  enriches  indeed  the  Lawyer,  but  beggars  the  Plain- 
tiff; who  often  gains  the  Suit,  but  lofes  his  Eftate. 

This  Piece  of  Charity  rais'd  an  unexpedfed  Enemy, 
whoattack'd  Eufeblus  with  Might  and  Main.  The  Story 
deferves  a  Relation.  It  will  delight  and  inftrudl,  and  fa 
convey  Profit  through  Pleafure. 

P II I L  A  R  G  y  R  u  s's  CharaEler. 

Phllargyrus  (for  fo  I  muft  chriften  the  Gentleman) 
was  born  to  a  low  Fortune,  \^R.afcal  in  Torkjhire  was  the 
Place  of  his  Birth,]  and  the  Denomination  jump'd  with 
his  Perfon.  He  only  inherited  the  common  Benefits  of 
Mankind  ;  the  Earth  to  walk  on,  the  Air  to  breathe,  and 
all  the  Rivers  of  the  World  to  drink  :  Being  leanly  pro- 
vided by  Nature,  he  refolv'd  to  fet  up  for  himfelf ;  and 
though  he  wanted  Materials,  he  was  not  ill-furnifli'd  of 
Refolution :  He  had  no  mind  to  wander  upon  the  Com- 
mon: Poverty  feem'd  to  him  unfaihionable.  Dependence 
hung  eafy,  and  he  thought  Courtefy  an  uncertain  Re- 
venue. He  had  receiv'd  of  Nature  a  lively  Wit,  and  of 
Education  a  weak  Confcience ;  he  improved  that  by 
Study,  and  wore  out  this  by  Practice ;  fo  that  at  laft  he 
turn'd  it  out  of  Service,  or  left  it  for  a  Pawn  with  a  Bro- 
ker: For  Confcience  and  Lawyers  are  not  to  be  recon- 
ciled ;  they  can  fcarcc  be  brought  to  lodge  under  the 
fame  Roof,  but  never  to  lie  in  the  fame  Bed.  Money 
was  his  PalRon  ;  and  if  he  could  fecure  the  End,  he  ne- 
•  ver  bogled  at  the  Means.  He  charg'd  through  all  the 
Niceties  of  Morality,  and  fcorn'd  to  flop  at  hard  Names 
invented  by  ScliOolmen,  and  fear'd  by  Fools.  Honour, 
faid  he,  and  Confcience  are  pretty  Things  eiiough ;  they 
jingle  upon  rtie  Ear,  but  not  in  the  Pocket ;  they 
are  Orthodox  in  Speculation,    but  Heretical  in   Life 

and 


The  Gentleman  Injlru^ed:       513 

and  Commerce.  A  Man  that  intends  to  thrive  muft  no^ 
iteerby  foreign  Opinion,  nor  ftartle  at  a  Set  of  forma^ 
Notions,  that  cramp  Merit,  pall  the  Spirits,  and  confine 
Adlivity  to  a  fmall  Gompafs :  Thefe  Principles  took  otf 
Reftraint,  made  room  for  vigorous  Efforts,  removed  the 
Difficulties  of  Bufinefs,  and  pointed  out  a  fhort  cut  to  Ex- 
pedition and  Succefs:  For  a  Man  that  has  difchargM 
Confcience,  laid  open  the  Inclofures  of  Good  and  Evil, 
thrown  off  the  Incumbrances  of  Right  and  Wrong,  and 
melted  down  Juft  and  Unjuft  into  the  fame  Mafs;  that 
regards  Generofity  as  Farce  and  Ceremony,  Piety  as 
childifli  Softnefs,  and  Honefty  as  a  Check  to  Indurtry; 
that  haggles  away  his  Credit  for  Six-pence,  and  his  Soul 
for  a  Shilling,  has  Line  enough  to  fport  his  Net  in,  and 
Elbow-room  more  than  enough  for  Invention. 

We  muft  not  therefore  wonder  a  Man  thusequipp'd 
for  Advancement  meets  with  Succefs ;  for  Fortune  and 
no  Confcience  are  generally  on  the  fame  Side  ;  and  tho' 
fometimes  fhe  dotes  on  young  Men,  (lie  often  flings  her 
Favours  upon  Reprobates.  He  was  by  Conftitution  one 
Fourth  of  a  Rafcal,  ?'.  e.  Scrivener  and  Solicitor  ;  and, 
to  be  Cheat  all  over,  he  corrimenced  Attorney.  So  that 
this  one  Alan  pofleft  all  the  ill  Qualities  of  the  Species, 
■without  the  Allay  of  a  good  one  ;  he  was  Scrivener  on 
the  oine  Side,  Soluitor  on  the  other,  and  Monfter  in  ev»- 
ry  Limb. 

He  had  glean'd  up  all  the  little  Artifices  of  his  Profef- 
fion,  and  augmented  the  Number  by  a  frefh  Supply  of  his 
own  Invention  ;  for  he  was  fenfible  Time  and  Ufe  wear 
out  Intrigues,  aswellasCloaths;  and  that  the  GentlemiCn 
of  the  Robe  muft  recruit  their  Forces,  no  lefs  than  thofeof 
the  Sword  ;  that  a  Legerdemain  once  difcover'd,  like  a 
maimed  Soldier,  is  unfit  for  Service.  In  a  Word,  his  In- 
clinations Vv'ere  ungenerous,  his  Pradtlce  unwarrantable  ; 
he  lay  below  thePaflion  of  Love,  and  flew  above  that  of 
Gompaflion ;  he  broke  through  all  the  Barriers  of  Blood, 
through  all  the  Regards  of  Honour^  atid  Principles  of 
Humanity.  And  indeed,  ,what  Virtue  can  take  hold  of 
a  Rake,  whenlntercft  comes  in  Competition? 

There  are  Lawyers  of  Fortune  as  well  as  Soldiers  > 
and  as  thefe  will  fight  on  any  Side  for  P.ny,  thofe  wiil 
plead  on  any  for  a  Fee.  arid  often  on  both.  Philar^^yrtts  was 
of  this  Temper;  he  examin'd  his  Client's  Purfe-  before 

LI  'he 


514      ^^^  Gentleman  Injiru^ed, 

heenter'dintothe  Merits  of  the  Caufe,  and  always  pro* 
nounced  the  Suit  juft,  if  the  Man  was  wealthy;  but 
where  there  was  no  Money ^  there  was  never  any  Tttle  ; 
Gold  zn')  Right  went  Hand  in  Hand,  and /-/ro»^  perpe- 
tually waited  upon  Poverty.  He  play'd  firft  his  Tricks 
of  Legerdemain  in  Town  ;  he  wneedled  People  into  his 
Snares,  anddecoy'd  them  into  their  Ruin.  But  Time  laid 
open  the  Impofture,  and  unmafk'd  his  Artifice;  fo  that 
at  length,  like  frighted  Birds,  the  Citizens  grew  wild  ; 
they  took  Wing  at  his  very  Shadow,  and  he  could  never 
come  within  Shot.  And  what  wonder  that  Reafon  {hould 
teach  Cautio-n,  as  v^^ell  as  Inftinft ;  and  ill  Ulage  clap 
Men  on  their  Cauard,  as  Vv'cll  as  Beail. 

He  changes  therefore  his  Camp,  and  wheels  oft'  into 
the  Country  to  forage  ,the  Peafant,  as  he  hadgull'd  the 
Merchant ;  he  i?  arm'd  cap-a-pee  with  Codes  and  Pau- 
deds,  Sifttufesand  Reports.  But  in  a  7a«  of  Law,  there 
was  not  one  Grain  of  Juftice  ;  he  left  this  in  Town,  to- 
gether with  his  Ears  to  fave  Expences,  toinlinuate,  that 
People  fhould  not  wonder  if  he  was  deaf  to  the  Com- 
plaints of  Widows  and  Orphans,  feeing  he  had  loll  the 
Faculty  of  Hearing. 

He  found  the  good  People  in  a  neighbourly  Corre- 
fpondence  employ'd  in  Tillage;  they  had  no  Leilure  to 
think  of  Feuds,  nor  Mind  to  ftart  Quarrels ;  they  carried 
on  their  own  Bufinefs,  without  entering  into  the  Concerns 
of  others,  and  enjoy'd  their  own,  without  the  troublefome 
Thoughts  of  Fear  or  Envy.  No  fooner  was  he  fettled 
among  them,  but  the  Scene  changed.  Thefe  Boors  began 
to  talk  of  Law  and  Encroachments  ;  of  Forfeitures  and 
Seizures ;  fo  that  the  Difeafe  that  raged  in  Hudihras^s 
Days  feized  upon  the  Clowns  of  Middlefex  and  Surrey. 

When  civil  Dungeon  firjl  grew  high. 
And  Men  fell  out,  they  knew  not  why  : 
IVhen  hard  Words.,  ^Jealoufies.,  and,Fears, 
Sets  Folks  together  by  the  Ears. 

The  Furies  feemed  to  have  left  Hell  to  haunt  the 
World,  and  forfaken  the  Damned  to  plague  the  Livings 
They  tranfplanted  the  Glhhendi  o(  WeJlmin/ler-Hall into 
the  Country,  •  Tomznd  Dickhid  down  the  How  goes  the 
Market^  to  talk  of  Statutes,  Precedents,  Reports,  Writs 
of  Error,   Reverfe  of  Judgment,   &c.    One  would  have 

thought 


ne  Gentleman  Injru^ed,     515 

thought  the  Jargon  of  the  Bar  had  out-Iawed  the  Tongue 
of  the  Country;  and  fomc,  that  the  /V^w^-^  King  fhip'd 
for  E»g/aft Jhis  Norman  Language,  to  open  a  Paffagefor 
his  Arms.  There  was  Adlion  uponAdtion:  The  Son 
iued  the  Father  for  an  Allowance ;  The  Wife  fet  upon 
theHufband  for  a  feparate  Maintenance:  One  Mortga- 
ged his  Tenement  to  recover  Damages  ;  another  pleaded 
away  loo  I.  per  Annum^  to  chop  at  tive  ;  and  in  the  End 
People  bought  Law,  and  P/yilargyr us  fwept  away  all  their 
Money;  fo  that  he  out- ran  the  very  Lawyer  in  the  Fable; 
for  this  only  fupped  theOyfter,  but-our  Attorney  pocket- 
ed the  very  Shell  into  the  Bargain  :  He  flip'd  into  their 
Livings,  when  he  had  privateer'd  upon  their  Purfe.  For 
even  thofe  who  gain'd  their  Suit,  loft  their  Capital,  to  quit 
his  Bill  of  Charges. 

It's  ftrangeaChriflian  could  intend  fuch  Mifchief,  and 
yet  more,  that  one  Pettifogger  could  adt  it.  But  the 
Truth  Is,  the  Lawyer  was  too  hard  for  the  Chriftian  ;  the 
Profeflion  got  the  better  of  Religion.  Belides,  tho'  his 
Forehead  was  double  gilL  with  Brafs,  his  Tongue  was 
fteepedin  Oil;  he  was  Mafter  of  his  Words,  and,  what 
is  more,  of  his  Confcience;  a  Flatterer  in  Folio,  and  no 
Man  better  fkill'd  in  the  Art  of  moving  the  Paffions;  he 
could  tranfmute  Phlegm  into  Choler;  and  then,  by  a  turn 
of  the  Tongue,  harangue  down  the  Hurricanintoa  Calm; 
he  had  a  hundred  Precedents  at  a  dead-lift,  and  could 
throw  over  a  bad  Caufe,  all  the  Varnifh  of  a  good  one  • 
In  a  Word,  he  was  an  errand  Lawyer,  (/W  eji)  all  Paint, 
allPlaifter;  Honeft  without,  and  Knave  within. 

Tour  Caufe  is  good,  faid  he  to  IVilliam,  give  me  my  Fee^ 
and  Vll  dejend  it.  Now  the  poor  Fellow  had  no  more 
Right  than  to  the  Empire  oi  China.  At  the  Trial  a  Verdidlt 
palles  againft  him.  If'^oere  are  vje  now,  Mr.  Attorney, 
cx\ts  IV  1 1  Ham}  My  Fee,  anfwers  Philargyru!,  Vll  move 
the  Court  in  arrefi  of  judgment.  But  Sentence  is  confirm'dj 
and  IViWs,  Hopes  fink  with  his  Purfe.  M-^e  are  lofl,  fays 
the  poor  Man,  Not  yet,  anfwers  Mr.  Attorney,  my  Fee^ 
and  P II  bring  a  Writ  of  Error.  But  here  again  Judg^ 
ment  is  confirmiCd,  and  IVHTs  condemn'd  to  Cofts  and 
Charges.  What  now,  good  Sir  I  fays  William,  v/ith  a 
doleful  Accent.  'There  is  no  more  to  be  faid,  replies  fvla- 
fter  Attorney,  with  a  Shrug,  pay  the  Knave  bis  Money i 
«nd  I  amfatisfied. 


51(5     The  Gentleman  Injiru^ed, 

So  Lawyers^  left  the  Bear  Defendant, 
/Jnd  Plaintiff  Dog pould  make  an  end  on^t  j 
Do  Jlave  and  toil  with  IFrits  of  Error^ 
Reierfe  ofjudgments  and  Demurrer, 
To  Ut  't-w  breathe  a  while ^  and  then 
Hoop,  a»dfo  fets  ''era  on  again. 

The  DefenJu-'it  went  away  with  one  Partof  ^-7/^5 
Livelihood,  the  Attorney  with  the  other;  fo  that  the  Law 
ftrip'd  him  to  the  Skin,  and  turn'd  him  on  the  Parifli 
without  Support,  and  what  is  worfe,  without  Piiy. 
The  poor  Alan  complainVi  he  was  heggar'd  by  the  Law  j 
hut  he  mifplac'd  hisiMisfurtunc,  and  laid  it  at  the  wrong 
Door.  I'or  as  a  Mats  of  peccant  Humours  makes  indeed 
a  Man  lick,  and  the  Phylician  kills  him  ;  Jo  Avarice  and 
Contention  embroil  an  Eftate,  but  the  Lawyers  ruin  it ; 
and  as  no  Man  dies  of  a  Fever,  Plague,  ^c.  but  of  the 
Dod^or ;  fo  ro  Man  is  deprived  of  his  Living  by  the  Law, 
but  the  Lavv?yer. 

However,  Experience  has  an  excellent  Knack  at  in- 
ftrucling ;  it  polifhes  the  mod  unhew'd  Underrtanding, 
and  inftills  Wifdoni  into  Fools :  It  often,  indeed,  raifes 
upon  its  Chapmen  at  Difcretion,  and  rates  Prudence 
above  the  common  Standard  of  the  Market.  Notwrth- 
itandingthe  Ware  keeps  fome  Proportion  with  the  Price, 
and  its  Goodnefs  atones  for  the  Dearnefs.  The  good 
People  were  now  fatisfied.  Attornies  give  not  their  La- 
bours Gratis ;  that  they  compofe  Differences,  as  the  Wolf 
parted  the  Dogs  in  the  Fable,  by  devouring  the  Conten- 
ders, and  thev  concluded,  that  Beggary  from  the  Hands 
of  an  Attorney  was  worle  complexioned,  than  from  thofe 
of  a  Neighbour ;  that  their  Tongues  were  as  infe(f\ious  as 
the  Teeth  of  a  Crocodile,  Ouod  dentibui  laceravit  nun- 
quam  fanattir  \  with  this  only  Difference,  that  this  Ser- 
pent bites  to  Death,  and  thofe  footh,  fawn,  and  flatter  in- 
to Poverty  and  Indigency. 

They  refolv'd  therefore  to  compofe  their  Differences, 
i^'Ccitx  a  V amiable.^  than  at  the  Bar,  and  ftand  to  the  Arbi- 
rration  o'iEufebins,  than  to  lay  their  Concerns  at  the  Mer- 
cy of  Philargyrtis ;  his  Virtue  gave  in  Security  for  his  Up- 
rightnefs,  and  his  Abilities  qualified  him  for  the  Poll  of 
a;n  Umpire,  fo  that  they  were  fure  his  Sentence  would 
not  clafh  with  his  Judgment,  nor  probably  with  Juftice. 

He 


fhe  Gentleman  Injfru^ed.     j i y 

He  knew  a  Beatitude  is  the  Reward  of  a  Peace-maker, 
3nd  embraced  the  Trouble  of  this  charitable  Underta- 
king, to  purchafe  the  Virtue.  For  why,  f^.ys  he,  fnall 
Charity  be  lefs  couragious  than  Intereft  ?  Or  court  Eaie 
more  than  Avarice?  If  Men  put  themfelves  on  the 
Wheel  for  Money  in  Hand,  and  Hell  in  Reverfion ;  if 
they  rack  their  Brain,  and  torture  Confcience,  to  fence 
againft  Poverty,  or  to  rear  up  a  petty  Fortune  upon  the 
Ruins  of  Honour  and  Humanity,  why  Ihall  Chriftians 
upon  an  Apprehenfion  of  Trouble,  dechne  a  Duty  that 
is  noble  and  generous,  pleafing  to  God,  and  glorious  in 
the  very  Eftimate  of  Men  ? 

His  Houfe  was  always  open  to  the  Neighbourhood, 
and  he  was  always  at  Leifure  to  hear  their  Grievances, 
and  ready  to  redrefs  them  ;  his  Abode  was  eafy  and  in- 
viting;  his  Behaviour  without  Stiffnefs,  or  Formality  j 
for  he  thought  to  be  great  was  not  to  be  ftarch'd  and  fu- 
percilious ;  as  headled  .without  Intereft,  fo  hepronounc'd 
without  Favour;  he  regarded  the  Caufe  without  taking 
any  Notice  of  the  Perfon  :  Noife  could  not  biafs  him, 
nor  Numbers  fright  him,  nor  Intereft  draw  him  into  any 
Injuftice;  he  durft  appear  for  injured  Right,  notwith- 
ftanding  the  Authority  of  the  Oppofer,  and  he  equally 
fcorn'd  to  trample  upon  a  Beggar,  and  to  fneak  to  a 
Prince ;  and  all  were  fo  prepofl'efs'd  with  the  Opinion  of 
his  Integrity,  that  even  thofe  who  loft  the  Suit,  rather 
blamed  their  Title,  than  his  Judgmerit. 

In  the  mean  \\mc  Phllargyrus  was  without  Bufinefs ; 
his  Trade  flagg'd,  Cuftoms  fell  oft",  and  his  Rents  came 
in  but  flowly ;  thofe  Streams  that  fed  his  Pockets  were 
dammed  up,  or  run  in  another  Channel  ;  fo  that  his 
good  Fortune  was  at  a  ftand  :  Lucre  ebb'd,  and  Curfes 
Bowed  in  upon  him  ;  he  raged  at  his  Difappointment, 
and  poured  out  a  Tun  of  Gall  upon  Eufebius^  the  laft 
Retreat  of  Anger  and  Malice.  For  few  People  are  un- 
fkilful  at  thofe  Weapons;  and  he  that  cannot  ftab  an 
Enemy  with  his  Tongue,  is  fallen  fome  Degrees  below 
the  State  of  Impotence. 

Refolutions  alter'd  with  his  Paflion,  like  Waves  in  a 
Tempeft  ;  one  rouled  upon  the  Back  of  another.  Some- 
times he  was  for  preferring  an  j^^ion  againft  him,  for 
pradlifmg  the  Law  without  Licence;  then  for  reprefent- 
jng  h|im  to  the  Government  as  a  difaff(£(fted  Perfon,  a 
L 1  3  J(iC9  bite 


51 8      'the  Gentleman  lnflru[ied, 

Jacohhe  in  Fadlion,  and  a  Fanatick  in  Religion.  But 
Erifebius  laugh'd  at  his  Threats,  and  pitied  his  Malice. 
He  pitch'd  at  laft  upon  a  perfonal  Conference,  as  the 
moft  efFeftual,  andlefs  expen five  Way  to  come  to  Terms 
of  Accommodation.  And  for  thisReafon  he  invited  him- 
felf  to  Dinner.  Eufebins  was  gtad  of  the  Occafion  ;  he 
had  no  lefs  a  Defire  to  difcourfe  with  Philargyrus^  than 
Philargyrus  with  him.  The  Lawyer  had  a  Mind  to  draw 
up  his  Grievances  againft  the  Gentleman,,  and  the  Gen- 
tleman to  catechize  the  Lawyer;  fo  that  both  Parties  be- 
ing eager  to  found  the  Charge,  what  wonder  they  clofed, 
and  foon  came  to  a  hot  Engagement? 


P  I  A  L  O  G  U  E    in. 

The  Abufes  of  fome  Lavjyers  laid  open  ;  and  Precepts  gi- 
ven how  to  difcharge  their  Duty  like  Chrijlians. 

TpUJl'bim  perce'iv'd  at  Table  Philargyrus  had  a  better 
-^  Stomach  to  complain,  than  to  eat  ;  to  fall  upon  his 
Hoft,  than  his  Dinner :  For  when  Paflion  rifes,  Hunger 
falls ;  and  Appetite  finks,  when  Gall  overflows.  However, 
Eufebius  thought  the  Lawyer's  Sournefs  was  no  Prece- 
dent for  Rudenefs ;  that  one  Man's  Failures  in  Civilities 
could  be  no  Juftification  of  another's ;  but  after  Dinner 
he  took  him  into  the  Garden,  that  he  might  throw  up 
the  Oil  that  opprefs'dhis  Stomach,  andalmoft  ftop'dRe- 
fpiration.  Philargyrus  took  hold  of  the  Occafion,  and 
thus  addrefs'd  himfelf  to  Enfebius. 

Philargyrus.  I  have  often  heard  of  your  Piety  and  Wif- 
dom,  but  how  can  I  reconcile  your  Cohdud  to  either  ? 
Be  not  difpleas'd  if  I  defer  more  to  my  own  Knowledge, 
than  to  Fame ;  that  cannot  deceive,  this  is  impofing : 
It's  but  Intelligence  at  fecond-hand,  liable  to  Error  in 
its  Rife,  and  to  Mifreprefentation  in  the  Conveyance. 
Pray,  Sir,  where  is  Prudence,  when  you  embark  in  every 
Man's  Affair,  and  draw  into  your  Forum  all  the  Feuds 
pf  the  Hundred  ?  You  have  adjourned  the  Courts  of 
IVe/lminJier-Hall  into  your  private  Family;  and  pro- 
nounce more  Sentenc?es  from  an  arm'd  Chair,  than  my 
Lord  Chief  Juftlce  from  theBench.  A  Man  muft  have 
a  low  Efteem  of  Eafe  to  refign  it  for  Trouble,  without 

Necemty, 


^he  Gentleman  InflruHed,    ^i^ 

Neceflity,  Profit,  or  even  Invitation  j  and  a  mean  Judg- 
ment to'  proftitute  it  to  the  Caprice  of  a  mercurial  and 
reftlefs  Temper. 

Butbefides,  Sir,  I  fuppofe  you  veil  your  Indifcretion 
under  the  Cover  of  Charity,  and  difguife  an  unquiet  Hu- 
mour with  the  Ma(kof  a  Virtue.  But  you  fhould  con- 
fider  your  Charity  Hands  upon  flippery  Ground,  and 
may  fink  into  Injuftice  before  you  are  aware.  For  Right 
and  Wrong  are  meafured  by  the  Law  ;  by  this  Tenure 
we  hold  our  Lands,  and  our  Lives,  and  all  Title  muft 
ftand  or  fall  by  the  Conftitution  of  the  Government. 
Now  the  Knowledge  of  the  Law  comes  not  unto  us  by 
Infpiraiion,  nor  is  acquir'd  by  the  fole  Didates  of  Na- 
ture. For  the  Rules  of  Juftice  are  fo  unlike  in  one  Me- 
ridian to  thofe  in  another,  that  one  would  think  Mens 
Species  varied  with  the  Climate,  or  the  Elevation  had  a 
tranfmuting  Quality,  and  could  throw  Things  out  of  one 
Nature  into  another  ;  that  the  civil  Magiftrate  minted 
Virtue  and  Vice,  which,  like  Coin,  pafs'd  Current  only 
in  his  own  Dominions.  You  muft  not  therefore  only 
read  the  Magna  Charta  of  Nature,  but  mull  plod  over 
Reports  and  Statutes^  Glojfes  and  Comments^  thumb  Codes 
and  Pande^s^  and  wander  through  all  the  Labyrinths  of 
Cujlom  and  Precedent.  This  is  a  tedious  Journey,  and  I 
fancy  you  have  not  been  either  at  the  Charges  or  Trou- 
ble of  it.  No,  the  Law  is  to  you  Terra  incognita^  an 
unknown  Region.  You  underftand  the  Language  of  the 
Bar,  no  more  than  that  of  the  great  C/:'^j;».  How  there- 
fore will  you  come  at  the'Senfe,  and  fquare  a  Judgment 
by  the  Rules  of  Jullice  and  Equity  ?  1  fear,  good  Sir, 
you  kill  fome  with  Kindnefs,  and  pack  others  into  Almf- 
Houfes,  or  quarter  them  upon  the  Parifh  out  of  Charity, 
who  notwithftanding  might  have  liv'd  comfortably  upon 
their  own  Fund,  without  being  a  Burthen  to  themfelves, 
or  Incumbrance  to  their  Neighbour.  Whilft  you  wrong 
others,  by  giving  'em  right,  when  they  have  only  a  Title 
to  Poverty,  and  the  Revenues  of  the  Bafket.  I  am  willing 
to  allow  you  to  .pronounce  according  to  Confcience;  but 
alas,  Confcience,  without  Law,  is  atbeft  but  an  innocent 
Miftake ;  and  tho'  it  exempts  from  Punifliment  in  the 
next  World,  it  expo fes  your  Neighbour  to  Beggary  in 
this.  So  that,  tho'  perch anfce  it  may  be  no  Crime,  it's 
a  very  real  Injuftice.  Why  don't  you  fet  up  for  a  Dcdlor 
L  1  4  of 


520       7he  Gentleman  Injini^ed. 

of  the  Faculty,  as  well  as  for  a  Genilemnn  of  the  (nns  of 
Court,  and  poft  yom  Rccipc^s  about  the  Country,  as  well 
as  your  VerdidsP  It  is  Ids  charitable  to  fet  a  dying  Man 
upon  his  Legs,  than  an  expiring;  Title?  To  cure  a  bro- 
ken Arm,  than  a  disjointed  Eilate  ?  You  are  fenfible, 
I  fuppofe,  you  are  unqualified  for  the  Employment;  that 
you  may  fend  Poifon  for  a  Remedy,  and  Arfenick  in 
place  of  a  Cordial.  But  pray,  Sir,  does  not  your  Cha- 
rity throw  you  into  the  fame  Danger  ?  You  are  as  great 
a  Stranger  to  the  Law,  as  to  the  Difpenfatory :  And  as 
flcnderly  read  in  Cook  upon  Littlaoii^  as  in  Galen  or 
Hippocrates.  How  therefore  can  you  diftinguifh  between 
Right  and  Wrong?  The  Law  is  the  fole  Standard  of 
both ;  and  even  this  is  not  fo  manifeft  as  to  flafh  Evi- 
dence and  Convi(5lion.  The  Senfe  flicks  not  on  the  Sur- 
face, nor  perches  upon  the  Top  of  the  Letter ;  it  muft 
be  often  drawn  out  by  Illation  and  Precedent;  it's  a 
Mydery  nothing  but  Study  and  Pradice  can  unriddle; 
■withdraw  therefore  from  Bufinef<;,  and  let;  Controverfies 
run  in  their  ordinary  Channel :  And  remember  Charity 
is  prepofterous  when  It  perfuades  a  good  Adlion,  by  do- 
ing an  ill  one. 

The  Gentleman  exprefs'd  himfelf  with  Heat  and  Em- 
phafis,  with  more  Paffion  than  Realbn,  and  fometimes 
tranfgrefs'd  the  common  Rules  of  Decency  and  Breeding; 
but  he  pleaded  his  own  Caufe,  and  fo  we  muft  fling  iri 
fome  Grains  of  Allov/ance ;  for  the  moft  lazy  Tongue, 
when  kick'd  by  Intereft,  and  fpurr'd  on  by  Paflion,  will 
run  Poll:,  and  ftumble  in  the  hurry  over  Modefty  and  Be- 
haviour. Eufchins  faw  he  run  too  fafl:  to  continue  the 
Career  ;  that  when  he  had  fhot  all  his  Ammunition,  he 
might  be  attnck'd  at  greater  Advantages ;  and  that  proba- 
bly when  Paflion  was  talk'd  down,  Rcafon  might  get  the 
Afcendant.  He  therefore  heard  his  Harangue,  without 
Commotion  or  Interpofing  ;  and  when  Philargyrus  had 
ended  his  Inventive,  Eufehius  began  his  Juftification, 

Eufcbuii.  I  perceive  that  the  Tewiple  and  Grey'' s- Inn 
havedeclar'd  me  a  publick  Enemy  to  the  Hoghen  moghen, 
iearyied  in  the  Law  ;  a  Tray  tor  to  the  Prince,  and  a  Be- 
trayer of  the  I^ibcrty  and  Property  of  the  Subje^f.  In 
fine,  guilty  of  all  Crimes  by  Implications,  though  of  none 
in  Reality.  You  have  drawn  your  Tongue  in  the  Caufe ; 
you  appear  the  iirfl  in  the  P  icld  with  your  Quota,  to 
"   '      *  '  prevent 


The  Gentleman  Inftru^ed,     521 

prevent  the  Invafion,  and  all  the  dire  Confequences  of, 
my  Attempt  upon  the  Bar  and  the  Bench.  But  your  Pre- 
parations for  War  are  no  lefs  unfeafonable  than  expen- 
live;  for  I  am  refolv'd  to  entertain  a  friendly  Correfpon- 
dence  with  your  Corporation,  and  neither  provoke  nor 
truft  you.  You  are  dangerous  both  Ways ;  your  Friend- 
fhip  is  as  fatal  as  your  Anger ;  and  he  v^'ho  confides  in 
your  Fidelity,  receives  more  Wounds,  than  he  who  de- 
ierves  your  Refentment.  However,  Sir,  you  do  well  to 
keep  the  longa  roba  Militia  in  Difciplinej  to  skirmifh  in 
Jeft,  before  you  engage  in  Earneft. 

You  would  certainly  be  to  blame  did  you  rate  my 
Qualities  by  the  Report  of  Fame,  for  fhe  fpeaks  at  Ran- 
dom, and  pronounces  without  Judgment  or  Sincerity : 
She  claps  Vices  upon  good  Men,  and  Virtues  upon 
Rafcals :  She  lampoons  or  praifes  at  a  venture,  and  adapts 
Satyr  or  Panegyrick  to  the  Exigence  of  Intereft,  and  the 
Biafs  of  Fadion,  as  you  ftand  off  in  Caution  and  Referve 
for  fear  of  a  Surprize.  Fll  follow  the  fame  Method, 
for  did  I  take  the  Size  of  your  Morals  and  Religion  by 
the  publick  Cry,  I  fliould  conclude  you  had  a  flender 
Provifion  of  Confcience,  and  none  of  Honour  or  Honefty. 

I.  Youqueftion  my  Prudence  for  intruding  my  I'elfinto 
Bufinefs  without  Neceflity  or  Invitation,  and  I  your  Re- 
ligion for  the  Cenfure.  If  Wifdom  perfuade  me  to  C^hri- 
ftianity,  why  do  I  forfeit  it  by  difcharging  the  Duties 
of  my  Profeffion?  Now,  you  know,  Chrill  commands 
me,  not  only  to  extend  my  Love  to  Friends,  which  is  at 
molt  a  Pagan  or  Jewijh  Virtue,  but  to  my  Enemies;  I 
muft  return  Good  for  Evil,  and  Favours  for  Affronts. 
I  muft  cloath  the  Naked,  and  drop  my  Alms  into  the 
Hands  of  the  Indigent.  I  muft  reconcile  Enemies,  and 
bring  Neighbours  to  a  good  Underftanding  ;  and  Chrift 
pays  the  Labour  with  a  Beatitude,  BlejJ'ed  are  the  'Peace- 
makers, Certainly,  this  Earneft  of  Heaven  balances-  the 
Labour  ;  and  who  engages  in  Bufinefs  upon  fuch  a  Pro- 
mife,  gives  not  his  Pains  gratis.  Intereft  therefore  and 
Duty  invite  me  to  Bufinels,  viz.  the  Precepts  of  Reli- 
gion, and  the  Hope  of  Heaven,  grounded  upon  the  Pro- 
mifes  of  our  Redeemer ;  and  thefe  are  my  Commiflions 
too;  fo  that  my  Condudl  is  neither  illegal  nor  foolifti: 
For,  I  fuppofe,  a  Man  who  has  Chrifts  Command,  is 
armed  with  an  unexceptionable  Authority  ;  and  that  the 

broad 


522     7>&^  Gentleman  Inflru^ed, 

broad  Seal  of  Heaven,  is  as  authentick  as  that  of  the 
Realm. 

2.  You  are  not  fatisfied  of  my  Capacity,  becaufe  I 
am  a  Stranger  to  the  Laws.  Perchance,  Sir,  I  am  more 
familiarly  acquainted  with  them,  than  you  fufpedl.  I 
was  always  of  Opinion,  a  Smack  of  the  Law  was  no  lefs 
neceflary  to  manage  an  Eftate,  than  t»  acquire  one;  and 
that  a  Man  to  avoid  Circumvention,  mu'.l  dive  into  all 
the  little  Artifices  of  the  Bar,  and  the  Myftery  of  Plead- 
ing ;  for  whoever  looks  down  a  Precipice,  is  within  an 
Ace  of  a  Fall;  and  when  the  Snare  lies  out  of  Sight,  it*s 
beyond  the  Power  of  forecaft  to  avoid  it  ;  for  this  Rea- 
fon  I  have  turned  over  the  Law,  and  methinks  it  has 
fomething  of  the  Prophet  EzekleN  Pviver,  in  which  a 
Lamb  might  walk,  and  an  Elephant  fink;  a  Man  who 
means  well,  may  eafily  fall  upon  the  Senfe;  and  who  in- 
tends to  play  the  Knave,  may  find  a  Cover  for  his  For- 
geries. 

But  after  all,  an  ordinary  Pittance  of  Law,  with  a 
good  Confcience,  rids  more  Suits  than  the  Science  of 
Cook  with  a  bad  one.  Indeed,  a  Man  beaten  to  the 
Trade,  may  wrangle  and  harangue  better  than  one  that 
is  unexperienced  in  the  Science  of  Chicane;  he  may  talk 
more  plaufibly,  and  embroider  his  Difcourfe  with  Sta- 
tutes and  Precedents. 

But  generally  this  is  only  flourifh  Terms,  and  IVeJl- 
r<iinjler  Cant ;  it  raifes  a  Duft,  flings  a  Glitter  on  a  bad 
Caufe,  and  a  Gloom  over  a  good  one:  It  racks  the  Law 
and  Reafon  too:  It  raifes  Doubts,  wiredraws  Suits /» 
infinitum^  and  makes  Demonftration  itfelf  as  two-hand- 
led as  the  Pagan  Oracles.  Whereas,  would  Men  as  ftu- 
dioufly  employ  their  Time  to  difcover  Truth,  as  to  over- 
look it;  to  end  Debates  as  to  perpetuate  them  ;  Senten- 
ces would  be  more  quick,  and  perchance  morejuft;  at 
leaft  the  Subjeft  would  feldom  plead  away  his  whole 
Eftate,  to  maintain  a  Part,  nor  findjuftice  moreexpenfive 
than  Extortion,  and  raore'barbarous  than  Violence:  Nor, 
in  fine,  lofe  the  Subftance  to  chop  at  a  Shadow. 

I  claim  not  the  Prerogative  of  Infallibility,  like  my 
Neighbours,  I  am  liable  to  Miftakes,  and  fubjedt  to 
Error;  the  Features  of  Wrong  have  often  fuch  a  Refem- 
blance  with  thofe  of  Right,  that  there  is  no  diftinguifhing 
the  one  from  the  others  and  therefore  I  never  pretend 

tny 


'T'he  Gentleman  Inftru^ed.    523 

my  judgment  (like  the  Laws  of  the  Medes  and  Per/ians) 
is  irrevocable ;  thole  who  are  diflatisfied  may  appeal  to 
higher  Powers,  and  Ihelter  themfelves  and  their  Concerns 
under  the  Protection  of  the  Law.  But,  Sir,  they  have 
found  by  Experience,  the  Expedient  is  dangerous  and 
chargeable ;  that  thofe  who  raife  Suits,  are  not  proper  to 
end  them;  and  that  few  engage  in  the  Law,  without 
Wounds  in  the  Skirmifli,  and  thofe  mortal  too;  nay, 
and  by  a  ftrange  Sympathy,  they  are  entailed  on  the  Fa- 
mily ;  and  defcend,  like  chronical  Diftempers,  to  their 
Pofterity. 

Philargyrus.  So  ;  here  is  a  Satyr  upon  the  Profeflion, 
and  all  that  praftife  it  are  Cheats  and  Impoftors,  at  leaft 
by  Conftru£tion ;  the  Words  will  bear  an  Adion ;  and 
did  I  not  refpedt  your  Perfon,  I  might  i)ring  you  upon 
your  Knees,  and  penance  your  Indifcretion. 

Eufebius.  You  mifunderlland  me,  and  throw  a  guilty 
Comment  upon  an  innocent  Text.  No  Man  has  a  greater 
Value  for  the  Profeflion  than  my  felf ;  it's  the  very  Bafis 
of  Government,  the  Support  of  Society  and  Commerce  ; 
it's  a  Science  that  Hops  not  at  airy  Notions,  nor  fleeps  in 
Speculation  and  Revery;  it  fets  Hand  to  work,  puts 
Bounds  to  Right  and  l^'rong,  proteds  the  Clown  from 
Slavery,  and  the  Nobility  from  the  violent  Encroach- 
ments of  the  Multitude.  It's  as  neceflary  for  the  Confer- 
vation  of  Order,  as  Air  for  that  of  Life,  Without  it, 
the  greateft  Empires  muft  fall  into  a  Heap  of  Confu- 
lion,  and  the  World  become  a  Retreat  to  Thieves  and 
Aflaflins.  Power  will  determine  Right,  and  Force  juf- 
tify  Extortion  and  Violence;  a  long  Sword  will  be  Ti- 
tle, and  Force  will  put  in  Pofleflion. 

As  the  Profeflion  is  commendable,  fo  thoufands  of  its 
Profeflors  have  been  , not  only  above  Praife,  but  even 
above  Calumny:  Flattery  could  not  fawn  them  into  an 
ill  Adlion,  nor  Menaces  fright  them  from  a  good  one; 
they  were  juft  in  fpite  of  Intereft,  and  upright  in  fpite 
of  Temptation ;  they  bore  up  againft  the  Provocations 
of  Greatnefs  and  Favour;  they  durft defend  Juftice under 
the  Difguifeofa  Beggar,  and  profecute  Injuftice,  though 
proteded  by  Title  and  Authority. 

Who  has  not  heard  of  the  great  Boetius  ?  His  Probity 
out-fhined  his  noble  Extraction ;  his  Juftice  gave  a  Luftre 
to  the  Scarlet,  and  his  Prudence  dignified  the  very  Dig- 
nity 


524      The  Gentleman  InJiruBed, 

nity  he  poITefs'd  j  he  had  the  Privilege  to  revive  all  LeaK- 
iiing,  and  at  his  Death  to  bury  the  whole  Roman  Grarv- 
deurinhis  ovi'ii  Tomb;  more  glorious  in  his  Difgrace, 
than  in  the  very  Meridian  of  his  Fortune,  and  more  hap- 
py in  his  Alilery,  than  at  the  Top  of  his  Profperity.  This 
brave  Man  was  above  Difcouragement  and  ill  Ufage,  and 
not  lb  much  as  check'd  into  Indillerency  by  Injury,  or 
carelled;  he  declar'd  for  Truth  againft  Majefty,  and  de- 
claimed againft  QppreiTion  in  the  Face  of  Tyranny, 

Who  can  fufficiently  praife  the  incomparable  ^\xTho- 
mas  Moor^  the  Glory  of  our  Nation,  and  the  Phoenix  of 
his  Age  :  He  was  the  moll  able  Lawyer  of  his  Time, 
and,  what  is  more,  thebeftMan:  His  Virtue out-ftretch'd 
his  Knowledge,  and  his  Conftancy  was  too  hard  for 
Cruelty;  he  mounted  from  the  Bar  to  the  Bench,  and 
carried  on  Virtue  through  all  the  Oppolition  of  Avarice  ; 
the  Charms  of  his  Honefty  were  irrefiftible  j  they  both 
conquered  Prejudice,  and  captivated  Envy  it  rfelf ;  and 
tho'he  loft  his  Life  on  a  Scaftbld,  he  went  off  with  Fide- 
lity. For  what  could  King  Harry  condemn  but  Virtue  ? 
Or  who  could  he  pronounce  Guilty,  but  the  Innocent  ? 
A  Difgrace  from  him  was  more  honourable,  than  a  Pa- 
tent of  Peerage,  and  to  be  ftrip'd  of  a  Dukedom,  thai,i  t;o 
receive  one. 

Tho'  the  Intereft  of  Virtue  is  almoft  funk  in  our  dege- 
nerate Age;  tho'  Confcience  and  Regularity  have  fmall 
footing  among  us ;  yet  I  could  lingle  out  fome  Gentle- 
men of  the  Law,  whofe  Honefty  vies  with  the  moft  up- 
right Examples  of  Antiquity,  as  well  as  their  Science ; 
and  if  the  Ancients  have  any  Advantage,  it's  only  that 
they  are  Originals,  and  our  Moderns  Copyifts:  Thefe 
are  Men  that  neither  bend  to  Favour,  now  bow  to  Inte- 
reft ;  that  profecutc  Injuftice  in  Power,  and  abet  Juftice 
under  all  the  Difadvantages  of  Poverty  and  Confinement; 
They  mind  not  the  Plaintiff,  but  the  Caufe  ;  and  rather 
ftand  for  Right  without  Fee,  than  fide  with  Wrong  for 
the  double. 

Yet,  I  confefs,  the  irregular  Condu6l  of  fome,  has 
thrown  a  Scandal  on  the  very  Profeffion ;  and  the  Probity 
of  many  fuffers  in  the  Opinion  of  the  World,  for  the 
mean  Artifices  of  a  few  ;  but  what  Wonder  if  fome  Chil- 
dren of  wicked  Cain,  mingle  their  Blood,  and  their  Prac- 
tice, with  t|ie  Race  of  6V//&  ?  A  Lawyer  and  a  Cheat  are 

now 


^e Gentleman  InftruBed,     52^ 

how  Terms  almoft  fynonymous  ;  and  Men  that  thrive 
by  the  Law,  are  fuppofed  to  live  without  any.  But  it's 
unjuft  to  ftigmatize  a  whole  Body,  for  the  Failures  of 
Ibme  Members;  the  Funiftiment  and  the  Fault  (hould 
go  together,  and  he  alone  fhould  bear  the  Reproach  of  a 
bad  Adion,  that  had  the  Face  and  Pleafure  of  commit- 
ting it.  Thefe  arc  Men  of  low  Fortunes,  and  profligate 
Manners,  unable  to'  rife-  by  Merit ;  they  turn  off' to  Over- 
reaching, and  fupply  the  want  of  worth  by  Tricks  and 
Artifices.  Such,  we  fay,  rife  by  their  Wits;  but  it's  a 
Miftake,  they  live  by  the  Proftitu'tion  of  Confcience,  and 
vSale  of  Probity  ;  here,  Sir,  you  have  my  Senfe  of  the 
Matter;  and  if  3'ou  pleafe  to  adtion  me,  take  your 
Courfc. 

PhyUrgyrus.  I  perceive  you  will  not  have  Men  exert 
their  Parts,  nor  employ  their  Talents  for  Lucre  and  Gain. 
No,  they  muft  ruft  in  a  Corner,  or  be  lock'd  up  in  a 
Clofet;  they  muft  be  laid  out  in  the  publick  Service,  or 
fpent  in  Charities ;  and  if  a  Lawyer  praftifes  not  to  a 
'tetter  the  Doftrine  of  Self  abnegation,  if  he  cart:s  an  Eye 
on  his  own  Intereft,  as  well  as  on  his  Neighbours ;  or 
has  the  Forefight  to  lay  in  a  Provifion  for  Age  and  Acci- 
dent, he  muft  be  dubb'd  a  Cheat,  and  pofted  up  for  a 
Fourb  and  Impoftor.  I  confefs  I  am  not  fo  difengaged 
from  all  temporal  Concerns,  as  quite  to  over-look  them. 
I  will  oblige  my  Neighbour,  but  then  I  will  notdifoblige 
my  Reafon;  I  will  furnifh  out  Life  to  the  beft  Advan- 
tage. A  Man  may  live  by  the  fweat  of  his  Brains,  as 
well  as  by  the  Work  of  his  Hands,  and  balance  the  Ex- 
pence  of  his  Studies,  with  the  Fruits  of  his  Pradlice.  In 
fine,  Sir,  I  will  mind  my  Client's  Intereft,  but  intend  not 
TO  forget  my  own  ;  he  fhaii  have  Law,  but  muft  return 
Money  for  the  Barter. 

Eufebius.  Nay,  I  conceive,  a  Lawyer  that  drudges 
Gratis^  will  be  overlaid  with  Cuftom,  though  fcant  of 
Money  ;  and  if  he  fets  out  with  a  low  Fortune,  he  will 
not  fall  upon  a  higher  in  his  Journey  ;  for,  as  ihe  World 
goes,  Generolity  and  good  Nature  are  no  thriving  Embel- 
lifhments ;  and  when  one  leaves  the  Payment  of  an  Obli- 
gation to  the  Difcrction  of  the  Receiver,  the  Acknow- 
ledgment feldom  rifes  in  Proportion  of  the  Favour.  But 
you  mif-conceive  my  Meaning  :  I  am  not  for  throwing 
all  the  Labour  upon  the  Lawyer,  and  all  the  Profit  upon 

the 


^2^      The  Gentleman  lnjiru[ied, 

the  Client.  No,  let  him  keep  within  the  Bounds  of  Ho- 
nefty,  and  I  have  no  Exceptions  againft  him  j  a  Setter 
o'i  Meiim  and  Tmtm  deferves  a  Salary,  as  well  as  a  Setter 
of  Bones :  But,  as  I  would  not  have  a  Surgeon  make 
Wounds  for  the  Gain  of  curing  'em;  nor  a  Do6lor  poi- 
fon  a  Patient  to  force  upon  him  an  Amulet ;  fo  a  Gentle- 
man of  the  Bar  fliould  not  fet  People  together  by  the  Ears, 
to  be  paid  for  the  parting  them. 

Pbilargyrus.  That  is,  when  two  commence  a  Suit,  we 
mull  compofe  the  difference  a  P aimable,  and  rather  run  to 
Arbitration  than  the  Law.  Indeed  our  Trade  would  go 
on  at  a  ftrange  Rate  were  Umpires  in  Fafhion,  Curg» 
woLfld  not  pay  the  Voyage. 

Etifebius.  Suppofe  fuch  a  Projecl  were  put  in  Executi- 
on, where  is  the  Harm?  Tho'  you  might  need  lefs  Law, 
you  would  pradlife  more  Gofpel ;  and  if  the  Lawyer  loft, 
the  Chriftian  would  gain  by  the  Expedient.  Your  Vails 
might  be  flender,  however  they  would  be  juft;  and  I 
think  a  Crown  with  Innocence,  is  more  valuable  than  a 
Pound  with  a  Crime  ;  but  befides,  you  would  ftill  find 
fools  enough  to  impofe  upon,  for  the  World  is  ftockM 
with  Neck  or  Nothing  ;  with  Men  that  will  make  over  by 
Retail  an  Eftate  of  a  thoufand  Pound  per  Annum^  to  a 
Lawver,  in  Expe<5tation  of  being  pleaded  into  another  of 
two  Hundred. 

Pbilargyrus.  You  will  have  us  keep  within  the  Bounds 
of  Juftice,  you  caution  us  againft  Injuftice,  explain  the 
Jargon ;  for  I  fear  our  Notions  difagree,  and  that  my 
Idea  is  more  indulgent,  and  of  greater  Latitude  than 
yours.  I  believe,  according  to  your  Scheme,  a  Man 
muft  make  the  leaft  of  his  Parts  to  be  honeft,  and  play 
the  good-natur'd  Fool  to  be  a  Saint  in  your  Calendar: 
But  to  be  free  with  you,  I  intend  to  fell  my  Pains  by  Inch 
of  Candle.  I'll  not  venture  one  lingle  Fulfe  but  upon 
good  Security,  and  high  Intereft;  and  if  I  can  get  Ten 
in  the  Hundred,  why  flialll  refufe  the  Offer  i"  Injoftice 
is  a  Chimera  when  both  Sides  agree.  Able  Lawyers  are 
now  as  fcarce  as  Corn  was  the  laft  Year :  Why  then 
fhall  they  not  tax  their  Labour  af  Difcretion,  and  raife 
the  Market  as  well  as  Farmers  ? 

Eufcbins.  I  fear  indeed  our  Notions  of  Juflice  are  as 
wide  as  our  Pradtice ;  Lawyers  arc  no  ftraight-  lac'd  Cafuifts 
in  their  own  Concerns  j  they  fteer  by  the  old  Philofophi- 


The  Gentlemak  Injlru^cd.       527 

cal  Principle,  Nothiti^  is  jinjuji  that  is  profitable.  But  tho' 
thefe  Maxims  have  Pradice  for  their  Warrant,  they  have 
neither  Reafon  nor  the  Gofpel ;  and  without  this  Sup- 
port, the  mod  eftablifli'd  Cuftom  is  only  Vice  trium- 
phant. Now,  if  you  plcafe,  I  will  deliver  my  Judgment 
upon  the  Matter. 

I. 

It's  certain  Law-fuitsare  warrantable  mcerly  by  Ac- 
cident: Two  cannot  have  Right  to  the  fame  Thing;  but 
becaufe  the  Title  is  ilnccrtain,  the  contending  Parties  may 
appeal  to  the  Law,  and  muft  acquiefce  to  the  Judgment 
of  the  Court. 

2. 

Hence  it's  clear,  when  Right  (lands  evidenily  for  one 
fide,  a  Lawyer  cannot  plead  for  the  other;  if  he  does, 
he  ilands  no  lefs  guilty  of  ln)uftice,  than  if  he  help  a  Pad 
to  take  a  Furfe  upon  the  Highway.  Indeed  his  Crime 
appears  more  genteel  in  the  Eyes  of  Men,  but  in  the  Sight 
of  God  it's  ten  Times  more  monflrous;  for  he  abufes  a 
Virtue  to  pra6tife  a  Vice ;  and  endeavours  to  ruin  In- 
nocence by  the  Law,  that  was  enaded  to  protect  it ; 
he  turns  the  Sanftuary  into  a  Butchery,  and  ftabs  Juftice 
at  the  Foot  of  her  own  Altar. 

3- 

When  folid  Reafons  fupport  both  Sides,  Right  lies' in 
the  dark,  and  therefore  you  may  plead  for  either,  but 
not  for  both  ;  for  which  Party  foever  has  Right,  you  are 
fure  to  be  in  the  Wrong  :  Two  can  have  no  Title,  in 
folidum^  to  the  fame  thing.  Indeed,  to  take  with  both 
Hands  is  a  prefent  Remedy  againil  an  empty  Pocket,  but 
a  Poifon  to  the  Confcience:  For  double  Fees  opprefs  the 
Stomach;  nor  is  there  any  Cure  but  a  Vomit,  that  is, 
Reftitution.  Such  Men  are  Nufance?  to  Society;  and 
for  my  Part  I  am  of  the  Satyr's  Opinion  in  the  Fable, 
that  it's  dangerous  to  truft  one  that  blows  hot  and  cold; 
nor  would  I  have  any  more  to  do  with  him,  than  with 
an  Italian  Bravo,  who  will  difpatch  my  Enemy  for  a 
Crown,  and  my  felf  for  a  couple.  Thofe  old  Ifraelites 
that  halted  between  Bell  and  the  true  God,  were  nei- 
ther ftaunch  yews,  nor  thorough-pac'd  Gentiles^  but  a 
Compound  of  two  Species  united  in  one  Monfter.  What 
are  our  j^^f-^-of-both  lide  Gentlemen,  but  an  Oft-fpring 
of  th»  fame  Race?  They  plead  for  Jullice  on  the  one 

fide 


528      ^he  Gentleman  Inftruffed. 

fide  of  the  Mouth,  and  againft  it  on  the  other;  proteft 
it,  and  profecute  it  in  the  fame  Moment,  and  fo  cheat 
both  Clients  and  themfelves  into  the  Bargain :  Whofo- 
ever  buys  either  Wealth  or  Honour  at  the  Price  of  a 
Crime,  over  purchafes.  Tell  me  not,  There  muji  be  no 
interfering  between  Bujinefs  and  Religion^  that  if  the  Pul- 
pit wtll  not  agree  with  the  Bar,  we  r/iuji  thri%<e  in  the 
IVorld^  and  make  the  mojl  of  Labour.  I  am  apt  to  be- 
lieve thofe  unchriftian  Principles  have  made  the  very 
Laws  a  greater  Grievance,  than  thofe  that  break  them  ; 
that  they  have  heaved  fome  into  fair  Livings,  and  others 
out  of  them ;  and  that  they  permit  not  Confcience  to  grow 
too  hard  for  Intereft:  But  hov\'ever.  Sir,  if  the  Bar  be 
at  Variance  with  the  Bible,  whatever  you  gain  in  Hand, 
will  bear  no  Proportion  with  what  you  muft  expedl  in 
Reverfion.  For  I  cannot  think  that  he  makes  the  moll 
of  his  Parts,  who  writes  and  pleads  himfelf  into  ten 
thoufand  Pounds /'^r  Annum,  for  fome  Years,  and  into 
inconceivable  Torments  for  an  Eternity.  But  you  muft 
thrive  in  the  World !  In  God's  Name,  provided  the 
Means  be  handfome,  neither  unjuft  before  God,  nor  fcan- 
dalous  in  the  Sight  of  Men  ;  but  let  me  tell  you,  he  who 
refolves  to  rife  is  already  within  an  AceofbeingaCheatj 
it's  ten  to  one  he  never  formalizes  upon  the  Means ;  when 
Covetoufnefs  has  got  the  Reins,  there  is  no  holding  it  in 
with  Notions. 

4- 
You  muft  not  draw  out  Law- fuits  mSaculaSteculotum, 
nor  ftretch  them  in  Lengths,  till  a  poor  Client  lofes  both 
Patience  and  Money;  this  is  to  join  Murder  to  Robbe- 
ry ;  to  lake  a  Man's  Purfe  with  one  Hand,  and  his  Life 
with  the  other;  it's  a  Medley  of  Cruelty  and  Injuftice ; 
firft  put  me  upon  the  Rack,  between  Hope  and  Fear, 
and  then  force  me  to  pay  the  Executioner  for  my  Tor- 
ment. A  Suit  now  runs  for  Life,  and  oftentimes  defccnds 
down  to  the  fourth  Generation.  So  that  the  Law  is  a  La- 
byrinth ;  when  once  you  are  engaged,  there  is  no  Retreat ; 
if  you  are  ftrait-handed,  the  Lawyer  becomes  refty,  he 
will  not  ftir,  and,  like  an  ignis  fatuus,  he  leaves  you  in  the 
Mire;  if  you  fee  him  high,  and  rain  down  upon  him 
plentiful  Showers  of  Guineas,  he  fpins  out  the  Caufe  to 
drein  your  Pocket ;  fo  that  he  cither  docs  too  much,  or 
too  little,  and  perpetuates  Difputes  no  Icf^'  by  being  too 

well 


The  Gentleman  Itijlru^ed.      525? 

Veil  fee'd,  than  ill:  Every  one  complains  of  the  Grie- 
vance; however,  it  goes  on,  and  like  to  continue  till 
our  Benchers  have  cither  quietus  eft,  and  Morels  Utopian 
Gentlemen  are  call'd  to  the  Bar,  and  the  Bench)  in  their 
Leather-Breeches, 

S- 

There  mud  be  no  crofs-biting  Evidences,  nor  frighting  5 
ho  laugliing,  no  queftioning  them  out  of  Truth  and  their 
Senfes;  to  baffle  a  true  Evidence  is  no  lefs  unjuft,  than 
to  countenance  Perjury.  This  is  reported  to  have  been 
faid  at  the  Bar,  but  by  no  means  on  the  Bench-  l^^'el/y 
good  Man  Leather-Breeches  ,(faid  once  a  grave  Judge  from 
the  Bench)  what  have  you  for  Swear  in'^l  He  fuppofed  a 
Pealof  Laughter  might  difmount  the  Clown,  ruffle  his 
Memory,  and  make  him  trip  in  his  Difpofition  ;  but  he: 
piiftook  his  Man,  and  met  with  his  Match;  the  Fellow 
was  too  fturdy  to  be  feared  by  Furs  or  Scarlet  ;  or  to 
jQinchforaSarcafm,  My  Lord,  hadyouno  more  for  Lyings 
replied  he,  than  I  for  Swearing,  you  might  have  wore 
Leather-Breeches Jiill.\  Now  a  Man,  who  upon  fo  folerhn 
an  Occafion  dares  affront  a  legal  Witnefs,  will  certainly 
at  a  dead-hft  fuborn  a  falfe  one  ;  and  though  his  Defign 
mifcarried,  his  Malice  v/as  at  full  Swarth.  I  know  we 
are  pleafed  to  call  this  unhandfcmc  dealing  with,  but 
Names  makej  no  Alteration  in  Things,  The  Scripture 
terms  it  cheating,  and  we  muil:  rath6r  appeal  to  its.  Ver- 
di6t,  than  to  Cullom,  or  Calapine.  Qjtevedo  tells  i:3, 
that  at  the  Sound  of  the  Trumpet  to  Judgment,  an  At- 
torney would  have  demurred,  upon  pretence  he  had  got  a 
Soul  was  none  of  his  own,  and  that  his  Body  and  Soid 
^ere  not  Fellows.  J.  believe  fome  Lawyers  vvill  have  more 
Confcience  in.  the  next  World,  than  they  have  in  this  j 
and,  at  the  Day  of  Account  wifli,  that  they  had  made 
over  their  Souls  to  their  Legatees,  as  well  as  their  Ellates ; 
but  they'll  not  dare  to  pretend  their  Souls  and  Bodies  arb 
not  Fellows;  for,  alas,  they  have  gone  halves  in  the 
Crime,  as  well  as  the  Fleafure  and  Profit,  and^  by  con- 
lequentej  mull  fli^re  in  the  Punifliment. 

A  Man  that  will  thrive,  eiiiily  ilides  into  anlnjudice; 
but  then  it's  almoft  as  hard  torecoVef,  as  to  return  from 
Hell :.  For  lajuftice  iecms  to  be  one  of  tljofe  Grimes  that 
are  neither  forgiven  in  this  World,  nor  in  the  next.  In- 
deed a  M.in  may  repent,  but  the  Ci^nditions  ai'.;  lb  hard^- 
i\'i  m  ft? 


530      "fhe  Gentleman  Inftm^eci, 

\'o  mortifying,  that  not  one  of  a  thoufand  will  fign  them. 
For,  in  fine,  an  Injuftice  is  not  pardon'd  without  a  full 
Reitituiion,  and  Reparation  of  Damages;  and  thefe  run 
.often  as  high  ss  the  Lawyer's  Gains ;  notwithftanding, 
tho'  you  have  raked  together  ten  thoufand  Pounds  per 
Annum^  by  defending  unjuil  Suits,  and  ftretching  out  juft 
ones ;  by  baffling  true  Evidences,  or  bribing  Knights  of 
tlie  Foff,  you  inufl:  difgorge  and  fall  into  your  own  firft 
Poverty,  as  naked  of  Support  as  when  you  hrft  fet  out. 
Now,  is  it  not  againfl  the  Grain  to  expofeyour  Reputa- 
tion to  Cenfure  and  Obloquy,  to  fhrink  in  your  Figure, 
i^nd  to  fink  into  nothing?  However,  thefe  hitter  Pills 
mufl:  down,  unlefs  you  can  refolve  to  welter  in  Fire  and 
Brimftonc eternally.  It's  hard,  I  confefs,  to  fling  up  a 
fairEilate;  yet  better,  than  to  fling  up  all  Title  to  Hea- 
ven, and  to  entail  upon  you  God's  Curfein  this  World;, 
and  his  Vengeance  in  the  other. 

No  Man  m  his  Wits  would  purchafe  an  Eftate  for  his 
Child  at  the  Expence  of  his  Life ;  why  then  will  he  at 
the  Price  of  his  Soul?  Is  this  fo  contemptible,  and  that 
of  fo  fuperlative  a  Value?  One  muft  h^ve  a  faint  Idea 
of  future  Punilhments  and  Rewards,  thus  to  mifplacehis 
Judgment  and  Efteem ;  he  mull  fuppofe  his  Soul  vaniflies 
into  nothing,  when  his  Body  falls  into  Duft;  that  the 
River  oi P bisgethan  is  as  real  and  tormenting  as  the  Lake 
of  Brimftone,  and  that  tlie  Pains  of  the  Devils  and  dam-  - 
ncd,  as  romantick  as  thole  of  Tytius  and  Sxfipbtis :  In 
line,  at  moft,  that  Heaven  is  no  more  pleafing  than  Spring- 
Garden,  nor  Hell  no  moi  e  tormenting  than  Newgate  or 
the  Compter. 

Now  the  beft  Method  to  avoid  this  Difficulty  is  to 
avoid  the  Sin  ;  it's  ten  times  more  eafy  to  abftain  from 
Rapine,  than  to  repent  of  it.  it's  not  hard  to  keep  within 
the  Bounds  of  Juftice,  if  Avarice  get  not  the  Afcendant ; 
but  if  this  Vice  runs  away  with  our  Heart,  we  Hop  at 
nothing.  Strong  Defires  are  llrong  Temptations  to  ufe 
ill  Means;  in  the  hurry  of  Paflion,  Confcience  is  feldom 
heard;  he  thatisbent  upon  a  thing  will  have  it  right  or 
wrong. 

Nor  will  this  Refervednefs  baulk  your  Fortune  :   A   • 
Lawyer  that  has  the  Reputation  c  f  an  honed  Man,  will 
always  find  Employment.     For  who  will  not  rather  put 
his  Concerns  in  the  Hands  of  one  who  makes  a  Confci- 
ence 


'The  Gentleman  Injiru^ied.     ^S ^ 

fence  of  over-reaching  a  Client,  than  lay  himfelf  at  th2 
Mercy  of  a  Knave?  Honefty  is  efteemM  by  all,  the'  few 
go  to  the  Price  of  the  Furchafe,  and  even  thofe  who 
practice  it  the  leaft,  are  moll  eager  Pretenders  to  it.  In- 
deed your  Fortune  will  not  rife  fo  faft,  but  then  the  Edi- 
fice will  be  more  firm  and  lalling  :  Thofe  Buildings  that 
rife  on  a  fudden,  fall  in  a  Moment;  like  precipitated 
Births,  they  are  never  long-lived,  and  generally  bury  the 
Builder  under  the  R.uins.  Gain  never  relifhes  better  than 
when  it's  juft,  and  Advantage  isalmoft  doubled  by  being 
lawful.  Pray,  Sir,  be  not  difpleafed  at  my  Freedom  ; 
fuch  plain  Dealing  is  neceflary  to  recover  Juftice,  and 
difarm  its  Enemy.  I  expofe  the  Pradice  to  reform  the 
Man.  I  may  perchance  draw  upon  me  the  Anger  of 
fome  guilty  Benchers,  and  expofe  my  Perfon  to  Calum- 
ny and  Difcountenance ;  but  1  fliall  only  pity  their  Blind- 
nefs,  and  defpife  their  Malice ;  for  fear  not  to  crofs  upon 
a  Vice  tho'  never  fo  prevailing,  nor  tooppofe  a  Grievance 
tho'  back'd  by  Number,  and  fupported  by  Prefcription. 
I  will  pleafe  no  Man  to  his  Difadvantage,  nor  fix  him  in 
an  Error  by  a  Complement^  nor  carefs  him  out  of  his 
Duty  and  Happinefs. 

Philarji^yras  ftood  upon  Thorns ,  and  heard  the  Dif- 
courfe  with  a  thoufand  Grimaces ;  he  was  Proof  to  home- 
ly and  good  Counfel,  by  a  Kind  of  Antiperiftafis^  har- 
dened in  111;  you  might  as  well  have  preadi'dan./ii^^/tf- 
pian  into  a  IVhite^  as  this  Attorney  into  an  honeft  Chri- 
ftian.  Ill  Habits  hung  not  loofe  upon  him,  but  twilled 
themfelves  with  his  Nature  ;  they  funk  into  his  very  Soul^ 
and  debauch'dhim  in  Pradtice  and  Principle  too. 

Look  ye.  Sir,  faid  he  to  Eufebius^  you  have  regaled 
me  with  Cant,  withFlourifhes,  and  a  glut  of  Cafuillry  j 
but  I  will  not  be  beaten  out  of  my  Road  by  hard  Words, 
Univerfity-Jargon,  and  ftrain'd  Speculations.  I  live  by 
the  Law,  not  by  Cafuiftry  ;  and  that  ftands  upon  Prece- 
dent, not  Reafon :  How  many  brave  Gentlemen  have 
beat  great  Eftates  out  of  the  Law,  by  the  Force  of  Me- 
rit and  Induftry,  and  plead  Coronets  on  their  CoacheSj 
and  themfelves  into  the  Houfe  of  Peers  I  They  work'd  on 
the  fame  Materials  I  do  ;  rteered  by  the  fame  CompafSj 
and  were  governed  by  the  fame  Principle  :  Yet,  where 
are  thefe  Reftitutionb!  Believe  me,  Sir,  your  Dodfrine 
ji  not  calcuhied  ibrour  Elcvjition  or  Atc.     Prefcription 

M  tn  2     "  run5 


532     The  Gentleman  InJiru^eS, ' 

runs  ngainft  fuch  out-dated  PraftiCes,  and  that  is  Lawj^ 
A  A4an  that  will  part  with  an  Eftate,  deferves  none  ;  and 
he  that  returns  a  Lordjhip  out  of  Tendernefs  of  Confci- 
ence,  refigns  his  Wits  in  the  Bargain.  Pray  let  us  not 
interfere;  keep  your  Eftate,  and  fufter  me  to  glean  up  a 
handlbme  Livelihood.  Confcience  will  not  interpofe  be* 
tween  me  and  Profit;  Wealth  brings  Eale,  and  Poverty- 
hangs  a  Man  upon  the  Tenters. 

When  Philargyrus  was  gone,  £«yie^/«j  returned  to  him- 
felf ;  the  parting  Complement  of  the  Lawyer  had  almofi: 
feared  him  into  a  Trance  :  He  was  at  a  ftand  to  deter- 
mine whether  he  was  above  ground  or  under,  in  Hell 
among  the  Damned,  or  in  Englafid  among  the  Living. 
Such  Stroaks  of  Libertinifm  fat  on  every  Tittle  of  his 
Difcourfe ;  fuch  Sallies  of  Atheifm,  that  one  would  have 
thought  the  Man  had  trick'd  himfelf  not  only  out  of  Re- 
ligion, but  out  of  human  Nature  ;  there  was  no  Start  of 
Pafiion,  no  fudden  Surprize  to  difcompofe  him,  he  fpoke 
under  cool  Blood,  under  Thought  and  P.efle6tion  ;  all 
thefe  Circumftances  enflame  the  Guilt,  and  fwell  the 
Reckoning :  This  Farewel  damp'd  Enfebius^  and  brought 
into  his  Mind  thofe  uncomfortable  Words  of  our  Blelled 
Saviour^  Many  are  called^  but  few  are  chofea.  To  what 
Height  of  Madnefs,  faid  Eufebius.  does  Avarice  pufli 
Men,  when  once  it  has  got  the  Maftery  of  Confcience  ? 
To  pawn  ones  Soul  for  a  Fee,  and  Heaven  for  a  double 
one :  Is  it  not  Frenzy  to  Excefs ;  and  Lunacy  beyond  Ex- 
prelFion  ?  All  the  Mad-houfes  in  the  Nation  are  unable 
to  furnifh  fuch  Inftances  of  Folly  ;  fuch  Strains  of  Di- 
Itradion  and  Stupidity.  Did  Men  believe  no  future 
State,  I  conceive  they  might  make  the  mod  of  this  ;  they 
might  forage  Hpon  their  Neighbour's  Land,  and  cruize 
upon  their  Purics,  and  llore  their  Magazines  with  Plunder 
and  Rapine.  But  to  believe  the  Dodrine  of  Chrift,  and 
to  adl  by  that  of  Hobbs ;  to  own  a  Hell,  and  fweat  to 
feel  it,  is  extraordinary  and  furpriling.  Lei  my  Soul  be 
rather  vjith  the  old  Phihfuphers^  than  with  thofe  of  our 
modern  Lawyers ;  perchance  they  might  have  had  lefs 
Faith,  but  I  am  fure  they  had  more  Honefty  ;  and  if  their 
Religion  wasworfe,  their  Pra^ftice  was  better. 


jyiA^ 


S'he Gentleman  Infiru^ed,     53 3 

DIALOGUE    IV. 

Horn  Eufebius  behaved  himfelf  towards  his  Neighbours. 

T^HO'  Eufebius  lived  in  Retreat,  he  had  notforfworn 
Company,  jior  difbandcd  Trom  Society.  Piety  is  nei- 
ther lullen  nor  Iblitary ;  it  cares  not  indeed  to  be  crowded 
with  Vifitors,  nor  always  to  be  tied  up  to  Ceremonies,  to 
be  peftered  with  Flies,  nor  tormented  vilih  Flattcfers; 
yet  it's  never  behind-hand  in  paying  thofe  Duties  Civility 
requires,  and  Decency  calls  for :  He  liv'd  in  a  neigh- 
bourly Correfpondence  with  all  the  Gentry,  and  received 
and  returned  both  Vifits  and  Invitations;  His  Temper 
was  too  ferious  to  be  aftefted  by  the  younger  Fry,  that 
place  Mirth  in  Noife,  and  Diveriion  in  Extravagances ; 
that  meafure  a  Welcome,  not  by  the  Bottle,  but  the  Gal- 
ion;  and  fuppofe  they  are  not  treated  like  Men,  unleis 
they  are  drunk  down  to  the  Beaft ;  but  if  thofe  Sparks 
^ad  fmall  Inclination  to  his  Company,  he  had  lefs  to 
theirs,  and  rather  kept  his  Time  and  Liberty  to  himlelf , 
than  fling  them  away  upon  fuch  infignificant  Trifles ;  he 
neither  could  mend  their  Morals,  nor  endure  their  Follies; 
however,  he  diltinguifiied  their  Qiiality  from  their  Vices ; 
and  tho'  upon  Occafion  he  Uih'd  ihefe,  he  always  treated 
their  Perfons  with  Regard.  Nay,  he  fo  timed  his  Repre- 
henfions,  that  they  rather  feemed  to  fall  in  by  Hazard, 
than  defigning ;  and  tho'  he  fpoke  in  Jeft,  he  inftrucfted 
in  Earneft.  In  fine,  he  rather  glanced  at  their  Faults  by 
{honl/sauefido^s,  than  attack'd  them  in  Form,  anden- 
deavour'd  to  raife  a  Blufli,  not  their  Anger;  for  he  knew 
that  Choler  cramps  Reafon,  and  when  this  flies  off:'  the 
Hinges,  a  Man  is  no  more  lit  to  receive  good  Counfel 
than  a  Tempeft. 

For  this  Reafon  he  ufcd  to  fay.  Prodigals  muft  rather 
be  reclaimed  by  Surprize,  than  Force,  by  Kindnefs  than 
Reproach:  They  will  follow,  but  not  drive;  they  en- 
dure a  Remedy  if  applied  with  a  gentle  Hand,  but  then 
they  wince  if  you  gall  them ;  like  that  of  Children,  their 
Phyfick  muft  be  palatable  ;  the  Pills  v/ill  not  down  un- 
lefs  they  are  gilt ;  he  therefore  difapproved  thofe  hot- 
headed Zealots,  who  give  Vice  no   tolerable  Quarter; 

M  m  5  they 


534      ^^^  Gentleman  Injirn^ed, 

they  treat  it  with  the  fame  Freedom  inScarlet,  as  in  Linr 
fey-woolfey,  and  catechile  a  Lord  with  no  more  Cere- 
mony than  a  Peafant:  But  they  take  falfe  Meafures  ; 
great  Men  mud  be  complemented  into  their  Duty,  as 
well  as  out  of  it.  Civility  works  more  kindly  upon 'em 
than  Rudenefs. 

Though  the  young  Sparks  kept  aloof  from  Etifebius, 
the  more  fober  coveted  bis  Acquaintance;  he  v/as  grave, 
yet  he  had  nothing  ftarch'd,  nothing  ftilf;  his  Converfa- 
tion  was  eafy,  and  he  always  modelled  his  Difcourfe  to 
the  Time  and  Company  ■■,  he  hated  thofe  old  Tops  who 
prefs  for  Submiflion  upon  the  Younger,  with  a  ftately 
Mean  and  referved  Air;  and  fuppofe  Age  and  Grey-hairs; 
give  them  a  juft  Title  to  Refpeft.  This  is,  faid  he,  to. 
lax  Converfation,  and  to  put  the  Company  under  Con- 
tribution for  Defence  and  Regard ;  it  renders  the  Preten- 
der cheap,  and  Society  a  Nufance.  In  line,  he  never 
declined  any  juftCondefcenlion,  and  would  rather  ftretch 
Complaifaiice  a  Point,  than  fcrew  up  his  Gravity  to  Re- 
fervednefs  or  Importunity. 

He  was  a  declared  Enemy  to  Prodigality  and  Nearnefs, 
he  proportion'd  his  Expences,  as  I  have  faid,  to  his  In- 
come ;  he  never  fpared  Money  when  Occalions  required 
it;  nor  flung  it  z'WTiy  mal  apropo^  to  pleafe  a  Frolick  ; 
he  thought  both  Extreams  equally  vicious,  that  a  fordid 
Parfimony  was  ungenteel,  and  Profufenefs  foolifh.  When 
he  treated  his  Friends,  he  affected  Neatnefs  rather  than 
Grandeur,  and  rather  fought  to  i^ratify  the  Tafte  with 
Delicacies,  than  the  Eye  with  Variety;  for  Feafts  are  to 
entertain  the  Palate,  not  Curiofity.  In  drinking  he  fol- 
lowed Affuerui'^  Orders,  Vi^um  quo^ue  ut  magfj'ficentia 
Regia  d:gnum  erat^  abunda'as  Cif  piwc'tptatm  ponebatur^ 
nee  erat  qui  nolentes  cogeret  ad  bibendtim  :  fed  ficut  Rex 
jlatrterat  praponens  menfisjiiigulns  de  Principibui  fuis^ut 
fumeret  nnufquifque  quod  vellet  ;  lie  thought  it  no  lefs  un- 
civil to  prefs  his  Guefts  to  drink,  than  to  ftint  them,  and 
could  not  endure  an  Englip  Principle,  that  Cuftom  has 
naturalized,  and  Intemperance  has  made  free  Denizon  of 
the  Country.  A  Man  thinks  himfclf  welcome  by  hnlves,, 
that  is  not  quite  drowned  in  a  Barrel,  and  ill  ufed  till  his 
Body  be  turned  into  a  Hogfhead,  and  his  Head  into  a 
Wind-mill. 

This 


7%e  Gentleman  Infiru^ed.     5  35 

This  Conduft,  fo  contrary  to  the  eftablifh'd  Laws  of 
Englijh  HofpilaUty,  difpleafed  feme;  and  a  Gentleman 
took  once  the  Freedom  to  inform  him,  that  he  lay  under 
adifadvantageous  Charafter  for  his  FrugaUty.  Sir,  laid 
he,  I  doubt  not  of  your  Generolity,  but  People  unac- 
quainted with  your  Temper  impeach  you  v/ith  Avarice ; 
a  fingle  Bottle  will  not  wafh  off' the  Afperfion  ;  you  muft 
marfhal  'em  upon  the  Table  by  Dozens :  We  love  to  look 
our  Enemies  in  the  Face,  and  muft  be  carried  from  the 
Table,  as  well  as  from  the  Breach;  for  we  drink  as  well 
as  fight,  like  Men,  and  all  your  French  Ragoufts  are 
unpalatable,  unlefs  high-feafon'd  with  Burgundy  and 
Claret.  When  the  Ladies  retire,  adjourn  to  a  Bye-room, 
and  be  fure  to  march  at  the  Head  of  the  Brigade,  and 
lead  it  upon  the  Attack  :  Let  your  Provilions  anfwer  the 
Number  of  th^  Aflailants;  an  EngUJhman  can  cope 
with  as  many  Bottles  of  French  Wine,  as  Frenchmen  i 
and  you  know  one  to  fix  is  an  Over-match:  Thus,  Sir, 
you'lhctrieve  your  Honour,  and  recover  your  Reputati- 
on from  the  Imputation  of  Stinginefs,  and  ungenteel  Slur 
of  Parfimony. 

This  Gentleman  had  a  real  Efteem  for  Eufei>iiis,  but 
none  for  his  Fraftice ;  he  bore  an  Office,  and  poflefs'd  a 
fair  Eftate  in  the  Country.  He  was  a  good  Companion 
at  the  Pot,  and  an  Adorer  of  the  Pipe :  He  laugh'd  at 
thofe  who  placed  Glory  in  Wounds  and  broken  Legs, 
and  run  their  Heads  againft  Baftions  and  Half-moons  for 
a  Place  in  the  London  Gazettey  or  the  Pojl-  Boy ;  he  would 
not  venture  one  fingle  Pulfe  for  the  taking  Lijle  or  Tbar- 
Kay,  nor  fling  his  Money  upon  Do6lors  and  Surgeons, 
much  lefs  be  carried,  fike  a  Calf,  from  the  Attack  to 
his  Tent,  or  his  Grave:  No,  faid  he,  I  came  not  into 
the  World  to  be  cannonaded,  or  bagonetted  out  of  it ; 
I  will  nurfe  up  Life  to  the  Extent  of  Nature,  and  leave 
it  in  my  Bed,  not  in  a  Ditch. 

However,  tho'  the  Deputy-Lieutenant  had  no  Inclina- 
tion for  Camp-glory,  he  was  ambitious  of  Fame;  but 
then  he  refolved  to  fetch  it  rather  from  the  Cellar,  than 
the  Field ;  and  indeed,  he  was  a  kind  of  Flagman^  a 
Vice-Admiral^m^Xi  thofe  Expeditions  of  Good  fellowfhip; 
M  m  4  fo 


53 1^     ^loe  G  E  i;  T  L  E  M  A  N  Infinifiecl 

{o  beaten  to  the  Trade,  that  no  Body  durft  contend  for 
the  Command.  So  that,  though  by  Commiflion  he  was 
only  Deputy-Lieutenant,  his  topping  Embellifhments  en- 
titled him  to  the  Lieutenancy  of  the  Country.  I  have 
feen  Right  Woifliipful  knock  down  half" a  Dozen  under 
the  Table  in  a  trice,  and  then  he  will  clap  and  crow 
like  a  Game-cock.  Nay,  he  fwore  he  deferv'd  a  publick 
Complement  for  the  Exploit,  as  well  as  our  great  Duke 
for  his  Blangy ;  becaufe  he  flew  more  with  his  own  Hand, 
and  loft  fewer  than  this  mighty  General ;  nay,  and  kept 
the  Field  into  the  Bargain.  A  Friend  defired  him  not 
to  proftitute  his  Qiiality  and  Commiflion  to  Scorn  and 
Obloquy,  by  fo  mean,  fo  unmanly  a  Vice ;  but  he  an- 
fwer'd,  thofe  lie  under  a  great  Miftake,  that  mark'd  it 
with  Unmannerlinefs.  We  drink  like  Beafts,  faid  he, 
When  We  drink  leaft,  but  like  Men  when  we  drink  till 
we  can  neither  go  nor  Hand, 

Eufebhis  was  ftruck  at  his  quaint  Harangue,  and  more 
at  his  Principles  :  He  thought  Caution  it  felf  might  fome- 
times  be  overfeen,  and  Sobriety  trepanned  by  Company 
into  Litemperance ;  but  to  gage  Breeding  by  the  Barrel, 
to  turn  Drinking  into  an  Employment,  and  the  Infamy  of 
Drunkennefs  into  a  Perfedion  of  human  Naturewas  ex- 
traordinary ;  he  thank'd  the  Gentleman  for  his  Advice, 
but  defired  leave  to  follow  his  own  Method,  till  he  had 
offered  feme  better  Reafon  to  change  it. 

For,  Sir,  faid  he,  you  perfuade  me  to  refcue  my 
Honour  from  the  Imputation  of  a  pretended  Vice,  by 
committing  a  real  one.  You  provoke  me  by  the  Motives 
of  Glory,  to  Adions  that*  degrade  a  good  Man,  and  force 
an  ill  one  even  to  blufli.  You  mifapply  the  Notions  of 
Honour  and  Infamy  i  ^you  blame  and  praife  in  the  wrong 
Place ;  and  thus  you  pronounce  Monllroufnefs  to  be  Pro- 
portion, and  the  Blcmiflics  of  Mankind  to  makeup  its 
JBeauties.  I  lie,  you  fay,  undci*  the  Afperfion  of  Ava- 
rice; and  nothing  will  remove  the  Calumny,  unlefs  I 
drovv'n  my  Gucfts  in  Claret  and  Canary.  I  confefs,  the 
Remedy  feems  fen  times  worfe'  than  the  Difeafe ;  I  would 
rather  be  pointed  at  for  a  M/fer,  than  be  condemned 
for  a  Prji»kar£i ;  that  Vice  indeed  is  uncreditable,  but 
this  is  brutal ;  ihat  makes  an  ill  Man,  but  this  throws 

him 


fhe  Gentleman  hJlruBed.     ^^  y 

hlmoutofiiis  Species,  and  turns  him  into  aBeaft;  nay, 
lays  him  below  the  vileft ;  for  he  is  a  Beaft  of  Man's 
Creation,  and  by  confequence  more  monftrous  than  the 
loweft  Fart  of  God's,  or  rather  he  is  a  reafonable  Beaft, 
and  irrational  Man, 

"  What  a  noble  Speftacle  muft  it  be  to  fee  a  Club  of 
Gentlemen  of  Figure  and  Quality  metamorphofed  into 
'Bethlems^  and  their  Palaces  into  Mad-houfes ;  to  fee  'em 
play  the  Ape  and  the  Swine,  and  run  out  into  Lengths  of 
Folly  and  Extravagance?  No  doubt,  it's  an  honourable 
Employment  for  a  Mafter  to  play  the  Mimic k  and  Scara- 
mouch before  his  Men,  to  entertain  them  with  Farce 
Gratis,  and  to  fling  a  merry  Interlude  into  their  Salary  ; 
to  out-do  the  Roman  Bacchanals  in  Diftra6lions,  and  to 
ftrain  Jollitry,  not  into  annual,  (for  once  a  Year  a  wife 
Man  may  have  leave  to  be  mad)  but  into  a  daily 
Madnefs. 

Good  God !  What  a  Scene  did  I  once  behold  at  Sir 
B — F — 's !  It  gave  me  fuch  a  Surfeit  of  Wine,  that 
.for  a  Twelve-month  the  very  fight  of  a  Bottle  call  me 
into  a  Sweat  and  Agony.     I  began  almoft  to  believe 
that  Pythagoras's  Tranfmigration   was  rather  a  Trutb^ 
than  Allegory  or  Fable;  for  in  the  Space  of  an  Hour 
a  dozen  Gentlemen  commenced  Beads,  and  all  of  dif- 
ferent Species ;  there  were  j^pes.  Bears,  Lyons,  and  Jack' 
calls :  Some  roared,  others  yeiyd,  and  others  hoivl'd.     In 
one    Corner  there   was   making  Qiiarrels,    in    another 
Love;  here   they   fung,    there   they  blafphemed;    they 
kifs'd  in  one  Place,  and  box'd  in  another:  In  fine,  there 
was  a  Medley  of  Farce  and  Tragedy,  of  Folly  and  Mad- 
nefs, a  Subje6t  for  Laughter  and  Tears ;  but  when  they 
began  to  return  Home,  they  play'd  all  at  crofs  Qiieftions, 
the  Pollilion  crept  behind  the  Coach,  the  Coach-man  in- 
to it,  and  the  Mailer  into  the  Box  :  For  Wine  is  a  Level- 
ler, it  either  raifes  the  Man  to  the  ?v/[afi:er,  or  throws 
down  the  Mafter  to  the  Man.     When  Reafon  fleep?, 
Extravagance  breaks  loofe ;  Qiiality  and  Peafantry  pig 
together;  there  is  no  difference  between  a  Lord  and  a 
Lacquey,  but  that  he  is  more  to  blame;  in  a  Word,  they 
were  in  no  Condition  for  a  Journey ;  fo  that  the  Gentle- 
men were  conveyed  into  Beds,  and  the  Equipage  camp'd 
in  the  Court, 
»■  ■ 

Well, 


53 S*      ^he  Gentleman  InJiruBed, 

Well,  Sir!  reply'd  the  Deputy-Lieutenant,  OverT 
fights  will  happen,  but  Good-felIo\v{hip  muft  go  on,  and 
a  neighbourly  Correfpondence  be  improved. 

As  much  Good- fellow fliip,  faid  Enfehius^  and  Kind- 
nefs  as  you  pleafe,  provided  you  flufli  right  Notions,  and 
frame  an  Idea  of  both  by  the  Rule  of  Reafon,  not  of  Cu- 
ftom;  but  I  cannot  perfuade  my  felf,  the  Laws  of  Good- 
fellowfhip  command  me  to  drink  away  my  Health  and 
my  "Wits  for  a  Frolick:  Health  is  no  Nufance,  nor  Rea- 
ibn  a  Burthen.  If  you  had  a  fancy  to  a  Cup  of  Poifon, 
does  the  Ceremony  of  Good-fellowfhip  order  me  to 
pledge  you  in  the  fame  Liquor?  Now  over-drinking 
turns  the  beft  Ale  in  the  Nation,  and  the  bed  Wines  in 
France  into  Poifon.  Indeed,  they  difpatch  not  by  fudden 
Aflault,  as  Ratsbane  or  Arfenick,  but  by  Mine  and 
Siege ;  however,  their  Operation  is  fure,  and  though  their 
Malignity  be  flow,  it's  mortal. 

Nor  can  I  think  any  Principle  of  Friendfhip  obliges  me 
to  help  a  Man  to  deftroy  his  Eftate,  to  hnk  his  Family 
into  Beggary,  his  Perfon  into  Contempt,  and  his  Body 
into  Difeafes:  Now  your  Kindnefs  wades  further  into 
Mifchief;  I  muft  dofe  his  Reafon,  and  ftab  his  Soul, 
nay,  and  my  own  too.  No  Man  certainly  dares  own 
this  for  Kindnefs,  who  is  not  adlually  drunk.  Befides, 
you  may  as  well  entertain  Heat  with  Cold,  as  Friendfhip 
with  Drinking,  Alas,  good  Sir,  when  Wine  flies  into 
the  Head,  Glafles  fly  about  the  Ears;  for  when  once 
Reafon  is  drowned,  Paflion  always  fwirrfs  on  the  Surface  ; 
moft  of  thofe  Quarrels  that  end  in  Blood,  begin  in  Winej 
Jollitry  drunk  too  high,  degenerates  into  Fury. 

But,  befides,  Drunkennefs  is  a  Sin,  and  of  a  very  black 
Dye;  it's  one  of  thofe  that  (huts  Heaven's  Gate,  and 
opens  that  of  Hell  to  the  Offender.  Now,  tho'  it  were 
as  genteel  as  it's  clownifh,  that  very  Confideration  (hould 
fright  thofe  from  the  Pradice,  that  bound  not  their  Hope 
or  Fear  with  Sight  and  Sen[e ;  Kindnefs  and  Good-fellow- 
fhip  muft  not  take  Place  of  our  eternal  Welfare,  nor  Ce- 
remony of  our  Duty.  If  therefore  Drunkennefs  be  a 
Sin,  is  it  none  to  invite,  none  to  perfuade  a  Neighbour 
to  it?  Muft  a  Gentleman  be  mark'd  with  Infamy,  be- 
caufe  he  will  not  turn  off'  Confcience  ;  nor  purchafe  the 
Reputation  of  Houfe- keeping,  at  the  Expence  of  his  Soul  ? 
I  am  not  fo  fond  of  Efteem  as  to  buy  it  by  a  bafe  A^^tion  i 

nor 


^he  Gentleman  Inftru^ed,    ^^^ 

nor  fo  fearful  of  Contempt  as  to  avoid  it  by  a  Sin.  I 
will  not  transform  my  felf  into  a  Brute  for  the  Reputati- 
on of  a  fine  Man,  nor  ftoop  to  the  Office  of  a  Tempter, 
for  the  Title  of  Generofity.  No,  no,  Sir^  in  my  Houfe 
Guefts  (hall  never  be  ftinted,  nor  forc'd.  Heave  them 
to  their  own  Difcretion,  and  invite  them  to  be  merry, 
but  not  to  be  mad.  I  love  a  cool  Head,  and  a  calm  Con- 
fcience;  and  I  had  rather  fee  Flights  of  Diftradlion  in 
Bethlem^  than  of  Extravagance  at  Home.  To  conclude, 
I  had  rather  be  reproach'd  for  Sobriety,  than  carefs'd  for 
intemperance;  and  lam poon'd  for  a  Virtue,  than  Pane- 
gyrick'd  for  a  Vice. 

•  Well,  well.  Sir,  replied  the  Knight,  we  will  not  fall 
out  for  the  Matter  :  Let  every  Man  take  his  Way ,  but, 
give  me  leave  to  tell  you,  Confcience  and  all  your  Fiddle- 
faddles  will  not  fcreen  you  from  Cenfure.  When  we  go 
to  a  Merry-meeting,  we  leave  that  Lum.ber  at  Home  ;  but 
when  we  are  fummoned  to  a  Qttarter-Sejfiuns,  or  fo,  then 
indeed  we  take  it  up  behind  us,  if  the  Horie  will  carry 
double,  for  though  it  may  be  of  Ufe  in  a  Bufinefs  of 
Menm  and  Tuum^  it's  a  Burthen  at  a  Feaft,  a  Controller 
of  Mirth,  and  a  Poifon  to  Good-fellowftiip. 

Eufehius  blefs'd  himfelf  at  the  grave  Gentleman's 
Preachment ;  to  hear  Magiftrates  plead  for  Riot,  and  Jn- 
ftices  of  Peace  for  Diforder,  feemed  furprizing  ;  but  the  E- 
vil  lies  deep,  there  is  no  removing  it ;  it's  become  a  Branch 
of  Engl'ijh  Property,  and  we  will  no  more  part  with  the 
Vice  of  Drinking,  than  with  our  Magna  Charta.  We 
have  received  it  from  our  Fore-fathers,  and  improv'd  the 
Talent  to  Admiration ;  one  Man  infedls  another,  and 
the  prefent  Set  of  Tiplers  will  hand  down  the  Difeafe  to 
their  Pofterity ;  and  thus  the  Diftemper  will  run  on  with- 
out Cure,  and  continue  without  End. 


DIALOGUE    V. 

Of  his  Recreations. 

JpUfebius  was  not  fo  engaged  in  Piety,  as  wholly  to  lay 
-f-'  afide  all  Recreation ;  he  knew  that  fome  Divertife- 
ment  was  neceflary  to  refrefh  the  Body,  and  unbend  the 
Mind ;  that  a  continual  Application  difpirits  the  one, 

founder^ 


540      The  Gentleman  Infiru^eL 

founders  the  other,  and  renders  both  unfit  for  Adion  ? 
but  then  he  took  care  not  to  turn  Diveriion  into  Bulinefs, 
nor  to  play  away  his  Time,  hke  Children,  in  Trifles. 
Age  had  taken  off  the  Paflion  he  had  for  the  Sport  of 
Hunting;  his  Body  could  not  endure  the  Violence,  and 
his  Inclination  carried  him  to  more  moderate  Exercifes; 
he  was  often  upon  the  Bowling-green  in  Summer,  and  to 
entertain  Converfation  would  take  a  Game  at  Cards  j 
but  then  he  play'd  for  Diveriion,  not  Gain  ;  and  would 
never  venture  more  upon  a  Caft,  than  he  could  lofe  with- 
out the  Danger  of  Impatience  ;  for  when  Bets  run  high. 
Solicitude  baulks  Pleafure,  and  the  Fear  of  lofing  turns 
Sport  into  Pain  and  Penance  ;  it  boils  up  the  Puffions  in- 
to a  Ferment,  heats  the  Blood,  and  then  an  unlucky  Hit 
flings  a  Man  upon  the  Tenters. 

Whatever  he  won  was  a  Bank  for  the  Poor  ;  a  kind  of 
Tecunia  Sacra^  always  employed  in  Charity ;  fo  that  he 
fell  upon  a  Secret  (more  beneficial  than  the  pretended 
Philofcpher's  Stone,  and  more  real)  of  turning  Diverfion 
into  Virtue,  and  of  raifing  the  moft  ordinary  and  loweft 
Actions  to  the  Dignity  of  the  moft  Divine.  Thus  at  once 
he  refrefh'd  his  Body,  and  improv'd  his  Time;  or  (in 
the  Apoftle's  Language)  pray'd  and  play'd,  recruited  his 
Spirits,  and  fupplied  his  Neighbour  j  pafs'd  his  Time  in 
Mirth,  and  yet  redeemed  it. 

However,  he  ufed  even  the  moft  harmlefs  Recreati- 
ons, as  I  faid,  like  Phylick  for  Health,  not  hke  Meat 
for  Suftenance,  for,  faid  he,  they  are  not  the  Bulinefs, 
either  of  a  Gentleman  or  of  a  Chriftian  ;  and  therefore 
whofoever  iuffers  them  to  ulurp  his  Time  (allow'd  for 
more  noble  Employments)  plays  the  Child,  tho'  not  the 
Innocent,  while  he  thus  trifles  away  his  Life,  and  Bowls 
and  Cards  away  thole  precious  Moments,  that  once  he 
will  recal  with  Tenrs  but  never  recover.  He  therefore 
retired  fo  foon  as  Civility  permitted,  and  entertained 
himfclf  with  reading;  but  he  never  would  open  a  Book 
that  ftruckat  Morality,  or  queft-oned  Religion  ;  the  one 
debauches  Prailice,  llie  other  Principle  ;  and  he  ufed 
to  fay,  bad  Books  are  the  'ij;'orie  for. being  well  writ j 
they  iubdue  almoft  without  Refiftance,  when  they  min- 
gle Corruption  with  Wit,  and  convey  Poifon  intoPlca- 
lurc;  but  he  fpent  whole  Hours  in  the  Ledure  of  thofe 
tha^  treat  of  Piety,  th.U  lighten  the  Undtrftanding,  and 

warm 


*the  Gentleman  Injru^ed.     541: 

%arm  the  Will  ;  that  point  out  the  Way  to  Virtue,  and^ 
with  a  Refolution  to  purchafe  it.  Such  he  look'd  upon 
as  fure  Guides,  and  profitable  Entertainments ;  as  fup- 
ports  in  Solicitude,  and  Friends  in  all  the  different  Oc- 
currences of  Life  and  A6lion  ;  they  cenfure  without  Re- 
proach, and  praiie  without  Flattery  ;  they  neither  fawn 
on  Gentlemen,  nor  over-look  Peafants,  but,  like  Pidures 
made  to  Sight,  look  equally  upon  all ;  nor  was  he  con- 
tent with  the  bare  Speculation  ;  he  knew  the  Virtue  of  a 
Chriftian  confifts  not  in  the  Knowledge  of  his  Duty,  but 
in  the  Exercife  of  it,  and  therefore  he  drew  by  the  Life; 
he  copied  from  thofe  Originals,  and  joined  Practice  to 
Theory,  and  thus  he  weaned  himfelf  from  all  thofe 
worldly  things  Men  fo  eagerly  purfue  as  Flies  ;  he  nei- 
ther hoped  for  any  temporal  Advantage,  nor  feared  any 
Adverfity  ■■,  his  Defires  look'd  beyond  Time,  and  nothing 
but  the  Pains  of  the  Damned  v/ere  able  to  awake  his 
Fear  ;  fo  that  he  embraced  Crofles  and  Flavours  with  the 
fame  AfFeftions,  and  always  faid,  thefe  led  us  indeed  the 
eafieft  Way  to  Heaven,  and  thofe  the  mof^fecure;  and 
thus  he  was  neither  fond  of  Life,  nor  dreaded  Death, 
but  equally  difpofed  to  keep  his  Poll,  or  to  abandon  it 
at  the  firft  Command  of  his  great  Mafter. 

And  indeed,  he  had  fuch  an  Empire  over  his  Paffions, 
fuch  a  Submiffion  to  all  the  Defigns  of  Providence,  that 
he  feemed,  if  not  above  the  Reach,  at  leall  above  the 
Senfe  of  Adverfity,  even  when  he  lay  under  the  Weight 
of  a  Misfortune.  His  Niece  whom  he  loved  with  the 
Tendernefs  of  a  Father,  fell  fick  of  a  burning  Fever :  She 
deferved  indeed  his  AiFedion  ;  for  flie  was  fct  off"  with  all 
the  Perfections  of  a  Woman,  and  enrich'd  with  all  the 
Virtues  of  a  Chriftian.  One  might  truly  fay,  with  the 
wife  Man,  {he  lived  a  great  while,  tho'  ihediedat  Seven- 
teen, and  that  fhe  v/as  ripe  for  Heaven  in  the  very  Sprino" 
of  her  Age:  She  pafs'd  thro'  a  long  Courfe  of  Pains, 
with  an  invincible  Patience,  and  expet^led  Death  rather 
with  the  Courage  of  a  Hero,  than  the  Timoroufnefs  of  a 
Woman. 

Every  one  thought  this  Accident  would  put  Enfci^hn's 
Phllofophy  to  the  Stretch  ;  that  a  Blow  in  fo  fenfible  a 
Part,  would  flrike  out  fome  Symptoms  of  Wenknels; 
but  they  miffook  the  Fvian  ;  he  fdt  the  Lofs,  but  ^r±  not 
under  it:  He  let  f^-.W  inched  a  Tear  at  parting,  but  wipea 

it 


54^      T'i'^  Gentleman  Injlru^ed, 

it  off  in  a  Moment,  and  he  told  his  Friends,  who  wonder*(i 
at  his  Unconccrnednefs,  to  be  forry  (he  is  not  with 
me,  when  I  believe  (he  is  better  from  me,  is  a  mark  I  va- 
lue my  Satisfaction  above  hers,  and  mourn  for  the  Li- 
ving more  than  for  the  Dead  ;  it's  Infirmity,  not  true 
Kindnefs,  when  we  will  not  refign  to  our  felvcs  the 
Happinefs  of  a  Friend. 

I  believe  fhe  is  in  a  State  of  Blifs,  why  then  fhould  I 
weep  for  her,  whom  I  fuppofe  in  a  Place  we  all  wifli  to 
be  fettled  in?  If  fhe  be  not,  my  Affedion  will  not  eafe 
her  Torments,  nor  raife  her  from  her  Grave:. So  that 
my  Grief  will  cither  be  unfeafonable  or  vain ;  it  may 
render  me  miferable,  but  will  add  not  a  Grain  to  her 
felicity,  nor  abate  one  of  her  Pains.  But,  in  fine,  God 
who  gave  her  Life,  is  pleafed  to  recal  the  Gift,  what 
Reafon  have  I  to  complain  of  hard  Ufage  ?  Rather  I 
thank  his  Goodnefs  for  having  lent  me  her  fo  long,  than 
blame  him  for  taking  her  from  me  fo  foon  ;  his  Favours 
arc  free  Gifts,  no  Debts :  It's  our  Duty  to  receive  them 
with  Thankfulnefs,  and  to  return  them  at  the  firft  Call 
with  Submifiion  and  Franknefs.  Thefe  Difpofitions 
feem'd  fo  noble,  fo  generous,  that  they  became  the 
Gentleman,  as  well  as  the  Chriltian,  and  every  Man 
confefs'd  his  Charafter  could  not  be  rais'd  too  much, 
nor  efteem'd  enough :  For  Virtue,  like  the  Sun,  is  more 
gazed  on  when  eclips'd,  than  when  it  glitters  in  Profpe- 
rity,  and  we  m.ay  be  fure  it's  Sterling  when  it  bears  the 
Touch-ilone  of  Afflidion. 

I  cannot  omit  one  Paflage  that  happened  in  this  young 
Lady's  Sicknefs;  it  Ihews  the  Skilland  the  Confcience  of 
Dodors  are  all  of  a  Piece,  and  that  they  are  oftner  fee'd 
for  killing  than  curing  a  Patient,  or  at  leall  for  doing  no 
Harm,  than  for  doing  Good.  I  thought /l/o//>rf  lafh'd 
the  Gentleman  of  the  College  with  too  much  Freedom ; 
that  he  entertain'd  Vdr'ts^  and  the  Court,  at  the  Expence 
of  the  Faculty,  and  drew  their  Piftures  at  random,  with- 
out any  regard  to  the  Original;  but  the  Jury  of  Phyfi- 
cians  that  fat  upon  this  poor  Lady's  Life,  alter'd  my  C>- 
pinion,  and  forc'd  me  to  own,  that  the  Comedian  has 
thrown  more  Truth  than  Fidtion  in  their  Chara<Ster,  and 
rather  tVdls  fhort  than  over- flourifli'd  ic. 

And  firft,  half  an  Hour  ilipu'd  by  in  Ceremony  and 
Complement  j  then  they  gave  an  Accouni  of  Yellerday's 

Ren- 


'fhe  Gentleman  InJiruBed,    543 

Rendevouz,  and  expofed  the  Diary  of  their  Debauches, 
had  not  the  Doftor  in  Ordinary  put  them  in  mind,  they 
had  forgot  their  Errand,  and  returned  with  their  Fee, 
without  leaving  fo  much  as  a  Recife  j  but  then  they 
would  not  take  the  Pains  to  ftep  into  her  Chamber,  but 
referred  themfelves  to  the  Information  of  the  Ordinary; 
he  regaled  the  JhnHo  with  a  Difledion  of  the  Diftemper, 
and  pillaged  U''illis  de  Febnbus  to  rig  out  his  Harangue. 
Galea  and  Ilfpocrates  were  brought  upon  the  Stage, 
nay,  and  Arijtotle  :  To  compleat  the  Farce,  Greek  and 
Latift  were  fcrved  up  in  Plenty,  and  one  Aphorifm  tum- 
bled in  upon  the  Back  of  another.  A  Maid  told  him  the 
Lady  grew  worfe,  and  that  (he  was  drawing  towards 
her  Agony  :  The  Gentleman  laugh'd  at  her  Meilage. 
It's  impojfible,  faid  he,  Hippocrates /j />/<«/»,  that  Fevers 
come  to  aCriJis  the  fourteenth  or  one  and  twentieth  Day, 
now  this  is  only  the  tenth  :  Hoiu  then  can  your  Mijirefs  be 
fij  near  her  End  ? 

Hippocrates  may  fay  what  he  pleafes,  replied  the 
Maid,  but  if  you  difpatch  not  foon,  your  Remedy  will 
come  too  late. 

Hasfhe  taken  the  Dofe  of  EmeticP.  fays  the  Dodlor. 
Yes,  anfwer'd  the  Maid,  but  it  had  no  EfFedl. 
Bon,  cries  the  Confult,  a  happy  Prognoftick. 
It  caft  her  into  Convulfions,  continued  the  Maid. 
Better  yet,  fays  the  Confult.  But  alas,  in  fpite  of  the 
Dodtor's  Better  and  Better,  the  Lady  grew  li^orfe  and 
IVorfe.  A  new  Courier  put  a  ftop  to  Enquiry,  and  fum- 
moned  the  Jundo  to  the  Lady's  Chamber:  She  lies -in 
Extremity,  a  Subject  of  CompafTion  and  Admiration ; 
the  Emetick  put  her  upon  the  Rack,  yet  her  Patience  was 
ftronger  than  the  Pain.  She  feem'd  almoft  to  out-brave 
thofe  Primitive  Martyrs,  who  neither  flinch'd  in  the 
Fire,  nor  cried  Oh!  at  the  Torment  of  Knives  and  Ra- 
zors J  and  though  her  Force  funk  every  Moment,  her 
Refignation  to  Providence  was  invincible. 

One  Dodlor  was  for  Bleeding,  another  for  Caufticks, 
a  third  for  he  knew  not  what,  and  a  fourth  for  fending 
her  to  the  Waters  j  their  Skill  was  non-plus'd,  and  they 
had  already  difcharged  their  Latin,  and  poured  out  their 
Stock  of  Aphorifms;  fo  that,  in  fine,  they  concluded 
Nemine  contradicente,  for  a  Bolus  of  Opium,  that  {xx~ 
might  depart  without  Pain. 

lEsufebiy.: 


544       ^^^  Gentleman  Injlru^e'd. 

Eufebtus  bore  all  their  impertinent  Jargon;  but  whei^. 
he  heard  this  barbarous  Refoluiion,  he  was  not  Mafter 
of  his  Refentment.  What,  faid  he,  Gentlemen,  do  you 
believe  another  State?  That  an  Eternity  depends  upon 
thislaft  Moment?  If  you  do,  with  what  Confcience  can 
you  in  this  fatal  Circumilance,  caft  Reafon  into  a  Le- 
thargy, when  a  poor  Creature  ftands  molt  in  need  of  it  ? 
YoH  would,  forfoothy  put  her  out  ofPai/7,  but  your  Pity  is 
barbarous,  and  your  Compallion  cruel;  for  you  deprive 
her  of  the  very  Power  of  asking  God  forgivenefs,  and  by 
confequence  of  Pardon.  -  Indeed,  the  virtuous  Tenure 
of  her  Life  is  in  fome  Meafure  an  Aflurance  her  Death 
will  not  be  miferable;  for  it's  rare  to  fee  a  Perfon  who 
has  lived  well,  die  ill :  But  however,  it's  a  great  Step 
taken  in  the  dark ;  a  Trip  is  fatal,  and  an  Over-fight 
may  pitch  her  on  the  v/rong  Side  of  the  Shore,  and  then 
there  is  no  Return.  No,  no,  Gentlemen,  if  you  can  do 
her  Body  no  Good,  you  fnall  do  her  Soul  no  Harm.  Few 
Moments  remain,  let  her  difpofe  of  them  to  Advantage  j 
let  her  die  in  Pain,  to  revive  in  never-ending  Pleafures. 

This  fnort  Harangue  propagated  the  'Jundo,  and  put 
an  End  to  their  Refolves:  However,  they  took  care  of 
their  Fee,  but  then  left  all  Concern  for  the  Lady  behind 
them.  The  Ordinary  llaid  not  to  cure,  but  to  fee  her 
die.  Indeed,  this  was  extraordinary;  but  Doctors,  like 
Judges,  pronounce  the  Sentence,  but  feldom  are  prefent 
at  the  Execution. 


DIALOGUE   VI. 

Whether  it  he  expedient  for  Gentlemen  to  travel^  ivitk 
fome  Diredhijs  to  thofe  vjho  go  Abroad. 

'\lEander''s  Father  perfuaded  him  to  travel,  before  he 
^^  fettled  in  the  World:  He  was  of  the  common  Per- 
fuafion,  that  home-bred  Gentlemen  are  only  rough  caft ; 
that  they  mult  receive  the  laft  Strokes  of  Behaviour  in 
Frar.ce  znA  Italy.  But  N:andfr.,  who  rated  the  Perfecu- 
tions  of  a  Chriitian,  above  all  httle  Accomplilhments  of 

aGentleman,.and  afFecled  rather  a  Decency  of  Manner?,, 
than  of  (^arria^e,  would  not  confent  to  the  Propofal,  ti-1! 

be 


The  Gentleman  InJlmBed.     545 

he  had  confulted  his  Oracle  Eufebius^  and  he  refolved  ra- 
ther to  follow  his  Judgment,  than  his  own  Inclination. 
He  therefore  gave  him  a  Vifit ;  the  Father  acquainted 
him  of  his  Defign,  and  afked  his  Advice. 

My  Son,  fjid  he,  grows  in  Years  lit  for  Improvement ; 
he  has  Quality  and  Eftate  to  fupport  it.  And  befides. 
Nature  has  furnifhed  him  withagood  Genius,  and  a  fiiarp 
"Wit,  fo  that  nothing  is  wanting  to  render  him  ferviceable 
to  his  Country,  and  an  Honour  to  his  Family,  but  Expe- 
rience. Now  this  cannot  be  well  acquired  but  by  Travel- 
ling. He  has  indeed  all  the  Learning  the  Univerlitycan 
give  him  J  but  then  to  fteer  wholly  by  Books,  without 
looking  into  Men  and  Bufinefs,  is  like  learning  a  Trade 
witiioutever  coming  to  the  Pfaftice:  Who  intends  to  be 
Mafter  muft  draw  by  the  Life,  as  well  as  copy  fromi  the 
Original,  and  join  Speculation  with  Praftice.  My  Rela- 
tions are  divided  upon  the  Matter  ;  fome  perfuade  me 
to  fend  him  Abroad,  others  to  keep  him  at  Home;  fome 
tell  me  .  Home-breeding  will  ungentlcman  him,  and 
others,  that  foreign  Education  will  turn  his  Englip  Blood 
into  French  or  Italian  ;  favour  me  with  your  Opinion 
upon  the  Matter. 

I  am  not,  reply'd  Eufebitis^  fo  fond  of  Travelling, 
as  fome  of  our  Noblemen  ;  nor  yet  fo  averfe  as  others. 
A  Man,  no  doubt,  may  reap  great  Improvement  from 
the  Tour  of  France  and  Italy,  and  alfo  make  the  Journey 
^o  Difadvantage.  He  may  rather  glean  up  their  Vices 
than  their  Virtues,  and  return  both  a  Clown  and  a  De- 
bauchee. He  may  fall  in  Love  with  their  Wine,  and  their 
Women  ;  and  bring  back  nothing  but  a  Wife,  a  Miftrefs, 
or  a  Difeafe,  for  zMa^oranc^lum  of  his  Voyage.  At  leaft, 
I  know  fome  who  left  their  Innocence  and  Money  in  the 
Contwent^  and  landed  at  Gr^jT'^/eW,  with  as  light  Heads, 
and  lighter  Pockets,  than  when  they  hrft  fet  out  zx.  Do- 
"ver.  I  confefs  this  windring  Humour  Ipreads  wide,  and 
grows  epidemical :  Men  fancy  foreign  Air  purifies  the 
Brain,  as  well  as  the  Lungs;  that  Breeding  and  Ex- 
perience fp'rout  up  in  the  Streets  of  Paris  and  Venice ; 
and  that  a  View  ot  Verjailles^nd  Marly  transforms  Rufti- 
city  into  Behaviour.  But  alas.  Sir,  the  Fr^-wr/^j  Climate 
breeds  Clowns  nolefs  than  our  Englip ;  and  I  have  feeii 
there  as  ill-fhap'd  Gentlemen,  zszt  London.  Our  Car- 
riage indeed  has  fomething  of  the  Lion,  and  theirs  of 

N  n  ths 


54^     ' The  Gentleman  hiflruEied. 

the  Ape  ;  ouis  awes,  theirs  delights  j  theirs  is  foolifh,  and 
ours  lurly. 

You  have  drawn,  fays  the  Gentleman,  a  difadvanta- 
geous  Map  of  the  Continent,  and  if  Debauchery  be  the 
only  Fruit  of  Travels,  I  think  we  may  buy  that  Com- 
modity nearer  home  at  lefs  Charge  and  Labour.  For 
Vice  thrives  to  Admiration  in  our  Soil ;  and  we  have 
tranfplfinted  it  thefe  ten  Years  into  Flanders^  Germany 
and  Spain  ;  and,  what  is  ftrange,  our  Stock  is  not  funk  ; 
nay,  it  rather  rifes  every  Day  ;  and  though  often  Men  of 
other  Trades  flip  afide,  we  hear  no  Debauchees  turn  Bank- 
rupt of  their  Vices.  But,  under  favour,  tho'  other  Na- 
tions have  their  Defeats,  they  are  not  quite  bare  of  Per- 
fedlions.  They  may  fet  us  Patterns  for  Imitation  as  well 
as  for  Averfion  ;  and,  by  confequence,  improve  a  young 
Gentleman  as  well  as  corrupt  him.  Every  Country  pro- 
duces Remedies  as  well  as  Poifons,  and  he  deferves  to  die 
who  leaves  thofe  for  thefe. 

No  doubt,  reply'd  Eufebius^  there  are  fine  Things  be- 
yond Sea,  and  a  young  Man  may  waft  over  a  handfome 
Cargo  oi  Italian  Improvements,  with  a  Valize  of  French 
Behaviour.  But,  alas.  Sir,  they  will  lie  upon  his  Hands, 
and  ruft  in  his  Wardrobe  for  want  of  ufing.  We  hate  the 
ftiff  and  gumm'd  Deportment  of  the  Italian,  and  to  be 
yoak'd  in  Ceremony,  or  tied  up  to  Steps  in  Converfation. 
Andthe  French  Shrug  only  fits  tolerably  on  a  Beati^  and 
intitles  him  to  the  Honour  of  a  Fop. 

But,  Sir,  anfwer'd  the  Gentleman,  Breeding  confiils 
not  meerly  in  a  genteel  Carriage,  and  Decency  ot  Ge- 
llure  jit  reaches  to  the  Improvement  of  the  Underftand- 
ing.  I  look  upon  a  Man,  whofo  only  Ornaments  hang 
upon  the  Surface,  like  thofe  Palaces  that  arefcately  with- 
out, and  unfM-nifli'd  within.  Now  Travelling  manures 
theUnderftanding ;  it  affords  Knowledge  and  Difcovery  ; 
it  enlarges  the  Faculty,  and  gives  a  more  extcniive  infight 
into  Things  and  Men.:  Whereas  a  hom.e-bred  Gentleman 
is  confin'd  to  narrow  Limits ;  he  wants  Materials  for  Ob'- 
fervation,  and  cannot  work  out  a  Subjed  for  a  genteel 
Difcourfe. 

Befides,  Sir,  he  learns  the  great  Myftery  of  Foreign 
Governments ;  their  Fort,  and  their  Foible  ;  the  Intereits 
of  Princes,  and  their  Defigns:  And  thus  at  the  fame  time 
he  feafons  Pleafure  with  Profit  ;  he  ftan;es  (if  I  mav  fiy 

fo) 


^he  Gentleman  InJlruBed.     547 

fo)  irfto  Politicks,  and  rides  Poll  into  Bufinefs  :  He  re- 
turns equip'd  for  Employment,  and  rigg'dout  for  an  Em- 
balTy  at  leaft,  to  the  Cantons  or  Ham-Towns . 

Oh,  Sir,  faid  Eu[ebtus^  you  fend,  I  perceive,  your 
Son  abroad  to  catch  Politicks.  You  fhould  remember, 
we  flufh  at  home  that  Game  in  every  Tipling-houfe : 
It  over-runs  both  Town  and  Country,  and  is  funk  from 
an  Imbelliihment  into  a  Nufance.  Our  Coblers  and 
Tinkers  take  into  their  Gonfideration  the  ardiia  regn't  ne- 
gotin,  as  well  as  our  Parliament  ;  and  leave  Holes  in 
Shoes  and  Pans  to  mend  the  Government.  I  tell  you. 
Sir,  our  Soil  produces  more  Politicks  than  all  Europe  be- 
fides ;  fo  that  to  tranfport  Foreign  is  to  fend  Owls  to  A- 
thens.  We  are,  in  a  Word,  pefter'd  with  thofe  of  our 
own  Growth,  and  I  believe  a  Prohibition  to  fliip  over  ex- 
tern Politicks  into  England  might  prove  no  lefs  beneficial 
to  the  Nation,  than'that  of  bringing  over  FrenchWixits^ 
or  planting  Tobacco. 

But,  Sir,  fuppofing  our  Gentleman  arriv'd  at  Paris  or 
Venice^  what  Company  muft  he  ply  for  thofe  mighty 
Advantages  you  fpeakof?  In  one  place,  without  doubt, 
the  topping  Minlfter  of  State  ;  in  the  other,  the  Counfel 
di  Died.  Certainly  in  fuch  Schools  he  may  in  a  fhort 
time  run  thro'  a  Courfeof  Politicks,  and  commence  Do- 
dor  of  State-  tricks.  But  do  you  think  thofe  Achitopheb 
will  unveil  the  fecret  Myfteries  of  their  Mafters  to  Stran- 
gers, and  throw  before  them  the  Arcana  of  the  Cabinet  ? 
No,  no,  Sir,  he  mull  be  content  with  Town-Intelligence,- 
or  the  Table-Reports  of  Treating- Houfes;  and  then  you 
may  guefs  with  what  a  Provilion  of  Politicks,  with  what 
a  fading  of  Science  he  is  like  to  freight  the  Packet- Boat 
at  liis  return.  I  counlel  you  rather  to  furnifli  your  Son 
V/ith  Gazettes^  Mercuries^  and  Clefs  de  Cabinets.  Here  he 
may  catch  Language  and  Knowledge  at  the  fame  Draught, 
and  polifli  his  Tongue  and  his  Brain  together.  I  all'ure 
^ou.  Sir,  I  knew  a  Gentleman,  who  bid  f^iir  for  the  Re- 
pute of  a  great  Man,  and  an  able  Minifter:  He  topp'd 
the  Gravity-'of  Don  Frederick  de  Toledo  ;  his  Air  Was  as 
inyfterious  as  his  Difcourfe  ;  like  the  Pagan  Oracles,  he 
nfFe6led  Riddle  and  Innuendo's.  One  would  have  taken 
him  for  the  GrandVizir-General  of  Europe,  the  common 
Manager  of  Treaties,  and  fole  Dcpbfitory  of  all  the  Cabi- 
net Refolutions.  Yet  he  own'd  all  his  IntelliTCncs  toZ/^A 
N  n  ::  la?}d 


j;4^     ^he  Gentleman  Infinuied. 

land  News  Books ;  and  when  the  Wind  blew  from  ow 
Shore  in  the  Br/V/Packet-Boat's  Teeth,  he  was  at  a  lofs 
for  a  Difcourfe.  One  would  have  fwore  a  North-Weft 
Gale  had  work'd  upon  his  Brain,  and  Iplown  his  Wit  and 
his  Memory  mXo  Norway  or  Denmark. 

But,  Sir,  do  you  fancy  a  Gentleman  at  iiis  Arrival  at 
Paris  fends  Hue  and  Cry  after  a  Mafler  of  Politicks  ?  No, 
no,  this  is  point-blank  againft  Cuftom  and  Precedent. 
His  Bufinefs  is  to  oblige  Senfe,  not  to  cultivate  the  Un- 
derftanding;  he  firft  regales  his  Eye  with  a  view  of/^^er- 
failles  ^nd  Marly,  and  then  his  Appetite  with  all  the  De- 
licacies of  the  Town.  Tho'  he  brought  from  home  the 
bare  Title  of  Squire,  the  Parifians  will  prefent  him  a  Pa- 
tent of  Peerage,  and  the  noifeof  a  Jeune  my  Lordvi'iW 
hollow  into  his  Attendance  all  the  Breteurs  and  Sharpers 
of  the  Town.  And  when  once  he  is  fallen  into  fuch 
Hands,  he  will  fcarce  get  out  of  them,  till  he  has  delivered 
his  Purle,  and  pawn'd  his  Confcience.  Believe  me.  Sir, 
a  young  Man  that  has  Pleafure  in  View,  will  be  fhrewd- 
iy  tempted  to  tafte  whether  they  be  as  agreeable  to  the  . 
Palate,  as  to  the  Sight,  and  charm  the  Senfe  as  much  as 
the  Imagination ;  and  its  odds  he  will  never  ftand  fii*m 
againft  the  Temptations :  For  Flefli  and  Blood,  accom- 
pany'd  by  Yoiith,  have  a  ftrong  Tendency  to  Evil,  they 
plead  hard  for  Liberty,  and  as  eagerly  againft  Conftraint. 
And  when  a  Youth  lies  at  the  Mercy  of  fuch  Tutors,  what 
can  be  expelled  but  Debauchery  .?  He  will,  in  a  word,  firft 
break  through  the  Pra6t:ice,and  then  through  the  very  Prin- 
ciples of  Morality,  Befides,  he  is  out  of  a  Parent's  Sight, 
heisnotaw'd  by  his  Prefencc,  nor  within  the  Reach  of 
his  Correction  :  So  tl-iathe  r.mges  without  Reftraint,  and 
plays  the  Prodigal  without  Controul. 

Under  favour,  faid  the  Gentleman,  you  fuppofe  me 
little  read  in  the  Extravngancies  of  Youth,  when  you 
fancy  I  will  lay  the  Reins  on  my  Son's  Neck,  and  aban- 
don his  to  his  own  Condu6l.  Though,  God  be  think'd, 
his  Behaviour  be  regular  and  untainted,  his  Innocence 
may  be  furprized.  Youth  has  a  natural  Tendency  to 
Lewdnefs ;  it  wants  Experience  to  wave  Temptation, 
and  Rcfolution  to  encounter  it.  In  fine,  Paflion  andCare- 
lefnefs  throws  itoff'iis  Guard,  and  lays  it  open  to  Sur- 
prize. Now  to  obviate  this  Inconvenience,  I  have  pro- 
vided hira  a  fober  Governor,  who  knows    Things  and 

Men  ; 


fhe Gentleman  Inftru^ed,     54^ 

Men  ;  who  has  feen  the  World,  and  makes  no  inconside- 
rable Figure :  He  is  a  Man  of  Parrs,  talks  well,  and  I 
hope  lives  better.  Such  a  Perfon  is  able  to  flop  the  Sal- 
lies of  Youth,  to  awe  it  into  the  Bounds  of  Decency  by 
his  Authority,  and  to  inftruiil  it  by  his  Prudence. 

This  Caution,  anfwer'd  £?(/c'Z'/«j-,  is  laudable  and  pru* 
dent ;  but  I  afllire  you,  Sir,  it  feldom  anfwers  Expecta- 
tion: I  have  known  Governors  who  wanted  Gover-^ 
nors  themfelves,  and  were  ten  times  more  fit  to  receive 
than  to  give  Inftruflion.  Their  Religion  was  as  iofe  as 
their  Manners ;  they  believed  any  thing  for  Intereft,  and 
pradlifed  any  thing  for  Pleafure.  Now  when  the  Go- 
vernor is  diflblute,  who  can  expe6t  Regularity  from  the 
Pupil  ?  But  fuppofe  him  clear  of  thefe  Imputations,  it's 
ftill  a  queftion  whether  the  young  Man  either  refpeds  or 
efteemshim:  If  not,  it's  odds  his  Inftruftions  will  make 
no  Imprefiion.  They  may  beat  the  Ear,  but  will  never 
touch  the  Heart.  He  may  as  well  chaftife  the  Wind  as 
that  Spark  into  Sobriety,  who  difefteemshis  Perfon.  The 
Man  re-inforces  the  Counfel,  and  perfijades  more  often- 
times than  his  Reafons. 

But  farther,  a  young  Man  pad  Twenty  is  a  refty 
Creature;  his  PalTions  are  at  their  full  growth,  and  con- 
fequently  ungovernable.  They  contend  hard  for  Liberty, 
and  it's  ten  to  one  Pleafure  will  get  the  better  of  Precept : 
For  in  that  Age  Senfe  afieds  more  than  Duty  ;  and  the 
agreeable  enchants  more  powerfully  than  the  lawful. 
When  the  Law  declares  him  Major,  he  will  not  eaiily 
fubmit  to  the  Slavery  of  Minority,  (/'.  e.)  he  will  not  be 
rid  by  Governors,  nor  led  by  Pedants,  like  Children,  by 
their  Hanging-lleeves.  He  fuppofes  he  can  walk  by 
himfelf,  and  ftand  upon  his  own  Legs ;  and  thus  becomes 
fo  unruly,  that  he  will  neither  lead  nor  drive.  What  a 
fine  Menace  did  I  fee  at  Paris  between  a  Tutor  and  his 
Pupil  ?  They  liv'd  in  a  State  of  War  j  the  one  camp'd 
in  the  Faiiburg  St.  Germain^  the  other  in  the  Kue  de 
'Temple  ;  and  had  not  the  Seine  run  between,  they  might 
have  come  to  Adion  ;  at  laft  they  agreed  upon  a  Trea- 
ty:  But  before  it  was  brought  to  a  Conclufion,  as  many 
Couriers  run  between  them  as  from  Gertrudenburgh  to 
the  Hague,  or  Verfailles. 

I  am  fenfible,  faid  the  Gentleman,  thefe  Inconveni- 
ences happen  j  and  when  a  Pupil  undervalues  the  Peribn 

N  n  3  of 


550       ^he  Gentleman  Injiru^ecl 

of  his  Governor,  he  feldom  approves  his  Counfel :  For 
it  goes  againll  the  Grain  to  conform  to  the  Advice  of 
thofe  we  contemn.  '  Befides,  we  prefume  Reafons  can- 
not rife  above  the  level  of  thofe  that  propofe  them:  So 
that  whtn  we  entertain  a  low  Opinion  of  a  Perfon,  we 
difable  his  Friendfliip,  and  rut  him  under  an  ImpofTibili- 
ty  of  d'oingus  any  good.  For  this  Reafon  I  have  pitch'd 
upon  a  French  Minifter ;  his  Parts  will  call  for  Efteem, 
2nd  his  Charader  for  Refpefl. 

Upon  a  French  Minifter,  reply'd  Fufeh'tus^  what  do 
you  mean?  Are  our  ov/n  Countrymen  fodeftitute  of  Pru- 
dence, good  Nature  and  Probity,  that  you  could  not  fall 
upon  one  comipleatly  furnifli'd  for  the  Employment? 
Good  God  !  My  Lady's  Woman  mull  be /"/'£'»<;■/:',  as  well 
as  my  Lord's  V^tlet  de  Chamhre  ;  we  cannot  eat,  unlefs 
French  Qoo\s.{tx\'t  us  up  Ragouts,  nor  drefs  but  a-la- 
mode  de  France.  We  hate  the  Nation,  yet  cannot  live 
without  the  Natives.  They  fcrew  themfelves  into  the 
chief  Families,  and  engrofs  both  Places  of  Truft  and 
Profit,  fo  that  their  Punifliment  has  prov'd  a  Favour.  For 
they  enjoy  abroad  more  Plenty,  than  they  durft  have  ex- 
petted  at  home.  Who  can  reconcile  this  Conduit  to  our . 
Clamours?  Who  will  not  think  we  rail  in  jeft,  when  we 
thus  carcfs  in  earneft  ?  And  that  our  Hearts  are  Fremh,  as 
well  as  our  Clonths  ? 

We  complain  the  Church  of  England  is  aver-run  with 
Fanaticifm,  that  the  Presbyteriam  over-top  it  in  Number 
and  Quality ;  what  wonder,  when  French  Minifters 
train  up  the  Nobility  ?  Their  Religion  is  Puritan^  thrice 
refined ;  their  Zeal  has  more  Heat  than  Light,  and  more 
Peeviflinefs  than  Charity.  How  often  have  they  in 
France^  made  room  for  their  Religion  with  the  Sword, 
and  brought  Liberty  of  Confciencc  by  Slaughter  and  De- 
vaftations  ?  They  are  Republicims  in  Principles  and 
Pradice,  and  feldom  obey  v.'hen  it's  in  their  Power  to 
command. 

Now  is  it  likely  thefe  Gentlemen  will  train  up  their 
Pupils  in  the  Obedience  to  the  Church?  No,  no,  I 
would  as  foon  fend  a  Youth  to  learn  Chriftianity  of  the 
Mirf}!.,  as  .the  Doftrine  of  the  Church  of  England  of 
thefe  Monjieurs.  They  hate  the  very  Conftitution  of  its 
Government,  and  long  fince  pronounced  its  Ceremonies 
fjolifh  and  impious.     Let  us  then  ccafe  to  wonder,  the 

Nobi- 


ne  Gentleman  Injiru^ed,       551 

Nobility  ftrikes  off  from  the  Church  to  Conventicles : 
trench  Minifter?  have  brought  Apoftacy  intofefhion,  and 
railed  the  Spirit  of  Fadion  in  Englayid^  as  well  as  in 
France  ;  and  I  fear  the  Infedion  vi'ill  dilate,  fo  long  as 
they  vvindthemfelves  into  Ecclel^illical  Benefices,  and 
govern  the  Children  of  the  Nobility. 

But  waving  a  French  Minifter's  Religion,  I  am  not 
throughly  perfuaded  of  his  other  Abilities,  1  fear  he  will 
rather  confult  his  own  Intereft,  than  his  Pupil's  Improve- 
ment, and  hufband  the  Occaiion  to  his  own  Advantage. 
For  thofe  Gentlemen  fettle  not  among  us  to  fpend,  but 
to  gain  ;  to  fupply  prefent  Neceflities,  and  to  lay  in  Pro- 
vilions  againft  Age  and  Accidents.  Now  a  Man  that  has 
Preferment  in  View,  and  a  Fortune  in  his  Head,  will 
probably  take  the  {horteil  way  to  his  Journey's  end.  A 
generous  Freedom^,  he  knows,  as  the  World  goes,  is  no 
thriving  "Quality ;  wholefome  Advice,  if  unpalatable, 
revolts  the  Stomach,  and  alienates  the  Affection ;  that 
thofe,  who  countenance  Vice,  are  better  paid,  than  thofe 
that  preach  up  Virtue.  This  is  a  ftrong  Temptation  to 
the  Governor  to  ilacken  the  Reins,  to  endear  the  young 
Gentleman  to  him  by  all  the  little  Tricks  of  Condefcen- 
dence  and  Flattery  ;  and  then  the  Pupil  commands,  and 
the  Governor  fays  Amen  to  all  his  Extravagances. 

It's  true,  he  betrays  hisTruft;  but  alas.  Sir,  Traitors 
are  no  Phoenixes  in  our  Age.  However,  he  is  true  to  his 
Intereft ;  and  I  find  itv^  felicitous  of  others  Concerns, 
if  their  own  Work  goes  on  kindly.  He  may  indeed  fear 
a  Reprimand  from  the  Father  ;  but  then  he  hopes  a  For- 
tune from  the  Son  ;  and,  believe  me,  good  Coin  afFedls 
more  than  hard  Words.  You  know,  Sir,  Men  are  more 
prone  to  adore  the  rifing  than  the  fetting  Sun,  and  to 
fawn  on  thofe  who  enter  upon  an  Eftate,  than  thofe  who 
refign  it. 

You  are  then  I  perceive,  faid  the  Gentleman,  no  ad- 
mirer of  Travelling:  You  are  for  breathing  our  native 
Air,  and  growing  grey  under  our  own  Elevation. 

I  fay  not  fo  neither,  anfwer'd  Eufebim^  I  am  not  ab- 
folutely  for  it,  nor  univerfally  againft  it.  Travel  may 
improve  fome,  and  ruin  others.  They  may  fit  fome  for 
the  higheft  Employments,  and  render  others  unworthy  of 
the  loweft.  I  think  it  convenient  for  the  prime  Nobility 
to  take  a  walk  into  the  neighbouring  Kingdoms  j   for 

N  n  4  fuch 


SS^     Th  G  £  N  T  L  E  iM  A  N  Inftruffecl 

fuchare  mark'd  out  forpublick  Bufinefs;  they  are,  as  it 
were,  by  Birth  fixed  in  Court,  and  may  pretend  to  a 
Place  at  the  Council-Table,  and  to  fit  at  the  upper  End 
of  the  Government.  Now  People  in  fuch  Circumllances 
Ihould  lay  in  a  competent  Stock  of  French  and  Dutch^ 
that  they  may  treat  in  Perfon,  not  by  Proxy  and  Inter- 
preters. For  Bulinefs  goes  on  flowly  when  carried  on 
hy  Deputy,  and  Minifters  feldom  agree  when  one  un- 
derftands  not  the  other.  It's  proper  for  them  to  make 
ibme  Acquaintance  with  Penfionary  Heitifius  and  Mon- 
iieur  de  Turcy,  before  they  go  over  with  a  Charadler  and 
Credentials.  For  the  Quality  of  a  Friend  may  haften  the 
Difpatchesof  the  Minilter  ;  and  the  Capacity  of  the  one 
forward  the  Work  of  the  other. 

But  then,  I  think,  Gcntlemenof  a  lower  Rank  fliould 
not  always  be  upon  the  Ramble  ;  cfpecially  thole  who 
raife  not  their  Pretenlions  to  Court- Offices,  but  confine 
their  Ambition  to  the  Dignity  of  a  Country- Jurtice,  or 
look  no  higher  than  the  Place  of  a  Deputy-Lieutenant : 
In  fine,  thofe  who  are  cut  out  for  the  Country,  and  de- 
fign  to  fpend  thc.r  Time  and  their  Money  among  their 
Neighbours. 

Firjl,  Becaufe  foreign  Breeding  is  not  a-lawode  out  of 
Town.  It's  too  fine  com plexioned  for  a  Village,  and  as 
ufclefs  as  a  Coach  and  -^'ix  in  the  A'lountains  of  Glamor- 
gunjhire.  He  will  fcarce  meet  an  Occafion  once  in  a 
Twelve-month,  to  pradlife  French  or  Italian  ;  and  a 
Country-Dance  well  perform'd  will  receive  more  Ap- 
plaul'ethan  7\.  French  IM:nuit^  Saraband^  or:  Riccadone.  Be- 
lides,  our  Country  Air  willtarnifli  the  Lu'ftre  ofoutlan- 
difh  Behaviour :  Time  and  Converiation  will  walh  off 
theVarnifh,  and  then  /^r7/?o//t''s  Aphorifm,  corrupiioop- 
timifit.  pejjlma,  will  have  place  ;  the  beft  Manners  dege- 
nerate into  the  v/orft,  and  the  fineft  Gentleman  makes  the 
moft  complcat  Ciovvn.  For  what  can  be  more  antick, 
than  Rulticity  cut  on  Breeding?  Methinks  it  refembks 
Canvaslaidon  Sattin,  or  Embroidery  on  Linfey-woolfey. 

Secondly^  A  Gentleman  irain'd  up  in  the  fenfual  Free- 
doms of /^^'^/V^r ,  and  the  gaudy  Pageantry  of  Pdr/'j  will 
return  with  a  Surfeit  of  a  Country  Life.  He  will  regard 
his  Home  as  a  Banifliment,  and  his  own  Houle  as  a 
Dungeon.  An  Italian  Symphony  ilrikes  the  Orgaii  more 
ihioothly  than  that  of  a  Pack  of  Hounds,     (honied iep. 

Opera's, 


'the  Gentleman  InJlruBed.     ^^3 

.Opera's,  and  publick  Entradoi's  of  Princes  and  Embafla- 
dors  draw  more  pleafing  Profpeftives  in  the  Eye,  tlian 
thole  of  Dunghills  or  Cabanes.  Gay  Company  afteds 
more  than  Solitude  ;  and  Balls  fet  oft'  with  all  the  glit- 
tering Gaudy  of  Silk  and  Silver  are  far  more  tranfport- 
ing  than  Country  If^akes. 

Now  a  Gentleman  that  returns  overgrown  with  thefe 
Notions,  biafs'd  with  thefe  Inclinations,  will  he  rehfh 
the  Campaign,  and  pen  up  his  Perfon  and  Happinefs  in 
a  Village  ?  No,  no,  he  will  take  up  in  Town  ;  and  on- 
ly vifit  his  Mancir  to  refrefh  his  Lungs,  or  his  Purfe. 
Since  the  middle  of  thelaft  Age,  ourWayof  Livingisno 
more  Engtip  ;  hke  our  Language,  it's  piec'd  up  o{ French 
and  Italian ;  and  to  compleat  the  Oleo^  we  have  thrown 
into  the  Compofition  the  Vices  of  Holland ?L\\dt  Germany. 
The  Nobility  withdraws  from  the  Country  into  Town: 
That  noble  Hofpitality  proper  to  our  Nation  is  out  of 
Ufe,  and  almoll  out  of  Memory,  and  thofe  LargelTes 
that  entertain'd  the  Poor  run  in  another  Channel:  Game 
fweeps  away  one  Part,  gaudy  Equipages,  or  Milles  the 
other.  In  the  mean  time  the  Provinces  are  drain'd  of 
Men  and  Money.  Some  run  to  Town  to  fpend  Eftates, 
and  others  to  gain  them.  The  antient  Seats  of  the  No- 
bility are  let  out  to  yack-Daws  and  Screech  Owls,  or 
tumble  under  the  Weight  of  Time,  and  Cattle  graze 
upon  their  Ruins;  yam  feges ejl  ubi  'Troja  fuit. 

We  may  date  this  Change  from  the  Time  travelling 
became  genteel,  and  wandering ^-/^-»2o^^.  Foreign  Com- 
merce has  brought  in  foreign  Cuftoms ;  and  as  corquer'd 
Greece  and  /}fui  overcame  the  Roman  Virtue  and  Sobrie- 
ty,  fo  France  and  Italy  have  debauch'd  ours. 

However,  I  acknowledge  a  young  Man  may  improve 
by  Travelling,  if  Caution  be  ufed  :  For  beyond  Sea  there 
are  great  Virtues,  as  well  as  great  Vices,  and  Examples 
that  deferve  Imitation  as  well  as  Averfion.  You  may 
p<»Jifii  the  Body  and  the  Mind,  better  the  Gentleman,  and 
perfect  the  ChriUian. 

I. 

In  the  firft  Place,  pitch  upon  a  virtuous  and  prudent 
Governor.  Youth  is  blind,  and  if  it  follows  a  blind 
Guide,  their  Journey  will  end  in  a  Precipice,  ambo  in 
foveam  cadent.  A  Man  that  overlooks  his  own  Duty  to 
God,  will  not  piat  a  Pupil  in  mind  of  his.    Our  Inftruc- 

tions 


554      l'^^  Gentleman  Infru&ed. 

tions  and  Pradice  are    generally  of  a  piece;  and  if  this 
be  tainted,  thofe  are  feldom  found. 

Let  him  be  prudent,  neither  too  indulgent  on  the  one 
hand,  nor  too  fevere  on  the  other.  It's  no  lefs  dangerous 
to  keep  too  heavy  a  hand  over  a  Gentleman,  than  too 
light ;  and  to  baulk  all  his  Defires,  than  none.  A  Gover- 
nor may  lofe  his  Authority  by  too  much  Stiiihefs,  as  well 
as  by  too  much  Condefcendence.  And  if  he  commands 
with  Haughtinefs,  he  will  certainly  be  difobey'd.  To 
refufe  a  young  Man  a  juit  Liberty  is  a  Temptatibn  to 
take  it,  and  if  once  the  Ice  is  broken,  he  will  ihake  off 
Dependance,  and  difcard  Refpedt. 

I  would  not  have  a  great  Fault  pafs  without  a  fuitable 
Correction,  nor  a  fmall  one  punilh'd  beyond  Proportion  : 
For  if  the  Reprimands  are  equal,  the  young  Man  will 
fancy  the  Faults  are  alfo,  and  then  he  will  conclude  it's 
better  to  be  teazd  for  fomething,  than  to  be  rated  for  no- 
thing. When  we  draw  near  one  and  twenty,  Severity  is 
out  of  Seafon  ;  we  may  be  led  indeed  into  our  Duty  by 
Kindnefs,  but  hardly  hcclor'd  into  it  by  PvOughfiefs.  A 
Governor  may  maintain  his  Ch^radier,  if  he  pretends 
only  to  advife,  but  will  certainly  forfeit  it,  if  he  pre- 
fumes  to  command  with  Empire  and  Supercilioulhefs: 
And  therefore  1  would  rather  have  him  wait  upon  his 
Pupil  as  a  Companion,  than  as  a  Spy  and  a  Cenior  ;  and 
ply  him  more  with  Counfel  than  Authority.  We  often 
yield  frankly  to  the  one,  and  alv/ays  with  repugnance  to 
the  other. 

4. 
■  Let  him  not  ftay  too  long  in  a  great  City;  when  he 
has  view'd  what  is  worth  Obfervation,  let  him  purfue  his 
Journey.  A  long  Stay  breeds  Acquaintance,  and  Ac- 
quaintance expofes  to  Debauchery.  A  Man  that  knows 
no  Body  will  have  no  Temptation  to  tempt  another  to 
ill,  and  is  out  of  the  Danger  of  bting  tempted  ;  for  who 
will  fet  up  an  iKcognho'i  Familiarity  goes  before  cri- 
minal Affignations^  and  Privacy  planes  the  W,ay  for  Ex- 
travagance. 

There  is  not,  perchance,  a  City  in  the  World  better 
flock *d  with  Men  of  Parts  and  polite  Behaviour  than 

<  Far  is  ; 


Tha  Gentleman  Infru^ed,     55 5 

Paris;  and.  none  more  eafy  and  fociable  to  Strangers. 
A  young  Man  may  improve  by  luch  Converfation :  He' 
may  enlarge  his  Underftanding,  and  open  to  himfelf  a 
more  extenfive  Profpeit  than  by  Study  and  Apphcation  : 
And  thus  he  will  enter  into  a  handfome  Provifion  of 
Senfe,  not  only  without  Trouble,  but  even  with  De- 
light :  He  will  raife  a  Fortune  in  Knovv'ledge,  without 
the  Drudgery  of  Study,  and  tranfplant  another's  Science 
into  his  own  Skill. 

But  then  if  he  may  better  himfelf  by  the  Company  of 
Men,  he  will  certainly  expofe  himfelf  to  a  thoufand 
Dangers.  If  he  frequents  the  Converfation  of  Women, 
their  Language  charms,  their  Expreffions  infinuate,  and 
their  Ak  is  impohng  ;  they  paint  Gallantry  with  Wit, 
and  both  with  Freedom  ;  fo  that  at  the  fame  Time  they 
attack  the  Underftanding  and  Will,  and  conquer  both 
almoft  without  Refiftance.  How  many  have  I  known 
of  our  Nation  fafcinated  by  thefe  Syrens^  enchanted  by 
thefe  Circes.  They  ftole  away  their  Hearts  and  their 
Heads ;  empty'd  their  Brain  and  their  Purfe,  and  com- 
pleatly  equip'd  *em  fora  Adad-houfe,  oran  Hofpltal.  The 
Paflion  was  too  ftrong  for  Precept,  and  the  Oratory  of 
the  Ladies  baffled  the  Counfel  of  Governors.  For  Love 
is  without  Ears,  as  well  as  without  Eyes,  and,  what  is 
worfe,  without  Underftanding.  It's  true,  we  fend  our 
Children  abroad  to  learn  French  Courtfhip,  as  well  as 
Modes ;  but  this  Errand  is  as  unchriftian  as  unneceilary. 
We  carry  the  Principles  of  this  Science  within  us,  and 
Nature  alone  will  teach  it  at  Home  without  the  Aftiftance 
of  outlandifn  Preceptors.  Too  great  a  Proficiency  in 
the  Art  is  rather  to  be  fear'd  than  Ignorance  ;  and  it's 
ten  to  one,  that  in  fpight  of  Caution  young  Men  will  im- 
prove it  fome  Years  too  foon,  than  a  Moment  too  late. 
And  this  is  the  Rcafon  fome  leave  their  Hearts  and  their 
Confcience  in  France  and  licly  •  and  others  return  with 
a  poor  Wife,  and  fome  with  an  impudent  Curtizan. 

7- 
I  would  not  have  a  Gentleman  fquare  his  Obfervati- 
on  by  Dr.  Lyfters  Alemoirs  of  Paris;  they  are  below  re- 
mark, and  fit  better  on  an  Igmrar/iHs,  than  on  a  Fellow  of 
the  Royal  Society.,  or  a  Gentleman.  Let  him  not  therefore 
trifle  away  his  Time  in  examjping  whether  ylfparagus 

taftes 


j^6     The  Gentleman  Inftru^ed. 

taftes  Tweeter  in  April  or  'Jamtary  ;  or  the  Roman  Lettuces 
better  than  our  Sdejian,  or  the  Fiacres  more  conveniently 
hung  than  my  Lord  EmbafTador's  Coach;  let  him  not 
trot  about  to  view  rare  Colleclions  of  Cockle-fheils,  or 
Skeletons,  or  Todpoles  and  Spiders:  For  after  all,  thefe 
Difcoveries  are  not  worth  the  Candle ;  nay,  within  an 
Ace  as  ridiculous  as  Caligula  s  Journey  to  theSea-fhore  to 
load  his  Army  with  this  childifli  Trumpery.  LaJ]el\ 
Voyage  will  be  far  more  ufeful  than  Lyfter's ;  it  will  fur- 
nifh  matter  for  Inquiry  and  Obfervation,  and  both  de- 
light and  inftrufh  in  your  Journey.  Here  is  a  fhort 
Draught  of  the  Advantages  and  Difadvantages  of  Tra- 
velling, I  have  given  you  my  Judgment  of  the  Matter, 
and  leave  to  your  Prudence  the  Determination. 

I  am  infinitely  cblig'd,  faid  the  Gentleman,  for  your 
Advice  and  Freedom ;  and  am  perfuaded  young  Men 
mull  not  be  fent  abroad  without  Care  and  Caution.  I 
will  take  the  moll  jufl  Meafures  Prudence  can  fuggeft,  to 
keep  my  Son  within  the  Bounds  of  Duty.  I  am  wholly 
of  your  Opinion,  that  Virtue  is  the  mod  accomplilTied 
Ornament  of  a  Gentleman,  that  this  alone  renders  him 
amiable  in  this  World,  and  happy  in  the  next. 


DIALOGUE    Vir. 

Of  the  Soul's  Immortality. 

TOUfchiui  was  invited  in  Chrijlmas  by  a  Gentleman  to 
•*--'  an  Entertainment.  He  found  a  great  deal  of  Com- 
pany, who  were  refolv'd  to  be  merry  i  there  were  fome 
fober  Gentlemen  among  them  ;  but  then  others  were  of 
the  Town-cut, 7<)/-/«^  Goddamme^s,  that  Ipoke  ill,  andliv'd 
worfe.  They  had  pl'.c'd  their  Requiem  in  this  World, 
and  turn'd  off  all  Thoughts  of  the  other ;  and  when  Claret 
had  warmed  the  Head,  Impiety  broke  outat  theTongue; 
their  Heart  fat  upon  their  Lips,  and  difcover'd  to  the 
Company  the  Corruption  that  lurk'd  within,  and  one 
Plight  read  the  Secrets  of  their  Souls  in  their  Words. 
Some  were  for  the  High-Churchy  others  for  the  Lovj^  and 
moll  for  no  Church.  Their  Faith  was  Fadion  and  Inte- 
rell,  and  Pafiion  the  fole  Motives  of  Credibility. 

A 


The  Gentleman  hjiru^ed.      557 

A  grave  Gentleman  thought  it  his  Duty  to  rebuke  the 
tnfolence  of  the  daring  Salr/ioneans :  Gentlemen,  faid 
he,  this  Difcourfe  neither  fuits  with  your  Company,  nor 
your  Profeffion :  It  makes  the  very  Soul  of  a  Chriflian 
mrink  back,  and  leaves  Nature  in  a  kind  of  chill.  If 
you  take  the  Liberty  to  blafpheme  God,  and  play  upon 
Religion,  I  muft  take  the  Freedom  to  defend  both ;  to 
defireyou  to  leave  the  Subjeft,  or  the  Room.  For  to  be 
ihort,  thefe  Sallies  breed  Difguft,  they  are  Penance  and 
Mortification  to  the  Company.  God  will  call  you  to  Ac- 
count one  Day  ;  and  if  he  winks  at  your  Impieties  in 
this  World,  he  will  punifli  them  in  the  other. 

One  of  the  Blades  (whorn  I  call  Athymius)  received 
the  Corredtion  with  a  Smile.  If  God,, fays  he,  vouch- 
fafes  to  let  me  run  my  Courfe  fmoothly  in  this  World, 
I  will  venture  his  Anger  in  the  next.  For  to  be  plain,  I 
am  of  Mr.  Dryden's  Opinion  ;  Our  Miuds  are  perpetually 
wrought  on  by  the  T'er/iperar/ie»t  of  our  Bodies,  ivhich  makes 
me  fufped  they  are  nearer  allied^  than  either  our  Philofo- 
phers  or  School  Divines  will  alloiv  them  to  be. 

That  is,  reply'd  the  Gentleman,  our  Soul  is  indiftindl 
from  the  Body  :  Or  in  plain  EngUJb,  nothing  but  a  Heap 
of  Organized  Matter ;  this  is  a  fine  Scheme :  The  Sy- 
ftem  a-la-mode  raked  out  of  the  Aflies  q{  Hohbs  and  Pom- 
ponatiin^  and  fquared  for  the  Latitude  of  Libertinifm  ; 
that  poj}  Mortem  nulla  J^oluptas^  removes,  rubs,  and  planes 
the  way  for.  Liberty  ;  for  when  the  Profpeil  of  another 
Life  is  fhut  up,  Men  may  fport  without  Reftraint,  and 
play  without  Remorfe  ;  but  this  is  to  pretend  to  Wit,  to 
con  the  Poets. 

Sir,  faid  Athymius^  Icfs  of  Exclamation,  ifyoupleafe, 
and  more  of  Reafon  :  Heat  muft  not  decide  the  Qiieftion, 
but  Argument.  I  am  not  for  implicit  Faith,  nor  over- 
refigning  to  Authority  ;  my  way  is  to  examine  before  I 
aflent,  and  to  preferve  Reafon  in  its  juft  Liberties  :  Abfo- 
lute  SubmifTion  keeps  us  in  a  kind  of  Minority ;  it  palls 
the  Underftanding,  and  expofes  us  to  Impofture;  al- 
ways to  walk  on  Crutches  is  the  way  to  lofe  the  Ufe  of 
our  Limbs,  and  to  fteer  by  another's  Reafon,  to  forfeit 
the  Benefit  of  our  own. 

Reafon,  anfwer'd  Eufeblus,  is  an  excellent  thing; 
but  thofe  who  bear  the  Charter  bv  which  they  enjoy  it, 
feem  not  over- fond  of  the  Polieflion :,  if  your  Soul  be 

matsrial. 


j)^      "the  Gentleman  InJiniBed. 

material,  what  becomes  of  this  topping  Prerogative? 
Man  muft  draw  in  his  Figure,  and  herd  with  Beafts:  At 
moft  there  will  be  no  more  difierence  between  them  than 
between  a  Fox  and  a  Beetle^  or  Scotch-Cloth  and  Fine 
Holland;  the  Materials  are  the  fame,  the  Diftindion  lies 
in  the  Finenefs  of  the  Contexture. 

Iconfefs,  reply'd  Jthymins,  I  fhould  efteem  my  felf 
happy  were  I  unprovided  of  Reafons  that  demon'ftrate 
my  felf  lefs  than  popular  Errors  make  me  ;  for  after  all, 
to  turn  Advocate  againll  one's  felf,  to  plead  againfl:  our 
greateft  Prerogative,  and  to  difpute  one's  felf  out  of  a 
Poffibility  of  being  happy  in  the  npxt  World,  is  the  great- 
eft  Misfortune  that  can  befal  a  Man  in  this,  but  Truth 
muft  have  place.  I  lovfe  to  know  my  juft  Dimenfions, 
and  as  I  fcorn  to  refign  the  leaft  Perfediion  that  belongs 
to  my  Nature,  fo  I.  will  never  ufurp  thofe  that  are  fo- 
reign ;  I'll  not  grow  great  by  Flattery,  nor  claim  a  Dig- 
nity fupported  by  Ignorance  and  Vifion.  If  you  can 
prove  by  Dint  of  Reafon  my  Soul  is  immortal,  I'll 
fubmit  toDemonftration;  and  you  fhall  fee  by  my  Con- 
duct I  expecl  Heaven  as  the  Recompence  of  Virtue,  and 
fear  Hell  a.s  the  Punifhments  of  Vice. 

Under  Favour,  faid  Eufebiu^^  methinks  your  Opini- 
on calls  louder  for  Demonftration  than  mine;  for  if  it 
prove  falfe,  you  forfeit  Heaven  for  the  Miftake,  and  muft 
groan  under  all  the  Thorns  of  the  damned  into  the  Bar- 
gain -,  whereas  I  fhall  go  off  with  the  Satisfadlion  of  li- 
ving like  a  Man,  tho'  I  die  like  a  Beaft.  And  tho'  I  am 
not  happy  in  the  nex  World,  I  fhall  be  out  of  the  reach 
of  Alifery.  In  fine,  I  bid  fair  for  Heaven,  tho*  I  fall 
fhort  of  my  Pretenfions.  But  however,  feeing  you  put 
me  upon  the  Proof,  I'll  condefcend  to  your  Dcfire;  yet 
thoua;h  you  promife  to  fubmit  to  Evidence,  I  cannot  be 
fatisfied  of  the  Performance. 

I  fuppofe.  Sir,  you  will  take  the  Word  of  a  Gentle- 
man, reply'd  Athymius. 

The  Word  of  a  Gentleman,anf\vered"  Eufebius^m^ide  of 
Soul  and  Body  goes  as  far  with  me  as  a  Bond,  but  your  Mat- 
ter and  Motion  Gentlemen's  Credit  finks  low  in  my  E- 
fteem  ;  for  look  ye.  Sir,  any  little  Accident  from  without 
may  ruffle  your  prefent -Situation,  and  jumble  you  into  a 
new  fet  of  P.efolutions  j  it  may  flufli  a  new  Train  of 

Thoughts,. 


^he  Gentleman  InftruBed,     55^ 

Thoughts,  and  then  adieu  to  the  old :  For  Matter  and 
Motions  are  bizarr  Things,  humourfome  and  capricious 
to  Excefs;  they  are  arbitrary  and  uncontroU'd ;  you 
muft  will  and  nill  as  they  pleafe;  every  new  Impulfe 
flings  a  new  Figure,  and  wears  off  the  old  j  lb  that  you 
are  guided  by  Fate,  and  drove  on  by  Chance  in  your  Sy- 
ftem,  and  confequently  muft  be  an  Infidel,  or  a  true  Be- 
liever, an  honell  Man,  or  a  Knave,  in  fpite  of  your  Teeth. 
Now  I  can  no  more  truft  fuch  a  Man  than  a  Puppet:  I 
will  not  venture  a  Crofs  upon  his  Honour,  nor  hazard  a 
fingle  Six-pence  upon  his  Reputation ;  for  who  is  not 
Mafter  of  himfelf,  can  be  no  Slave  to  his  Word. 

But  for  all  that,  faid  Athymius^  my  Word  will  go  a 
great  Way,  and  my  Neighbours  look  upon  it  as  good  a 
Security  as  a  Mortgage. 

I  believe  you,  anfwer'd  Eufebius;  but  this  is  an  In- 
ftance  that  thofe  Neighbours  are  perfuaded  your  Soul  is 
fomething  more  than  Matter,  when  they  take  your  Word, 
nay,  and  your  felf  too  when  you  give  it ;  for  who  but 
Fools  will-  truft  a  Man  that  is  moved  by  Chance,  that  is 
pufli'd  on  by  Fate,  and  drawn  by  Neceffity  ?  Thus  you 
fee,  Sir,  you  difavow  your  Tenet  when  you  ad:  like  a 
Man^  which  makes  me  ilifpedl  you  only  abet  it,  when 
you  intend  to  play  the  Beaft,  and  that  your  Difeafe  hes 
more  in  the  Heart  than  the  Head. 

If  you  pleafe,  faid  Achymius,  cut  fhort  and  come  to 
the  Point;  Preambles  take  up  Time,  and  rid  no  Ground ; 
but  pray  let  us  not  fteer  within  fight  of  Metaphyficks, 
nor  fall  to  cappin  of  Syllogifms.  I  am  for  p!ain  Rea- 
fon  without  Fard  or  Fucus^  and  it  works  more  kindly  in 
honeft  EngUlh^  than  in  the  barbarous  Ergotifm  ot  the 
Schools. 

I  am  for  3^ou,  reply'd  Ezifehius^  and  you  fhall  hear 
thofe  Arguments  that  are  more  eafily  underftood  than 
confuted.  Tell  me  then,  is  it  better  to  be  a  Beaft  or 
a  Man  ? 

I  perceive,  anfwer'd  Athymhis^  you  are  fallen  into  a 
fit  of  bantering;  the  Qiieftion  is  fcandalous,  and  the  ve- 
ry Comparifon  is  degrading  to  human  Nature;  he  who 
prefers  a  Beiift  to  Man,  deferves  to  be  thrown  among 
them. 

D  I  A- 


S^o      the  Gentleman  InJlru^eS, 

DIALOGUE    VIII. 

If  the  Soul  be  mortal^  it^s  better  to  he  «  Beajl  than  a 

Man. 

Eufeb.^V" OUR  Anfwer  is  moft  true,  but  then  youF' 
•*-  Tenet  is  no  lefs  falfe  ;  give  Attention  to  the 
Proof;  nothing  falls  under  Choice  but  Good,  and  with- 
out doubt  a  greater  Good  is  preferable  to  a  lefs  :  Now 
Good  and  Happinefsare  fynonymous,  therefore  a  greater 
Happinefs  is  preferable  to  a  lefs.  Our  prefent  Difpute 
falls  therefore  within  this  Compafs;  whether  a  Beaft: 
in  your  Scheme  of  the  Soul's  Mortality  be  more  happy 
than  a  Man?  I  contend  it  is,  and  prove  it  thus. 

It's  evident  the  Bodies  of  Beafts  are  more  robuft  than 
thofe  of  Men,  they  are  neither  fo  fenfible  of  Heat  nor 
Cold ;  their  Conftitutions  vary  not  with  the  Seafons,  nor 
change  with  the  Barometer.  Hence  may  Difeafes  fpare 
them  that  aflail  us;  they  apprehend  not  their  Pains  be- 
fore they  come,  nor  remember  them  when  paft ;  they 
only  groan  under  the  prefent,  and  fo  their  Dolors  are 
momentary. 

Belides,  their  Pleafures  are  more  affeding  than  ours, 
and  their  Enjoyments  more  pure  ;  they  are  purchafed 
without  Care,  and  loft  without  Trouble  ;  they  are  nei- 
ther followed  with  Remorte,  nor  waited  on  by  Repen- 
tance;  they  are  not  clap'd  on  the  Rack  by  Jealoufy,  nor 
haunted  by  the  Fury  of  Ambition  ;  they  are  too  content 
to  hope,  and  not  miferable  enough  to  fear ;  they  know 
no  more  what  it  is  to  be  grearcr  than  to  be  lefs,  and 
therefore  take  no  Meafures  to  conferve  Fortune,  or  to 
better  it. 

But  poor  Man  lies  open  to  the  Afiaults  of  a  thouHuid 
Calamities  that  overlook  Beafts;  his  Body  is  an  liofpita]" 
General  of  all  Difeafes,  and  he  entertains  them  at  the  Ex- 
pence  of  his  Eafe,  and,  in  the  end,  of  his  Life  too : 
But  the  Difeafes  of  his  Mind  are  rhore  numerous  and 
more  tormenting ;  Hope  drives  one  way,  Defpair  ano- 
ther ;  Solicitude  difcompofes  the  Head,  Jcalouly  the 
Heart ;  Envy  qualms  on  his  Bowels,  Prodigality  on  his 
Purfe  ;  he  keeps  no  Mein  either  in  Profperity  or  Adver- 
fity  ;  that  draws  his  Reafon,  this  overfets  his  Patience ; 

he 


^e  Gentleman  hipni^-ed.    ^6i 

^e  is  infolent  in  one  ilate,  abjeft  in  the  other;  and  that 
his  Misfortunes  may  be  without  Remedy  as  well  as  with- 
out Bounds,  he  calls  back  pad  Mifcarriages  to  torment 
himfelf  again,  and  conjures  up  the  Gholls  of  his  departed 
Pleafiires  to  iransforrn  them  into  Furies ;  and  when  lie 
can  difcover  in  the  future  no  real  Objects  uf  Difgults, 
his  Imagination  creates  them.  He  fprings  Chimera's,  and 
trembles  at  Monfters  that  have  no  Being  but  in  Fancy  j 
yet  though. they  are  fictitious,  his  Fears  are  real,  and  by 
confequence  his  Mifery. 

Indeed  he  is  not  without  Pleafures^  becaufe  not  with- 
out  Senfe  ;  biit  then  they  are  feafoned  with  io  many  bit" 
Ter  Ingredientc,  that  they  rather  difgult  than  delight. 
What  ihall  I  fay  of  thofe  brutiOi  Tranfports  of  Lewdnefs, 
that  hate  the  Sun,  and  range  about  in  Shades  and  Ob- 
fcurity  ?  Of  thofe  Obfcenities  that  make  up  here  trie  Mw 
ioometicai  Elylium  of  Libertines,  and  in  good  time  wili 
throw  them  into  the  real  Hi^Uofthe  ChriiHans.  in  this 
point  the  Advantage  flands  for  the  Beads;  their  Piifiion 
is  as  keen,  their  Senfe  as  acute  as  Man's;  andj  by  con- 
fequence, their  Senlation  as  afFedling ;  but  then  their 
Pleaiure  is  not  da(ht  with  Shame,  nor  bought  at  the  ex- 
pence  of  Honour  or  Confcience  ;  they  contrive  no  Plots 
to  Ileal  Satisfadlion,  no  Intrigues  to  conceal  it;  it  ends 
without  Regret,  without  Remorfe^  and  never  Itabs  at 
parting.  But  Fear  always  fucceeds  Man's  criminal  Piea- 
iures,  and  even  the  Atheill  that  laughs  at  Hell,  is  at  tha 
fame  time  forc'd  to  tremble  at  it.  If  therefore  the  Plea- 
fures  of  Beads  are  at  lead  equal,  and  Troubles  lefs,  wo 
may  judly  concludej  even  m  this  Point,  they  are  more 
happy. 

It's  true,  neither  Beads  nor  Men  have  found  a  Recipe 
againd  Death,  but  then  they  march  otf  without  Concern, 
and  receive  the  Blow  without  Reludtancy,  becaufe  with- 
out Knowledge  ;  but  this  parting  Pang  hangs  cruelty  in 
our  Heads,  and  fometimes  dyes  them  gray  before  the  Aga 
of  Twenty.  For  after  all,  it's  an  unpleafant  Retiedion, 
that  we  mud  (ink  into  a  State  of  Iniignificancy,  and  bi.-- 
come  cumberfome  to  our  felves,  and  unaccept,ible  to 
others)  that  we  mud  grow  lefs  and  .lefs,  and  (d\\  avviy  by- 
Inches.  In  fine,  that  though  we  nurfe  up  continually  the 
Decays  of  Nature,  Death  will  be  too  hard  for  Doitorg 
and  Surgeons,  and  tear  us  from  the  Enjoymenti  of  all 
O  Q  ^\yj\^ 


s6i      The  Gentleman  Injlru^ied, 

ihofe  fenfunl  Objedls,  in  which  we  place  our  Requiem* 
So  thai  I  mud  conclude,  that  feeing  Beafts,  in  your  Sup- 
poiition,  are  more  happy  than  Men,  it's  better  lo  be  a 
Bead  than  a  Man. 

'I'lie  Confequence  is  fhameful,  beyond  Scandal,  and 
a  Man  muft  be  weary  or  ignorant  of  the  Dignity  of 
his  Nature  to  admit  it.  What  does  the  Happinels  of 
a  Horfe  dcferve  Envy  ?  Is  the  Punilliment  en  Nebuchad- 
Ktz.zar  become  an  Ornament  to  the  whole  Species?  Such 
a  Creature  fliould  be  thrown  below  his  Kind,  and  con- 
demn'd  to  wander  on  the  Mountains  with  Bears  and 
Lions. 

Athyrmuu  You  have  held  forth  with  much  Emphafis 
upon  the  Happincfs  of  Beafts,  and  Calamities  of  Man ; 
but  you  fidgin  your  Inference:  For  who  would  chufe  ra- 
ther to  be  a  Stone,  than  the  moft  wretched  Man  that 
ever  breathed  ?  Yet  thofe  brave  Ages  are  out  of  reach  of 
Fits  of  the  Gout,  and  uncapable  to  receive  uneafy  Im- 
prcfiions. 

Etifebms.  Were  I  fure  my  Soul  was  mortal,  I  fhould 
chufe  rather  to  remain  in  a  State  of  Nothing,  than  to  be 
iniferable;  for  I  can't  underftand  why  Being  is  better  than 
not  Being i  only  becaufe  in  one  State  we  have  agreeable 
Senfations,  and  none  in  the  other ;  and  I  declare  that 
Exigence  without  Pleafure  here,  or  hereafter,  is  no  Fa- 
vour, and  with  Torment  a  Burthen;  and  were  I  fure  ne- 
ver to  be  pleafed,  I  fhould  wilh  my  felf  into  Nothing, 
and  pray  for  Anniliilation:  For  to  maintain  that  a  mife- 
rable  Being  is  preferable  to  no  Being,  or  no  fenfible  Be- 
ing, is  the  wildeft  Thefis  that  Folly  can  abet,  and  I  believe 
the  braveft  Champions  of  this  ftrange  Paradox  may  be 
racked,  or  even  baftinado'd  out  of  the  Error. 

Athymius.  Suppofing  Beafts  equal  Men  in  the  Percep- 
tion of  agreeable  Senfations,  are  lefs  lubjeft  to  unplea- 
fing  ones,  yet  they  are  void  of  Reafon.  This  Advantage 
is  proper  to  Man;  and,  I  muft  tell  you,  one  Grain  of 
Science  weighs  more  than  a  Tun  of  fenfual  Satisfaction  ; 
thisdifcovers  the  Beauty  of  Virtue,  and  the  Deformity 
of  Vice,  and  throws  before  the  Will  a  thoufand  Reafors 
to  embrace  that,  and  hate  this:  A  virtuous  Man,  tho' 
miferable,  walks  in  a  higher  Sphere,  than  the  moft  hap- 
py Beaft.  V*^ho  would  not  char^ie  up  to  a  Cannon's 
Mouth  for  a  good  Caufe,  and  rather  expofe  his  Life 

than 


The  Gentleman  InflfuBed,       ^6^ 

than  defert  Juftice  ?  I  would  rather  give  up  my  Body  to 
a  Tyrant,  than  betray  a  Friend,  and  die  Innocent,  than 
live  a  Traytor :  It's  v^'orth  coming  into  the  World  to  go 
virtuoufly  out  of  it.  A  Man  vi^hofe  Virtue  will  bear  the 
Trial  of  Pain,  v/ithout  {hrinking  upon  the  Torture,  is 
more  happy  than  a  Debauchee  upon  the  Throne.  Suffer- 
ing renders  not  a  Man  bad,  or  unhappy,  but  the  Caule  j 
Reafon  pronounces  the  Tyrant  miferable  that  murthers 
Innocence,  not  the  Hero  that  dies  for  it.  Seeing  there- 
fore Beafts  are  below  thofe  noble  Qualities,  Wifdoni 
and  Virtue,  I  mult  conclude,  that  the  moll  wretched 
Man  is  more  happy,  than  the  moft  fortunate  Beaft  j  and 
therefore  it's  better  to  be  a  Man  than  a  Beaft. 

Eufeb.  You  harangue  upon  the  Excellence  of  Science 
like  a  Peripatetick,  and  huff  upon  Virtue  like  a  Sloick: 
I  never  read  Seneca  de  contemnenda  morte^  but,  methinks, 
I  hear  a  Coach  and  Six  rattle  in  the  StJ-eet;  they  both 
make  a  majeflick  Noife,  and  almoft  fright  and  pleafe  at 
the  fame  Time. 

Science,  no  doubt,  is  a  fine  Thing,  and  Virtue  a  bet- 
ter ;  but  if  we  fuppofe  no  future  State,  their  Price  mult 
fall,  and  the  Purchafe  of  both  will  never  pay  the  Char- 
ges of  a  hundred  Objects  that  fall  within  the  Sphere  of 
our  Knowledge;  few  pleafe  us,  many  are  indifferent,  and 
moll  torment  us*  Is  it  fo  diverting  an  Entertainment  to 
t"efle6t,  that  Friends  betray  me,  and  Enemies  perlecute 
me?  That  wife  Men  fcorn^  and  Buffoons  burleique  me? 
Were  we  void  of  Knowledge,  how  Ihould  we  Lmguilh  ■ 
Under  Hope,  or  fret  under  Defire?  Hov/ fhould  we  lie 
open  to  the  Affaults  of  Fear,  or  groan  under  the  Pangs  of 
Defpair?  It's  certain,  in  your  Scheme^  this  mighty  Pre- 
rogative would  rather  deferve  the  Name  of  a  Curfe,  than 
of  a  Bleffmg;  for  though  it  made  us  greater,  it  would 
render  us  more  unhappy^ 

Courage,  Fidelity,  and  Virtue  are  great  Advantages^ 
even  upon  the  Rack,  in  Suppofition  of  the  Soul's  Immor'*- 
tality,  and  Innocence  in  Flames  is  preferable  to  Guilt  ill 
Power  and  Pleafure ;  for  this  leads  us  to  an  eternal  Mi- 
fery,  and  thofe  to  everlafting  Happinefs ;  for  certainly, 
that  Creature  is  far  removed  from  a  State  of  Happinefs^ 
that  mull  account  for  a  criminal  Satisfadtion  in  Fire  ani 
Brimftone  ;  and  he  defervcs  not  the  'Name  of  miferable, 
Vvhopalll'S  through  a  fhori-liv'd  Martyrdom  into  a  perpe- 
tual Relrcflimenti  O  o  2  Bwt 


5^4     ^^^  Gentleman  Inflm^ed, 

But  then,  if  our  Souls  fink  into  nothing,  when  our 
Bodies  fall  into  the  Grave,  Vice  has  all  the  Advantage 
over  Virtue  ;  for  that  brings  prefent  Pleafure,  this  Pain  j 
and  then  in  the  other  World,  the  one  fears  no  Punifh-* 
ment,  and  the  other  expeds  no  Reward,  So  that  neither 
Knowledge,  nor  the  Pradice  of  Virtue,  add  a  Grain  of 
Happinefs  to  Man,  if  his  Soul  be  mortal. 

But,  what  do  we  talk  of  Virtue  ?  It's  a  Chimera  in 
your  Hypothelis ;  you  deftroy  not  only  the  Thing,  but 
the  very  Powers  of  it.  Can  Choice  fpring  from  Fate,  or 
Virtue  from  Neceffity  ;  how  can  we  be  Mafters  of  our 
Adlions,  when  we  are  not  of  our  Souls  ?  And  if  thefe  are 
nothing  but  a  Mixture  of  Matter  and  Motion,  where  is 
Liberty  to  26I  or  not  ait,  and  hy  confequence  Virtue? 
For  who  defcrves  Blame  for  what  he  could  not  avoid,  or 
Pmife  for  following  the  Impulfe  of  Neceffity? 

Ath^muii.  Yoa  may  flourifli  on  the  Happinefs  of 
Bealls,  and  the  Miferies  of  Man,  till  Doom's-day,  but  you 
will  never  perfuade  me  to  truck  Nature  with  an  Afs. 

Er<jl'l>ius.  For  all  that.  Sir,  Men  of  your  Principles 
generally  make  good  Progrefsin  the  Art  of  Transformati- 
on. I  knew  fome  at  Twenty,  that  became  Centaurs, 
half  Beads,  half  Man.  Reafon  declared  them  Men,  the 
Abufes  of  it  Afles ;  Intemperance  Swine,  and  Lewdnefs 
Goats  or  Baboons, 

/ithymitis.  Reafon  ends  when  Railfery  begins.  You 
havedrain'd  the  Subjed,  for  1  perceive  Senfe  runs  lov/, 
let  us  ftart  another  Argument. 

The  Second  Proof. 
Etifeb'tMs.  If  Man's  Soul  be  mortal,  h\s  fummum  ho" 
Kum  uiuil  confifi;  in  the  Pleafures  of  the  Body,  in  the 
iSalisfadion  of  the  Senfes :  For  feeing  his  Nature  is 
whoNy  materuil,  like  that  of  Beafts,  his  End  cannot  be 
diiTercnt,  Whence  it  follows,  that  as  Man^s  Happinefs 
and  Perfection  rife  with  his  Brutality  ;  and  that  he  fits  in 
the  height  of  his  Greatnefs,  when  he  appears  as  little  as 
Lewdnc'is  can  make  him;  the  Reafon  is,  bccaufe  every 
liiing  is  in  the  fuU  State  of  its  Perfection,  when  united 
to  its  laft  End  ;  then  its  Capacities  are  filled,  and  this 
iiiocicty  lays  alleep  both  the  Unquietnefs  of  Defire,  and 
the  tormenting  Impreffions  of  Hope  or  Fear.  If  there- 
fore the  Pleafures  of  Senfe  aie  ManS  ultimate  Happinefs, 
tjie  more  he  induliies,  the  more  happy  he  is,  aud  more 

per- 


fhe  Gentleman  InftruB^d.       j (^5 

iperfeft.  Wherefore  our  King  an  J  Parliament  fhould 
call  in  all  thole  Laws,  thatdifcountenance  Vice,  and  fine 
Lewdnefs.  It  was  an  A6t  of  Injuftice  to  make 'em,  and 
IS  of  Cruelty  to  execute  'em  ;  they  fcare  Men  from  their 
Duty,  and  fright  them  from  \\\€\x]'ur/imnm  bonuyyi ;  they 
ftigmatize  thofe  Actions  with  Shame  that  deferve  Ap- 
•plaufe,  and  canonize  Sobriety  and  Self-denial,  with  fuch 
as  call  for  Infamy  ;  for  certainly  it's  laudable  tcprofecute 
our  lall  End  with  the  utmoft  Care  and  Diligence  ;  for  this 
we  came  into  the  World  :  The  Purfuit  of  if  isour  Duty, 
and  its  Poffeflion  the  Top  of  our  Felicity ;  therefore  Rapes, 
Adulteries,  Incefts,  and  all  thofe  Pleafures  that  fmooth 
the  Organ,  and  oblige  the  Body,  are  exempt  from  Prohi- 
bition ;  they  have  nothing  ill  but  v/hat  is  thrown  on  'pm 
h'j  Prejudice,  Education,  and  Miftake. 

But  this  is  not  all,  for  Reafon  tells  me,  my  fovereign 
Good  is  preferable  to  all  others,  and  that  I  may  comply 
with  any  Means  to  purchafe  it:  If  therefore  it  be  placed 
in  the  fenfual  Operations  of  this  Life,  to  conferve  it,  [ 
may  fwear  pro  and  con^  blafpheme  God's  Goodnefs,  and 
abjure  his  Being.  I  may  (lieer  off  from  one  Religion  to 
another,  profefs  all,  and  believe  none,  to  fence  again (t 
Death.  ■  Muft  not  that  Doflrine  be  monftrous  in  it  felf, 
that  is  fo  flamingly  impious  in  its  confequences?  It's  a 
Spawn  of  Hell ;  I  wonder  it  infeds  not  the  Air^  and 
turns  all  into  Plague  and  Poifon. 

Athym'uis.  Under  Favour,  thefe  Inferences  flow  from 
Miftake,  not  from  the  Mortality  of  tli^  Soul. 

Eufebiu!.  From  Miftake!  if  the  Soul  be  material, 
muft  not  its  fupream  Felicity  confift  in  the  Fruition  of 
lome  Temporal,  fome  fenfual  Obje6l? 

/Ithyrrtiui.  Some  Philofophers  are  of  this  Opinion. 

Eufebtus.  It  is  therefore  lawful  to  poftponeany  inferior 
Gooi  to  the  Supream,  to  hazard  all  Acceilariesj  to  en- 
fure  the  Principle. 

Aihymtus.  What  then? 

Enfcbius.  Why,  I  may  at  any  rate  conferve  Life,  if 
.in  Danger ;  for  this  is  the  Bafis,  the  Foundation  of  Hap- 
phiefs ;  fo  that  if  a  Tyrant  commands  me  to  deny  God, 
with  a  Piftol  in  one  Hand,  and  a  Sword  in  the  other,  I 
may  comply  without  Offence  to  my  Maker,  or  Scandal 
to  my  Neighbour ;  and  than  your  Cnmes  rfii^oruyn ^e»(i- 
u<n,  upon  the  fame  Account,  muft  ftand  for  Virtue. 

O  o  3  Aihym'titi, 


^66      fhe  Gentleman  Inftru^ed, 

Athymius.  You  mifreprefent  my  Dodlrine,  and  expofe 
it  in  fo  monftrous  a  Drefs,  to  hollow  in  the  Rabble  upon 
me.  I  tell  you  therefore  once  more,  it's  more  noble  to 
die  a  Man,  than  to  live  an  Impoftor:  For,  as  I  faid, 
Man's uliimate  Felicity  confifts  in  the  Pradlice  of  Virtue, 
and  his  Mifery  in  the  Exercife  of  Vice:  Now  in  the  fore- 
mentioned  Circumftances,  we  muft  give  up  our  Carcafs 
to  Fire  and  Faggot,  rather  than  fccure  it  by  a  Crime ; 
for  of  two  Evils,  Reafon  tells  me,  I  muft  chufe  the  leaft  ; 
now  it's  a  lefs  to  refign  Life,  than  to  forfeit  our  Happi- 
nefs,  that  confifts  in  Virtue,  by  Thefts,  Murthers,  or 
Adulteries. 

Enfebius.  No  more  of  Virtue  as  you  love  Senfe ;  in 
your  Scheme,  it's  nothing  but  Sound  and  Vifion. 

Athymtus.  Though  the  Soul  be  mortal,  fome  A6lions 
jnay,  I  prefume,  conform  to  the  Didlates  of  right 
Reafon,  and  others  deform. 

Enfehius.  To  theDidlates  of  Divine  Reafon,  but  not 
of  Man's ;  for  Reafon  in  your  Hypothefis  muft  be  filed  ofF 
the  Lift  of  our  Prerogatives:  This  glorious  Quality  finks 
into  bare  Inftin£l,  and  nothing  clafhes  with  any  innate 
Principle  that  obliges  Senfe. 

Befides,  though  fome  Acflions  were  deform,  and  others 
conform  to  right  Reafon  ;  yet  thofe  could  not  be  worthy 
of  LLime,  nor  thefc  of  Praife,  becaufe  an  Agent  com- 
pounded of  Matter  and  Motion  afls  by  Impulfe  and  Ne- 
cefliry,  and  hy  confequence  can  neither  pradtife  Virtue 
nor  Vice. 

But  fuppofing  him  capable  of  Virtue,  yet  we  fhall  find 
it  a  lefs  Evil  to  defert  Virtue,  than  to  die  in  its  Defence  j 
fur  if  the  Soul  be  mortal,  Death  is  deftitute  of  the  very 
Appearance  of  Good  ;  it  ftrips  a  A'lan  not  only  of  Happi- 
nefs,  but  of  the  very  Hope  of  retrieving  the  Misfortune, 
for  it  throws  him  into  a  State  of  Nothing.  Now  Sin,  in 
your  Theology,  corredls  the  Evil  with  fome  Grains  of 
Good;  it  preferves  Life,  the  Bafis  of  Happineis,  and  tho* 
it  ftops  the  Stream  of  Felicity  you  place  in  Virtue,  it 
does  not  drain  it;  he  may  rile  after  his  Fall,  and  fo  r-y 
cover  his  loft  Happinefs:  Death  therefore  being  the greateft 
Evil,  he  may  purchafe  the  Continuation  of  Life  at  the 
|^xj'>ence  ot  Honour,  Honcfty,  and  Confcience. 

Athym.  Death  for  the  Defence  of  Virtue,  has  nothing 
evil  but  Fancy;  bear  off  the  ghaftly  Vizours,  and  you 

v/iii 


fhe  Gentleman  Inftm^ed.    ^6y^ 

will  difcover  nothing  bur  Charms:  C-in  Imagination 
frame  a  Sight  more  ravifliing  than  a  Hero  th:u  declares 
for  Virtue  on  the  Scaffold,  that  dares  be  honeft  in  fpight 
of  Torments?  Such  a  noble  Caufe  melts  an  expiring 
brave  Soul  into  Tranfport  and  Extafy ;  it  overfets  his 
Faculties  with  Pleafure,  and  drowns  them  in  an  Ocean  of 
Delight:  To  foar  above  the  common  Impreflions  of  Fear 
is  a  noble  Flight,  and  to  laugh  in  the  Face  of  Torments, 
a  beautifying  Piece  of  Courage. 

Eufeb.  For  all  that,  you  will  give  me  leave  to  tell  you, 
I  admire  more  your  Martyr's  Stupidity,  than  his  Bravery  ; 
and  I  am  apt  to  believe,  be  would  refign  you  all  his  Plea- 
fure, if  you  \yould  take  his  Pain  into  the  Bargain.  But 
fuppofe  he  overflows  with  Delight  in  this  critical  Mo- 
ment, he  flaflies  into  nothing  the  next.  What  Propor- 
tion therefore  is  there  between  the  lofs  of  Life  that  is  eter- 
nal, and  the  Satisfaction  of  a  Moment?  If  therefore  the 
Soul  be  mortal,  Vice,  with  Pleafure,  is  preferable  to  Vir- 
tue without  Reward,  and  by  confequence  your  Hero  dies 
rather  worthy  of  Pity  than  Applaufe  ;  hecaufe  he  chufes 
Death  void  of  all  Good,  before  Life  the  Bafis  of  all  Hap- 
pinefs,  and  fo  crofles  manifeftly  upon  that  Statute,  by 
which  the  prefent  Controverfy  is  tried.  Oftivo  Evils  the 
hfs  is  to  be  chofea. 


D  I  A  L  O  G  U  E    IX. 

If  Man's  Soul  be  mortal,  he  has  no  lafi  End. 

j1thym.^T^H.e{e  Arguments  ah  abfurdo,  are  ill  featured, 
•*-    they  raile  more  Dufl  than  Light,  and  rather 
puzzle  than  convince  ;  give  me  a  direft  Proof  that  the 
Soul  is  immaterial,  and  i  fiingupthe  Caufe. 

Eufcb.  Abfurdities  are  the  Spawn  of  Falfhood,  not  of 
Truth;  and  when  the  Sequel  is  abfurd,  the  Thefis  can- 
not be  reafonable ;  if  therefore  a  confequence  of  the 
Soul's  Mortality  cut  upon  the  known  Truth,  the  Tenet  it 
felf  muft  be  erroneous.  Thefe  Arguments  then  are  well 
complexioned,  and  fit  for  the  Pofl  I  aflign  them  ;  they 
fpring  Evidence,  and  flufh  Conviction  ;  Obftinacy  may 
withftand  them,  but  Reafon  cannot:  However,  give  me 
O  o  /J.  Ieav2 


j68      ^he  Gentleman  Inflm^fed. 

leave  to  explain  another  Inference  of  your  Opinion,  and 
thtn  i  will  come  to  tliofe  Proofs  you  call  for. 

Surely,  you  are  not  fo  great  a  Stranger  to  your  own 
Defires,  as  not  to  feel  an  inclination  to  be  happy  ;  this 
Pnflion  is  Hereditary  to  the  whole  Species  j  it  accompa- 
nies us  in  all  Stations,  and  even  to  the  Death-bed,  when 
ill!  other  Appetites  either  ilecp  or  expire,  this  grows  more 
keen  and  ravenous  :  Now,  why  has  Nature  ftampt  on 
our  Souls  fuch  a  longing  after  Happinefs?  Why  has  it  in-: 
flamed  us  with  fo  fond  a  Paflion,  that  we  court  it  under 
a  thoufand  Difguifes  ?  Why  has  it  equipM  us  for  Con- 
queft,  if  Victory  be  impoflible  ?  Certainly  at  our  Crea- 
tion, God  never  intended  to  treat  us  Wke /^pril  Fools,  by 
fending  us  on  Adventures  that  mull  end,  not  only  in 
Diiappointment,  but  Afrli(fl:ion. 

All  Philofopbers  take  it  for  a  Pojlulatum^  ihTiitiatura 
mil  agh  friijWa ;  if  therefore  Nature  never  a6ls  in  vain, 
the  carking  Defire  of  Happinefs  that  haunts  us  from  the 
Cradle  to  the  Coffin,  may  be  fatiated  by  the  Fruition  of 
fome  Objedl.  I  fay  fiuiated,  for  Happinefs  cannot  bQ 
compleat  whilft  we  defire  what  we  do  not  poflefs,  or 
fear  to  bedifcarded  of  what  we  enjoy  ;  for  Defire  implies 
■want  in  the  very  Notion,  and  Fear  a  Poffibility  of  want, 
and  both  fuppoie  Uneafinefs  and  Diilatisfa(ftion,  and  by 
confcquence  exclude  Felicity. 

Now  it's  evident,  nothing  in  this  World  is  able  to  fa- 
tiate  the  Heart  of  Man,  the  Pofieflion  never  anfwers  Ex- 
pcftation  J  the  moft  promifing  Enjoyments  languifli  upon 
Experience,  and  flcep  upon  the  Senfes ;  we  rowlfrom  the 
Foilellion  of  one  Obje6t,  to  the  Defire  of  another^  dilla- 
tisfied  in  all  States,  content  in  none.  Alexander  the 
Great  could  never  put  any  Bounds  to  his  Ambitiot;, 
though  he  did  to  his  Conquefts  ;  his  Defires  widen'd 
with  his  Dominions,  and  v/hen  he  had  almoft  conquer- 
ed one  World,  his  Pride  would  have  attempted  the  Con- 
^ueft  of  a  Thoufand  ;  the  prodigious  Treafures  of  the  Eaji 
could  rot  flop  his  Avarice;  his  Wiflies  were  as  prodigal 
as  his  LaiyclTes:  So  that  hi3  wants  ran  higher  than  his 
Revenue,  though  he  had  ten  Millions  of  Talents,  he 
pofiei's'd  notl-.ing,  becaufc  he  dclired  more  ;  his  Plcalures 
f)f  Senfe  kept  pace  v.-ith  ihoie  of  his  Power ;  yet,  after  all, 
he  was  not  happy,  becaufe  diilatisHcd. 

No\Y 


f'h Gentleman  InftruBed.     ^6p 

Now  if  mighty  Princes  who  walk  on  Crowns,  and 
tread  on  Silver,  who  have  Power  to  command  Pleafures, 
And  a  Fund  to  fupport  them,  feel  the  Points  of  Thorns 
on  Beds  of  Rofes,  the  Pangs  of  Want  in  the  Arms  of 
Plenty,  Crofles  in  Succefs,  and  Difiippointment  in  their 
^  moft  fortunate  Enterprizes,  muft  we  not  pronounce  them 
miferable  in  the  very  height  of  their  Fehcity  ?  And  if  it 
can  be  found  neither  in  Empire,  Riches,  nor  Senfuality, 
Jior  in  all  together,  muft  we  not  conclude  Mzn'sfummum 
honum  dwells  in  a  fuperior  Region  ;  and  that  we  mult 
leave  this  World  before  we  can  enter  upon  the  Pofi'eflion. 
of  it? 

In  a  Word,  the  Defire  of  Happinefs  is  ingrafted  in  our 
Nature,  it  may  therefore  be  attained,  becaufe  it's  impof- 
iible  IVlen  fliould  be  born  with  a  natural  Tendency  to  a 
Chimera;  there  is  no  meeting  it  in  this  World,  therefore 
we  muft  expe6t  it  in  the  other  ;  our  Souls  therefore  iur- 
vive  our  Bodies,  and  if  for  one  Moment,  they  muft  re- 
main eternally;  for  without  this  perpetual  Duration 
jChere  can  be  no  Content,  becaufe  no  Security. 

Athym'ius.  I  own  Philofophers  have  been  at  a  Plunge 
to  aflign  \}vi\%  Jummum  bonum  of  Man:  Some  have  feated 
it  on  the  Pinnacle  of  Honour ;  others  have  placed  it  in  the 
Piealuresof  the  Body;  but  the  firft  is  too  thin,  too  airy, 
pnd  too  precarious  to  fatiate  a  reafonable  Soul  ;  and  the 
lecond  too  brutal.  lam  inclined  to  fix  it  with  A-nfiotlcy 
in  the  Satisfatlion  of  our  moft  noble  Faculty,  that  has 
no  Dependance  on  Fortune,  nor  lies  within  the  Reach  of 
C^fualties:  Now  it's  agreed  on  all  Sices,  that  notliing 
comes  up  to  the  Undcrftanding,  therefore  our  Felicity 
muft  confift  in  the  Satisfaction  of  this  glorious  Faculty. 

Etifeh.  But  where  fhall  we  chop  upon  this  beatifying 
Objec'l? 

Athym.  The  ftately  Machine  of  the  World  will  furnifh 
lis  a  large  Profpeft  of  Contemplation  and  Pleafures.  I 
can  never  contemplate  the  Beauty  of  the  I'irmament, 
the  fine  Subordination  of  the  celeftial  Orbs,  iheir  vari- 
ous, yet  regular  Circumvolutions,  but  I  find  my  felf  in 
Rapture  and  Extafy,  Sometimes  I  dive  into  Caufes, 
and  conftrue/^/r^/7  by  Experience,  Felix  qui  pviuit  n- 
rum  coinofcere  caufas :  When  my  Undcrftanding  is  po- 
,fpd,  I  Itcp  over  the  Difficulty,  and. am  even  charm 'd 
WiLli  my  I^^norance  ;  for  a  nonplus   has  its  Satisfiidion, 

and 


J70       ne  Gentleman  Infm^ed. 

and   there  is  a  Charm  in  knowing  we  are  ignorant  of 
fomething. 

Etifeb.  This  Contemplation  is  indeed  a  handfome  Di- 
verlion,  but  a  lean  Felicity;  and  I  am  apt  to  think  it's 
far  more  capable  to  puzzle  than  to  content;  for  alas,  we 
furvey  thofe  Objects  that  are  at  hand  through  Mills,  and 
thofe  that  are  remote  through  falfe  Profpe6tives :  So  that 
our  Ignorance  extends  wider  than  our  Knowledge,  and 
our  Intelleft  is  rather  harafs'd  with  Doubts,  and  alarm'd 
■with  Sufpicions,  than  regal'd  with  ftaunch  Demonltration. 
Now  I  fuppofe  Ignorance  rather  f;ets  theUnderftanding 
than  fatiates  it;  Doubts  rack  it,  and  Sufpicions  clap  it 
on  the  Torture:  Flow  then  can  this  fine  Contemplation 
you  talk  of  lay  afleep  all  our  Defires,  and  place  us  in  a 
ilate  of  Repofe  ? 

But  zdiy^  If  Hunger  ravage  my  Stomach,  and  Penury 
my  Purfe;  if  I  tug  at  an  Oar,  will  Contemplation  filence 
Appetite?  Or  fill  my  Purfe?  Or  knock  oft"  my  Chains? 
Alas,  Sir,  thefe  Miferies  fit  hard  upon  a  Man  in  fpight  of 
Speculation,  and  muft  be  removed  by  fome  more  effec- 
tual Means  than  Knowledge. 

3-y/)',  All  the  World  cannot  whip  and  fpur  for  Oxford 
and  Cambriilge ;  fome  have  no  Wit  for  Studies,  fome  no> 
Inclination,  and  otiiers  no  Leifure;  Clovv^ns  find  upon 
Experiment,  that  Action  turns  to  better  account  than  Spe- 
culation, and  you  will  never  perfuade  them  to  truck  the 
Spade  for  Arijiotle  or  Archimedes. 

Again,  Women,  I  fuppofe,  may  lay  fome  claim  to 
Happinefs  as  well  as  Men;  muft  they  alfo  leave  the  Di- 
JtafF  to  con  Plato,  and  contemplate  Nature,  whilft  they 
iliould  make  Bone-lace?  I  always  ruppos'd  the  fupream 
Felicity  of  every  Individual  v/as  the  fame  with  that  of  the 
whole  Species ;  but  no,  it  varies  with  Conftitutions  and 
Employments ;  and  you  treat  the  Sex  in  England  with  as 
little  Ceremony  as  the  BoKzees  in  Japan,  who  difcard 
them  of  all  Title  to  Knppinefs ;  but  this  is  to  pollpone 
the  Scripture  to  Pomponaiius;  to  rely  more  on  the  Reve- 
ries of  an  Atheiftical  Pedant,  than  on  the  Authority  of 
Jesus  Cmusx. 


DI  A- 


The  Gentleman  Injini^kd,     571 


DIALOGUE   X. 

The  Soul  is  immaterial. 


maten- 


Bufeb.  "Y*  O  U  called  for  diredt  Proofs  of  the  Imrr 
•*■    ality,  I  muft  comply  with  your  Defire. 
I, 

Man  is  a  free  Agent,  and  by  confequence  his  Soul 
draws  not  its  Origin  from  Matter.  Sure  you  will  not 
oblige  me  to  prove  a  thing  fo  clear,  fo  evident.  We  ex- 
perience this  Liberty  in  our  A6lions ;  we  may  continue 
the  prefent  Difcourfe  or  interrupt  it :  I  am  not  neceffita- 
ted  to  fpeak,  nor  you  to  hear  me.  Upon  this  Perfua- 
lion  of  Freedom,  Commerce  is  carried  on,  and  Govern- 
ment founded:  Who  would  truft  a  Neighbour,  were  he 
not  perfuaded  Honefty  were  in  his  Power?  And  why 
fhould  a  Murderer  leave  his  Life  on  a  Gibbet  if  the 
Crime  was  unavoidable?  In  fine,  why  do  all  Common- 
wealths difcourage  Vice  by  Punifhments,  and  encourage 
Virtue  by  Rewards,  but  upon  this  univerfal  Perfuafion 
that  Man  is  a  free  Agent?  This  being  premifed,  I  argue 
thu?. 

Liberty  is  a  Power  to  aSi  and  not  aSl^ivhen  all  things  pre- 
required  fur  Adion  are  ready -^  for  no  Creature  can  be  con- 
ceived free  that  is  antecedently  determined  to  one  fide  of 
a  Contradidlion.  Now  if  there  be  a  Power  in  Man,  that 
can  fufpend  an  Aftion,  when  all  things  pre-required  are 
prefent,  its  Adlion  depends  not  upon  any  Difpofitior;  ei- 
ther in  the  Objeft  or  Organ  ;  and  by  confequence,  it 
muft  be  independent  of  Matter ;  but  if  the  Adtion  be  in- 
dependent, the  Power  it  felf  muft  be  fo  alfo;  for  no 
Operation  can  be  more  perfeft  than  its  Caufe. 

If  you  fay  the  Will  is  not  determined  by  it  felf,  but 
by  the  Charms  of  fome  apparent  Good,  or  fome  material 
Difpofitions  in  or  without  th?  Organ,  you  overthrow  the 
very  Notion  of  Liberty  ;  for  then  it  can  no  more  abftain 
from  Adion,  than  the  Eye,  when  all  things  neceilary 
for  Vifion  are  prefent.  Seeing  therefore  Man  is  fuppofcd 
free,  and  that  Freedom  is  incompatible  with  a  Deter- 
mination that  proceeds  from  any  previous  Difpofition  in 
Matter,  yet  we  muft  conclude  it  determines  it  felf,  and 
by  conlequence  is  independent  of  Matter,  ;".  e.  im- 
material. 

To 


57 2     *^f^^  Gentleman  InfiruSted. 

Toexpofe  this  Truth  in  a  greater  Light,  do  we  r©t 
fometimcs  mortify  the  Inclinations  of  Flefh,  and  hold  in 
the  Tendency  of  Appetite?  How  many  tie  up  their  Bo- 
dies to  Chaftity  in  Ipight  of  Solicitations?  Suppreis  the 
Sallies  of  Intemperance  by  Abftinence,  and  of  Drunkcn- 
nel's  by  Sobriety  ?  Now  if  the  Soul  depends  on  the  Body, 
it  cannot  baulk  its  Inclinations :  Can  a  Horfereftrain  Ap- 
petite when  he  ftands  at  a  full  Manger,  and  faft  in  the 
Prefenceof  Provender?  Alas,  poor  Creatures,  their  Souls 
and  Bodies  are  made  of  the  fame  Stuff;  and  fo  thofe  have 
no  Superiority,  nor  Juujfdiftion  over  thefe :  In  all  their 
Flights  and  Purfuits  they  follow  the  Direction  of  Senfe  ; 
•whatever  glides  fmoothly  upon  the  Organ,  the  Soul  em- 
braces, and  whatever  grates  upon  it  raifes  its  Averfion. 

What  material  Difpontion  could  force  St.  Lawrence 
rather  to  broil  on  a  Grid-Iron,  than  to  apoftatize  from  his 
Religion  ?  They  all  banded  againft  his  Refolution ;  Senfe 
perRnded  him  to  relent,  and  his  Body  funk  under  the 
Violence  of  Torments ;  yet  bis  great  Soul  was  deaf  to  the 
Clamours  of  Senfe  ;  it  facrific'd  the  Body  to  conferve  its 
Innocence.  You  may  as  foon  perfuade  me  that  Ice  can 
burn,  and  Fire  freeze,  as  that  a  material  Principle  can 
thus  aft  contrary  to  the  Difpolitions  of  Matter ;  but  St. 
J^awr-ence  A\d^,  and  thoufands  befides;  therefore  there  is 
jn  Man  a  Principle  that  determines  it  felf,  and  confe- 
quently  independent  of  Matter. 

2. 

If  the  Soul  he  material,  all  Plcafure  muft  be  conveyed 
pnto  it  by  the  Channel  of  fomc  Senfe;  no  agreeable  Fer- 
f  eption  can  come  at  it,  but  by  the  Mediation  of  corporeal 
Organs ;  but  the  Soul  is  capable  of  Delight,  that  has  no 
Jnfluepce  on  Senfe,  that  refides  wholly  in  the  Under- 
ftanding  ;  thus  the  Difcovery  of  a  Truth  diftrafted  Ar- 
fhlr/iedes,  and  he  dcmonftrated  himfelf  almoft  out  of  hig 
Wits ;  he  was  not  able  to  bear  the  Impreilion  of  Joy. but 
cver-fet  with  the  afle(fl:ing  Charms  of  his  cafual  Dif- 
covery, he  lenp'd  out  of  the  Bath,  and  rnn  naked 
through  the  Streets,  without  any  Regard  to  Age  or 
Decency. 

Now,  what  plunged  this  M.'^themUicinn's  Soul  info 
r.irh  an  Ocean  of  Delight?  No'hing  but  a  new-found 
Truth,  fo  proi^j-r  to  the  Underflandini,  that  no  Senfe 
could  pretcnid  any  Share  in  it  j  it  came  not  within  the 

Reach 


fhe  Gentleman  InJlrnBed,     j;^j 

Reach  of  the  Eye,  or  Smell,  it  was  too  airy  to  be  finger-^ 
ed  ;  and  I  believe  a  thoufand  Demonftrations,  though* 
never  fo  high-feafoned,  v/ould  prove  a  meagre  Regale  lo 
the  Palate.  Seeing  therefore  a  material  Soul  can  receive 
no  agreeable  Senfation,  but  from  an  Impreffion  ftamp'd 
on  fome  Senfe;  and  that  the  Pleafure  oi  Archimedes  ivas 
not  the  Objedt  of  any  Senfe,  vi'e  mufl  conclude  it  reli- 
ded  in  the  Soul,  without  Dependance  on  any  Senfe,  and 
by  confcquence  that  his  Soul  v/as  immaterial. 

AtJjym.  Thefe  are  a  pack  of  Hackney  Arguments,  and 
fent  upon  all  Expeditions;  they  are  a  kind  oi  erjjiws per- 
due, expofed  in  every  Rencounter;  but  after  all,  they  are 
more  fit  for  Appearance  than  Service.     I  have  not  time 
at  prefent  to  dilcover  their  Weaknels;  in  the  mean  time, 
fuppofing  the  Soul  immaterial,  why  mud  it  be  immortal? 
Eufeb.  The  Arguments  I  propoieare  ordinary  inict-d, 
and  lie  in  every  Man's  Way,  but  they  are  not  lels  con- 
cluding, becaufe  obvious;  all  may  underitand  then),  but 
no  Libertine  can  anfwer  them.     You  ask  me  why,  from 
.Immateriality,  I  infer  Immortality  ?  Give  me  leave  to 
put  this  Quellion  ;  is  the  A4afs  of  iVIatter,  that  makes  up 
the  World,  naturally  eternal? 
Athym.  Yes. 

Eufeb.  Can  you  prove  it? 

Aihym,  Philofopliers,  if  I  am  not  miftaken,  prove  it 
thus  ;  God  as  Author  of  Nature  never  withdraws  his 
Hand  from  any  Creature  but  at  the  Exigence  of  fome 
contrary  Agent.  Now  Matter  has  no  contrary;  all  the 
operative  Qualities  in  Nature  relide  in  Matter,  and 
though  they  fall  out  among  themfelves,  it  enters  not  into 
the  Quarrel,  bending  to  neither  fide,  it's  a  Friend  to  all. 
In  fine,  being  the  common  Subjedt  of  Contraries,  it  can 
be  oppofite  to  none,  and  there  lies  out  of  the  reach  of 
Corruption. 

Eufeb.  I  receive  your  Reafon,  but  then  it  anfvvers 
your  Query  ;  for  if  the  Soul  be  immaterial,  it  mull  be 
fpiritual;  there  is  no  Mean  between  thefe  two  Extreams. 
It  cannot  be  an  Accident:  For  it's  agreed  on  all  Hands, 
that  Man  is  a  fubftantial  Compound  ;  therefore  the  moft 
noble  Ingredient  muft  be  a  Subilance.  Such  is  his  Soul, 
without  doubt,  for  this  entitles  him  to  Reafon,  and  feats 
him  above  the  Herd.  The  Soul  therefore  is  a  fpiritual 
Subrtance,    that  i?,  a  Spirit  :  Now,  no  miiterir.!  Agent 

can 


574      ^^  Gentleman  InJiruBed, 

can  a6l  upon  a  Spirit,  becaufe  it  can  have  no  Oppofition 
to  it ;  therefore,  feeing  nothing  in  Nature  requires  its 
Deftru6tion,  it  naturally  requires  to  exift  as  well  as 
Matter. 

Indeed,  as  God  gave  it  a  Being,  fo  he  can  at  Pleafure 
recal  the  Gift  ;  but  then  he  muft  a<5t  as  Sovereign,  not 
as  Author  of  Nature  ;  for  in  this  Quality  he  never  with- 
dravi^s  his  conferving  Influence,  but  at  the  Exigence  of 
fome  contrary  Agent ;  novi^  the  Soul  having  no  contrary^ 
God  as  the  Author  of  Nature  muft  conferve  it  eternally. 

Athym.  Your  Arguments,  though  obvious,  make,  I 
confefs,  fome  ImprelTion,  and  though  they  do  not  con- 
vince, at  leaft,  they  perfuade,  but  the  Refemblance  be- 
tween Men  and  Beafts  hangs  cruelly  in  my  Head  ;  they 
are  fo  like,  that  methinks  they  muft  be  made  of  the 
fame  Ingredients :  Their  Species  is  propagated  by  Gene- 
ration, they  grow  up  by  Degrees,  and  receive  Nourifh- 
ment  and  Increafe  from  Meat  and  Drink ;  ill  Ufage  heats 
their  Paflions,  Kindnefs  cools  'em ;  they  hear,  fee,  fmell, 
and  tafte,  and  regulate  their  A<5lions  by  the  Senfes;  they 
lie  open  to  Difeafes,  and  at  laft  fink  under  Age  or  Mala- 
dy ;  is  not  this  an  exadt  PitSture  of  Man  ?  Does  he  not 
make  as  ignoble  an  Entrance  into  the  World,  and  as 
fhameful  an  Exit,  as  the  vileft  Infed  ?  He  rolls  in  Or- 
dure nine  Months,  and  then  falutes  the  Light  with  Tears 
and  Clamours ;  he  begs  a  Livelihood  of  all  Creatures, 
and  courts  the  very  Beaft  for  Suftenance  and  Cloathing ; 
Paflions  grow  upon  him  with  Years,  Age  inftils  Vigour, 
and  Malice  fcts  them  on  Fire;  his  Brutality  vies  with  that 
of  Bears;  and  his  Cruelty  out-runs  the  rage  of  Lions; 
he  is  furnilh'd  with  Senfes  as  well  as  they,  and  gives 
himfelf  over  to  their  Direftion  :  If  Beafts  languifh  under 
Diieafes,  is  Man  exempt  from  the  Inconvenience  ?  They 
both  ftruggle  with  Diftempers,  difpute  their  Poft,  and 
then  furrender  to  Death,  and  what  remains  but  breathlefs 
Carcafes.  Alexander  and  Buceph.ilns  lie  on  the  fame  Le- 
vel, the  Duft  of  the  Emperor  has  no  Privilege  above 
that  of  the  Horfe.  Seeing  therefore  Beafts  are  mortal, 
why  muft  we  inveft  Man  with  Immortality?  A  Refem- 
blance of  Operations  fuppofcs  a  Likenefs  of  Principles  j 
and  when  the  Effeds  are  equal,  it's  againft  Re.Ubn  to 
make  the  Caufcs  unequal. 

Enfebt 


^he  Gentleman  Injiru^ed,     5 75 

Eufeh.  In  the  firft  place,  your  Argument  proves  as 
ftrongly  the  Immortality  of  Beaft's  Souls,  as  the  Morta- 
lity of  Man's. 

Athym.  Nay,  then  I'll  forfwear  difputing. 

Euj'eb.  Would  all  Gentlemen  take  the  fame  Refolution, 
Religion  would  be  more  regarded  among  us,  and  the  Ci- 
vil Government  lelsdivided  ;  for whofoeverdifputes  Arti- 
cles of  Faith,  believes  none  j  and  it's  a  general  Remai^, 
that  thofe  who  eternally  enter  upon  Coniroyerfyj  giy| .,. 
more  Evidence  of  Infidelity  than  Wit :  'l*fiTs'is,  iflani.;^ 
rot  miftaken,  your  Argument;  there  is  a  molt  perfed^  "  " 
Refemblance  between  Men  and  Beads;  both  as  to  the 
Necellity  of  dying,  and  to  all  the  apparent  Sequels  of 
Death ;  but  Beafls  die  entirely,  therefore  Men  die  en- 
tirely. * 

Athym.  It  is. 

Eufeb.  Let  us  now  turn  the  Tables ;  there  h  a  mnjl 
perfeil  Refemblance  between  Men  and  Beajls,  boti)  as  to 
the  NeceJJitp  of  Dying ,  and  to  all  the  apparent  Sequeh^ 
Death,  but  Men  die  not  entire ly^  therefore  Beajls  die  nut 
entirely. 

Athym.  Under  Favour,  you  obtrude  a  wretc!ied  So- 
phifm  for  a  ftaunch  Reafon ;  my  Argument  ftands  upon  an 
avowed  Principle,  whilll:  yours  fuppofes  the  Qiieltion  we 
contend  for:  It's  agreed  on  both  fides,  the  Souls  of  Beafts 
are  mortal :  if  therefore  there  appear  an  exadl  Conformi- 
ty between  them  and  Men,  in  the  whole  Series  of  their 
Life,  and  Sequel  of  their  Death,  I  may  very  philofophi- 
cally  infer  Men's  Souls  are  mortal,  feeing  we  both  agree 
thofe  of  Beafts  are-,  but  you  cannot  conclude  the  Immor- 
tality of  Beaft's  Souls  from  that  of  Men,  for  this  lies  un- 
der Debate;  we  are  inqueftofthis  Prerogative,  and  can- 
not determine  whether  Man  owes  his  Claim  to  Nature, 
or  Flattery,  or  Vifion :  The  Confequence  therefore 
draws  from  one  contefted  Antecedent  is  illegal;  it  nei- 
ther helps  the  Opponent,  nor  foils  the  Defendant. 

Enfeb.  The  Queftion  is  not  what  I  believe,  but  what 
you  can  reafonably  conclude  precifely  from  the  Refem- 
blance between  Men  and  Beads,  i  fay,  you  can  no  more 
infer  the  Mortality  of  human  Souls,  than  the  Immorta- 
lity of  thofe  of  Beafts.  We  fee  the  one  and  the  other  die, 
but  the  Senfe  is  unable  to  bring  any  News  of  the  Soul, 
though  you  fend  them  on  Difcoveries ;  If  you  venture  up- 
on 


^y 6      7he  Gentleman  Injlru^ed. 

<^\  a  Difleclion  of  their  Bodies,  you  may  come  at  the 
Diitemper  that  carried  them  off":  But  you  will  meet  witK 
iro  Symptoms  of  A-lortality  or  Immortality  ;  and  there- 
fore Itanding  to  the  bare  Refcmblance,  your  Argument 
has  no  Advantage  over  mine. 

But  1  acknowledge,  fay  you,  that  the  Souls  of  Beafts 
ate  mortal;  but  then  remember,  I  believe  thofe  of  Men 
to-be  immorrah  ,If  therefore  you  abandon  the  Refcm- 
blance, and  call  the  Caufe  upon  my  Authority  ;  rely  uport  . 
it,  inoneCafe  as  vi/ell  as  in  the  other:  If  it  is  of  no  vi'eight 
for  the  Immortality  of  Man's  Soul,  why  fhall  it  enter  in- 
to the  Proof  oi'  the  Mort:ility  of  Beafts  ?     . 

If  the  Reafons  with  which  I  eftablifti  the  Mortality  of 
the  Souls  of  Beafts,  prove  the  Mortality  of  thofe  of  Men, 
you  come  up  to  the  Point  \  in  this  Cafe  my  Re.ifons  might 
help  on  your  Argument,  but  not  by  Authority ;  but  alas. 
Sir,  the  Reafons  for  the  one  fide  have  no  relation  to  thofe 
of  the  other:  Thofe  that  mainta'in  the  Mortality  of  Beafts 
are  foreign 'to  Man,  and  would  remain  in  their  ful! 
b^trengih  though  he  were  not  in  Beings 

To  draw  to  an  end,  I  grant  the  Souls  of  Beafts  ars 
mortal,  and  that  there  is  a  great  Refemblance  between 
them  and  Men;  the  Queftion  is,  what  can  be  legally  in-, 
ferred  from  this  Similitude  ?  I  fiy  nothing,  but  that  all 
that  is  animal  in  Man  dies;  his  Body  dies,  his  fenfitive 
and  vegetative  Life  end,  and  all  thofe  Faculties  that  de- 
pend on  corporeal  Organs  ceafe  with  the  laft  Breath.  This 
is  a  fiir  Inference,  and  all  Chriftians  receive  it ;  but  then 
itftopsat  the  animal  Part  of  Man  without  touching  the 
reafonahle,  whofe  Being  and  Operations  have  no  Depcn- 
dance  upon  Matter. 

But  you  reafon  as  ill  as  you  believe,  and  your  LogicJc 
is  of  tl;e  lame  Statnp  with  your  Tenet.  Man^  fay  )'ou,' 
rcfcmbles  Beajis  in  thofe  Things  that  arc  common  to  boihy 
trwerly  us  they  are  Animals  \  therefore  Z'f  refemhles  i»  thofe 
Things  that  are  proper  to  him  as  Man.  Ag;ain,  Bciijis  die 
accordi>!g  to  the  fenjitive  Life ^  which  is  e[]cn!ial  to  A»t- 
w.'ils^  but  Alan  refcmbles  Beajis  in  that  Vihuh  is  cfjentiat 
to  Anirnaii  \  therejorehc  dies  as  to  the  rational  Lifc^xvhich 
is  nut  ej]eHti(4l  to  /Inimals.  In  fuic,  Alan  is  mort^il  as  to  hit 
Body^  therefore  he  is  mortal  as  to  hts  Soul.  If  this  be  Rea- 
fon, what  is  Sophifni?  To  conclude  I'loni  a  Part  of  the 
I'f'huU'  is  a  Solecilm  in  Logick  s  and  to  atiiibulc  un  a 

ihipgc 


fhe  Gentleman  Inftru^ed,     577; 

thing  abfolutely^  that  belongs  to  it  merely  ^er  accidens,  i'| 
to  defy  Reafon. 

In  .Sne,  if  there  be  a  great  Refemblance  between  fome 
Operations  of  Men,  and  thofe  of  Beafts,  there  is  as  wide  a 
difference  between  others  ;  if  therefore  from  a  Confor- 
mity of  Actions  you  infer  a  Simihtude  of  Principles,  pray 
fuffer  me  to  conclude  a  difference  of  Principles  from  th^ 
difference  of  Aitions. 

I  have  already  thrown  before  you  fome  human  Opera- 
tions that  mult  proceed  from  a  Principle  wholly  different 
from  any  that  is  to  be  found  in  Beafts ;  and  to  go  no  kv:~i 
rher,  Wh^t  is  there  in  Beafts  that  bears  any  Proportiorv 
to  the  Underftanding  ?  it  enters  into  the  very  Eilence,  an» 
rifles  the  molt  abftrufe  Recefies  of  Nature ;  it  defines,  di*; 
vides  and  diftinguifhes;  its  Motion  outftrips  the  Winds, 
and  its  Rapidity  diftances  Lightnings;  in  a  Word,  it  em.- 
braces  the  Poles  together,  and  at  one  intelleftual  grafp, 
clutches  the  whole  Extent  of  the  Univerfe.  Befides,  Man's 
Soul  calls  all  the  material  Faculties  to  account,  and  minds 
the  Senfes  of  their  Miftakes  ;  it  impeaches  the  Fancy  of 
Folly,  and  laughs  at  thofe  Moi^mo's  it  creates  to  fright  us: 
If  it  be  of  the  fame  Alloy  with  them,  how  came  it  by  this 
defpotick  Power  ?  Who  commiffioned  it  to  call  them  to 
the  Bar,  and  to  pronounce  Sentence  ?  View  all  the  Beafts 
of  the  Field,  and  Birds  of  the  Air,  and  you  will  not  find 
one  whofe  Soul  pretends  to  any  Superiority,  to  any  Jurif- 
diftlon  over  their  Bodies ;  they  follow  the  Guidance  of 
Senfe,  and  believe  the  Intelligence. of  Fancy  ;  they  cor- 
rect no  Errors,  becaufe  they  perceive  none :  Survey  not 
their  paft  Aftions,  nor  confult  upon  the  future;  for  their 
Souls  drawing  their  Origin  from  Matter,  they  derive  all 
their  Knowledge  from  the  Senfes,  and  thus  in  Nature 
being  equal,  can  exercife  no  ASt  of  Superiority  ;  for  he 
who  corrects  muft  be  more  knowing  than  he  who  is  cor- 
redled,  and  he  who  commands  than  he  who  is  forc'd  to 
obey.  Seeing  therefore  the  Soul  of  Man  commands  the 
material  Powers,  unmasks  the  lUufions  of  Fancy^  and  the 
falfe  Reports  of  Senfe,  that  it  judges  of  Ohjeds  not  ac- 
cording to  the  Reprefentations  of  corporeal  Organs,  but  of 
a  fuperior  Principle;  it  muft  be  more  noble  than  Senfe, 
fuperior  to  Imagination,  incependant  of  Matter,  and  con- 
fequently  immaterial. 

P  s^  Ach^^. 


5 §7      ^^^  Gentleman  Injlru^fed, 

Athym.  Well,  Sir,  we  have  waded  into  the  Depth  of 
the  Controverfy,  it's  time  to  retire :  Your  Arguments 
look  f.,ir  without;  at  my  Icifurc  I  will  examine  whether 
they  are  found  within. 

Ei'.feh.  It's  llrange  that  Men  who  build  their  Infidelity 
upon  Conje6tures  will  yield  to  nothing  but  Evidence : 
Why  fo  much  Caution  againft  Truth,  and  Jo  little  againft 
Error  ?  Is  it  ib  much  your  Intereft  to  be  in  the  Wrong, 
and  fuch  a  Grievance  to  be  in  the  Right  ?  Spend  fome 
cool  Thoughts  upon  the  Matter;  [j)e;n  ac  metum  exa- 
mina^  confront  your  Hope  with  your  Fear;  examine 
what  you  fhaU  gain  if  your  Soul  be  mortal, what  you  will 
Jofe  if  immortal;  if  immortal  you  forfeit  all,  if  mortal 
nothing.  If  therefore  the  Qiieftion  were  merely  problema- 
tick,  you  fhould  ftand  for  that  Side  that  promifes  morcj 
and  threatens  lefs ;  ^  quotia  incerta  erunt  omnia  tibi  favCy 
if  I  am  not  miftaken  I  fhall  never  deplore  my  Error,  nor 
even  perceive  it;  but  alas.  Sir,  if  you  are  in  the  Wrong, 
you  will  once  difcover  yonrs,  and  always  deplore  it,  but 
never  retrieve  your  Misfortune. 

7'he  Arguments  o^ Eufebius  made  fome  Impreffion  on 
the  Gentleman,  and  this fhort  Refledtion  more;  but  the 
difmal  end  of  that  Arch  Atheift  Theomachm  finifh'd  his 
Converfion  ;  fo  that  I  may  fay  the  Gentleman  was  rather 
feared  than  argued  into  a  Senfe  of  his  Duty.  Eufebius 
received  in  the  nick  of  time  an  exaft  Account  of  that  un- 
fortunate Gentleman's  Death  from  a  Friend  in  Town  ; 
and  it's  fo  remarkable  in  all  its  Circumflanccs,  that  God 
feems  to  have  permitted  it  for  the  Inftru6tion  of  Pofteri- 
ty^  and  to  convince  Libertines,  that  he  not  only  punifhcs 
their  Impieties  in  the  next  World,  but  often  in  this. 
EufebiHs  read  the  Letter  as  follows. 

Honoured  Sir, 
~phrmit  me  to  interrupt  your  Retirement  with  ajhort  Ac' 
■*■  count  of  a  diplqrahle  Accident  :  T'our  Antagontft  Theo- 
machus  is  no  more  \  DivifieVexgemice  has  overtaken  his  Int- 
pieties,  and  -made  his  PtiniJJoment  no  lefs  ajlonifloing  than  his 
Crimes  ;  he  left  the  World  a  Convert  indeed^  but  not  a  Peni- 
tent ;  for  though  he  dtfowned  Atheifm,  he  retained  the  Sin, 
and  delivered  himfelf  into  the  Hinds  of  Go  a' s  'Jujiice^  be- 
caufe  he  defpaired  of  his  Mercy  :  So  that  one  would  think  he 
ackMbwkdgtdaGedmerilytoprovoke  him  ifor  by  denying  his 
J  Mercy 


The  Gentleman  InJiruBed,       57^ 

Mercy  to  be  infimte^  he  forced  him  to  exert  his  Juflice^and 
dared  htm  to  damn  htm^  infpite  of  all  his  Invitations  to 
Repentance. 

'That  unfortunate  Harlot^  that  fometime  hefore  began  his 
Ruin,  at  length  compleated  it  ;  fo  true  it  is,  that  the  In- 
firuments  of  our  Sins,  fro've  often  thofe  of  our  ¥  nn'jhment, 
and  that  we  find  our  Mifery  in  th'/fe  very  things  in  which 
we  place  our  fupream  Felicity :  This  Creature  mtwith- 
fianding  had  nothing  extraordinary  to  recommend  her,  but 
the  Ltiicrtiesofa  Profiitute,  and  the  Freedom  of  her  Pro- 
fejfi'jn  ;  ttnftirnijh^d  of  one  good  Quality^  Jhe  had  gleaned 
up  all  the  bad  ones  of  the  Sex  :  In  a  word,  if  her  Face 
was  fair,  her  Soul  was  black,  her  Fore-head  of  Br  afs,  and 
her  Heart  of  Steel:  However  Jhe  fubdned  Theomachus, 
and  maintained  her  Conqueft ;  he  furrendcred  at  Difcre- 
tion,  and  to  purchafe  her  Favour  made  over  his  Heart, 
his  Eflate^  Reputation,  and  in  the  end  his  Soul  alfo  to  this 
Town-yHt ;  for  jhe  was  no  better. 

A  Friend  took  Compajfion  of  this  poor  Gentleman,  and 
fuppofed  he  might  conjure  down  his  Pajfion,  by  expofmg 
the  Lewdnefs  of  his  Idol :  Bat  alas,  Theomachus  was 
fiot  only  enchanted  with  Charms  of  her  Perfon,  but  (what 
is  more  incredible)  with  thofe  of  her  Virtue :  So  that  for 
Thanks  he  returned  Curfes,  and  asked  Satisfaction  for  the 
Advice,  inftead  of  benefiting  himfelf. 

Nay,  Sir,  faid  the  Friend,  IJhall  foon  make  a  Bank^ 
rupt,  if  I  give  good  Counfel  and  pay  for  it  too.  I  have 
dij  charged  the  Duty  of  a  Friend,  if  you  take  me  for  an  Ene- 
my who  can  help  it  ?  My  Intention  is  friendly,  and  my  Coun^ 
fel  wholfome.  IFhy  do  you  mifconfirue  ih^iX,  and  turn  this 
into  Poifon  ?  It's  no  injury  to  tell  a  Friend  he  is  injur'' d  ; 
ijo  Affront  to  convince  him  he  is  affronted:  IVell,  Sir,  I 
abandon  you  to  her  Mercy,  and  I  am  fure  I  cannot  leave 
you  in  worfe  Company, 

Theomachus  acquainted  his  AHflrefs  with  the  Paffage, 
and  envenom' dhisFriend' s DifcozirJ'^e  with  a  mortij'yingCom- 
ment ;  jhe  flew  out  into  all  the  extravhgances  ofPajfion  at 
the  recital,  and  would  have  melted  into  Water,  had  not  Re- 
venge fet  all  her  Humours  on  fire.  She  would  by  all  Means, 
forfooth,  abandon  her  Gallant,  unlefs  he  vindicated  her  Ho'" 
nour,  promulge  his  Cowardice,  and  cur fe  his  Ingratitude. 

I  am  informed  this  zuas  nothing  but  Artifice  and  Strata- 
gem :  She  had  been  too  prodigal  of  her  Favours y  to  be  nice 

Ppz  of 


5S0     The  Gentleman  Injirucied, 

of  her  Refutation^  Jhe  had  hn^fince  difcharged  both  Ho- 
nottr  and  Confciencs^  and  placed  her  Glory  in  the  very  Cen- 
tre of  Infamy^  She  had  plumed  poor  Theomachus  to  fea- 
ther her  own  Neji^  and  was  now  willing  to  remove  him 
out  of  the  way  to  make  room  for  frejfj  Gallants ;  fo  that 
her  Enemies  Death  was  the  Pretence^  and  Theomachus 
iS  the  real  Defign  of  her  Revenge. 

'This  poor  Gentleman  had  no  mind  to  appeal  to  the  Sword 
in  Defence  of  his  Mifirefs  ;  he  knew  herCaufe  was  as  bad 
as  his  Skill;  but  however  ^overcome  by  her  Importunity^  he 
fent  a  Challenge^  and  required  an  Anfwer ;  this  done^ 
raifed  more  Pity  than  Anger  in  his  Friend^ s  Breafi.  Theo- 
machus, faid  he,  has  lived  her  Slave,  he  has  now  a  mind 
to  tmn  Knight-errant,  and  die  her  Martyr :  Tears  may 
indeed  wajh  out  her  Crimes  ;  but  all  the  Blood  in  his  Veins 
is  unable  to  refture  her  Innocence.  1  have  performed 
the  Office  of  a  Friend,  he  provokes  me  to  add  that  of  an 
Enemy  ;  he  fcorns  my  Counfcl,  and  importunes  me  for  a 
Stab;  but  if  ill  Nature  deferves  Refentment,  it  Jhall  not 
move  me  to  Revenge. 

However,  Y[\eom2LQhMSwasonfire,  and  the  Jilt  blazed 
it  into  a  Flame,  he  met  his  Friend,  and  drew  upon  him  with 
the  Rage  of  an  Enemy,  but  Fortune  declared againfl  him  as 
■well  as  ytifiice ;  the  Sword  flipt  through  his  Lungs,  andhe 
fpeechlefs  to  the  Ground:  lie  was  carried  home  in  a  Trance, 
and  every  Body  fuppofed  be  breathed  his  lafi  ;  his  Mifs^  who 
had  been  iiijlr omental  to  his  Misftrtnne,  was  all  Sorrow 
vjithopit,  alljoy  vjithtn-y  fjewepi  inearnefl,  but  mourned 
injefl,  and  indeed  her  Grief  appeared  tt,»  extravagant  to 
he  real:  Reafon  at  length  rcturncd,and\  heomachus  rv///; 
rowiing  Eyes,  arid  deep  Sighs  cried  out.,  Where  am  I  ?  Oh, 
I  burn  and  freeze,  F^re  and  he  poft  through  every  Vein  ; 
picthinks  I  feel  all  the  Pains  of  the  Damned.  I  leave  Time 
behind^  and  ft  and  upon  the  Brivik  (f  Etiirnity. 

What,  fays  a  Gentleman^  is  then  the  Soul  immortal.  Is 
there  a  Fie II  to  pnnijk  Crimes;  and  a  God  to  injliSl  the  Pu- 
nijloment  ?  /  thought  the  F.xtftence  of  a  God  was  FiJioA, 
and  of  a  future  State,  Fable  and  Romance. 

Pajfion,  replied  Theomachus,  concealed  thofe  Truths, 
Death  difcovers  the  Heart  may  bean  /Itheifi,  but  not  Rea- 
fon.  IVbat  we  earne/ily  defire,  we  eafily  believe  :  A  vehc' 
ment  Paffion  fupplies  the  place  of  Demonftration  ;  but  now, 
alas.^  the  Profped  of  Death  h^rs  laidtlpofe  Vapours,  that  in- 

terpofed 


^e  Gentleman  Inftru5fed,     581 

fcrj>o[ed  between  Time  and  'Eternity  ;  the  Curtain  is 
draivn^  and  I  take  a  full  Survey  of  that  boundlefs  Ocean 
without  Bottom^  without  Shore. 

The  Company  overjoyed  at  this  unexpeded  Converfion^ 
called  a  Divine  to  bring  him  to  a  perfect  Senfe  of  his  Duty  ; 
he  laid  before  him  all  the  Motives^  Charity  and  Learning 
were  able  tofttggejl,  and  prejfed  them  home  with  fuch  a 
moving  Emphajii^  that  all  melted  into  Tears^  bejides  the 
unfortunate  Gentleman  whom  they  moji  concerned. 

Sir^  faid  the  Divine,  yourGlafs  is  run  ;  few  Moments 
divide  you  from  Eternity :  Teu  flandupon  the  laji  Confines 
ofTime^  andwilleitherfallintotheTorments  of  the  Damn- 
ed^ or  fly  up  into  the  never-ending  Pleafures  of  the  Blejfed. 
Impenitence  convey  you  to  Hell,  a  hearty  Repentance  into 
Heaven  ;  tho""  your  Sins  are  great,  God's  Mercy  is  greater  i 
ask  Pardon  J  he  will  not  refufe  it ;  a  contrite  Soul  difarms 
hit  Jufiice^  and  turns  his  Severity  into  Mercy. 

The  Jick  Man  Jhewed  more  Symptoms  of  Rage  than  of 
Repentance  at  the  Difcourfe,  anafeemed  rather  ffillen  than 
moved  with  the  Exhortation. 

At  lafl,  I  remember  the  Time  {cry'' d  he,  with  a  doleful 
Accent^  when  thofe  Words  would  have  dijfolved  me  into 
Tears,  andfplit  my  Heart  with  Sorrow  ;  but  now,  alaSy 
'my  Eyes  are  drier  than  a  Flint,  and  my  Heart  more  ob- 
durate than  Marble :  I  fee  my  Crimes,  and  tremble  at  the 
Profped.  but  cannot  detefi  them. 

If  you  cafi  one  Eye,  replied  the  Divine,  on  the  Heinouf- 
nefs  of  your  Sins,  pray  turn  the  other  to  the  Greatnefs  of 
God's  Mercies ;  if  the  one  breeds  Defpondence,  the  other 
Hope  and  Confidence :  One  I  have  finned  to  the  Lord, 
jreed  David /ro«2  the  Guilt  of  Adultery  and  Murder .  The 
good  Thief  mounted  the  Crofs  a  Criminal,  and  was  taken 
down  a  Saint ;  yet  one  memento  me\  wrought  his  Change, 
and  raifed  him  from.  Hell  to  Heaven.  Peter,  the  Favou- 
rite 0/ Jesus  Christ,  bafely  difowned his  Mafler,  and 
hacked  Apojlacy  with  Oaths  and  Perjury  ;  yet  no  fooner . 
did  he  deplore  his  Sin,  but  Chrifl  pfonounced  his  Pardjfiy 
and  received  him  into  his  Favour. 

Thefe  Injlances,  good  Sir,  faid  Theomachus,  come 
not  up  to  my  Cafe  ;  they  tranfgreffed  their  Duty  through 
Frailty ;  human  Infirmity  had  a  greater  Share  in  their 
Falls  than  Malice  ;  and  thus  they  feem  rather  worthy  of 
fiompajfion  thanPuniJhment  j  but  I  have  not  on.sf  corned 

Cod's 


j8i     7h^  Gentleman  Injnukd. 

God''s  Laivf,  but  flew  in  his  Face  ;  I  have  defied  his  Per-- 
fuKy  a-yid  denied  his  very  Being:  An  Infinite 'J  uftice  muji 
chaflife  fuch  a  flaming  Infinlence  \  nay^  and  will ;  my  Sen- 
tence is  pronounced^  and  nothing  remain^  to  comtleai  my 
Mifery  hut  the  Execution. 

At  le'ift  [replied  the  Divine^  ask  Par  don  !  To  be  damn- 
ed out  of  a  Fear  of  being  damned  is  extraordinary ;  God 
has  engaged  his  H'^ord^  he  will  not  refuje  hts  Msrcy  to 
thofe  who  Jincerely  implore  it  :  He  invites^  he  follicits you 
to  accept  his  Offer,  why  will  yuu  oblige  his  Goodnefs  to 
abandon  you  to  the  difmal  Refentments  of  bis  Fury  ?  Has 
If  ell  fuch  Charms  ?  Are  his  Threats  fa  inviting^  and  his 
Promifes  fo  frightful  ? 

The  Lofs  of  Heaven^  anfweredT\\eomtLch.\xs,bolts  Darts 
of  Sorrow  and  Rage  through  every  Artery  ;  and  the  very 
Apprehenfions  of  Hell  Jlr etches  my  Limbs  upon  all  the 
Racks,  all  the  Tortures  of  the  Damned  \  methmks  I  feel 
the  dire  Embraces  ofthoje  mercilefs  Flames,  andfmellthe 
Vapours  of  Fire  and  Brimfione.  Did  I  repent,  God  I  know 
would  receive  me  into  his  Mercy,  but  I  cannot,  I  will  not. 
Scarce  hadhe finijh'' dthis  defperateHarangue,  which  moved 
the  Standers-by  to  Horror,  Indignation,  and  Compajfion 
too;  but  muflering  up  all  his  Forces,  he  raijed  himfelf  up, 
and  clafping  his  Arms  about  his  Mijlreffes  Neck,  For  thee, 
(Caidhe)  alone  do  I  defire  to  live ;  in  Defence  of  thy 
Honour  I  die,  thou  haft  been  my  foJe  Happinefs  in  this 
Life,  and  I  will  have  no  other  in  the  next.  In  this  Po- 
jlure  expired  Theomachus,  an  unhappy  Inflance  to  him- 
felf  of  God^s  'Judgment  upon  Atheifis,  but  I  hope  it  may 
prove  fortunate  to  others. 

Honoured  Sir, 

Yourmoft  obedient  Servant, 

N.N, 


^^Eufebius  read  th"^  Letter  with  Tears,  and  the  Compa- 
ny heard  it  with  Tranfports  of  Admiration  ;  all  pitied 
the  Gentleman's  Misfortune,  and  blamed  his  Obftinacy. 
Well,  l^ud  Athymius,  I  fee  Atheifts  and  Libertines  are 
lefs  faiisficd   with  their   Pris-iciples  than  they  pretend  ; 

they 


^he  Gentleman  InflruEltd,     5S3 

they  will  Itaad  forihcm  ufque  nd  aras^  to  the  Death-bed, 
but  then  when  they  ftepinto  Eternity,  they  leave  them  be- 
hind. If  there  be  a  God  in  the  other  World,  certainly 
there  is  one  in  this  j  and  if  our  Souls  are  Immortal  when 
we  die,  they  are  Immortal  whilft  we  live.  Theomaihus 
fwore  the  Soul  into  Matter,  and  heilored  God  out  of 
Being,  but  could  never  reafon  them  into  nothing  j  his 
Rhodomontadoes  ended  in  Trembling,  and  his  Laughter 
in  Delpair.  God  has  left  his  Punilhment  a  fad  Memo- 
randum to  the  Living  ;  I  will  profit  by  his  Misfortune, 
and  not  inftru6l  Poflerity  by  my  own. 

Eufeb'tHs  was  fcarce  come  to  himfelf ;  the  Letter  caft 
him  into  a  melancholy  Contemplation  of  Theomachus's, 
Difafter,  and  God's  fevere  Juftice  upon  the  wretched  Gen- 
tleman. At  length,  turning  to  the  Company,  Theoma- 
chus,  faid  he,  is  gone,  and  his  Death  anfvvers  the  Te- 
nure of  his  Life ;  his  Pleafures  have  taken  Wing,  and 
what  remains  but  a  Coffin  for  his  Body,  and  a  Lake  of 
Fire  and  Brimftone  for  his  Soul  ;  he  fed  high,  like  the 
rich  Glutton,  and  drank  higher  j  and  as  he  followed 
his  Example  in  this  World,  fo  has  he  met  with  his  Pu- 
nifhment  in-  the  other,  and  now  cries  loud  for  a  drop  of 
Water  to  refrcfh  Kl§  Tongue,  as  before  for  Champ aigtie  to 
oblige  Senfuality.  Gentlemen  !  l^aniias  Vamtatum  ^ 
omnia  Vamtas^  all  temporal  Enjoyments  are  vain  and 
trivial,  purchafed  with  Pain,  poflels'd  with  Fear,  and  loll 
with  Regret,  theydifguft  a  good  Man,  and  are  unable 
to  fatiate  an  ill  one  ;  they  rnay  glide  upon  the  Orgagi  for 
a  time,  but  cannot  fmooth  the  H,eart  \  they  fawn  apon , 
theSenfes,  but  always  give  a  Stab>  at  parting.  Thcre^is" 
no  Pleafure  here  but  in  the  Pradice  of  Virtue  ;  this  in- 
deed is  worthy  the  Purchafe,  and  will  pay  Charges  with 
Inter'eft  ;  it  railes  a  Man  above  Fear^  and  difencumSers 
him  of  all  the  uneafy|*angsof  Defire  ^  it  turns  a  Sin- 
ner into  a  Saint,  it  gives  Jpim  in  hand  a  Title  to  Heaven, 
aM  tbe  g^'effionjMfegfflaa(ier. ,  ^    «  ^  j.      ^ 

Let  us  allow  fom^.  t;i33e TcrcblWhifff**  TJijciMfe, 
and  not  make  ovet  our  whole  Lives  to  MerrimentJ^iat 
muft  end  in  Tears,  or  unrepeflfl?d,''4toneV'^-8j*i»E^jHP>'^ 
fpair.  We  walk  on  uneven  Ground,  and  if  we  Ihut  our 
Eyes,  every  Step  leads  us  to  a  Precipice,  from  which  there 
is  no  return  :  If  Caution  can  give  no  Security,  into  what 
an  Abyfs  will  ^esligenceplun^.1^?        •*'-«^-'|fcr**  ■• -» 


'•'•t^ 


^84     ^H  Ge NttEMAN  InJIruBed, 

Take  up  then,  Gentlemen,  and  abandon  Lewdnefs  be- 
fore it  abandons  you ;  tQrn  Neceflity  into  Virtue,  and 
rcfign  de  boHfie  Grace^  what  within  fome  Years  you  muft- 
in  fpight  of  Reliiftance  and  Oppofition :  There  is  no 
Recipe  againft  Death,  no  Protection;  itsStroak  is  fure, 
and  often  unforefeen ;  it  attacks  not  fo  much  by  Vio- 
lence as  Stratagem;  and  if  it  furprizes  us  unprovided, 
we  are  undone  forever,  for  on  this  Moment  depends  an 
Eternity:  It's  eafy  to  prevent  an  eternal  Mifery,  butim- 
polTible  (when  once  we  are  fallen  into  Hellj  to  abate  the 
Flames,  or  to  extinguifli  them. 

Oh  the  deplorable  State  of  a  damned  Soul!  To  feel 
always  all  the  Evils,  and  all  together  that  can  be  feared. 
What  Death  !  Never  to  enjoy  the  lead  Good  that  can  be 
defired?  What  Life!  To  fuffer  always!  To  defpair  al- 
ways !  And  never  to  hope,  will  be  the  eternal  Employ- 
ment of  a  Reprobate  !  How  little  do  Gentlemen  be- 
lieve this  fad  Truth  !  How  little  do  they  romprehend  it ! 
And  this  is  the  Reafon  they  lin  without.Feaf,  without 
Remorfe.  '-  /* 

Oh  the  Folly  of  Men,  who  will  not  believeJtiil'Flames 
confume  their  Infidelity,  but  not  theirQfin]^^  Till  Re- 
pentance proves  Ui7prQfitable,^aitJi<lf!!7r  Mifery  becomes 
Eternal!  •   •' 


»  - 


r 

V 


iW 


(I  - . 


?M-: 


...'>■ 


