MISS   BERRY'S 
JOURNALS    AND    CORRESPONDENCE. 


VOL.  I. 


LOS DON 
PEIHTED    BY    SPOTTISWOODE    AND    CO. 

nEW-STOEEI    SQUABE 


liiss  •EEMi'iT  ak: 


EXTKACTS 


JOURMLS    AND    COERESPONDENGE 


OF 


MISS   PERRY,  Klar^ 


FROM     THE     YEAE     1783     TO     1852. 


EDITED    BT 


LADY    THEEESA    LEWIS. 


IN    THREE    VOLUMES. 

VOL.  I. 


LONDON : 

LONGMANS,    GEEEN,    AND     CO. 

1865. 


^ 


TO 


THOSE    SUEVIVING    FEIENDS 


WHO    FORMED   THE   SOCIETY 


AND     CHEERED     THE     LATTER     YEARS 


MISS   BERET'S   LIFE 


THIS      WORK      IS      RESPECTFULLY      DEDICATED 


THE    EDITOR. 


PREFACE. 


There  being  no  obvious  reason  why  the  editor- 
ship of  Miss  Berry's  Journals,  Letters,  and  Papers 
should  have  devolved  on  a  person  unconnected 
with  her  by  the  ties  of  blood,  or  of  long  and 
early  intimacy,  it  may  be  satisfactory  to  the 
reader  to  know  that  the  task  was  undertaken 
at  Miss  Berry's  own  request. 

Miss  Berry  had  bequeathed  all  her  papers  to 
the  late  Sir  Frankland  Lewis.  Not  long  before 
the  close  of  her  life,  she  informed  Lady  Theresa 
Lewis  that  she  had  done  so,  adding  that,  in  case  of 
his  death,  and  of  his  not  having  had  time  to  deal 
with  these  MSS.,  she  wished  her  to  promise  to 
take  charge  of  them,  and  not  let  them  pass  into 
any  other  hands.  After  the  death  of  her  father- 
in-law,  the  contents  of  two  large  trunks  were  put 
into  Lady  Theresa  Lewis's  hands. 

The  late  Mr.  Charles  Greville  had  been  named 
in  some  testamentary  paper  many  years  before, 


X  PEEFACE. 

as  one  of  those  to  whom  Miss  Berry  wished  to 
have  her  papers  transferred ;  but  Mr.  Greville  at 
once  declared  his  wish  to  abide  by  Miss  Berry's 
later  request  to  the  Editor.  Miss  Berry  had 
taken  a  very  kind  and  flattering  interest  in  the 
'Lives  from  the  Clarendon  Gallery'  (published 
1852),  and  the  Editor  had  reason  to  believe  that 
it  was  owing  to  her  approbation  of  that  work 
(which  had  been  read  to  her  in  MS.)  that  she 
was  thus  selected. 

The  task  of  reading,  of  selection,  and  of 
arrangement  from  such  a  mass  of  MSS.  has  been 
somewhat  laborious ;  nor  has  it  been  easy,  or  even 
possible  in  all  cases,  to  identify  the  various  persons 
alluded  to  in  so  long  a  life.  The  want  of  any 
books  of  reference  on  the  Continent  corresponding 
to  Peerages  &c.  cuts  off  the  means  afforded  in 
England  of  tracing  out  families  or  individuals, 
when  not  sufficiently  distinguished  in  public  life 
to  claim  their  place  in  a  Biographical  Dictionary ; 
and  where  no  note  of  explanation  is  appended 
to  names  mentioned  throughout  the  work,  it  is 
owing  to  the  difficulty  of  obtaining  accurate 
information  respecting  the  persons  in  question. 

The  completion  of  the  work  has  been  inter- 
rupted and  delayed  by  trials  too  painftil  to  be 


PREFACE. 

obtruded  on  the  reader,  and  by  circumstances 
over  which  the  Editor  had  no  control :  she  can 
only  hope  that  the  diligence  with  which  she  has 
worked  through  difficulties,  and  the  pains  she 
has  bestowed  on  her  task,  will  be  accepted  as 
evidence  of  her  desire  to  do  justice  to  the  request 
of  her  loved  and  respected  old  friend. 

Kent  House  :  May  1865. 


INTRODUCTION. 


Miss  Berry  has  more  tlian  ordinary  claims  to  live  in  the 
memory  of  those  to  whom  she  was  personally  known.     For 
an  unusually  lengthened  period  of  years  she  formed  a  cen- 
tre round  which  beauty,  rank,  wealth,  power,  fashion, 
learning,  and  science  were  gathered ;  merit  and  distinction 
of  every  degree  were  blended  by  her  hospitaUty  in  social 
ease  and  famOiar  intercourse,  encouraged  by  her  kindness, 
and  enhvened  by  her  presence.     She  was  not  only  the 
friend  of  hterature  and  of  literary  people,  but  she  assidu- 
ously cultivated  the  acquaintance  of  intellectual  excellence 
in  whatever  form  it  might  appear,  and  to  the  close  of  her 
existence  she  maintained  her  interest  in  aU  the  important 
affairs  in  hfe,  whether  social,  hterary,  or  poUtical.     Without 
any  remarkable  talent  for  conversation  herself,  she  pro- 
moted conversation  amongst  others,  and  shed  an  air  of 
home-like  ease  over  the  society  which  met  under  her  roof, 
that  will  long  be  remembered  by  those  who  had  the  op- 
portunity of  witnessing  it,  and  who  saw  the  consequent 
readiness  and   frequency  with  which  the  guests  of  her 
impremeditated  parties  availed  themselves  of  her  general 
invitation. 

From  the  age  of  seventeen  or  eighteen  to  that  of  nearly 
lAinety,  Miss  Berry  and  her  sister  Agnes  (one  year  younger 


XIV  INTRODUCTION. 

than  hei;;self)  lived  constantly  in  society  both  at  home  and 
abroad :  they  had  seen  Marie  Antoinette  in  all  her  pride 
and  beauty,  and  they  Hved  to  regret  the  fall  of  Louis- 
Philippe,  for  whose  prudence  and  abihties  Miss  Berry  had 
for  many  years  conceived  a  high  respect,  and  with  whom 
she  was  personally  acquainted.  Born  in  the  third  year  after 
the  accession  of  George  III.,  she  lived  to  be  privately  pre- 
sented to  Queen  Victoria  a  few  months  before  her  death. 

In  her  early  youth  she  gained  the  respect  of  her  elders, 
and  was  well  known  to  have  engaged  the  devoted 
affection  of  one  already  far  in  the  decline  of  life  ;  in  her 
own  old  age  the  loved  and  admired  of  the  fastidious 
Horace  "Walpole  won  the  hearts  of  the  grandchildren 
and  great-grandchUdren  of  the  friends  of  her  youth,  and 
will  be  affectionately  remembered  by  some  who  still 
lingered  in  childhood  at  the  time  of  her  death. 

When  her  own  part  in  the  active  cares  and  duties  of 
life  was  over,  she  could  look  back  upon  it  as  on  a  drama 
that  had  been  played  out  in  her  sight ;  and  from  the 
eventful  period  in  which  she  had  lived,  she  had  seen  all 
the  vicissitudes  of  war  and  revolution,  the  overthrow  of 
nations,  the  fall  of  ancient  dynasties,  the  rapid  rise  of 
new  ones  to  supply  their  place,  the  bloodless  revolutions 
and  great  social  changes  in  her  own  country,  the  glorious 
achievements  of  heroes  of  undying  fame,  the  bitter  strifes 
of  political  combatants  hushed  one  after  another  by  the 
solemn  call  of  death  ;  and  she  had  seen  all  this  with  the 
eyes  of  a  most  intelligent  spectator.    She  had  seen  the 
dawn  of  genius  leading  to  lasting  renown,  and  the  wane 
of  power,  health,  and  beauty  generation  after  generation. 
She  had  seen  the  Seven  Ages  played  o'er  and  o'er  agaia. 


INTRODUCTION.  XV 

but  in  her  own  end  happily  escaped  the  dreary  inanition 
allotted  to  the  last  sad  stage.  She  retained  her  senses,  her 
vigour  of  intellect,  and  even  the  traces  of  her  personal 
beauty,  to  a  remarkable  degree ;  and  on  looking  back 
through  the  long  vista  of  the  life  she  was  quitting,  if  she 
remembered  its  disappointments  with  regret  approaching 
to  bitterness,  she  also  looked  back  upon  its  pleasures 
with  satisfaction,  its  affections  with  tenderness,  its  follies 
with  toleration,  and  its  sufferings  with  sympathy.  Such 
were  the  latter  days  of  one,  who  owed  not  the  position 
she  occupied  either  to  the  distinction  of  birth  or  of  wealth, 
but  to  the  result  of  personal  character,  of  peculiar  social 
habits,  of  hterary  tastes  and  pursuits,  and  of  a  modest  but 
generous  hospitality. 

Yet,  notwithstanding  the  pleasing  impression  of  social 
cheerfulness  which  Miss  Berry  has  left,  even  to  the  very 
close  of  her  hfe,  upon  all  who  knew  her,  it  is  clear  from 
the  perusal  of  her  letters  and  journals  that  her  character 
was  strongly  tinged,  from  her  youth  upwards,  with  melan- 
choly. In  her  journals  she  seemed  to  take  a  pleasure  in 
confiding,  as  it  were  to  herself,  all  that  wounded  her 
sensibility,  oppressed  her  heart,  or  depressed  her  spirits ; 
and  in  this  muiute  analysis  of  her  own  character  and 
sentiments,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  her  judgment  always 
dealt  far  more  severely  with  every  faihng  in  herself  than 
in  others.  Endowed  with  the  strong  good  sense  and 
power  of  thought,  more  often  attributed  to  man,  she  pos- 
sessed a  most  feminine  susceptibility  of  feehng  and  ner- 
vous organisation  of  body;  her  warmest  affections  had 
been  disappointed,  and  physical  ailments  were  a  frequent 
check  upon  mental  exertions.  Her  mind  constantly  soared 
above  the  sphere  in  which  it  could  act ;  she  longed  to 


XVI  INTRODUCTION. 

be  useful,  she  longed  to  influence  the  welfare  of  her  fellow- 
creatures,  she  longed  to  be  great ;  she  was  fired  with 
ambition  in  the  best  sense  of  that  term  ;  but  there  was 
no  career.  To  the  merely  vain  woman  there  is  in  every 
country  a  large  arena  for  display,  with  its  rich  harvest  of 
triumphs  chequered  by  mortification ;  but  to  the  ambi- 
tious woman,  in  this  country  at  least,  there  is  rarely  the 
power  of  earning  distinction  but  as  a  reflection  of  the 
stronger,  greater  light  of  man.  Miss  Berry  was  amongst 
the  few  who  would  have  received  that  hght,  and  would 
have  shone  by  it :  she  was  fitted  to  be  the  partner  of 
greatness,  and  she  missed  a  participation  in  the  serious 
realities  of  life. 

The  yielding,  indolent  character  of  her  father  inspired 
neither  deference  nor  admiration.  She  was  brotherless 
and  unmarried ;  hers  was  the  master  mind  at  home,  but 
without  corresponding  influence  abroad.  She  estimated 
very  highly  the  intellectual  powers  of  women.  She  felt 
within  herself  the  capability  of  understanding  the  philo- 
sophy of  Hfe  on  which  depends  the  conduct  of  human 
affairs  ;  but,  unassociated  by  the  ties  of  relationship  or 
marriage  with  men  of  superior  mind  and  cultivation,  she 
saw,  with  pain,  that  as  an  isolated  being,  the  highest  posi- 
tion she  could  attain  in  society  was  that  of  being  consi- 
dered an  '  agreeable  woman  of  the  world.' 

But,  if  this  consciousness  of  a  somewhat  wasted  exist- 
ence fostered  the  morbid  tendency  to  melancholy,  with 
which  adverse  circumstances  had  early  clouded  her  dis- 
position, it  never  rendered  her  insensible  to  the  value  of 
friendship,  and  her  heart  glowed  with  aflection  and  grati- 
tude towards  the  friends  who  surrounded  her  and  who, 


INTRODDCTIOK.  XVU 

to  the  last,  tendered  her  all  the  respect  and  attention 
which  her  character  and  hospitahty  had  so  well  earned. 

The  path  of  hterary  fame  was  still  open  to  Miss  Berry, 
and  that  she  pursued  with  such  diligence  as  the  claims  of 
society  and  the  too  frequent  interruptions  of  iU-health 
would  permit.  It  is  as  an  authoress  that  she  must  be 
judged  by  the  Public  ;  and  it  is  as  having  been  an  autho- 
ress that  must  rest  the  right  of  those  entrusted  with  her 
papers,  to  give  to  the  Pubhc  such  an  insight  into  her  feel- 
ings and  opinions  as  may  tend  to  develope  her  character 
and  abihties  without  venturing  too  much  to  invade  the 
privacy  of  domestic  life. 

The  great  age  to  which  Miss  Berry  lived  has  given 
almost  an  historical  interest  to  many  trifling  incidents  in 
her  journals  ;  and  changes  and  improvements,  that  steal 
imperceptibly  on,  in  manners,  in  morals,  in  refinement,  in 
general  convenience,  and  in  opinions,  become  more  defined 
and  more  interesting,  when  brought  before  the  rising  gene- 
ration by  the  notes  and  journals  of  one  who,  born  above 
one  hundred  years  ago,  was  so  lately  moving  amongst  the 
living  in  the  full  enjoyment  of  every  faculty.  They  are  as 
the  stepping-stones  that  help  us  to  remount  the  stream  of 
Time,  down  which  we  often  drift  too  fast  to  mark  the 
ever-varying  scenes  which  accompany  our  passage,  or  the 
objects  which  unconsciously  determine  its  course.  Miss 
Berry's  own  estimation  of  the  value  of  the  details  of 
private  life,  and  of  individual  opinion,  to  those  who  would 
study  the  past,  is  thus  expressed,  when  comparing  the 
superior  wealth  of  the  French  over  the  English  in  works 
of  that  order  : — 

So  entirely  (says  she)  do  time  and  distance  hallow  and 
VOL.  I.  a 


XVlll  INTRODUCTION. 

render  interesting  minute  details,  that  after  a  certain  period, 
history  becomes  more  or  less  valuable  as  it  presents  more  or 
less  lively  pictures,  not  only  of  events,  but  of  their  effects  on 
the  minds  and  manners  of  contemporaries. 

Miss  Berry's  first  literary  effort  was  in  assisting,  or 
rather  in  executing  for  her  father,  the  work  of  editor  to 
the  various  MSS.  left  jointly  to  him  and  to  his  daughters  by 
Lord  Orford.  But,  to  the  Public,  she  was,  on  that  occasion, 
known  only  by  her  father's  allusion  to  the  assistance  she 
had  aJBforded  him.  The  account  of  these  MSS.  and  of 
their  editorship  is  thus  given  in  the  Preface  to  Lord 
Orford's  works  pubhshed  in  five  vols.  4to,  in  the  year 
1798  :— 

Lord  Orford,  so  early  as  the  year  1768,  had  formed  the  inten- 
tion of  printing  a  quarto  edition  of  his  works,  to  which  he 
purposed  to  add  several  pieces,  both  in  prose  and  verse,  which 
he  had  either  not  before  published,  or  never  acknowledged  as 
his  own.  A  first  and  part  of  a  second  volume,  printed  under 
his  own  eye  at  Strawberry-hill,  were  already  in  a  state  of  great 
forwardness.  .  .  .  The  friend  to  whom  he  has  entrusted 
the  care  of  his  posthumous  works  has  thought  proper  im- 
plicitly to  follow  the  track  which  he  found  prescribed  for 
him.  ...  In  the  arrangement  of  the  two  last  volumes, 
in  the  notes  of  the  letters,  and  in  the  elucidation  of  many 
passages  contained  in  them,  the  Editor  has  been  materially 
assisted  by  a  daughter  to  whose  retentive  memory  most  of  the 
names,  dates,  and  circumstances  alluded  to  in  the  correspon- 
dence were  consigned  by  the  author  himself,  during  the  course 
of  that  intimate  friendship  and  almost  parental  regard,  with 
which,  for  several  years  before  his  death,  he  had  honoured  both 
her  and  her  sister. 

The  reader,  it  is  hoped,  will  pardon  from  the  heart  of  a 
father,  overflowing  with  affection  for  a  child,  who  from  her 
infancy  to  the  present  moment  has  rendered  his  retired  life  a 
scene  of  domestic  comfort,  this  public  acknowledgment  of  the 
assistance  he  has  received  from  her  on  the  present  occasion. 


INTRODUCTION.  xix 

Mr.  Berry's  affectionate  tribute  to  his  daughter  s  merits, 
in  this  little  appeal  to  the  reader,  might  be  very  gratifying 
to  her  filial  feelings,  but  his  acknowledgment  of  the 
assistance  she  had  rendered  in  preparing  these  works  for 
publication  by  no  means  represents  the  part  she  really 
bore  in  the  task  of  editorship.  In  a  letter  to  an  intimate 
friend  written  in  1797,  she  speaks  of  devoting  all  her  time 
and  thoughts  to  doing,  justice  to  the  wishes  and  to  the 
literary  reputation  of  their  deceased  friend  Lord  Orford, 
but  '  without,'  as  she  says  of  herself,  the  necessary  publi- 
city attached  to  the  name  of  editor. 

In  May,  1802,  a  comedy,  in  five  acts,  entitled  '  Fash- 
ionable Friends,'  by  Miss  Berry,  was  brought  out  at  Drury 
Lane  ;  it  was  performed  only  three  nights,  and  proved 
unsuccessful.  It  was  afterwards  published  by  Miss  Berry 
in  the  complete  edition  of  her  works,  with  her  own  ex- 
planation of  the  cause  of  its  failure  on  the  stage. 

Miss  Berry's  next  work  appeared  in  the  year  1810,  and 
was  that  of  editor  to  the  letters  bequeathed  to  Mr.  Walpole 
by  Madame  du  Deffand  at  her  death  in  1740.  Marie  de 
Vichy  Chamrond,  Marquise  du  Deffand,  was  born  in  the 
year  1697,  of  a  noble  family  in  the  province  of  Burgundy. 
She -was  married  in  1718  to  the  Marquis  du  Deffand, 
from  whom  she  was  afterwards  separated ;  in  1754  she 
became  totally  blind,  and  it  was.  Miss  Berry  writes, 

eleven  years  after  this  misfortune  when  Mr.  Walpole,  then  near 
fifty,  and  Madame  du  Deffand  about  seventy  years  of  age,  first 
became  acquainted.  She  had  (continues  Miss  Berry)  long  passed 
the  first  epoch  in  the  life  of  a  Frenchwoman,  that  of  gallantry,  and 
had  as  long  been  established  as  a  bel  esprit ;  and  it  is  to  be 
remembered  that  in  the  anti-revolutionary  world  of  Paris  these 
epochs  in  life  were  as  determined,  and  as  strictly  observed,  as 

a2 


XX  INTRODUCTION. 

the  changes  of  dress  on  a  particular  day  of  the  different  seasons ; 
and  that  a  woman  endeavouring  to  attract  lovers  after  she  had 
ceased  to  he  galante,  would  have  been  not  less  ridiculous  than 
her  wearing  velvet  when  all  the  rest  of  the  world  were  in 
demi-saison.  Madame  du  Deffand,  therefore,  old  and  blind, 
had  no  more  idea  of  attracting  Mr.  Walpole  to  her  as  a  lover, 
than  she  had  of  the  possibility  of  anyone  suspecting  her  of 
such  an  intention ;  and  indulged  her  lively  feelings,  and  the 
violent  fancy  she  had  taken  for  his  conversation  and  character, 
in  every  expression  of  admiration  and  attachment  which  she 
really  felt,  and  which  she  never  supposed  capable  of  misinter- 
pretation. By  himself,  they  were  not  misinterpreted ;  but  he 
seems  to  have  had  ever  before  his  eyes,  a  very  unnecessary 
dread  of  their  being  so  by  others :  this  accounts  for  the  un- 
gracious language  in  which  he  often  replied  to  the  importunities 
of  her  anxious  affection ;  a  language  so  foreign  to  his  heart,  and 
so  contrary  to  his  own  habits  in  friendship.'  ...  '  In  a  MS. 
note  upon  her  character  drawn  by  herself  and  published  in  this 
collection,  Mr.  Walpole  says  :  "  Her  severity  to  herself  was  not 
occasional  or  affected  modesty;  .  .  .  never  having  taken  any  studied 
pains  to  improve  herself,  she  imagined  she  was  more  ignorant 
than  many  others.  But  the  vivacity  and  strength  of  her  mind, 
her  prodigious  quickness,  her  conception,  as  just  as  it  was  clear, 
her  natural  power  of  reasoning,  her  wit,  her  knowledge  of  the 
world,  her  intercourse  with  the  brightest  geniuses  of  the  age, 
raised  her  to  a  level  with  them."  Her  natural  quickness,  indeed, 
(continues  Miss  Berry)  seems  sometimes  to  have  hit  upon  truths 
which  she  had  no  power  of  detecting  by  thought,  or  of  applying 
by  inference.  She  often  feelingly  regrets  to  Mr.  Walpole  that 
she  is  not  devout,  seeing  only  in  the  practices  of  devotion  an 
occupation  of  time,  and  a  defence  against  her  dreaded  enemy, 
ennui,  without  seeming  aware  that  nothing  but  fixed  principles 
on  the  subject  of  religion,  an  unshaken  belief  in  the  wisdom 
and  benevolence  of  the  dispensations  of  a  Creator,  can  reconcile 
us  in  advancing  years  to  the  increased  evils,  and  diminished 
comforts,  of  existence.  Nothing,  indeed,  but  a  perfect  and 
devout  reliance  on  that  Being,  incapable  of  the  changes  we  feel 
in  ourselves,  and'  see  in  all  around  us,  can  produce  resignation 


INTEODUCTlOIf.  XX] 

to  the  present  and  hopes  for  the  future ;  the  only  real  supports 
of  a  protracted  life.' 

The  task  of  selecting,  illustrating  witli  notes,  and  editing 
a  collection  of  miscellaneous  letters,  must  always  demand 
much  patient  industry ;  and  the  difficulty  of  supplying  in- 
formation respecting  persons  named  was  much  increased 
by  the  fact  of  their  being  mostly  foreigners  to  whom  allu- 
sions are  made  or  the  letters  addressed.* 

Miss  Berry  guards  herself  emphatically  against  any 
approbation  of,  or  participation  in,  the  opinions  and  views 
of  Madame  du  Deffand ;  and  thus  concludes  her  modest 
Preface  to  this  work  : — 

The  Editor  begs  leave  to  protest  against  being  associated 
either  in  the  principles,  the  opinions,  the  taste,  the  merits  or  the 
demerits  of  the  author  of  the  following  letters.  Having  exe- 
cuted an  humble  task  with  care,  and  having  obtruded  as  little  as 
possible  the  opinions,  the  principles,  or  the  taste  of  an  individual 
unconnected  with  the  writer,  or  the  subject  of  the  letters,  it  will 
not  perhaps  be  presumptuous  in  the  Editor  to  hope,  that  the 
public  will  give  to  them  such  a  reception  as  every  work  seems 
to  obtain,  which  in  any  degree  augments  our  insight  into  the 
human  heart,  and  adds  some  little  to  the  mass  of  human  know- 
ledge. 

*  In  a  prirate  letter  addressed  to  Miss  Berry,  maay  years  later,  is  tlie 
following  account  of  tlie  DefFand  collection  of  MSS. : — 

'  The  Deffand  collection  of  manuscripts,  consisting  of: — 1  folio  of  OEuvres 
de  Boufflers ;  1  do.  letters  from  different  persons ;  2  do.  letters  from  Voltaire 
to  Madame  da  Deffand;  1  do.  Journal  of  do.;  1  do,, '/divers  ouvrages  "  of 
do.;  5  large  bundles  of  manuscript  papers;  1  packet,  containing  several 
hundred  original  letters  from  Voltaire,  Rousseau,  Delille,  Montesciuieu,  De 
Stael,  Walpole,  Henault,  &c. ;  7  large  packets,  containing  800  letters  from 
Madame  du  Deffand  to  Horace  "Walpole — ^was  sold  in  one  lot  to  Dyce 
Sombre  for  157^. 

'  As  Dyce  is  in  Paris,  and  considered  by  the  French  Doctors  aa  the  least 

insane  Englishman  they  ever  saw,   you  may  refer  Monsieur  d' for 

further  particulars  to  that  gentleman.' 


XXll  INTRODUCTION. 

Miss  Berry  had  no  reason  to  be  disappointed  in  her 
hopes  of  a  favourable  reception  of  her  work,  or  of  her 
labours  as  editor. 

In  February  1811,  a  few  months  after  their  pubHcation, 
an  article  appeared  in  the  '  Edinburgh  Eeview,'  containing 
a  very  favourable  notice  of  the  manner  in  which  she  had 
executed  her  task;  and  in  May  of  the  same  year  an 
article  appeared  in  the  '  Quarterly  Journal '  on  the  same 
subject,  and  with  no  less  favourable  a  tribute  to  the  merit- 
of  the  then  anonymous  editor. 

In  the  year  1815  Miss  Berry  gave  to  the  pubhc  the 
results  of  a  work  that  must  have  been  peculiarly  congenial 
to  her  taste  and  feehngs.  The  original  letters  of  Eachael 
Lady  Eussell,  in  the  possession  of  the  Duke  of  Devonshire, 
had  been  placed  in  her  hands  for  selection  and  publica- 
tion. To  these  she  added  copious  biographical  notes,  and 
prefixed  'Some  Account  of  the  Life  of  Eachael  Lady 
Eussell.'  Of  her  difficulty  in  dealing  with  a  subject  when 
there  was  much  to  feel  and  little  to  narrate,  she  thus 
writes,  with  great  truth : — 

The  biographers  of  those  who  have  been  distinguished  in  the 
active  paths  of  life,  who  have  directed  the  councils  or  fought  the 
battles  of  nations,  have,  perhaps,  an  easier  task  than  those  who 
engage  to  satisfy  the  curiosity  sometimes  excited  by  persons 
whose  situation,  circumstances,  or  sex,  have  confined  them  to 
private  life.  To  the  biographers  of  public  characters,  the 
pages  of  history,  and  the  archives  of  the  state,  furnish  many  of 
the  documents  required ;  while  those  of  private  individuals 
have  to  collect  every  particular  from  accidental  materials,  from 
combining  and  comparing  letters,  and  otherwise  insignificant 
papers,  never  intended  to  convey  any  part  of  the  information 
sought  in  them. 


INTKODTJCTION.  XXIU 

It  is  impossible  not  to  be  struck,  on  reading  Miss  Berry's 
account  of  the  life  of  this  admirable  woman,  how  worthy- 
was  the  writer  to  deal  with  a  character  she  could  so  well 
appreciate. 

The  vein  of  weU-grounded  enthusiasm  that  pervades 
her  description  of  Lady  EusseU's  excellence  of  conduct  and 
principles  of  action  tends  to  raise  at  once  the  biographer 
and  her  subject.  She  makes  no  bombastic  eulogy  of 
dazzling  qualities,  or  assumption  of  manly  virtues  for  her 
heroine,  but  she  is  proud  of  her  as  a  Christian,  proud  of 
her  as  a  woman,  proud  of  her  as  a  fellow- countrywoman, 
proud  of  her  because  her  fortitude  was  piety,  her  courage 
the  strength  of  her  love,  and  her  dignity  her  never-failing 
simpKcity. 

In  the  year  1828  Miss  Berry  brought  out  the  first 
volume  of  her  most  considerable  work,  entitled '  A  Com- 
parative View  of  Social  Life  in  England  and  France,  from 
the  Eestoration  of  Charles  II.  to  the  Present  Time.'  The 
second  volume  followed  three  years  later,  and  both 
volumes  were  repubUshed  in  the  complete  edition  of  her 
printed  works,  which  appeared  in  the  year  1844.  Miss 
Berry  ihus  describes  in  her  Preface  the  objects  proposed 
in  her  '  Comparative  View ': — 

Some  considerations  (says  she)  are  here  offered,  on  the  changes 
which  have  taken  place,  and  the  fluctuations  observable  in  the 
two  countries,  which,  for  above  a  century,  may  be  said  to  have 
divided  between  them  the  social  world  of  Europe.' 

And  again,  she  tells  her  readers — 

That  individual  characters  are  sometimes  brought  forward,  as 
the  best  authority  for  the  sentiments  and  conduct  of  the  period 
to  which  they  belong ;  and  sketches  are  sometimes  given  of  the 


XXIV  INTRODUCTION. 

biography  of  such  as  have  been  distiBguished  in  social  life, 
although  little  noticed  in  history. 

She  disclaims  '  great  political  speculations '  and  '  finan- 
cial details,'  and  says  '  that  nothing  is  attempted  but  a  re- 
view of  "  Social  Life  "  and  manners,  from  materials  open 
to  every  one  as  well  as  to  the  Author.' 

The  Introduction  consists  of  ah  outline  sketch  of  the 
influence  of  pubhc  events  on  the  manners  in  both  countries 
-from  the  time  of  James  I,  to  the  Kestoration  of  Charles  II. ; 
she  reviews  the  circumstances  which  had  tended  to  pro- 
duce '  an  entire  alienation '  between  France  and  England 
during  the  twenty  years  preceding  the  Eestoration  ;  the 
narrowing  influence  in  our  insular  position  of  foreign 
travel  being  abandoned;  the  ignorance  and  prejudices  that 
followed  from  this  want  of  communication  with  other 
states ;  and  the  evils  that  resulted  from  the  sudden  reaction 
of  an  unusually  close  connection,  on  the  return  of  Charles 
II.,  between  the  courts  of  France  and  England. 

The  Eestoration  (as  Miss  Berry  observes)  sent  home  num- 
bers, of  whom  some  had  been  educated  and  others  spent  the 
youngest  and  gayest  years  of  their  life  in  France.  They  had 
necessarily  adopted  much  of  her  manners,  and  habits  and 
amusements.  Those  they  found  established  in  their  own  country 
were  certainly  not  likely  to  have  superseded  them,  even  if  the 
enthusiasm  of  the  moment  had  not  been  thrown  into  the  scale 
in  their  favour.  But  such  was  the  spring  which  the  public  mind 
had  received  from  the  removal  of  the  forced  and  unnatural 
pressure  of  the  sectaries  upon  every  unaffected  feeling  and  in- 
nocent amusement,  that  the  nation  started  at  once  from  prim- 
ness into  profligacy,  and  from  sobriety  to  excess.  The  serious 
manners  and  moral  habits  of  England  were  derided  at  Court 
as  fanatical,  and  stigmatised  in  the  country  as  disloyal.'  * 

•  Vol.  i.  p.  34. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXV 

The  work  itself  of  the  '  Comparative  View '  begins  with 
the  Kestoration  of  Charles  II.  in  1660,  and  ends  with  the 
elevation  of  the  Duke  of  Orleans  to  the  throne  of  Prance 
in  1830. 

Writers  on  historical  subjects  are  often  in  danger  of 
running  into  one  of  two  very  opposite  extremes  in  their 
style  of  narration :  they  may  be  influenced,  on  one  hand, 
by  the  dread  of  not  being  understood,  from  the  ignorance 
of  their  readers ;  and,  on  the  other,  by  the  fear  of 
becoming  tedious,  in  relating  at  too  great  length  what  is 
generally  known.  In  the  desire  to  explain  every  thing, 
the  important  facts  are  hable  to  be  so  overlaid  with 
details,  as  to  lose  their  just  and  fitting  prominence,  whilst 
the  wish  to  avoid  prolixity  and  an  undue  reliance  on  the 
knowledge  of  their  readers,  may  tend  to  deprive  an 
historical  composition  of  such  accessories  as  are  necessary 
to  give  substance  and  life  to  the  events  and  characters  of 
which  they  treat.  Neither  history  nor  biography  can  be 
recorded  with  the  fulness  of  the  daily  press  or  the 
minuteness  of  a  diary,  but  it  will  fail  to  be  effective  if 
written  with  a  succinctness  better  suited  to  the  index  of  a 
book  or  to  the  headings  of  chapters. 

It  is  to  be  regretted  that  Miss  Berry  fell  into  the 
error  of  too  great  condensation  in  a  work  which  would 
have  been  more  impressive  and  more  instructive  by 
greater  amphfication.  Her  '  Comparative  View  '  is  marked 
by  the  sound  judgment  and  good  sense  which  are  the 
growth  of  attentive  reading,  keen  observation,  and  social 
experience.  There  is  neither  picture-writing,  nor  party- 
writing  ;  no  hero-worship,  no  degraded  life  held  up 
to  admiration ;   no  character  drawn  with   striking  and 


XXVI  INTEODUCTIOW. 

impossible  combinations,  making  a  sort  of  living  antithesis ; 
but,  throughout  her  work,  may  be  traced  a  calm  and 
philosophic  anatomy  of  cause  and  effect  in  human  affairs, 
accompanied  vv^ith  great  toleration  for  the  influence  of 
external  circumstances,  on  the  conduct  and  character  of 
those  she  describes,  together  with  the  highest  appreciation 
of  those  principles  of  truth,  virtue,  and  justice,  without 
which  government  serves  only  as  a  means  to  secure  the 
personal  indulgence  of  those  in  power,  and  to  become  an 
instrument  of  oppression  to  those  who  must  submit.  But 
the  length  of  time,  the  variety  of  subjects,  the  number  of 
distinguished  persons  and  remarkable  events  included,  are 
crowded  into  too  small  a  space  to  give  sufficient  weight 
and  interest  to  the  various  parts  which  make  up  this 
moving  panorama  of  the  past.  The  mind  requires  more 
time  to  become  acquainted  with  the  foreground  figures 
of  the  landscape,  more  familiarity  vvdth  the  scenes  in  which 
they  are  placed.  Miss  Berry  wrote  so  well  what  she  did 
write,  that  one  cannot  but  wish  she  had  written  more. 
She  has,  however,  exhibited  a  gallery  of  portraits,  not  all 
strictly  historical,  but  all  illustrative  of  the  times  in  which 
the  origmals  hved.  They  are  painted  with  more  or  less 
of  finish  and  detail,  and  even  the  slighter  sketches  are 
made  with  a  careful  adherence  to  truth,  and  thus  help  to 
people  the  periods  described  with  those  who  breathed  a 
social  atmosphere  very  different  to  our  own,  and  whose 
manners  and  conduct  were  moulded  by  habits  and 
opinions  of  which  the  hving  generations  have  no  personal 
experience. 

Nor  is  it  only  by  the  introduction  of  remarkable  persons 
that  Miss  Berry  endeavours  to  bring  before  her  readers  the 


INTRODUCTION.  XXVU 

comparative  view  of  social  life  in  England  and  France ; 
the  standard  of  public  and  domestic  morals,  the  style  of 
education,  the  progress  of  literature,  the  cultivation  of  the 
arts,  the  taste  for  the  Drama  and  dramatic  writings  in  both 
countries,  with  many  other  subjects,  are  passed  in  review. 
The  Drama  in  aU  its  varied  forms  was  a  subject  on  which 
Miss  Berry  took  a  lively  interest ;  and  after  glancing  at 
the .  days  of  Masques  and  Pageants,  Eclogues,  Pastoral 
Cantatas,  &c.,  she  gives  in  some  detail  the  rise  and  pro- 
gress of  the  '  Opera,  or  drama  entirely  in  music' 

In  1660,  on  the  occasion  of  the  f6tes  for  the  marriage 
of  Louis  XIV.,  the  '  Ercole  amanti '  was  given,  with  a 
French  translation  of  the  Italian  poetry ;  and  in  the  year 
1652  an  Abbe  Perrin  obtained  letters  patent  for  the  estab- 
lishment of  an  '  academic  des  operas  en  langue  frangoise.' 
Other  operas  followed,  to  which  French  words  were 
adapted,  and  it  became  an  estabhshed  amusement  at  Paris.* 
It  was  in  the  reign  of  Wilham  and  Mary  (says  Miss  Berry), 
that  the  Italian  Opera  was  introduced  into  England. 
'  Several  distinguished  singers  havhig  visited  this  country 
during  the  reigns  of  Charles  and  James,  a  taste  had  been 
acquired  for  Italian  music ;  it  was  now  to  be  established 
in  a  theatre  exclusively  dedicated  to  it,  and  patronised  by 
the  nobility  and  the  good  company  of  London,  as  a  less 
exceptional  entertainment  than  the  National  Theatre.' 
Miss  Berry  then  quotes  a  passage  from  'Chetwoode's 
General  History  of  the  Stage,'  descriptive  of  the  mode  in 
which  the  performance  was  carried  on. 

Mrs.  Tofts,  a  mere  Englishwoman,  in  the  part  of  Camilla, 
counted    by  Nicolini,   an    Italian,   without    understanding    a 

*  Vol.  1.  p.  141.  t  Ibid.  pp.  208-9. 


XXVIU  INTEODUCTION. 

syllable  each  other  said ;  Mrs.  Tofts  chanting  her  recitative 
in  English  in  answer  to  his  Italian ;  and  on  the  other  hand, 
Valentini  courting  amorously  in  the  same  language  a  Dutch- 
woman, who  could  neither  speak  English  nor  Italian,  and  com- 
mitting murder  on  our  good  old  English,  with  as  little  under- 
standing as  a  parrot. 

Miss  Berry  gives  an  excellent  dissertation  on  Tragedy 
and  Comedy,  too  .  long  for  extraction,  but  showing  how 
much  and  how  well  she  had  thought  on  the  two  great 
branches  of  dramatic  composition. 

As  Miss  Berry  approaches  the  time  when  her  own  re- 
collections give  additional  life  to  her  '  Comparative  View,' 
the  interest  is  increased  m  her  observations  and  opinions ; 
and  a  passage  on  the  emigration  of  the  best  blood  of 
Prance  at  the  beginning  of  the  French  Eevolution,  is 
written  with  the  vividness  and  warmth  of  having  seen 
and  felt,  as  well  as  reasoned  on,  the  events  that  took  place 
in  the  days  of  her  youth. 

How  (says  she)  can  all  the  illustrious  names  boasting  of  twelve 
centuries  of  un contaminated  blood  and  of  distinguished  actions, 
how  can  they  excuse  their  dispersion  at  the  beginning  of  the 
Eevolution  ?  .  .  .  They  fled  leaving  their  King  in  the  midst 
of  an  enraged  capital  and  a  discontented  country ;  they  fled  to 
strangers  for  that  assistance  which  they  felt  they  could  not  hope 
for  from  their  own  dependants.  Had  not  the  great  territorial 
proprietors  known  that  many  of  them  were  as  obnoxious  (and 
much  more  justly  so)  to  their  own  vassals  than  their  poor  deserted 
King  was  to  the  populace  of  Paris,  they  would  have  gone  down  to 
their  estates,  and  spread  themselves  over  the  provinces.  .  .  . 
Instead  of  abandoning  at  such  a  moment  their  irritated  and  mis- 
guided country,  had  they  possessed  either  energy  or  conduct, 
they  would  have  reclaimed  or  perished  with  her.*  .  .  .     The 

*  Vol.  i.  pp.  266,  267. 


INTEODUCTION.  XXIX 

wiser  democratical  leaders,  aware  of  the  consequences  of  emi- 
gration, secretly  encouraged  it,  and  whilst  they  declaimed  from 
the  Tribune  of  the  National  Assembly  against  evaders,  took 
care  to  leave  all  doors  open  to  facilitate  escape.  .  .  .  Regi- 
ments were  encouraged  to  revolt  that  their  commanding  officers 
might  fancy  it  necessary  to  leave  them  ;  and  by  this  means  the 
raling  party  got  rid  of  persons  ill-disposed  towards  them,  and 
found  in  the  subaltern  and  non-commissioned  officers  zealous 
friends  to  the  new  arrangements.  .  .  .  While  the  King  was 
thus  abandoned,  the  country  was  left  to  be  torn  in  pieces  during 
ten  years,  by  the  most  bloody  and  despicable  demagogues  that 
were  ever  let  loose  on  a  people,  deprived  of  all  their  natural 
counsellors  and  defenders,  and  forced  to  struggle  out  of  anarchy 
through  all  the  horrors  of  popular  convulsions.  The  inevitable 
consequences,  the  natural  death  entailed  by  such  convulsions, 
were  the  military  despotism  which  so  long  extended  its  iron 
arm  over  that  rich  and  highly  favoured  country,  which  her 
nobles  deserted,  instead  of  defending,  and  irritated  instead  of 
guiding. 

The  author  is  here  speaking  (Miss  Berry  continues)  of  emigra- 
tion as  a  political  measure  of  the  day,  and  ventures  to  attribute 
it  to  what  it  is  believed  all  thinking  minds  will  allow  to  have 
been  at  once  its  cause  and  its  excuse — to  the  general  degraded 
state  of  moral  feeling  under  institutions  which  the  natural 
quickness  of  the  nation  had  long  outrun.  To  which  must  be 
added  the  administration  of  a  series  of  weak  ministers  acting 
under,  or  rather  for,  the  two  dissipated  and  profligate  princes 
(the  Regent  and  Louis  XV  )  who,  in  succeeding  to  Louis  XIV., 
succeeded  to  all  the  unpopularity  which  the  disorder  of  the 
finances,  entailed  by  the  passing  glory  of  his  reign,  necessarily 
devolved  on  his  successors.  The  spectacle  of  a  great  nation 
shaking  off  chains  it  had  so  long  worn,  and  reclaiming  rights  of 
which  it  had  been  so  long  deprived,  soon  attracted  the  eyes,  and 
interested  the  feelings,  of  all  Europe  in  its  success  : — that 
success  it  was  itself  entirely  unprepared  either  to  bear,  or  to 
profit  by.  Its  wits  and  its  philosophers  had  undermined  every 
prop,  both  of  its  throne  and  its  altars,  without  having  conde- 
scended to  form  any  plan  for  a  new  construction,  or  even  to 
have  any  foresight  of  what  was  likely  to  arise  from  the  ruins 


XXX  INTBODUCTION. 

they  had  made.  Few  of  their  number  had  had  opportunities 
of  occupying  themselves  in  any  practical  details  of  reform,  and 
the  whole  bulk  of  the  nation,  educated  for  centuries  in  the 
habits  of  despotism,  had  no  standard  to  recur  to,  by  which 
to  measure  either  their  rights,  their  expectations,  or  their 
demands. 

In  our  great  dispute  with  our  monarch,  a  century  before,  we 
reclaimed  rights  acknowledged  by  repeated  charters,  confirmed 
by  successive  sovereigns,  never  infringed  without  remonstrance, 
and  seldom  without  a  further  security  for  their  future  observance. 
But  the  intoxication  of  France,  on  her  first  successes,  in  a  cause 
so  new,  was  immediately  followed  by  a  general  fever  of  mind, 
a  mental  epidemic,  accompanied  by  symptoms  of  delirium  at 
once  horrible  and  ridiculous.  From  a  centre  of  infection  so 
potent  the  disease  soon  spread  itself  nationally  and  individually 
over  the  greater  part  of  Europe,  marking  its  progress  by  schemes 
of  impossible  reform,  complaints  of  irremediable  evils,  visions 
of  perfection  incompatible  with  human  nature,  a  dereliction  of 
real  and  experienced  benefits  for  untried  and  impossible  im- 
provements; a  general  discontent  with  the  existing  order  of 
things,  and  violent  aspirations  after  an  imagined  and  visionary 
future.'  * 

Miss  Berry's  speculations  as  to  the  possible  consequences 
to  the  state  of  France  had  other  countries  abstained  from 
interfering,  and  her  account  of  the  effects  she  saw  wrought 
by  the  excesses  in  France  on  the  opinions  of  political 
parties  in  England,,  have  to  the  present  generation  the 
value  of  a  direct  tradition  from  an  eye-witness.  Many 
a  treatise  may  be  found  more  elaborately  worked  on  the 
causes  of  the  frightful  tragedy  which  disgraced  the  close 
of  the  eighteenth  century;  there  may  be  ingenious  pallia- 
tions of  its  wanton  cruelties  set  forth,  or  eloquent  denun- 
ciations hurled  at  its  unprovoked  atrocities,  and  many 

*  Vol.  i.  pp.  269-72. 


INTEODUCTION.  XXXI 

profound  and  philosophic  reflections  may  be  founded  on 
the  consideration  of  the  various  written  histories  of  that 
period  ;  but  there  is  always  a  peculiar  interest  attached 
to  the  opinions  expressed  and  facts  related  by  a  contem- 
porary witness.  What  Miss  Berry  thinks  and  says  is  from 
what  she  heard  and  saw,  and  what  she  knew  or  beUeved 
she  knew,  at  the  time ;  and  it  always  adds  life  and  fresh- 
ness to  a  narrative,  when  the  narrator  can  say  of  the 
past,  '  I  remember.' 

It  is  curious  to  observe  how  little  the  institutions,  the 
social  habits,  and  political  views  of  England  were  under- 
stood in  France,  even  when  most  admired,  at  the  beginning 
of  the  French  Eevolution. 

They  looked  up  to  the  English  (says  Miss  Berry)  as  their 
preceptors  in  politics,  treated  their  prejudices  and  their  pecu- 
liarities with  indulgence,  and  seemed  only  desirous  of  proving  to 
them  that  they  had  outstripped  their  masters  both  in  the  theory 
and  practice  of  civil  liberty.* 

It  would  have  been  difficult  for  England  to  trace  the 
lessons  drawn  from  her  instructions  in  the  wild  alter- 
nations of  terrorism  and  hcense  displayed  during  the 
successive  governments  of  the  French  Eevolution.  It 
was  the  pohcy  of  Napoleon  '  to  put  the  Enghsh  name  and 
nation  out  of  fashion ; '  f  but  his  ignorance  respecting 
everything  relating  to  England  would  seem  incredible,  had 
it  not  been  fully  shared  by  those  whose  opportunities  of 
better  information  had  been  so  much  greater  than  his  own. 

The  intellect  of  Buonaparte  (says  Miss  Berry)  on  commercial 
subjects,  and  on  all  great  views  of  political  economy,  was 
remarkably  deficient.     And  she  was  assured  by  one  of  the  most 

*  Vol.  ii.  p.  36,  t  Itid. 


XXXll  INTRODUCTION". 

enlightened  persons  employed  by  him  in  these  matters,  and  his 
devoted  admirer  (M.  Eederer),  that  he  had  great  difEculty  to 
make  him  comprehend  even  the  axioms  which  lay  on  the 
surface  of  these  subjects.* 

He  thought  to  depreciate  a  commercial  nation  by  calling 
it  a  '  nation  boutiquiere  ;  '  and, 

provoked  (says  Miss  Berry)  at  the  unbending  spirit  of 
England  against  the  continued  aggression  of  his  all-devouring 
ambition,  ....  he  succeeded  in  representing  the  English 
Government  as  a  vile  despotic  oligarchy,  uniting  all  the  pride  and 
all  the  prejudices  of  the  old  system  of  legitimacy  and  heredi- 
tary honours,  with  all  the  meanness  and  all  the  self-interest 
ascribed  to  commercial  habits.  Writers  f  were  sent  to  England 
to  misstate  our  institutions,  and  to  misconstrue  our  laws ;  and 
the  daily  publications  were  full  of  sanctioned  falsehoods,  some- 
times emanating  from  the  pen  of  the  master  himself,  whose 
style  was  always  recognisable.  | 

The  vanity  that  sprang  from  his  successes  made  Napo- 
leon believe  that,  in  case  of  his  invasion  of  England,  he 
would  be  met  with  powerful  and  enthusiastic  support, 
and  his  total  misapprehension  of  our  institutions  led  him, 
when  gathering  information  as  to  the  spirit  in  which  he 
might  hope  to  be  received,  to  attach  the  highest  impor- 
tance to  obtaining  some  knowledge  as  to  the  feelings  with 
which  such  an  enterprise  would  be  regarded  by  different 
classes  in  England,  9,nd  above  all  hy  the  Lord  Mayor  and 
the  aldermen ! !  §  He  could  little  have  appreciated  the 
unity  of  sentiment  inspired  in  England  by  his  threatening 
and  aggressive  policy,  which  is  thus  described  by  Miss 
Berry: — 

*  Vol.  ii.  p.  15.        t  Fiev^e,  and  many  others.         f  Vol.  ii.  pp.  40-1. 
§  The  Editor  was  told  this  fact  from  undoulted  authority. 


INTBODUCTION'.  XXxiii 

In  spite  of  public  and  private  catastrophes — in  spite  of 
severe  privations,  severely  felt  by  every  order  of  the  state, — 
a  dejected  or  despairing  spirit  was  unknown.  The  measures  of 
ministers  were  severely  canvassed,  and  often  warmly  opposed, 
in  the  councils  of  Parliament ;  but  whenever  the  submission  of 
other  nations,  or  any  circumstances  connected  with  it,  seemed 
to  threaten  our  own  national  independence,  one  mind  and  one 
will,  rose  against  the  yoke  that  had  been  imposed  on  continental 
Europe ;  all  difference  of  party  disappeared.* 

But  if  in  Napoleon  this  somewhat  laughable  ignorance 
of  his  neighbours  might  have  resulted  from  that  active 
military  career  to  which,  from  his  earliest  youth,  he  had 
devoted  his  whole  time  with  such  brilhant  success,  and 
from  his  having  never  visited  the  country  he  wished  to 
undervalue,  and  affected  to  despise,  what  can  be  said  of 
the  noblesse  of  the  old  regime — who  took  refuge  on  our 
shores,  who  hved  amongst  us  from  the  time  of  their  emi- 
gration tin  the  Eestoration  in  18l4 — who  abstained  from 
learning  our  language,  or  endeavouring  to  comprehend 
our  government  and  institutions,  or  to  understand  our' 
national  character, — but  who  hved  in  the  atmosphere  of 
their  prejudices,  their  resentments,  and  their  recollections 
of  past  privileges  ;  of  whom  it  was  said  with  respect  to 
their  own  country  '  qu'ils  n'avaient  rien  appris  et  rien 
oubhe,'  ^^i  of  whom  it  might  have  been  equally  assumed 
that  they  had  allowed  no  new  ideas  derived  from  a  new 
country,  and  new  circumstances,  to  disturb  the  state  of 
mind  in  which  they  arrived  in  England  and  again  de- 
parted for  Prance  ? 

In  alluding  to  the  difficulties  of  the  restored  Bourbons 
in  amalgamating  the  discordant  elements  out  of  which 

•  Vo].  ii.  p.  34 
VOL.  I.  b 


XXXIV  INTKODUCTION". 

was  to  be  formed  a  representative  government  to  ad- 
minister their  new  chartered  rights,  Miss  Berry  thus 
describes 

the  old  inveterate  upholders  of  all  the  prejudices  and  pre- 
tensions of  their  own  age,  martyrs  to  ideas  which  found  no 
longer  any  sympathy,  and  sufferers  from  causes  known  by 
none  but  themselves ;  resting  the  whole  pretensions  of  a  great 
body  of  insignificant  but  of  inveterately  obstinate  people  on  the 
faithful  and  devoted  attachment  of  a  part  of  their  order  to 
the  fallen  and  desperate  fortunes  of  their  sovereign  and  his 
family — claiming  remuneration  for  losses  which  (for  the  most 
part)  their  own  errors  had  incurred,  and  which  the  country 
regarded  with  a  jealous  eye.* 

No  sooner  was  peace  established  (says  Miss  Berry)  than 
England  poured  forth  her  islanders,  impatient  of  their  con- 
finement. .  .  .  Many  arrived  (at  Paris)  with  ideas  of 
intimate  friendship  contracted  with  French  individuals  in  emi- 
gration, by  whom  they  conceived  they  were  to  be  received 
with  such  grateful  remembrance  of  the  past,  as  would  lead  to 
a  renewal  of  former  intimacy,  and  to  much  enjoyment  in 
their  society.  .  .  .  All  those  who  remembered  France  in 
the  moment  of  Anglo-mania  which  immediately  preceded  the 
Eevolution,  fancied  that  they  should  still  find  some  remains  of 
good-will  to  the  country  which  she  had  then  looked  to  as  her 
model,  and  some  respect  for  those  who  had  so  long  preceded 
her  in  the  enjoyment  of  civil  liberty.  All  our  men  of  science 
were  eager  to  make  acquaintance  and  seek  the  society  of  those 
distinguished  by  similar  pursuits  in  France.  ...  In  these 
expectations  every  one  was  more  or  less  disappointed.  .  .  , 
The  remembrances  of  emigration  could  not  be  agreeable,  and 
consequently  the  debts  of  friendship  were  in  general  paid  as 
succinctly  and  with  as  little  trouble  as  possible,  without  any 
renewal  of  great  intimacy.  Those  old  enough  to  remember  the 
opinions  in  France  of  England  before  the  Eevolution,  heard 
with  astonishment  all  the  vulgar  prejudices  against  the  consti- 
tution of  her  laws,  and  her  public  principles,  which  had  been 
*  Vol.  ii.  p.  88. 


INTEODUCTIOIf.  XXXV 

propagated  by  Bonapaxte,  repeated  not  only  by  those  of  his 
fallen  party,  but  by  the  returned  Eoyalists  and  the  professed 
ConstitutionaUsts  * 

Notwithstanding  these  discouraging  facts.  Miss  Berry- 
never  abandoned  her  cherished  hope  of  an  intimate 
alliance  between  France  and  England :  she  felt,  to  use 
her  own  words, 

that  the  combined  will  of  two  such  countries,  the  immense 
influence  of  such  a  mass  of  intellectual  superiority,  joined  to 
such  imposing  political  force,  must  and  ought  to  dictate  to 
Europe;  to  constitute  the  intellectual  soul  of  an  enlightened 
world ;  to  be  improved  by  their  science,  to  be  enriched  by  their 
discoveries,  and  to  be  advanced  by  their  example  in  all  the 
great  principles  of  civil  liberty  and  social  happiness,  f 

Miss  Berry  concluded  the  second  volume  of  her  work 
in  June  18S0  ;  but  the  events  of  the  following  month  at 
Paris  gave  rise  to  another  most  interesting  chapter : 

Having  been  present  (says  she)  at  the  marvellous  events 
which  lately  took  place  in  the  political  existence  of  France, 
the  author  feels  it  impossible  not  to  notice  so  remarkable  a 
passage  in  the  civil  history  of  mankind,  and  so  striking  a 
change  in  the  character  and  conduct  of  the  nation  where  it 
took  place. 

A  king  of  France  reigning  in  undisturbed  splendour  and 
unquestioned  authority  on  Sunday,  July  25,  and  on  Sunday, 
August  1,  in  one  little  week,  the  same  being  having  become  a 
fugitive,  without  power  and  without  rights,  haroly  allowed  to 
remain  two  days  longer  in  the  disturbed  and  uncertain  occupa- 
tion of  the  most  distant  of  his  palaces; — these  events  seem 
more  like  the  necromantic  catastrophe  of  an  Eastern  tale,  than 
facts  actually  taking  place  ia  the  most  regularly  organised 
European  government.^ 

Miss  Berry  had  been  famDiar  in  her  youth  with  accounts 
of  the  passing  horrors  of  the  first  Eevolution ;  and  she  was 

*  Vol.  ii.  pp.  93-5.        t  Vol.  ii.  p.  119.         X  Vol.  ii.  chap.  vii.  p.  121. 

b2 


XXXVl  INTRODUCTION. 

forcibly  struck  by  the  comparative  moderation  and  hu- 
manity that  was  exhibited  in  that  of  the  year  1830.  The 
more  liberal  institutions,  of  fifteen  years'  duration,  had 
done  much  to  improve  and  humanise  the  people.  The 
fierce  spirit  of  vengeance  and  retaliation  which,  in  the 
first  Eevolution,  had  pervaded  the  feehngs  and  prompted 
the  movements  of  the  lower  against  the  upper  classes,  did 
not  disgrace  on  this  occasion  the  struggle  for  more  assured 
liberty ;  and  from  this  improvement  in  the  national  dispo- 
sition, together  with  the  personal  character  of  the  sagacious 
prince  then  called  upon  to  fill  the  vacant  throne,  Miss 
Berry's  constant  hope  was  strengthened  that  the  intimate 
relations  between  the  two  countries  might  be  the  more 
and  more  confirmed. 

A  world  of  events  have  passed  in  the  thirty-four  years 
succeeding  that  in  which  Miss  Berry  closed  her  '  Com- 
parative View  of  Social  Life  in  England  and  France,'  and 
much  advance  has  been  made  towards  that  better  under- 
standing— that  better  appreciation  of  the  characteristics 
and  attainments  of  each  other.  Time  and  space  have 
been  changed  by  the  scientific  application  of  steam  and 
of  electricity  to  the  purposes  of  communication  :  the  two 
countries  are  brought  nearer  together,  the  intercourse  is 
constant  and  rapid,  the  combinations  in  commercial  enter- 
prise and  financial  speculations  numerous,  and  a  close 
approximation  of  the  middle  class  of  both  nations  has 
naturally  followed.  Twice  in  London,  and  once  in  Paris, 
have  all  the  products  of  nature,  art,  and  industry  been 
exhibited  in  friendly  rivalry ;  and  commercial  restrictions 
which,  under  the  name  of  protection,  fettered  and  impeded 
trade,  have  been  removed.     Our  armies  have  fought  side 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXVll 

by  side ;  our  diplomatists  have  negotiated  with  similar 
objects  in  view  ;  the  sovereigns  of  each  country  have 
exchanged  visits  not  only  of  state,  but  of  private  friendship. 
We  have  welcomed  in  the  chosen  Emperor  of  the  French, 
the  exile  who  sought  a  refuge  in  England,  who  has  never 
forgotten  on  the  throne  those  with  whom  he  here  asso- 
ciated on  friendly  terms,  and  who,  on  a  memorable  occa- 
sion, bore  his  part  as  one  who  was  ready  to  give  his  aid 
in  defending  those  laws  of  peace  and  order  which  every 
English  gentleman  showed  a  determination  to  maintain. 

We  are  proud  to  possess  as  residents  those  illustrious 
Inembers  of  the  lata  reigning  family  in  Prance  who, 
excluded  from  a  return  to  their  native  country,  have 
chosen  England  for  their  sojourn;  and  more  especially  of 
that  Prince  of  the  House  of  Orleans  who,  suddenly  cut 
short  in  the  double  career  of  military  glory  and  civil 
government,*  in  which  he  served  the  country  that  still 
retains  his  unfading  loyalty  and  affection,  now  turns  with 
frank  cordiality  to  associate  himself  on  every  fitting 
occasion,  whether  charitable,  hterary,  agricultural,  or 
social,  to  promote  the  comfort,  the  improvement,  or  the 
amusement  of  those  with  whom  he  has  cast  his  lot. 

Yet  neither  the  courtesies  of  the  highest,  nor  the  good- 
will that  arises  between  nations  when  the  laws  of  '  demand 
and  supply '  are  permitted  to  effect  a  friendly  dependence 
on  each  other,  nor  even  the  results  of  rapid  means  of 
communication,  wiU  prove  of  sufficient  force  to  remove 
the  barriers  of  old  prejudices  long  raised  between  the  two 


*  M.  de  Tocque-viUe,  no  mean  judge  in  sucli  matters,  conceived  from  per- 
sonal observation  the  highest  opinion  of  the  Due  d'Aumale's  ahilities  in 
the  administi-ation  of  his  government  in  Algeria. 


XXXVm  INTEODUCTIOIir. 

countries.  Much  has  been  done  in  thirty-four  years,  but 
more  remains  to  do.  The  once-received  axiom,  that 
England  and  France  were  '  natural  enemies,'  has  passed 
away;  but  neither  country  has  yet  reached  the  more 
Christian-Hke  doctrine  of  love  between  neighbours.  There 
are  differences  in  forms  of  government,  differences  in  re- 
ligion, differences  in  habits  and  character,  which  will 
always  dispose  each  nation  to  view  from  a  somewhat  dif- 
ferent point  the  passing  events  of  the  world :  but  that 
which  keeps  us  most  asunder — that  which  prevents  a  just 
appreciation  of  the  motives,  the  feelings,  the  thoughts  of 
each  other — that  which  most  causes  misjudgment,  wounded 
susceptibility,  and  resentments,  and  denies  to  each  the 
softening  influence  of  personal  communication, — ^is  the 
reciprocal  ignorance  of  each  other's  language.  It  is  a  very 
limited  number  in  England  who  really  speak  French  with 
tolerable  ease.  Amongst  the  upper  and  best-educated 
classes  there  is  generally  some  effort  made  by  parents  to 
give  that  advantage  to  their  daughters,  but  rarely  to  their 
sons ;  the  system  of  our  public  schools  giving  no  facihty  to 
the  acquirement  of  even  that  one  modern  language  which  is 
more  or  less  a  passport  throughout  Europe.  Some  few  for- 
tunate youths  may  occasionally  profit  by  the  opportunities 
given  to  their  sisters,  and  acquire  in  their  infancy  a  httle 
knowledge  of  French,  and  may  afterwards  have  the  energy 
to  improve  that  advantage  5  but  these  are  only  rare  and 
exceptional  cases  as  compared  with  the  mass  of  educated 
persons.  The  acquirement  of  French  forms  no  part  of  the 
instruction  which  an  English  gentleman  necessarily  re- 
ceives at  our  pubhc  schools  or  universities.  In  France, 
the  knowledge  of  the  English  language  and  of  English 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXIX 

literature  is  still  more  rarely  cultivated.  There  is  not 
much  social  intercourse  between  even  the  highest  and  most 
educated  classes  of  France  and  England  ;  and  this  difficulty 
as  to  the  medium  of  communication  is  a  constant  check  to 
acquaintance  or  intimacy.  Literary  and  scientific  men,  even 
when  accustomed  to  reading  French,  are  often  withheld 
from  attempting  conversation  by  conscious  defects  of  pro- 
nunciation or  want  of  fluency  in  expression  :  and  so  much 
practical  inconvenience  arises  from  this  ignorance  of  each 
other's  language  when  joint  action  is  to  be  carried  on  in 
the  services  of  war,  that  the  choice  of  persons  employed 
is  narrowed  by  the  question,  not  of  the  fittest  man,  but  of 
the  man  who  can  make  himself  understood  by  those  with 
whom  he  has  to  act.  Some  improvement  in  this  great 
defect  on  English  education  may  follow,  it  is  believed,  the 
long  and  patient  enquiries,  and  subsequent  report,  of  a 
Commission  which  concluded  its  labours  last  spring,  and 
that  the  teaching  of  French  will  become  compulsory  in 
all  our  great  seminaries  of  learning :  nor  is  it  unreasonable 
to  hope  that  the  dawning  knoAvledge  of  Enghsh  wiU  be 
cultivated  in  return  throughout  Franca  It  is  impossible 
to  overrate  the  value  and  importance  of  increased  facility 
in  direct  verbal  communication,  in  efiecting  those  better 
relations  between  the  two  leading  countries  of  Europe,  so 
much  to  be  desired,  and  so  warmly  advocated  by  the 
author  of  the  '  Comparative  View  of  Social  Life  in  Eng- 
land and  France.' 

Miss  Berry's. '  Advertisement  to  the  Letters  addressed 
by  Lord  Orford  to  the  Miss  Berrys '  (first  pubhshed  in 
Bentley's  Chronological  Edition  of  Lord  Orford's  Letters) 


xl  INTEODUCTIOX. 

is  included  in  this  last  edition  of  her  works,  and  is  dated 
October  1840.  It  is  a  defence  of  Lord  Orford,  whose 
character  had  been  roughly  handled  in  an  article  in  the 
'  Edinburgh  Eeview,'  reviewing  Lord  Dover's  edition  of 
the  first  part  of  Horace  "Walpole's  Correspondence  with 
Sir  Horace  Mann.  Miss  Berry  considered,  to  use  her  own 
words,  '  that  an  unjust  impression  had  been  given,  not 
only  of  the  genius  and  talents,  but  of  the  heart  and 
character,  of  Lord  Orford.'  She  was  quite  aware  that 
in  endeavouring  to  rescue  the  memory  of  an  old  and 
beloved  friend  from  the  'giant  grasp'  of  his  critic,  it 
was  with  no  other  than  Lord  Macaulay  that  she  had  to 
contend :  but,  though  she  unflinchingly  combated  his 
estimate  of  Lord  Orford's  character  and  feelings  with  the 
knowledge  of  facts  '  acquired  in  long  intimacy,'  it  was  not 
without  a  graceful  expression  of  regret  at  differing  from, 
or  calling  in  question,  the  opinions  of  a  person  for  whom, 
as  she  says,  she  felt '  all  the  admiration  and  respect  due  to 
superemiaent  abilities,  and  all  the  grateful  pride  and 
affectionate  regard  inspired  by  personal  friendship.' 

In  January  1831,  a  nominal  review  of  Miss  Berry's 
work  on  Social  Life  appeared  in  the  '  Edinburgh  Eeview.' 
The  substance  of  the  article  was  taken  from  her  book 
without  acknowledgment  or  marks  of  quotation,  and  given 
to  the  public  without  any  allusian  to  the  work  itself  as  an 
original  essay  on  the  subject. 

In  the  '  Quarterly  Eeview '  of  March  1845,  there  is  a 

careful  analysis  and  very  favourable  notice  of  Miss  Berry's 

complete  works  as  pubhshed  in  1844.    It  contains  so  just 

a  tribute  to  the  characteristic  merits  of  both  the  author 

.  and  her  works,  that  a  few  passages  from  this  article  will. 


INTRODUCTION.  xli 

it  is  hoped,  be  considered  a  fitting  conclusion  to  these 
prefatory  pages. 

We  rejoice  in  the  publication  of  this  excellent  and  useful 
essay,  as  the  avowed  production  of  Miss  Berry,  because  the 
value  of  its  original  remarks  upon  the  society  of  both  countries, 
in  which  she  has  so  long  moved  as  a  member  at  once  admired 
and  beloved,  is  greatly  increased  by  the  value  of  her  name — 
a  name  never  to  be  pronounced  without  the  respect  due  to 
talents,  learning,  and  virtue.  We  place  in  the  front  of  our 
criticism  that  which  all  rightly-constituted  minds  must  regard  as 
the  highest  panegyric — that  she  who  has  experienced  and  enjoyed 
the  pleasures  of  fashionable  as  well  as  literary  intercourse  more 
and  longer  than  any  living  author,  has  passed  through  both  the 
frivolities  and  the  corruptions  of  times  in  Paris  as  well  as  in 
London  without  a  shadow  of  a  taint  either  to  her  heart,  her 
feelings,  or  her  principles.  The  historian  of  society  in  her  own 
as  well  as  in  former  periods,  the  fond  admirer  of  genius 
whatever  form  it  assumed,  and  the  partaker  with  a  keen  relish 
of  all  the  enjoyments  which  the  intercourse  of  polished  life 
affords,  she  has  never  shut  her  eyes  for  a  moment  to  either  the 
follies  that  degraded  or  the  vices  that  disfigured  the  scene,  nor 
has  ever  feared  to  let  her  pen,  while  it  described  for  our  admi- 
ration the  fair  side  of  things,  hold  up  also  the  reverse  to  our 
reprobation  or  our  contempt. 


JOURNAL 


COEEESPOHDENCE  OF   MISS   BEEEY. 


NOTES    OF    EARLY    LIFE. 

Mt  father  -was  the  maternal  nephew  df  an  old  Scotch 
merchant  of  the  name  of  Ferguson,' who  had  been  sent 
for  up  from  Scotland  by  a  near  relation  of  his,  long 
established  id  Londdh,  on  a  promise  to  provide  for  him: 
this  he  did  so  completely,  that. before  the  middle  of  my 
uncle's  life  he  found  himself  in  possession  of  something 
near  300,000^.,  a  great  fortune  for  those  days,  for  the 
said  uncle  had  conie  up  to  London  in  the  year  of  the 
Union,  1709.  He  might  now  have  left  the  City  for  ever ; 
but  so  attached  was  he  to  the  habits  and  habitations 
of  the  counting-house,  that  not  even  his  marriage,  and 
his  having  purchased  a  considerable  estate  in  Fifeshire, 
could  persuade  him  to  remove  to  the  West-end  of  the 
town,  or  to  abandon  Austin  Friars,*  where  he  lived  for 
more  than  half  a  century,  and  till  his  death.  He  had 
married  a  Miss  Townshehd,  the  sister  of  the  wife  of 
Mr.  Oswald,!  ^  neighbour  of  his  in  Scotland,  who  was 

*  BroEwi  Street.     The  House  of  the  Augustine  Friars  was  founded  by 
Humphrey  Bohun,  Earl  of  Hereford  and  Essex,  in  the  year  1243. 

t  Mr.  Oswald  married  Elizabeth,  daughter  of Townshend,  of  Hon- 

ington  Hall,  Warwickshire,  1747.  Mr.  Oswald  was  for  many  years  in  Par- 
liament, and  filled  the  offices  of  Commissioner  of  Navy,  Lord  of  Trade  and 
Plantations,  Lord  of  the  Treasury,  and  Treasurer  of  Ireland.  He  died  in 
1766. 

VOL.  I.  *B 


2  MISS   BEKKY'S   NOTES.  [1762 

in  Parliament,  and  employed  in  several  public  offices 
during  the  Administrations  of  1753  and  1754. 

There  being  no  children  from  Mr.  Ferguson's  marriage, 
his  sister's  .sous  became  his  na,tural  heirs.  Of  these,  my 
father  being  the  eldest,  was,  like  all  elder  brothers  of 
those  days,  bred  to  the  law,  with  or  without  any  intention 
of  following  the  profession.  After  my  father  had  left 
college,  and  gone  through  the  routine  of  this  education, 
he  obtained  his  uncle's  leave  to  travel ;  but  he  had  only 
spent  seven  months  in  the  Netherlands  before  he  was 
recalled  by  his  uncle,  who,  I  conclude,  ensured  obedience 
to  his  orders  by  stopping  the  supplies.  The  law  he  seems 
never  to  have  thought  of  more,  nor  was  it  thought 
necessary  he  should.  But  in  all  other  respects  I  can 
easily  suppose  his  careless  disposition,  even  to  his  own 
situation,  his  turn  towards  literature  and  literary  society, 
little  suited  the  hard  narrow  mind  of  the  man  on  whom 
his  fortunes  depended. 

My  father's  marriage,  in  1762,  with  a  distant  relation 
of  his  own,  of  the  ancient  name  of  Seton,  the  daughter 
of  a  widow  then  living  in  Yorkshire,  with  a  family  of  four 
daughters,  did  not  serve  his  interests  with  his  uncle.  My 
mother  is  said  to  have  had  every  qualification,  beside 
beauty,  that  could  charm,  captivate,  or  attach,  and  excuse 
a  want  of  fortune.  At  first  she  succeeded  in  captivating 
the  good  graces  of  the  old  man,  but  not  to  induce  him  to 
augment  the  allowance  he  made  to  his  nephew.  On  this 
allowance  they  retired  to  hve  in  Yorkshire,  in  the  same 
house  with  her  mother  at  Kirkbridge,  where  she  gave' 
birth  in  two  succeeding  years  to  two  daughters,  myself 
and  Agnes.  But  however  well  pleaseq|K^e  old  uncle 
might  have  been  with  his  niece,  his  expectations  were 
disappointed  at  her  not  producing  a  male  heir,  and  were 
finally  crushed  by  her  death  in  childbirth.  I  have  been 
told  that  his  uncle  was  very  importunate  with  my  father 
to  marry  again  directly.    If  so,  I  am  sure  my  father  must 


17G9]  HER   FATHER.  3 

have  finally  destroyed  his  prospects  from  him,  by  the 
manner  in  which  he  would  have  received  such  a  proposal 
immediately  after  the  untimely  death  of  a  beloved  wife  of 
twenty-three,  after  four  years'  marriage. 

In  the  meantime,  his  younger  brother  William,  a  sharp 
lad,  who  had  obtained  a  good  report  from  the  mercantile 
house  in  which  he  had  been  placed  to  quahfy  him  for 
business,  was  employed  by  his  uncle  in  looking  into  his 
accounts  in  Scotland  during  his  absence  in  London,  He 
soon  perceived  the  carelessness  of  his  elder  brother's 
character,  and  how  httle  it  fell  in,  in  any  respect,  with 
that  of  the  old  man,  and  how  easily  he  could  assimilate 
himself  to  all  his  views.  He  thus  continued  to  gain  every 
day  on  his  confidence,  and  secured  his  goodwill  by  marry- 
ing a  daughter  of  the  house  of  Crawford,  with  5,000/.,  a 
handsome  female  fortune  in  those  days,  especially  in 
Scotland :  Fortune  too  favoured  him  in  the  birth  of  two 
sons  in  the  first  two  years  of  their  marriage. 

1769. — ^From  this  time  his  imcle  seems  to  have  con- 
sidered him  decidedly  as  his  heir,  estabhshed  him  in  the 
house  in  Fifeshire,  and  made  him  direct  everything  about 
his  estate  and  affairs  in  Scotland ;  while  quietly  letting  my 
poor  father  continue  to  starve  on  an  allowance  of  300^. 
a-year,  he  made  him  understand  that  his  intentions  as  to 
his  heir  were  entirely  altered,  and  that  he  had  been  sup- 
planted by  his  younger  brother.  That  my  father  should 
have  allowed  himself  to  be  thus  choused  out  of  a  great 
inheritance,  by  a  brother  who  had  not  a  sentiment  or  feel- 
ing in  common  with  himself,  and  by  an  uncle  whom  he 
had  never  offended,  and  in  whose  society  he  continued  to 
spend  three  days  of  every  week,  while  his  brother  was 
living  in  ease,  indulgence,  and  luxury  at  Eaith,  and  only 
making  a  yearly  visit  of  a  couple  of  months  to  the 
melancholy  residence  of  Austin  Friars, — that  the  easy 
temper  of  my  father  should  have  silently  acquiesced  in 
all  this  ;  that  he  should  not  have  seen  the  character,  and 

B   2 


4  MISS   berry's   notes.  [1764 

obviated  the  conduct,  of  his  brother  before  it  was  too 
late,  during  all  the  youth  and  middle  of  my  life  sorely 
afflicted  me.  Every  expense  of  education  in  the  acquire- 
ment of  talents  v?as  denied  us,  and  much  of  the  gaiety 
and  all  the  thoughtlessness  of  youth  were  lost  in  the 
continual  complaints  I  heard,  and  the  difficulties  I  saw  in 
getting  through  the  year  on  the  wretched  pittance  allowed 
us,  and  which  my  father's  disinheritance  (now  known  to 
everybody)  prevented^hisattempiSa^any^scheme  to  mend  : 
thus,  seeming  not  to  feel  for  himself,  he  "was  allowed  to 
sink  into  the  state  of  a  disinherited  man,  without  any  of 
the  pity  such  a  state  generally  inspires.  When  I  grew 
to  an  age  to  look  about  me  on  the  affairs  of  the  world,  and 
the  situation  of  my  own  family,  I  saw  the  lamentable  one 
in  which  my  father's  easy  inefficient  character  had  placed 
himself  and  his  children.  While  yet  a  mere  child,  I  had 
already  suffered  in  spirits  and  gaiety  from  the  melan- 
choly difficulties  and  little  privations  of  every  sort,  which 
his  very  narrow  income  entailed  on  us,  and  which  so  en- 
gaged his  mind  as  to  make  him  inattentive  to  its  effects 
upon  us. 

1763. — I  was  born  on  the  16th  of  March,  at  Kirk- 
bridge,  a  lone  house  situated  immediately  without  the  pre- 
cincts of  the  Park  of  Stanwick,  then  inhabited  by  Hugli 
Earl  Percy,  son  of  the  first  Smithson,  Duke  of  Northum- 
berland, and  his  first  wife,  the  daughter  of  Lord  Bute 
(the  Minister),  from  whom  he  was  afterwards  divorced.* 

1764. — My  sister  Agnes  was  born  on  the  29th  of  May 
this  year,  at  the  same  place,  which  was  the  residence  of 
my  grandmother  Seton  and  her  three  unmarried  daughters, 
Isabella,  Jane,  and  Mary,  with  whom  my  father  and 
mother  resided  during  the  first  two  years  of  their  mar- 

'  Earl  Percy  first  married,  in  July  1664,  Lady  Anne  Stuart,  third 
daughter  of  John,  Earl  of  Bute,  by  whom  he  had  no  issue  ;  they  separated 
in  1769 ;  and  in  1779  he  obtained  a  divorce,  on  account  of  her  intimacy 
■with  3Ir.  William  Bird,  Lord  Percy  afterwards  married  Miss  Frances 
Julia  Burrell,  sister  to  Lord  Gwydyr,  by  whom  he  had  a  numerous  family. 


1767]  HER   MOTHER.  5 

riage.  I  have  no  further  recollection  of  Kirkbridge, 
except  that  sixty  years  afterwards,  when  going  to  see 
Stanwick,  I  had  a  recollection  of  the  ornaments  of  the 
room  in  which  I  had  sat  in  somebody's  lap  at  breakfast, 
and  of  the  disposition  of  the  staircase  which  led  to  it.  I 
have  no  further  recollection  of  anything  till  when  my 
mother  died  of  a  milk  fever  (1767),  giving  birth  to  another 
girl,  who  died  at  the  same  time.  Of  my  mother  I  have 
only  the  idea  of  having  seen  a  tall,  thin  young  woman  in 
a  pea-green  gown,  seated  in  a  chair,  seeming  unwell,  from 
whom  I  was  sent  away  to  play  elsewhere.  Of  the  exces- 
sive grief  of  my  father  and  grandmother  at  her  death  I 
have  no  recollection ;  I  think  I  must  have  been  kept  away 
from  them.  Of  nay  own  irreparable  loss  I  had  certainly 
then  no  idea,  and  never  acquired  a  just  one  till  some 
years  after,  when  my  father  told  us  that  my  mother,  on 
hearing  some  one  say  to  her  that  I  was  a  fine  child,  and 
that  they  hoped  I  should  be  handsome,  said,  that  all  she 
prayed  to  Heaven  for  her  child  was,  that  it  might  receive 
a  vigorous  understanding.  This  prayer  of  a  mother  of 
eighteen,  for  her  first-born,  a  daughter,  struck  me  when  I 
first  heard  it,  and  has  impressed  on  my  mind  ever  since 
all  I  must  have  lost  in  such  a  parent. 

Prom  her  death,  however,  dates  the  first  feeling  of  un- 
kindness  and  neglect  which  entered  into  my  young  mind, 
accustomed  to  nothing  but  the  fondness  of  everybody 
about  me.  The  first  wife  of  that  Lord  Percy  who  lived 
at  Stanwick  had  become,  from  her  near  neighbourhood 
to  Kirkbridge,  very  intimate  and  very  much  attached  to 
my  mother.  Lady  Percy  was  in  London  at  the  time  of  my 
mother's  death,  but,  on  her  return  to  the  North,  had  stopped 
in  York  to  see  and  to  weep  with  my  grandmother,  who  from 
my  mother's  death  had  taken  the  care  of  her  two  children. 
I  have  even  now  the  clear  and  distinct  idea  of  a  lady  in 
a  riding  habit,  sitting  leaning  on  a  chair  drowned  in  tears, 
and  on  my  running  up   to  her  and  calling  her  by  her 


6  MISS   berry's  JTOTES.  [1768-70 

name,  pushing  me  away  from  her,  and  avoiding  looking 
at  me,  instead  of  taking  me  on  her  lap  as  I  expected. 
The  feelings  of  sorrow,  of  surprise,  and  mortification 
were  the  very  first  of  that  long  series  of  wounds  to  a 
very  affectionate  heart,  which  everybody  has  to  undergo 
in  life,  and  which  nothing  subsequent  has  blotted  from 
my  memory. 

1768,  1769.— Of  the  years  '68  and  '69  I  remember 
nothing,  but  that  there  we  remained  living  at  Askham, 
and  that  we  had  a  sort  of  Bonne,  governess,  Miss  Porter, 
who  walked  with  us,  and  taught  me  to  read  I  sup- 
pose ;  but  as  I  have  no  remembrance  at  all  of  the  pro- 
cess nor  of  existence  without  the  power  of  reading,  I  can 
say  nothing  of  the  talents  of  my  teacher.  Agnes  was 
slower  than  myself  at  her  book,  and  I  have  some  faint 
idea  of  tribulation  over  the  spelling-book  with  her.  Our 
only  playfellow  was  Mary  Garforth,  the  youngest  sister  of 
Mr.  Garforth,  the  Squire  of  the  parish,  whose  mother, 
during  her  son's  minority,  hved  at  the  Mansion  House, 
which  was  within  a  stone's  throw  of  the  house  in  which 
we  resided. 

1770. — In  the  spring  of  this  year  we  removed  from 
Askham  to  Chiswick.  My  father,  I  fancy,  had  begun  to 
think  (too  late)  that  he  ought  to  pay  more  attention  and 
to  court  the  favour  of  the  uncle  to  whom,  during  his 
education  as  an  advocate  and  before  his  marriage,  he  was 
considered  as  the  certain  heir.  At  Chiswick  we  inhabited 
the  College  House  on  the  river-side,  so  called  from  belong- 
ing to  the  Dean  and  Chapter  of  Westminster  as  a  retreat 
for  boys  on  the  foundation,  whenever  the  plague  was  in 
London.  In  the  intervals  it  was  let  unfurnished  at  a 
small  rent,  with  two  large  enclosed  gardens  belonging  to 
it*     It  was  tills,  I  conclude,  principally  recommended  it 

*  It  is  not  kno-wn  that  the  school  was  ever  removed  to  Chiswick  since 
Busby's  time.  It  is  on  record  that  he  resided  here,  with  some  of  his 
scholars,  in  1657.     A  few  years  ago,  when  this  house  was  in  the  tenure  of 


1770J  HER   EAELY   LIFE   AND   EDUCATION.  7 

to  my  father,  wlio  was  then  living  on  the  wretched  300^. 
a-year  allowed  him  by  his  uncle.  Here,  we  had  I 
believe,  soon  after  our  arrival,  a  new  governess  instead 
of  Miss  Porter — a  Miss  Bourchier,  a  lively  good-natured 
young  woman,  with  little  more  information  than  the 
former  one,  but  having  been  a  little  more  in  some  sort  of 
world.  She  was  intelligent  and  hvely  in  society,  and 
made  herself  agreeable,  without  any  bad  intention  (for 
she  was  engaged  to  marry  a  stock-broker  as  soon  as  ever 
their  funds  allowed  them),  to  all  the  few  men,  old  or 
young,  coming  to  the  house ;  and  I  remember  the  anguish 
we  both  felt,  when,  in  1775,  my  father  first  announced 
that  she  was  going  to  leave  us  and  to  be  married. 

I  was  then  only  twelve  years  old,  my  sister  only  eleven. 
My  extreme  precocity,  both  mental  and  physical,  helped 
to  lead  him  to  suppose  that  the  expense  of  another 
governess  might  be  spared,  and  we  were  thus  left,  almost 
children,  to  our  own  devices — to  be  as  idle,  and  to  read 
what  books,  and  choose  what  other  employments  we 
pleased :  with  me  it  led  to  much  serious  evil ;  with  Agnes, 
to  obliging  her  much  later  in  Hfe  to  acquire  such  know- 
ledge as  she  should  have  had  given  her  without  pains  in 
early  youth.  To  neither  of  us  had  the  least  religious 
education  been  at  all  thought  of.  It  was  in  the  middle  of 
the  age  of  Voltaire,  and  his  doctrines  and  his  wit  had 
been  adopted  by  all  the  soi-disant  Scotch  wits.  My  dear 
grandmother,  indeed,  aware  of  this  neglect,  made  me 
read  the  Psalms  and  chapters  to  her  every  morning ;  but, 
as  neither  explanation  nor  comment  was  made  upon 
them,  nor  was  their  history  followed  up  in  any  way,  I 
hated  the  duty  and  escaped  it  when  I  could.  The  same 
consequence  took  place  by  the  same  dear  parent  making 
me  read  every  Sunday  to  her  a  Saturday  paper  in  the 

Robert  Berry,  Esq.,  the  names  of  the  celebrated  Earl  of  Halifax,  John 
Dryden,  and  many  others,  were  to  be  seen  upon  the  walls. — History  and 
Antiquities  of  Chisioick,  Src,  by  Thos.  Faulkner. 


8  MISS   BEERY'S   notes.  [1774 

'  Spectator,'  which,  till  the  middle  of  hfe,  prevented  my 
e\-er  looking  at  those  exquisite  essays,  or  being  aware  of 
the  beauties  of  the  volumes  they  were  in. 

The  year  after  we  came  to  settle  at  Chiswick,  my  aunts' 
Cayley*  and  Lynnot  returned  to  England  from  Italy, 
where  they  had  passed  two  or  three  years  in  search  of 
health  for  Mr.  Cayley,  and  the  means  of  living  during  the 
lifetime  of  his  father  Sir  George  Cayley.f  The  accounts 
my  young  ears  heard  from  them  of  the  beauties  and 
charms  of  Italy,  first  impressed  on  my  mind  the  strong 
desire  of  seeing  what  they  described,  and  which  certainly, 
in  after-life,  fell  not  short  of  my  youthful  expectations, 
and  figure  as  the  greenest  spots  in  my  long  monotonous 
and  insignificant  existence. 

In  1773,  while  our  governess  was  yet  with  us,  my 
grandmother,  who  had  lived  with  us  ever  since  my 
mother's  death,  went  to  Ireland  for  six  months  to  visit 
her  daughter  Lynnot,  who  had  been  married  to  an  Irish 
squire  while  with  her  sister  in  Italy. 

In  1774,  my  grandmother  took  us  to  visit  at  Mr. 
Loveday's,  at  Caversham  near  Eeading,  an  old  Tory 
country  gentleman,  who  had  married  a  cousin  of  hers, 
and  had  two  daughters  much  about  our  age  :  with  them 
we  formed  an  intimacy  which  lasted  till  their  death  thirty 
or  forty  years  afterwards.  The  intimacy  gave  me  occasion 
to  learn  in  several  visits  to  them  afterwards,  and  when  I 
was  able  to  observe  it,  the  character  of  Tory  country 
gentlemen  of  those  days,  or  rather  of  days  before,  and  the 
sample  I  saw  was  certainly  a  rare  and  most  respectable 


*  Isabella,  daughter  of  John  Seton,  Esq.,  married,  1763,  to  Thomas  Cay- 
ley, Esq. ;  died  1828,  leaving  one  son  [afterwards  Sir  George]  Caylej',  and 
four  daughters : — 

Elizabeth,  married  to  Benjamin  Blackden,  Esq.,  of  West  Wyoomb,  Phila- 
delphia ;  Sarah,  married  to  Barry  Slater,  M.D. ;  Isabella,  to  Launcelot 
Shadwell,  Esq. ;  Anne,  married  to  the  Rev.  George  Worsley. 

t  Sir  George  Cayley,  Bart.,  died  at  the  age  of  eighty-four,  in  1791 ;  and 
was  succeeded  by  his  eldest  son,  Sir  Thomas,  bom  1732,  died  1792. 


i; 75-81]  LEGACY   LEFT   TO   HEE   FATHER.  9 

one.  He  saw  much  of  all  the  clergymen,  in  his  neighbour- 
hood. At  dinner,  the  first  toast  was  always  Church  and 
King  ;  the  second,  To  the  flourishing  of  the  two  Univer- 
sities ;  the  third,  To  Magdalen,  or  as  he  called  it, 
Maudlin  College,  where  he  had  been  educated.  But  he 
was,  with  aU  this,  an  elegant  and  accomplished  scholar, 
and  was  delighted  at  finding  me  apt  at  recalling  to  his 
mind  passages  of  the  Eoman  poets. 

Of  the  few  succeeding  years  the  entries  in  Miss  Berry's  notes 
of  her  early  life  are  unfortunately  very  meagre. 

In  1775,  she  states,  as  the  only  event,  the  loss  of  thefr 
governess. 

1776. — We  went  in  the  summer  with  my  father  to 
Lymington. 

1777. — My  grandmother,  Agnes,  and  I  went  to  York- 
shire to  Lady  Cayley,  and  did  not  return  till  the  middle 
of  winter. 

1778. — We  went  to  visit  Mr.  Michellm  Berkshire,  and 
the  Lovedays. 

1779. — I  became  acquainted  with  Mr.  Bowman.  Suf- 
fered as  people  do  at  sixteen  from  a  passion  which,  wisely 
disapproved  of,  I  resisted  and  dropped. 

1780. — The  Cathohc  riots  in  London. 

1781. — I  -rt^ent  into  Yorkshire  with  Miss  Drury,  an  old 
friend  of  my  mother's  on  a  visit  to  her ;  when  at  last,  at 
the  age  of  ninety-three,  our  old  uncle  died,  before  my 
return  in  November.  This  absence  I  have  ever  regretted,  as 
I  should  certainly  have  endeavoured  to  back  up  my  father 
in  these  difficult  and  mortifying  circumstances.  The  brother 
WilHam  was  left  all ;  was  residuary  legatee,  inherited 
above  300,000^.  in  the  funds,  together  with  an  estate  of 
some  4,000Z.  or  6,0001.  a-year  in  Scotland.  To  my  father 
a  bare  legacy  of  10,000Z.,  with  no  mention  at  all  of  his  two 
children ;  so  that  if  my  father's  had  been  a  lapse  legacy  by 
his  death  before  the  uncle,  we  must  have  been  left  to  the 
parish,  or  to  the  tender  mercies  of  his  brother.     There 


10  HISS  berry's  notes.  [irsi 

was  another  will  written  before  the  death  of  my  mother, 
which  was  never  produced ;  and  I  own  that  I  have  never 
been  able  to  conquer  my  suspicions  that  aU  was  not  fairly 
arranged  by  the  lawyers  towards  my  poor  father,  who 
stood  before  them  at  the  reading  of  the  wiU,  to  receive 
what  they  pleased  to  give  him,  and  to  be  asked  by  the 
principal  executor  (of  whom  he  knew  nothing),  when 
he  announced  to  him  the  10,000^.,  if  he  thought  it  too 
much ! 

For  many  years  afterwards  I  never  could  figure  to  my- 
self this  scene  without  my  blood  boiling  in  my  veins,  and 
lamenting  that  I  had  not  been  present  to  support  and 
reply  for  my  father.  To  this  10,000Z.  was  added  no  per- 
sonals of  any  kind,  nor  plate,  nor  linen,  nor  china,  nor 
anything  left  in  the  old  man's  house  in  London,  to  help  to 
set  him  up  in  greater  comfort — he,  that  had  so  long  been 
starving  on  300Z.  a-year !  My  uncle  knew  that  his  bro- 
ther would  not  complain,  and  he  treated  him  accordingly. 
But  he  was  aware  that  he  could  not  treat  the  opinion  of 
the  world — of  that  world  whose  opinion  he  valued — as 
he  had  the  feehngs  of  his  brother,  and  therefore  he  im- 
mediately announced  that  he  meant  to  settle  on  him  an 
annuity  of  1,000^  a-year,  with  no  mention  made  of  his 
two  daughters,  who,  he  concluded,  would  marry,  and 
be  thus  got  rid  of. 

This  arranged,  he  immediately  returned  to  Scotland  to 
take  legal  possession  of  a  residence  which  he  had  already 
long  enjoyed,  and  to  get  rid  of  the  society  of  a  brother  in 
whose  presence  he  could  not  but  feel  awkward,  in  whose 
tastes  he  did  not  at  all  participate,  and  to  whom  he  there- 
fore never  proposed  a  visit  to  Scotland.  This  we,  from  our 
ignorance  of  the  world,  had  supposed  he  certainly  would  ; 
but  I  must  do  his  conscience  the  justice  to  say  he  always 
avoided  as  much  as  he  could  his  brother's  society,  and 
felt  embarrassed  in  his  company.  But  from  my  father's 
carelessness  of  disposition  he  had  nothing  to  fear,  while 


1781-3]  TOUE   OF   HOLLAIs'D.  11 

on  the  other  side,  his  children  had  nothing  to  hope,  or  de- 
pend on,  for  he  was  quite  as  httle  careful  about  our  future 
prospects  and  success  as  he  could  ever  have  been  about 
his  own. 

1781. — I  was  now  eighteen,  and  began  to  long  to  see 
that  world  of  which  I  had  been  picking  up  all  sorts  of  ac- 
counts from  much  desultory  and  often  improper  reading. 

1782. — The  first  fruit  of  our  enlarged  income  was  spent 
in  a  tour  to  the  West  of  England  as  far  as  Plymouth,  and 
we  went  in  July  for  some  weeks'  residence  at  Weymouth. 

1783.^^1  persuaded  my  father  to  give  up  the  house  at 
Chiswick,  which  we  had  hitherto  inhabited ;  and  after  a 
month  or  two  spent  in  a  lodging  in  Charles  Street,  Gros- 
venor  Square  (now  an  hotel),  to  go  abroad.  This  had  long 
been  the  first  object  of  my  wishes;  and  it  was  therefore 
settled  that  my  grandmother,  who  had  hitherto  always 
lived  with  us  since  my  mother's  death,  should  be  received 
by  her  daughter.  Lady  Gayley,  now  a  widow,  during  our 
tour  abroad. 

In  May  1783,  we  went  from  Harwich  to  Eotterdam, 
where  a  branch  of  the  Crauford  family,  into  which  my 
uncle  had  married,  had  been  always  established,  and 
where  two  unmarried  sisters,  but  little  older  than  our- 
selves, were  now  spending  the  summer  with  their  brother. 
They  received  and  lodged  us  on  our  arrival  at  Eotterdam 
in  their  house  on  the  beautiful  terrace  shaded  with  great 
trees,  which  forms  the  principal  street  in  that  town.  With 
them  we  remained  about  three  weeks,  and  made  with 
them  an  almost  complete  toiu:  of  Holland  ;  and  certainly 
during  my  very  long  after-life  I  have  always  looked  back 
to  those  three  weeks  as  the  most  enjoyable  and  most 
enjoyed  of  my  existence,  in  which  I  received  the  greatest 
number  of  new  ideas,  and  felt  my  mind,  my  understand- 
ing, and  my  judgment  increasing  every  day,  while  at  the 
same  time  my  imagination  was  dehghted  with  the  charm 
of  novelty  in  everything  I  saw  or  heard. 


12  MISS   BEERY'S   notes.  [1783 

From  Holland  we  went  by  the  banks  of  the  Ehine  to 
Switzerland,  to  Lausanne,  where  a  family  of  Cerjats,  Swiss 
by  birth  and  English  by  marriage  and  connection,  to 
Avhoni  we  had  been  particularly  recommended,  took  a 
sort  of  protecting  care  of  us.  In  the  month  of  October 
we  took  the  Geneva  road  to  Italy.  At  Florence  was  our 
first  stop  ;  and  here  for  the  first  time  I  began  to  feel  my 
situation,  and  how  entirely  dependent  I  was  on  my  own 
resources  for  my  conduct,  respectability,  and  success.  My 
father,  with  the  odd  inherent  easiness  of  his  character, 
had  since  my  mother's  death  entirely  abandoned  the 
world  and  aU  his  early  acquaintance  in  it,  entirely  for- 
getting that  on  him  now  depended  the  success  and  the 
happiness  of  his  two  motherless  daughters.  I  soon  found 
that  I  had  to  lead  those  who  ought  to  have  led  me  ;  that  I 
must  be  a  protecting  mother,  instead  of  a  gay  companion, 
to  my  sister  ;  and  to  my  father  a  guide  and  monitor, 
instead  of  finding  in  him  a  tutor  and  protector.  Strongly 
impressed  as  I  was  that  honour,  truth,  and  virtue  were 
the  only  roads  to  happiness,  and  that  the  love  and  consi- 
deration of  my  feUow-creatures,  and  the  society  in  which 
I  was  about  to  live,  depended  entirely  on  my  own  con- 
duct and  exertions,  the  whole  powers  of  my  mind  were 
devoted  to  doing  always  what  I  thought  right  and  knew 
would  be  safe,  without  a  consideration  of  what  I  knew 
would  be  agreeable,  while  I  had  at  the  same  time  the 
most  lively  sense  of  everything  that  was  brilliant  and 
distinguished,  and  the  greatest  desire  to  distinguish  my- 
self Add  to  this  the  most  painfuUy  quick  feelings,  and  a 
necessity  for  the  support  of  some  kind  sympathising  mind, 
and  it  is  easy  to  imagine  not  only  how  little  I  could  profit 
by  all  the  advantages  nature  had  given  me,  but  how  little 
I  could  have  enjoyed  of  the  thoughtless  gaiety  and  Ught- 
heartedness  of  youth. 

Here  end  Miss  Berry's  Notes  of  her  early  life,  written  when 
far  advanced  in  years,  but  to  which  no  date  is  affixed.     In  the 


1848-9]  AT   FLORENCE.  13 

two  successive  years  of  1848-9,  she  added  the  following  melan- 
choly entries.  It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  her  intentions 
were  not  fulfilled  of  continuing  the  precis  of  her  life  she  had 
begun, 

1848. — I  had  intended  and  hoped  to  carry  on  this  sort 
of  short-hand  account  of  my  hfe  and  the  few  enjoyments 
and  severe  sufferings  of  my  middle  age,  which  hung  about 
me  longer  than  anybody,  for  I  was  past  sixty  before  I  was 
allowed  by  anybody  but  myself  to  consider  myself  as  old. 
But  within  this  last  twelvemonth  I  have  found  aU  the 
weaknesses  of  age  so  fast  increasing  that  I  have  little 
hope  of  being  able  to  fulfil  my  intention. 

1849. — Yet,  as  here  I  am  still,  and  in  spite  of  the 
regular  progress  of  old  age  on  all  my  senses,  stiU  possess- 
ing my  intellect,  understanding,  and  memory,  as  far  as 
regards  long-passed  events,  I  will  still  endeavour,  in  such 
hours  as  are  yet  left  me  of  capacity  for  writing,  to  recall, 
in  a  very  succinct  manner,  the  many  years  I  have  left  far 
behind.  I  must  for  this  return  to  the  date  of  1783 — no 
less  than  sixty-six  years  ago.  In  the  autumn  of  1783,  then, 
Ave  found  ourselves  at  Florence,  where  Sir  Horace  Mann* 
was  stiU  our  Minister,  and  where  LordCowper,f  the  grand- 
father of  the  present  lord,J  had  taken  up  his  abode  for 
several  years,  had  there  married  a  very  handsome  Enghsh 
woman  of  the  name  of  Gore,§  had  in  every  respect  a  very 

*  Horace  Mann  was  the  second  son  of  Robert  Mann,  Esq.,  of  Linton, 
Co.  Kent.  In  1740  he  was  appointed  Muiister  Plenipotentiary  from  his 
own  court  to  that  of  Tuscany.  In  1775  he  was  made  a  baronet,  and  after- 
wards a  K.B.  It  was  in  1740  that  Horace  Walpole  visited  Florence ;  and 
between  him  and  Horace  Mann  there  commenced  a  friendship  which  was 
maintained,  by  frequent  correspondence  only,  during  a  period  of  forty- six 
years. — Memoira  of  Horace  Walpole  and  his  Contemporaries,  by  Eliot  War- 
burton,  Esq. 

f  George  Nassau,  third  Earl  Cowper,  bom  26th  of  August,  1738  ;  mar- 
ried, 31st  of  May  1778,  Anne,  daughter  of  Francis  Gore,  Esq.,  of  South- 
ampton. He  was  created  a  Count  of  the  Holy  Roman  Empire,  January  1778 ; 
ob.  1789. 

J  Great-grandfather  of  the  present  Earl  Cowper. 

§  She  died  1826. 


14  MISS   berry's   notes.  [1849 

handsome  establishment,  by  which  all  the  good  company 
travelhng  in  Italy  were  anxious  to  be  admitted.  We  were 
received  most  graciously  by  a  letter  I  brought  to  Miss 
Gore,  Lady  Cowper's  sister,  who  was  then  living  with  her. 

Thus  ends  the  last  entry  of  these  Notes. 

Miss  Berry's  earliest  Journal  was  that,  written  during  her  first 
tour  on.  the  Continent,  to  which  she  alludes  in  the  preceding 
Notes  with  so  much  pleasure.  This  Journal,  begun  at  the  age  of 
twenty,  shows  how  early  the  tastes  of  her  after-life  were  exhibited. 
It  is  impossible  not  to  be  struck  with  the  choice  of  subjects  to 
which  she  turned  her  attention,  and  with  the  intelligence  and 
tone  of  decision  that  marks  her  observations  on  all  she  saw ; 
and  though  the  total  absence  of  all  apparent  consciousness 
of  personal  admiration  shown  towards  herself  and  her  sister,  and 
the  scrupulous  omission  of  light  gossip  and  frivolous  remarks  on 
the  characters  and  circumstances  of  those  with  whom  she  asso- 
ciated, may  make  the  journal  of  a  young  lady  in  the  year  '83 
less  amusing  to  read  eighty-two  years  later,  it  cannot  fail  to  raise 
the  respect  of  the  reader  for  one  who,  with  not  even  the  average 
advantage  in  the  training  and  cultivation  of  her  mind  and 
tastes,  felt  such  pure  enjoyment  in  the  beauties  of  nature  and 
such  absorbing  interest  in  the  works  of  art.  In  estimating  the 
value  of  her  opinions  on  all  she  viewed  in  architecture,  sculp- 
ture, and  painting,  it  must  be  remembered  that  Miss  Berry 
wrote  without  the  help  of  those  invaluable  works,  the  modern 
handbooks,  to  form  her  judgment  or  to  guide  her  taste.  She 
was  travelling  with  those  from  whom  she  did  not  derive  instruc- 
tion, but  whom  she  was  more  accustomed  to  lead;  and  that  her 
opinions,  whether  agreeing  or  not  with  the  popular  criticisms  of 
the  present  day,  have  the  merit  of  being  the  genuine  impression 
which  such  works  produced  on  a  young  fresh  mind  of  superior 
intelligence  and  of  genuine  enthusiasm. 

The  Editor  is  aware  that  Miss  Berry's  Journal  in  full,  of  her 
first  visit  to  Italy,  would  be  liable  to  the  objection  of  savouring 
too  much  of  the  guide-book,  or  catalogue  of  sights  and  pictures, 
to  be  interesting  to  the  general  reader :  but,  considering  the 
many  changes  that  revolutions,  wars,  and  treaties  make  in  the 
destination  of  treasures  in  art,  it  seemed  on  the  whole  desira- 
ble to  preserve  extracts  at  least  of  this  authentic  record  of  the 


1849]  MISS   berry's   LOVE   OF   NATURE   AND   ART.  15 

locality  and  condition  of  different  works  eighty  years  ago,  for  the 
benefit  of  those  who  take  an  interest  in  such  subjects. 

For  works  of  art,  and  for  the  beauties  of  nature,  Miss  Berry 
had  a  keen  perception,  but  for  that  which  we  term  picturesque- 
ness  in  buildings  she  was  evidently  without  any  appreciation. 
So  unobservant  was  she,  indeed,  of  the  picturesque  effects  that 
arise  from  those  irregular  outlines  of  varied  and  grotesque  forms 
that  would  fill  the  modern  artist's  portfolio  with  the  richest  sub- 
jects for  his  art,  that  the  doubt  naturally  arises  whether,  at  this 
time,  the  sense  of  the  picturesque,  as  now  understood,  was  yet 
developed.  The  particular  disposition  or  combination  of  objects 
in  nature,  or  the  appearance  of  grandeur,  of  unity  of  design,  or 
of  architectural  decorations  in  works  of  construction,  were  re- 
cognised subjects  of  admiration,  but  that  sense  of  picturesque 
beauty  which  springs  from  certain  combinations  of  form  and 
colour,  and  which  imparts  a  charm  and  gives  a  value  to  the 
poorest  tenement,  was  probably  unknown  and  unacknowledged 
till  a  more  recent  period.  Miss  Berry  could  see  no  beauty  in  a 
town  in  which  neatness,  cleanliness,  and  regularity  were  not  the 
prevailing  features,  or  that  could  not  boast  the  still  higher 
merits  of  well-built  houses  and  well-paved  spacious  streets,  run- 
ning at  right  angles  to  each  other ;  characteristics  so  seldom  to 
be  found,  that  it  was  not  surprising  Miss  Berry  should  often 
have  been  most  unfavourably  impressed  with  the  appearance  of 
continental  towns. 


16  MISS   BEEKY'S   journal.  [1783 


JOUENAL. 

1783. 

Tuesday,  May  26iA. — Set  out  from  Charles  Street  at 
four  o'clock ;  slept  at  the  Blue  Posts  at  Witham. 

Wednesday,  27th. — ^Arrived  at  Harwich  at  four  o'clock  ; 
sailed  on  board  the  Prince  of  Wales  packet-boat,  Capt. 
Nasson,  at  eight  at  night. 

Thursday,  28th. — AU  day  at  sea  with  a  very  brisk  gale ; 
monstrously  sick ;  came  to  an  anchor  at  the  mouth  of 
the  harbour  at  Helveot  at  ten  o'clock  at  night. 

Friday,  2dth. — Came  on  shore  to  the  Golden  Lion  at 
Helveot  between  three  and  four  in  the  morning ;  break- 
fasted at  six  with  some  of  our  fellow-travellers ;  at  eight, 
went  on  board  a  yacht  sent  by  Mr.  Crauford  to  convey 
us  to  Eotterdam.  These  yachts  are  elegantly  fitted  up 
with  every  convenience  for  eating,  drinking,  and  sleeping, 
and  are  often  hired  by  Dutch  famihes  for  several  weeks 
together  on  parties  of  pleasure.  The  passage  from  Helveot 
to  Eotterdam  is  commonly  made  in  four  or  five  hours, 
but  there  being  little  or  no  wind,  and  the  tide  being 
against  us,  we  were  from  eight  in  the  morning  till  nine  at 
night  in  the  yacht,  and  were  at  last  obliged  to  get  into  a 
little  rowing  boat,  in  which  we  arrived  at  Mr.  Crauford's 
house  at  Eotterdam  between  ten  and  eleven  o'clock,  not  a 
little  dehghted  to  find  ourselves  again  on  terra  firma  and 
in  company  of  our  friends. 

Saturday,  30th. — Spent  the  day  in  visiting  the  principal 
buildings  and  streets  of  Eotterdam,  which  must  strike  all 
strangers  with  its  appearance  of  great  bustle,  cheerfulness, 
and  most  remarkable  cleanliness.  The  canals  are  broad 
with  rows  of  trees  on  each  side,  and  generally  full  of 


1783]  FEOM   KOTTEKDAM   TO   ANTWERP.  17 

vessels  of  all  sizes,  which  are  enabled  to  come  up  to  the 
very  doors  of  the  merchants'  and  traders'  houses.  The 
canals  are  crossed  by  drawbridges,  of  which  there  are 
commonly  more  than  one  in  every  street,  and  which  gives 
them  such  a  look  of  similarity  that  it  was  with  difficulty  I 
could  distinguish  one  street  from  another. 

Sunday,  31s^. — Went  to  the  Enghsh  Episcopal  Church. 
It  is  a  neat  but  perfectly  plain  building,  and  is  in  general 
very  ill  attended  in  the  forenoon. 

Monday,  June  1st — Dined  at  the  Orangie  Eoom,  a 
house  of  entertainment  about  a  mile  and  a  half  from 
Kotterdam  ;  the  dinner  (given  by  Mr.  Crauford),  a  most 
elegant  French  and  Dutch  one  of  eight  courses  and  a 
dessert,  as  a  specimen  of  Dutch  cookery. 

Thursday,  19iA. — ^Left  Eotterdam  and  our  friends,  with 
much  regret,  at  seven  o'clock  in  the  evening ;  sent  our 
carriage  to  meet  us  at  Meer  Dyck;  crossed  the  Maese 
ourselves  from  the  new  works  to  the  Toll  Huys  in  a 
saihng  boat  in  about  ten  minutes ;  slept  at  the  Toll 
Huys. 

Friday,  2^th. — ^Left  the  Toll  Huys  at  about  five  o'clock 
in  the  morning  in  a  phaeton ;  arrived  at  the  passage  of 
Meer  Dyck  about  eight ;  crossed  in  a  saihng  boat  in  half 
an  hour ;  breakfasted  at  a  httle  ale-house,  from  whence 
we  took  six  horses  to  convey  our  coach  to  Antwerp,  and 
were  notwithstanding  eleven  hours  in  coming  thirty-nine 
miles,  on  account  of  the  very  deep  sandy  roads,  most  part 
of  the  way  over  a  great  black  dreary  heath,  till  within  about 
a  league  and  a  half  of  Antwerp,  where  we  came  upon  a 
broad  pavee,  with  a  row  of  trees^on  each  side  and  through 
a  rich  enclosed  corn  country.  Our  equipage  at  leaving 
Meer  Dyck  (being  the  first  of  the  kind  I  had  ever  seen) 
amused  me  not  a  little.  Our  six  long-tailed  black  horses 
were  fastened  together  with  very  long  rope  traces,  the 
leading  pair  mounted  by  one  of  the  tallest  men  I  ever 
saw,  in  a  long  blue  coat,  trowsers,  and  a  pipe  in  his 

VOL.  I.  C 


18  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1783 

moutli,  with  much  more  of  the  respectable  air  of  a 
skipper  than  of  a  postihon.  The  other  four  were  driven 
in  hand  by  a  man  sitting  upon  the  fore  trunk,  accoutred 
exactly  in  the  same  manner  not  excepting  the  pipe,  which 
they  never  failed  stopping  to  hght  every  two  or  three 
miles.  Arrived  at  the  Hotel  de  Bruxelles  at  Antwerp  at 
eight  o'clock  at  night. 

Saturday,  21st. — Saw  the  Church  and  Abbey  of  St. 
Michel,  or  rather  the  abbot's  apartments,  for  no  other 
part  of  it  are  ladies  permitted  to  see.  In  the  cabi- 
net is  a  Dead  Christ  by  Vandyck,  which  struck  me  more 
forcibly  than  any  picture  I  had  ever  seen.  The  squalid 
and  cadaverous  appearance  of  the  body  is  wonderful  and 
affecting.  It  is  three  quarters,  supported  in  the  arms  of 
his  mother,  with  another  head  (I  suppose  of  St.  John) 
weeping  over  it.  The  collection  of  M.  le  Chanoine 
KnyfF  consists  of  three  large  rooms,  entirely  covered  from 
the  floor  to  the  ceihng  with  valuable  pictures  of  the  Dutch 
and  Flemish  schools. 

Sunday,  22nd. — Spent  the  whole  day  in  visiting  various 
churches  enriched  with  the  noble  works  of  Eubens  and 
Vandyck,  and  the  collection  of  Mr.  Van  Lanckwex,  in 
which  were  several  pleasing  pictures,  but  I  beheve  more 
copies  than  originals.  Almost  every  gentleman's  house  in 
Antwerp  and  its  neighbourhood  has  a  collection  of  pictures ; 
nay,  almost  every  little  auberge  has  its  walls  covered  with 
vile  imitations  and  copies  of  the  Flemish  school,  which 
shows  how  general  the  profession  and  love  of  painting  has 
been,  nay,  even  stiU  is.  Our  valet  de  louage  was  by  no 
means  a  bad  judge  of  the  beauties  and  merits  of  pictures, 
so  much  is  the  taste  improved  by  having  constantly 
before  one's  eyes  the  works  of  great  masters. 

Monday,  2trd. — Breakfasted  at  Malines.  Arrived  at 
the  H6tel  de  BeUe  Vue,  at  Bruxelles.  The  road  between 
Bruxelles  and  Antwerp  is  a  fine  pavee,  planted  with  rows 
of  trees,  and  through  the  richest  and  most  uniformly  cul- 


1783]  FROM   ANTWERP   TO    BRUXELLES.  19 

tivated  country  I  ever  saw  ;  the  villages  and  farm-houses 
had  all  a  great  air  of  comfort,  and  the  country  in  general 
has  nothing  to  distinguish  it  from  any  of  the  richest  corn 
countries  in  England.  Within  three  miles  of  Bruxelles, 
by  the  side  of  the  canal,  the  road  becomes  particularly 
beautiful ;  fine  rising  ground  on  all  sides,  well  wooded 
and  adorned  with  several  fine  country-houses.  Indeed,  all 
the  environs  of  Bruxelles  on  every  side  deserve  this  cha- 
racter. The  lower  part  of  the  town  itself  is  up  and  down  hill, 
ill  buUt,  and  irregular ;  but  the  new  buildings  on  the  upper 
part  are  at  once  gay  and  magnificent,  especially  the  Place 
Eoyale,  the  street  that  leads  to  it,  and  the  buildings  round 
the  Park.  But  I  must  observe,  from  aU  I  saw,  the  new 
houses  are  not  very  judiciously  disposed  of  within,  nor  is  the 
finishing  by  any  means  equal  to  their  outward  appearance. 

Went  in  the  evening  to  the  Theatre  des  Enfants,  a  new- 
built  circular  theatre  in  that  part  of  the  Park  called 
VauxhaU.  The  performers  are  children  under  fourteen 
or  fifteen  years  of  age,  and  some  of  them  not  more 
than  six  or  seven.  We  saw  a  very  droU  petite  piece,  and 
afterwards  a  tragedy  in  pantomime,  both  admirably  well 
acted. 

Tuesday,  2i:ih. — At  shops  all  the  morning,  of  which 
there  are  excellent  ones  of  all  sorts  at  Bruxelles.  In  the 
evening  at  the  Grand  Theatre.  Much  like  our  Opera 
House  in  London,  but  the  painting  and  decorations  very 
dirty  and  shabby,  and  the  house  very  dark,  as  the  lights 
are  almost  aU  within  the  boxes,  and  never  hghted  but 
when  the  box  is  occupied. 

Wednesday,   2bth Went  to   see   the   country-house 

now  buUding  for  the  Archduke  Albert,*  the  Governor  of 


*  The  Prince  Albert  of  Saxe-Teschen  and  the  Archduchess  Maria  Christina 
■were  at  this  time  joint  Governors- general  of  the  Austrian  Netherlands.  At 
the  early  outburst  of  rebellion  they  attempted  to  temporise  :  the  Emperor 
disapproved  their  measures,  and  recalled  them  to  Vienna. — Lardner's 
Gy.clopeedia. 

c  2 


20  MISS   BERKY'S   journal.  [1783 

Bruxelles,  about  a  mile  and  a  half  out  of  the  town.  It  is 
a  large  handsome  building  commanding  fine  views.  The 
lawn  and  grounds  are  aU  laid  out  entirely  in  the  English 
taste. 

Thursday,  26th. — Went  to  the  play,  the  '  Femmes  Sa- 
vantes'  of  Moliere.  Very  well  acted,  particularly  the  parts 
of  Trissotin  and  the  Grecian.  Indeed,  if  I  may  be  allowed  to 
judge  from  the  little  I  have  yet  seen  of  foreign  theatres, 
one  is  never  shocked  with  either  a  very  awkward  or  a 
very  absurd  representation  of  any  part.  The  very  confi- 
dantes and  gentlemen-ushers  perform  their  offices  decently, 
and  the  chief  parts  have  always  been  supported  in  a  style 
of  mediocrity,  which,  if  it  did  not  captivate,  would  never 
disgrace  or  shock. 

Friday,  27th. — Left  Bruxelles.  Breakfasted  at  Louvain; 
from  thence  by  Tirlemont  and  St.  Thron  to  Liege,  where 
we  did  not  arrive  till  ten  o'clock  at  night,  owing  to  an 
accident  happening  to  our  wheel. 

Saturday,  28th. — ^Walked  about  the  streets  of  Liege, 
which  is  one  of  the  dirtiest,  ugliest,  worst-built  towns  I 
ever  saw.  The  very  palace  of  the  Prince  Bishop*  has  not 
the  least  air  of  cleanliness  or  propriety  about  it ;  the 
streets  are  crowded  with  beggars,  exhibiting  every  pos- 
sible form  of  wretchedness,  and  everything  bears  the 
appearance  of  poverty,  vice,  and  misery.  Indeed,  the 
many  instances  of  profligacy  observable  in  the  city  under 
the  government  and  the  residence  of  a  bishop,  shocks  and 
surprises  one.  Every  priest  openly  keeps  a  mistress,  and 
the  principal  bookseller's  shop  was  filled  with  nothing 
but  hbertine  and  profligate  tales  and  novels.  Left  Liege 
at  two  o'clock.  The  road  to  Aix  very  romantic, 
but  the  worst  I  ever  travelled,  so  narrow  as  only 
just  to  admit  the  coach,  and  always  very  high  on  one 


*  Liege  remained  under  the  dominion  of  its  'bisliops  do-wn  to  the  time  of 
the  French  invasion,  1794. — Vide  Murray's  Handbook. 


17S3]  FROM   DUSSELDOEF   TO   COLOGNE.  21 

side  and  low  on  the  other,  so  that  we  seemed  every 
moment  oversetting.  Arrived  at  Aix  about  eleven  at 
night. 

Sunday,  2^th. — Left  Aix ;  came  by  Juliers  (a  wretched 
old  walled  town,  guarded  by  some  as  wretched-looking 
troops)  to  Dusseldorf,  the  residence  of  the  Elector-Palatine ; 
crossed  the  Ehine  about  two  miles  before  Dusseldorf,  not 
less  (I  think)  than  half  a  mile  over. 

Monday,  30^A. — The  town  of  Dusseldorf  is  ill  built, 
poor,  and  without  manufactures,  but  is  distinguished  and 
much  visited  for  its  magnificent  cabinet  of  pictures  in  the 
Electoral  Palace.*  They  fill  five  large  rooms,  one  of 
which,  called  the  SaUe  de  Eubens,  is  entirely  occupied  by 
the  works  of  that  great  master :  the  largest  canvass  he 
ever  drew  (The  Last  Judgment)  is  among  them.  The 
Elector,  who  began  this  collection,  got  it  from  a  church 
of  the  Jesuits.  The  other  four  rooms  are  filled  with 
noble  examples  of  the  Dutch,  Flemish,  and  Eoman 
schools.  To  see  a  collection  of  this  sort  as  it  deserves, 
one  should  not  attempt  to  comprehend  it  all  at  once,  but 
return  day  after  day  to  its  various  beauties.  To  see  it,  as 
we  did,  in  two  or  three  hours,  surprises  and  fatigues  the 
mind  more  than  it  can  be  properly  said  either  to  entertain 
or  improve  it.  The  rest  of  the  apartments  of  the  palace 
have,  I  fancy,  nothing  to  boast  of,  for  they  are  not  shown, 
and  their  outward  appearance  is  not  very  prepossessing ; 
they  are,  however,  undergoing  a  considerable  repair. 

Left  Dusseldorf  at  two  o'clock ;  crossed  the  Ehine  again 
three  miles  from  the  town  (as  broad  as  the  Thames  at 
Greenwich)  in  a  large  vessel,  or  rather  raft  fixed  upon 
two  boats,  and  swung  over  by  the  rapidity  of  the 
stream.     Arrived  at  Cologne  at  8  p.m.     Cologne  is  a 

*  One  wing  alone  remains  of  the  palace  built  by  the  Elector  John 
William.  The  main  edifice  was  destroyed  by  the  bombardment  of  the 
French  in  1794.  It  formerly  contained  a  famous  collection  of  pictures. — 
Murray's  Handbnok. 


22  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1783 

remarkably  ill-paved  town,  but  seems  to  have  some 
business  going  on  in  it.*  Vessels  of  some  burthen  are 
drawn  up  thus  far  on  the  Ehine  by  horses ;  further  the 
rapidity  of  the  stream  renders  it  impossible,  for  it  may  be 
truly  said  of  this  noble  river — 

Facilis  descensus    ,    .     . 
Sed  revocare  gradum,     .     .     . 
Hoc  opus,  hie  labor  est. 

Tuesday,  July  1st. — Arrived  at  Bonn ;  the  road  the 
whole  way  along  the  banks  of  the  Khine,  which  here 
begin  to  lose  the  flat  appearance  they  had  about  Dussel- 
dorf.  "Went  to  see  the  palace  of  the  Elector  of  Cologne, 
who  resides  here.f  It  is  almost  the  greatest  extent  of 
building,  and  assuredly  the  very  largest  palace  I  ever 
saw,  and  is  just  as  unfit  for  the  Elector  of  Cologne  as 
the  small  house  of  Windsor  is  for  the  King  of  Great 
Britain ;  it  is  divided  into  long  suites  of  apartments,  one 
of  which,  together  with  a  tennis  court,  were  entirely  dis- 
mantled by  a  fire  about  seven  years  ago,  and  are  now 
repairing ;  but  of  the  other  suites,  some  apartments  are 
furnished  with  much  clumsy  old-fashioned  magnificence, 
and  some  hardly  furnished  at  all.  There  is  a  picture  gallery, 
200  feet  long,  filled  vdth  vile  daubings  of  a  number  of 
reigning  princes ;  a  music  room,  100  feet  long,  and  a 
complete  theatre,  in  which  German  plays  are  acted  three 
times  a  week,  at  the  Elector's  expense. 

Left  Bonn  at  three  o'clock ;  arrived  at  Andernach,  a 
little  village  on  the  banks  of  the  Ehine,  about  ten.  Bonn 
is  surrounded  by  vineyards,  and  the  road  from  thence  to 

*  It  is  e-ndent,  from  Miss  Berry's  making  no  mention  of  the  Cathedral  at 
Cologne,  that  it  was  not  in  those  days  regarded  as  one  of  the  most  indis- 
pensable, as  well  as  one  of  the  most  beautiful  sights  in  a  tour  on  the 
Khine. — Eb. 

t  The  Electors  of  Cologne  removed  their  court  from  Cologne  to  Bonn  as 
early  as  1268.  The  palace  now  contains  the  university  (established  by  the 
King  of  Prussia  in  1818),  lecture-room,  library,  academical  hall,  and  museum 
of  Khenish  antiquities. — Murray's  Handbook. 


1"83]  COBLENTZ.  23 

Eemagen,  and  from  Eemagen  to  Andernach,  is  most 
beautiful  and  romantic ;  the  whole  way  entirely  upon  the 
banks  of  the  Ehine,  which  rise  into  mountains  on  each 
side  covered  almost  to  the  top  with  vineyards,  diversified 
every  here  and  there  with  wood,  and  very  often  crowned 
with  the  ruins  of  an  old  castle,  or  rather  beacon,  for  one 
should  hardly  think  castles  could  have  been  at  any  time 
of  use  in  such  situations.  Por  some  miles  before  Ander- 
nach the  road  seemed  to  have  been  cut  out  of  the  rock, 
which  rose  almost  perpendicularly  on  our  right  hand,  and 
every  here  and  there  adorned  with  httle  crucifixes  and 
Jesu-Marias  placed  in  hollows  in  the  rock,  some  painted 
and  curiously  dressed  up  for  their  reception.  Between 
Bonn  and  Eemagen,  a  convent  of  nuns,  beautifully  situated 
on  an  island  in  the  Ehine. 

Wednesday,  2nd. — Breakfasted  at  Coblentz,  the  road 
hilly  and  bad.  Coblentz  is  large,  but  ill  built ;  it  is  the 
residence  of  the  Elector  of  Treves,  whose  palace  is  most 
romantically  situated  opposite  the  town,  on  the  other  side 
of  the  Ehine,  and  immediately  under  a  very  high  hiU,  or 
rather  rock,  the  top  of  which  is  covered  by  a  large  for- 
tress or  castle,  and  barracks  for  soldiers.  Nothing  can 
be  more  romantic  than  the  palace  when  viewed  from  Cob- 
lentz, the  rock  covered  mostly  by  shrub-wood  and  crowned 
by  the  castle,*  with  its  batteries  jutting  out  one  beneath 
another.  Left  Coblentz,  crossed  the  Ehine  :  the  road  from 
thence  to  Montabaur  is  through  a  most  beautiful  wood 
and  corn  country,  but  the  road  so  bad  that  we  were  five 
hours  going  eleven  miles. 

From  Montabaur  to  Limbourg  the  same  pretty  country, 
and  the  same  tedious  travelhng. 

Limbourg  is  a  large  wretched  village,  enclosed  within 
walls  :  it  contains  eight  or  ten  thousand  inhabitants,  has 
no  sort  of  manufacture,  and  every  appearance  of  poverty 

*  The  original  castle  of  the  Elector  of  Treves,  built  1558,  is  now  con- 
verted into  a  manufactory. — Murray's  Handbook. 


24  MISS   BEEEY'S   JOURNAL.  [1783 

and  idleness  ;  the  people,  too,  had  the  most  untidy  appear- 
ance of  any  I  have  yet.  seen  in  Germany. 

Thursday,  3ri.  — ■  Breakfasted  at  Wiergis  ;  between 
Limbourg  and  Wiergis  passed  the  famous  spring  of  Selt- 
zer ;  it  belongs  to  the  Elector  of  Treves,  and  is  guarded  by 
some  of  his  troops,  for  the  country  people  are  only  allowed 
to  take  the  water  away  in  broken  cruches,  that  they  may 
not  sell  or  export  it.  The  Elector  has  a  paltry  house  and 
garden  close  by  the  spring.  The  dexterity  of  the  people 
in  filling,  waxing,  and  corking  the  cruches  amused  me. 
From  Limbourg  to  Koningstein  and  Frankfort,  the  road 
throughout  the  worst  imaginable ;  but,  let  me  add, 
through  the  most  beautiful  country. 

Frankfort  is  a  large  populous,  busy  town,  but  not  in 
general  well  built,  though  there  are  some  good  houses  in 
it ;  they  are  mostly  painted  on  the  outside — some  of  the 
older  ones  very  whimsically  with  festoons,  pots  of  flowers, 
and  various  devices.  The  Maison  Eouge,  the  inn  we 
were  at,  is  I  believe  the  largest  in  Europe  ;  the  present 
landlord  puUed  down  the  old  house  and  built  this,  round 
the  three  sides  of  a  long  square  ;  it  contains  ninety-two 
apartments,  besides  accommodation  for  servants,  and  great 
cellars  under  the  whole  building,  in  which  the  landlord, 
who  is  hkewise  a  wine  merchant,  has  200  tonneaux  of 
hock,  each  tonneau  contains  eight  ohens. 

Friday,  Ath. — I  saw  the  church  in  which  the  emperor 
is  crowned  King  of  the  Eomans.  It  is  the  plainest  and 
the  worst-paved  Eoman  Catholic  church  I  have  yet  been 
in  :  in  one  of  the  altars  the  glory  round  our  Saviour  was 
expressed  by  yellow  glass  in  the  window  behind,  which  I 
thought  had  an  excellent  effect.  Left  Frankfort ;  slept  at 
Gerau,  a  small  neat  village  belonging  to  the  Prince  of 
Hesse ;  the  road  from  Frankfort  very  sandy  ;  half  the  way 
through  a  fine  enclosed  forest,  or  deer  park,  of  the  Prince 
of  Hesse.     Saw  a  very  large  wild  boar,  which,  walking 


1783]  MANHEIM.  25 

peaceably  in  his  native  woods,  is  by  no  means  the  fierce- 
looking  animal  he  is  represented  by  Snyders. 

Saturday,  bth. — Crossed  the  Ehine ;  breakfasted  at 
Worms ;  dined  at  Manheim,  the  capital  of  the  Elector- 
Palatine's  dominions.  It  is  by  far  the  prettiest  town  I 
have  seen  in  Germany ;  all  the  streets  are  broad  and  at 
right  angles,  and  aU  the  houses  white.  When  I  said  the 
palace  at  Bonn  was  the  largest  I  had  ever  seen,  I  had  not 
been  at  Manheim.*  The  palace  here  is  I  think  httle  less 
than  Greenwich  Hospital ;  it  has  an  air  of  grandeur  from  its 
immense  extent  of  front  and  the  large  court  before  it ;  but 
no  architectural  beauty,  nor  is  it  built  according  to  any  of 
the  Grecian  orders,  but  is  merely  a  body  and  wings,  con- 
taining long  ranges  of  windows,  adorned  with  fancy  stone 
ornaments.  It  contains,  besides  the  apartments  for  accom- 
modation, a  suite  of  nine  rooms  filled  with  pictures  ;  a 
tenth  with  drawings  and  the  collection  of  prints  ;  three 
with  a  cabinet  of  natural  history ;  an  opera  house  ;  a 
gallery  of  antiquities  ;  a  tennis  court ;  a  noble  library  ; 
and  a  chapel. 

The  cabinet  of  natural  history  is  prettily  arranged  :  it 
seemed  to  contain  fine  specimens  of  ores,  crystals,  and 
spars,  and  some  very  good  shells.  The  Hbrary  is  a  mag- 
nificent and  gay-looking  room,  100  feet  long,  50  broad, 
and  36  high,  with  three  rows  of  galleries  around  it,  and 
contains  80,000  volumes,  and  a  very  pretty  painted  ceil- 
ing by  a  young  German  who  had  studied  at  Dusseldorf 
Having  seen  the  cabinet  at  Dusseldorf,  I  confess  I  expected 
little  from  that  at  Manheim,  supposing  that  the  master  of 
the  former  could  not  have  much  more  to  boast  of  in  the 
way  of  pictures  ;  but  I  was  mistaken  :  for  though  the 
Jinest  pieces  of  Eubens  and  of  the  Itahan  school  are  at 

*  The  palace  was  erected  by  the  Elector  Palatine,  Karl  Philip,  when  he 
removed  his  court  from  Heidelberg  and  made  Manheim  his  capital  in  1720. 

MwTay's  Handbook. 


26  MISS  berry's  journal.  tl'83 

Dusseldorf,  there  are  in  every  one  of  the  nine  rooms  at 
Manheim  several  very  interesting  pictures,  and  a  fine  col- 
lection of  the  Dutch  school.  Two  heads  in  particular  of 
an  old  man  and  an  old  woman,  as  large  as  life,  by  Denner, 
of  Hamburgh,  so  minutely  and  so  accurately  finished,  that 
the  nearer  one  applied  a  magnifying  glass  to  them  the 
more  one  was  tempted  to  believe  them  alive.  The  Elec- 
toral troops  at  Manheim,  the  best-looking  and  best-dressed 
I  have  seen  in  Germany.  In  spite  of  all  the  magnificence 
of  Manheim  and  the  pictures  of  Dusseldorf,  the  Elector 
shghts  them  both,  and  lives  almost  entirely  at  Munich, 
another  Electoral  town,  where  the  hbrarian  told  us  he  had 
still  a  larger  collection  of  books  than  at  Manheim.  The 
Electress  spends  the  winter  at  Manheim  and  the  summer 
at  a  country-house  about  a  league  from  thence.  The  ap- 
proach on  every  side  is  by  beautiful  avenues  of  Italian 
poplars,  and  the  road  from  Gerau  excellent.  Slept  at 
Spires  :  the  aisle  of  the  church  there  one  of  the  loftiest 
I  have  seen. 

Sunday,  6th. — Arrived  at  Strasbourg,  a  large,  populous, 
busy,  ill-built  town.  The  front  of  the  cathedral  church  is 
one  of  the  most  highly  finished  and  beautiful,  in  the  Gothic 
style.  The  spire  too  is  beautiful,  but  loses  some  of  its  effect 
by  the  church  or  rather  belfry  coming  up  too  high  against 
it,  and  making  it  appear  not  high  enough  for  the  rest  of 
the  building.  Saw  the  monument  to  the  memory  of 
Marechal  Saxe  in  the  Lutheran  church  of  St.  Thomas. 
The  design  is  interesting  and  the  effect  excellent.  The 
expression  in  the  figure  of  France  is  particularly  happy  ; 
but  the  sculpture  and  execution,  though  done  at  the  ex- 
pense of  the  king  and  by  one  of  the  first  artists  in  France, 
struck  me  as  by*  no  means  equal  to  that  of  many  of  our 
capital  ones  in  Westminster  Abbey.  I  could  not  help  ob- 
serving with  pleasure,  that  among  the  emblems  of  the 
different  nations  with  whom  he  fought  and  conquered, 
while  the  German  Eagle  is  overthrown  and  the  Eussian 


1783]  FROM   STKASBOURG   TO    GENEVA.  27 

Bear  sprawling  on  the  ground,  the  British  Lion  is  Only 
turning  sulkily  away.  The  road  from  Spires  to  Stras- 
bourg like  the  finest  turnpike  in  England,  the  third  stage 
entirely  through  one  great  and  beautiful  forest  of  oak, 
beech,  birch,  and  firs ;  observed  strawberries,  raspberries, 
gooseberries,  and  barberries,  aU  growing  in  it. 

Monday,  7th. — Slept  at  Neuve  Brisac,  built  by  Louis 
XTV.  At  the  Peace  of  Eyswick  the  possession  of  Alsace 
was  confirmed  to  him ;  he  destroyed  the  fortifications  of 
old  Brisac,  a  German  town  exactly  opposite  on  the  other 
side  of  the  Ehine,  and  built  this.  It  is  a  fortification  of 
Vauban's,  is  surrounded  by  four  fosses,  and  has  every 
appearance  of  great  strength.  The  streets  are  neat,  all 
tire  a  cordeau,  and  there  is  a  large  square  in  the  middle 
of  the  town,  which  consists  entirely  of  such  houses  as  one 
can  suppose  brought  together  to  supply  the  want  of  a 
number  of  soldiers.  The  garrison  at  present  consists  of 
1,200  men,  including  a  regiment  of  cavahy. 

Tuesday,  8th. — Arrived  at  Basle  ;  the  streets  much  up 
and  down  hill,  but  most  romantically  situated  on  the 
banks  of  the  Ehine. 

Wednesday,  9th. — Left  Basle  with  a  voiturier,  who 
aoreed  to  carry  us  to  Lausanne  in  three  days  and  a  half, 
with  four  horses  for  the  coach  and  one  for  the  servant,  for 
ten  louis. 

Saturday,  12th. — Arrived  between  nine  and  ten  at 
night  at  Lausanne.  The  country  the  whole  way  most 
romantically  beautiful,  and  the  weather  most  intolerably 
hot. 

Sunday,  August  IQth. — Left  Lausanne;  passed  through 
Morges,  EoUe,  and  Nyon,  and  arrived  at  Geneva.  The 
road  from  Lausanne  to  Geneva  great  part  of  the  way 
upon  the  very  edge  of  the  lake.  Morges  is  a  fine  open 
broad  street,  the  prettiest  town  I  have  seen  in  the  Pays  de 
Vaud.  The  streets  of  Geneva  are  narrow  and  not  well 
built,  but  the  whole  town  has  the  greatest  appearance  of 


28  MISS   BEEEY'S   JOUENAL.  [1783 

business  and  population,  and  being  Sunday  evening,  we 
saw  crowds  of  people  of  all  sorts  both  in  the  streets  and 
upon  the  ramparts,  which  are  one  of  their  pubhc  walks, 
bordered  with  a  row  of  trees. 

Monday,  11th. — Left  Geneva ;  baited  the  horses  at 
Bonneville,  a  poor  town  upon  the  banks  of  the  Arve,  sur- 
rounded by  Alps.  Dined  upon  plums  and  bread  and 
butter,  not  hking  to  attempt  anything  else  at  such  an  inn, 
the  dirtiest  and  only  bad  one  I  have  yet  seen.  The  stair- 
case was  of  rough  and  broken  stones,  perfectly  dark,  with 
a  door  half-way  up  it  into  the  stable,  where,  indeed,  the 
horses  seemed  to  be  better  lodged  than  their  masters; 
the  bare  walls  of  the  room  where  we  sat  were  covered 
with  splashes  of  dirt  of  all  sorts  and  colours ;  the  floor  had 
surely  never  felt  water  since  the  time  of  its  being  laid, 
and  had  the  accumulated  dirt  of  years  upon  it ;  and  the 
beds,  '  where  dingy  yellow  strove  with  dirty  red,'  were 
quite  of  a  piece  with  the  room :  it  was,  indeed,  only  a 
comfortable  habitation  for  vermin,  which  abounded  in 
numbers.  The  road  from  Bonneville  to  Sallenches  beau- 
tifully wild,  winding  along  the  valley  of  the  Arve,  in  some 
places  so  narrow  as  only  to  admit  the  river  and  a  narrow 
road  for  a  carriage,  walled  in  on  each  side  by  immense 
mountains,  cultivated  almost  higher  up  than  one  could 
suppose  them  accessible,  and  their  craggy  tops  fringed  with 
firs  ;  from  the  winding  of  the  valley  the  mountains  seem 
in  many  places  entirely  to  shut  up  the  end.  Baited  the 
horses  at  Cluse,  a  larger  town  than  one  could  expect  to 
find  in  the  midst  of  mountains,  and  apparently  swarming 
with  inhabitants.  The  appearance  of  a  postchaise  and  two 
ladies  in  strange  dresses  drew  all  the  people  to  their 
doors,  a  train  of  children  after  us  walking  the  street,  and 
a  crowd  of  all  ages  round  the  carriage,  who  kept  their 
eyes  fixed  upon  us  and  examined  us  with  a  stare  of  as 
much  admiration  as  if  we  had  been  the  inhabitants  of 
another  planet.    The  other  villages  through  which  we 


1733]  TEOM   GENEVA   TO   CIIAMOUNI.  29 

passed  were  only  a  •  few  scattered  rude  cottages  built  of 
and  covered  with  planks  of  fir,  and  ill  calculated  to  keep 
out  either  heat  or  cold,  but  they  are  covered  in  summer 
by  the  shade  of  fruit  trees,  and  warmed  in  winter  by  the 
cattle,  wliich  are  all  brought  under  the  same  roof  Every 
cottage,  and  in  general  the  sides  of  the  road,  are  sur- 
rounded with  plum,  pear,  and  apple  trees ;  the  fruit 
being  dried,  in  the  winter  forms  a  part  of  the  food  of  the 
inhabitants.  The  plum-trees  were  so  loaded  with  fruit  that 
the  leaves  were  hardly  distinguishable  ;  they  were  of  two 
kinds,  a  small  purple  and  a  small  yellow.  Crossed  the 
Arve  at  Sallenches,  where  we  arrived  about  eight  o'clock. 
The  inn  decent,  and  the  fleas  less  troublesome  than  at 
Bonneville.  Much  amused  aU  the  evening  by  the  patois 
songs  of  a  voiturier  in  the  next  room  to  us.  Eained  all 
night. 

Tuesday,  12th. — As  it  still  continued  raining  we  could 
not  mount  our  char-k-banc  till  near  nine  o'clock  to 
proceed  to  Chamouni.  These  cars  have  little  resemblance 
to  the  carriages  we  generally  call  by  that  name,  and  in 
which  we  represent  gods  and  heroes,  being  nothing  more 
than  three  or  four  planks  fastened  between  four  low 
wheels,  and  on  which  you  sit  sideways  about  two  foot  and 
a  half  from  the  ground  ;  from  these  planks  is  suspended 
another  bit  of  board  by  two  chains  to  put  the  feet  on  by 
way  of  stirrup  or  foot-board.  It  being  wet  weather,  we 
had  a  canvass  roof,  supported  upon  four  sticks  ;  and  how- 
ever mean  it  may  appear  in  description,  it  is  an  excellent 
carriage  for  the  roads  it  is  intended  to  go  on,  as  it  cannot 
be  overturned  (the  shafts  forming  part  of  the  carriage), 
and  is  much  less  jolting  than  one  would  suspect. 

The  whole  road  from  Geneva  to  Sallenches  is  perfectly 
good  for  any  carriage.  Beyond  Sallenches  nobody  takes 
their  carriage,  as  the  road  becomes  impassable  except  for 
a  char-k-banc  or  horses.  One  here  leaves  the  Arve,  the 
current  of  which  is  confined  to  very  narrow  limits  by 


30  MISS   BEKET'S   journal.  [1783 

mountains  rising  perpendicularly  from  its  edge.  The 
scenes  presented  to  the  eye  are  the  most  sublime  that 
imagination  can  form.  They  fill  the  mind  with  great 
ideas,  and  leave  it  impressed  with  a  degree  of  admiration 
which  attempts  not  to  express  itself  by  words.  I  ex- 
perienced this  so  forcibly  that  when  I  arrived  at  Cha- 
mouni,  after  being  for  nearly  six  hours  surrounded  by 
these  new  and  astonishing  views  of  nature,  I  sat  down 
perfectly  absorbed  in  a  confusion  of  ideas,  every  one 
of  which  seemed  too  great  for  my  miad,  and  could 
neither  speak  myself  nor  wish  to  hear  others  on  the 
subject. 

Baited  the  horses  at  a  little  wooden  village,  where  there 
are  lead  and  silver  mines,  which  a  company  of  German 
and  French  have  undertaken  to  work.  The  house  that 
was  building  for  the  superintendent  of  the  mines,  from 
having  plastered  walls  and  glass  windows,  had  the  appear- 
ance of  comfort  in  a  place  where  the  house  of  the  cure 
consisted  of  nothing  but  deal  planks  rudely  enough  put  to 
together.  After  passing  through  about  two  leagues  of  the 
valley  of  Chamouni  arrived  at  our  inn,  the  interior  of  which 
had  a  semblance  of  decent  accommodation,  at  once  pleasing 
and  unexpected  in  so  remote  a  place.  The  village  of 
Chamouni  consists  of  about  twenty  or  thirty  houses,  a 
very  neat  church  and  cure-house,  and  both  the  cottages 
and  inhabitants  have  a  much  greater  appearance  of  com- 
fort than  those  of  any  other  village  through  which  we 
have  passed. 

Wednesday  IBth. — Eained  the  whole  forenoon  so  vio- 
lently that  we  could  not  stir  out.  About  four  o'clock  the 
rain  abating,  went  upon  mules  to  see  the  source  of  the 
Arveron  (a  small  river  which  joins  the  Arve  at  Chamouni), 
in  the  Glacier  de  Boisson.  The  river  runs  from  under  a 
large  cave  or  arch  of  ice  in  the  lowest  part  of  the  glacier, 
which  rises  sloping  up  between  two  immense  hills. 
The  ice  is  for  ever  falhng  in  large  bodies  from  the  mouth 


178:?]  CHAMOUM.  31 

of  the  cave  from  whence  the  river  proceeds  ;  it  is  of  the 
most  beautiful  greenish-blue  colour,  which  it  loses  after 
having  been  for  some  time  exposed  to  the  air.  Our  mules 
carried  us  to  within  a  quarter  of  a  mile  of  the  ice.  We 
then  clambered  over  a  number  of  large  pieces  of  rock, 
left  by  former  glaciers,  to  the  edge  of  the  water,  where  we 
stood  upon  large  blocks  of  ice  that  had  fallen  at  different 
times  from  the  great  body  of  the  glaciers  which  rose  on 
one  side  like  an  immense  wall  above  us,  while  on  the  other 
the  river  rushed  from  under  its  blue  cave  over  masses  of 
rock  and  ice. 

Thursday,  \Uh. — Still  much  rain,  and  fog  that  entirely 
covered  three  parts  of  the  mountains.  Went  to  the  mu- 
seum of  a  peasant  in  the  village.  It  consisted  of  some 
pretty  crystals  and  two  very  well-stuffed  chamois  and  a 
bouquetin.  The  man  himself  had  been  all  his  life  a  guide 
to  the  strangers  who  visited  the  valley;  and  from  that  and 
from  the  company  he  had  kept,  he  had  acquired  ideas  and 
conversation  far  above  his  situation. .  He  remembered  the 
arrival  of  Mr.  Wyndham  and  Mr.  Pococke,*  the  two  first 

•  Messrs.  Wyndham  and  Pococke'a  excursion  to  Chamouni,  and  their 
report  of  it,  led,  by  its  publication  in  the  Mercure  de  Suisse  in  the  months  of 
May  and  June  1741,  to  the  excitement  of  great  interest  in  tbose  retired 
wilds,  amidst  the  most  sublime  scenery  in  natm-e,  and  at  the  foot  of  tbe 
loftiest  mountains  of  Europe. — Murray's  Handbook. 

'  Quelque  incroyable  que  la  chose  puisse  paroitre,  cette  valMe  si  singu- 
lierement  int&essante,  dans  laquelle  on  voit  la  montagne  la  plus  61ev6e  de 
I'ancien  monde,  est  demeur^e  entierement  inconnue  jusqu'en  1741.  Ce  fut  alors 
que  le  cflebre  Toyageur  Pocock  et  un  autre  Anglais  nomm(5  M.  Windham 
le  visiterent  et  donnerent  a  I'Europe  et  au  monde  entier  les  premieres  notions 
d'lme  contrde  qui  n'est  qu'a  18  lieues  de  distance  de  Geneve.  M.  Baulacre, 
bibliotb^caire  de  Geneve,  fut  le  premier  qui  fit  connoitre  la  valine  de  Cha- 
mouny  par  une  relation  abr^g^e  de  ce  voyage  qu'il  publia  dans  le  Mercure 
de  Suisse  pour  les  mois  de  mai  et  de  juin  de  I'an  1743.' — Ebel,  Manuel  du 
Voyageur  en  Suisse,  vol.  ii.  p.  255. 

To  this  account  M.  Ebel  adds  the  following  note  :— 

'  Comme  tout  le  monde  croyoit  que  cette  valine  6toit  un  repaire  de 
brigands  et  de  peuples  barbares  et  sauvages,  on  blamait  g^n^ralement  leur 
r&olution,  on  leur  conseilla  si  s^rieusement  de  bien  se  tenir  sur  leur  garde, 
qu'ils  partirent  de  Geneve  arm^s  jusqu'aux  dents  avec  un  nombre  de  do- 
mestiques  ^galement  arm& ;  Us  n'oserent  entrer  dans  aucune  maison,  ils 


32  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1783 

strangers  that  ever  visited  the  glacier  from  curiosity,  to 
whom  his  father  had  served  as  guide ;  and  the  consterna- 
tion of  the  inhabitants  of  the  valley,  who,  seeing  two 
strangers,  with  several  attendants,  horses,  and  firearms, 
pitching  a  tent  in  their  village,  were  persuaded  they 
came  with  an  hostile  intention,  till  informed  by  the  cure 
of  the  real  motive  of  their  journey.  Went  into  the  inside 
of  the  church.  Much  neater  than  we  could  expect ; 
adorned  with  a  number  of  pictures  not  quite  of  the  sign- 
post kind,  and  a  profusion  of  gilt  wooden  figures  about  the 
altars.  About  eleven  o'clock,  the  weather  clearing  up  a 
little,  we  mounted  our  mules,  accompanied  by  two  guides 
on  foot,  to  ascend  Montanvert.  The  road  the  mules  picked 
out  upon  the  almost  perpendicular  side  of  the  mountain, 
over  and  between  immense  masses  of  rock,  loose  stones, 
and  roots  of  trees,  astonished  me  ;  but  as  I  had  before 
heard  of  their  sagacity  and  steadiness  when  left  to  them- 
selves, I  did  not  experience  the  least  degree  of  fear  even 
in  those  places  where  a  slip  would  have  been  fatal,  but 
putting  the  bridle  upon  the  mule's  neck,  took  care  only 
not  to  shp  ofi"  his  tail,  which  the  steepness  of  the  ascent 
often  rendered  possible.  When  we  had  got  about  a  third 
part  of  the  mountain,  as  high  as  the  mules  could  carry  us, 
the  rain  and  fog  were  so  great  that,  by  the  advice  of  our 
guides,  we  submitted  to  the  mortifying  necessity  of  return- 
ing. They  could  give  us  no  hopes  of  better  weather,  and 
declared  if  we  went  to  the  top  of  the  mountain  we  should 
see  nothing  from  the  thickness  of  the  fog.  We  descended 
on  foot,  and  I  found  myself  much  more  apt  to  stumble, 
and  the  road  much  more  difficult  to  pick  than  my  mule 
had  done.     Gathered  a  number  of  plants.     The  side  of 

camperent  sous  des  tentes,  et  tinrent  des  feux  et  des  sentinelles  en  garde 
pendant  touts  la  nuite.  Les  montagnes  des  environs  ^toient  alors  connues 
sous  le  nom  de  "  Montagnes  in^dites."  ' 

It  was  not  till  1760  that  M.  Saussure  first  visited  the  Valley  of  Cha- 
moLmi,  when  it  was  still  regarded  as  a  dangerous  journey. 


1783]  ASCEND   THE    GLACIEB   DE   BOISSON.  33 

the  mountain  abounds  in  bilberries,  cranberries,  and  straw- 
berries.    Found  our  mules  waiting  for  us  at  the  foot  of 
the  mountain.     Seized  the  first  fair  moment  to  go  to  the 
Glacier  de  Boisson,  which,  about  a  league  from  the  inn, 
descends  quite  into  the  valley  of  Chamouni.     The  mules 
carried  us  to  within  what  appeared  a  few  steps  of  the  ice, 
but  these  steps  were  so  rugged  and  upon  so  perpendicular 
an  ascent,  that  we  were  yet  half  an  hour  before  we  found 
ourselves  upon  the  moraine,  a  sort  of  wall  or  mound  of 
gravel  and  stones,  which  runs  parallel  with  the  length  of 
the  glacier.    From  hence  we  descended  to  the  edge  of  the 
body  of  ice,  in  the  side  of  which  one  of  our  guides  cut  two 
or  three  notches  with  a  hatchet  by  way  of  steps,  to  enable 
us  to  get  up  so  shppery  a  surface.     They  then  gave  us 
light  fir  poles,  shod  with  iron,  which  we  could  fix  into 
the  ice,  and  my  father  a  small  piece  of  leather,  with  iron 
spikes  fastened  in  it,  to  buckle  round  each  foot.    These 
they  caU  grimpons.     Thus  equipped,  and  with  the  help  of 
our  guides,  one  of  whom  took  me  by  the  arm,  and  the 
other  my  sister,  we  passed  the  ice  with  perfect   ease, 
and  without  even  the  fear  of  tumbling.     Our  guides  were 
so  accustomed  to  treading  upon  ice  that,  though  without 
any  precaution  but  a  pole,  they  never  made  a  false  step  ; 
took  us  over  that  part  of  the  glacier  where  the  surface 
was  least  unequal,  and  where  we  were  not  stopped  by  any 
of  those  dreadful  chasms  so  much  talked  of  by  travellers. 

Monday,  \2>th. — Left  Lausanne,  reached  Geneva. 

Wednesday,  Ibth. — Dined  at  Lord  Grandison's,*  at  the 
Chateau  de  Coppet. 

Thursday,   IQih. — ^Left  Geneva  with  a  voiturier  for 

'  George,  Earl  of  Grandison,  son  of  Lady  Elizabeth.  Villiers,  daughter  of 
James,  first  Earl  of  Grandison.  In  consequence  of  the  death  of  her  two 
brothers,  she  was  created  Viscountess  and  Countess  of  Grandison;  and, 
dying  1782,  was  succeeded  by  her  son  George,  born  1750,  married  February 
1772  to  Lady  Gertrude  Conway;  ob.  1800,  leaving  one  daughter,  Lady 
Gertrude  ViUiers,  married  to  Lord  Henry  Stuart.  The  title  of  Earl  of 
Grandison  ceased,  and  the  Viscounty  descended  to  the  Earls  of  Jersey. 

VOL.  I.  D 


34  MISS   BEEEY'S   JOUENAL.  [1783 

Turin,  who  agreed  to  carry  us  three,  with  three  ser- 
vants, to  pay  all  the  bills  on  the  road  and  aU  expenses  in 
crossing  Mont  Cenis — in  short,  to  set  us  down  at  Turin 
for  24  louis.  The  bargain  was  thought  a  good  one.  We 
were  asked  38^.  for  the  same  journey  from  Lausanne. 
But  this  man  was  at  any  rate  returning  to  Turin.  We 
did  not  arrive  at  Eemilly  till  past  ten  at  night,  our  horses 
never  going  out  of  a  walk  nor  ever  making  out  a  league 
in  an  hour. 

Friday,  %ih. — ^Breakfasted  at  Aix  les  Bains,  at  the  post- 
house,  a  wretched  hole. 

The  baths  are  in  a  handsome  edifice,  begun  by  the 
present  King  of  Sardinia  in  1773,*  and  hardly  yet  finished ; 
they  are  numerous  and  well  contrived  ;  the  water  is  much 
warmer  than  that  of  Bath,  and  has  a  sulphureous  smell  not 
much  less  disagreeable  than  that  of  Harrowgate ;  the  town, 
or  rather  village,  is  poor. 

Dined  at  Chambery,  the  capital  of  Savoy.  It  is  a  walled 
town,  garrisoned  with  Piedmontese  troops ;  its  situation 
beautiful,  in  a  fine  valley,  surrounded  by  mountains  with  a 
number  of  picturesque  chateaux  and  country-houses  scat- 
tered upon  their  sides;  the  streets  are  narrow,  but  it  has 
more  an  air  of  business  and  population  than  any  of  the 
other  towns  in  Savoy ;  the  best  auberge  very  bad.  Left 
Chambery,  arrived  at  Mont  Melian  at  seven ;  the  people 
very  civil ;  the  room  we  slept  in  was  tolerably  clean. 

Saturday^  llth. — Dined  at  AiguebeUe.  Arrived  at  La 
Chambre  between  eight  and  nine.  The  road  the  whole 
way  from  Mont  Melian  most  romantic  and  beautiful, 
along  a  narrow  but  cultivated  valley,  watered  by  the 
rapid  and  turbulent  Arche,  and  bounded  on  every  side  by 
lofty  Alps,  on  the  tops  of  many  of  which  some  spots  of  snow 
were  already  to  be  seen,  while  their  sides,  to  an  astonish- 
ing height,  were  covered  with  vines,  apparently  growing 

*  Victor  Amadeus  III.  succeeded  his  father  Charles  Emmanuel  111.  in 
1773.    His  reign  was  unfortunate ;  he  lost  Savoy;  died  1796. 


1783]  SWISS   VILLAGES.  35 

upon  the  bare  rock.  Mont  Melian  is  surrounded  by 
vineyards,  and  its  wine  much  in  esteem,  but  the  pleasure 
one  everywhere  receives  from  the  sublime  beauties  of  the 
country  is  much  diminished  by  the  appearance  of  extreme 
poverty  in  the  people,  and  the  perfect  wretchedness  of 
their  cottages  and  villages.  The  cottages  are  generally  a 
parcel  of  loose  stones,  put  together  without  even  mortar, 
over  which  a  mmiber  of  wooden  planks  or  pieces  of  flat 
stone  are  thrown  by  way  of  roof;  two  or  three  little 
holes  with  iron  bars  before  them  for  windows,  often  with- 
out either  paper  or  glass.  Their  villages  consist  of  about 
eighty  or  a  hundred  such  houses  placed  together  in  a 
street  hardly  ever  more  than  nine  feet  vride,  which  keeps 
it  at  all  times  of  the  year  equally  dirty,  wet,  and  dark. 
The  church  (with  which  they  are  all  provided)  is  the  only 
building  which  possesses  the  luxiiry  of  a  few  panes  of  glass. 
The  inhabitants,  in  every  respect,  too  well  correspond 
with  these  wretched  dwellings.  In  one  or  two  villages 
between  Aiguebelle  and  La  Chambre,  almost  eveiy  crea- 
ture we  saw  had  a  goitre,  and  most  of  them  that  humi- 
liating appearance  of  stupidity  and  idiotism  which  is 
observed  to  accompany  that  malady.  L'Ecu  de  France, 
at  La  Chambre,  dirty.  Two  French  travellers  had  got 
possession  of  the  only  decent  room  before  we  arrived, 
which,  however,  they  gave  up  to  us ;  there  were  three 
beds  in  it,  one  of  which  my  father  was  obliged  to  occupy. 

Sunday,  l%ih. — ^Dined  at  St.  Michel,  a  vsretched  vil- 
lage, enclosed  with  a  wall ;  from  hence  we  had  four  horses 
added  to  those  of  the  voiturier,  to  draw  us  up  a  very  long 
and  very  steep  hill  about  a  league  from  Modane. 

The  whole  road  from  La  Chambre  to  Modane,  still 
through  the  valley  of  the  Arche,  was  at  every  step  more 
and  more  sublimely  beautiful.  The  vine  cultivated  about 
all  the  houses  and  high  up  upon  the  sunny  sides  of  the 
mountains. 

Monday,  l^th. — Left  Modane;  arrived  at  Lanslebourg 

s  2 


36  MISS   BEKEY'S   journal.  [1781 

at  the  foot  of  Mont  Cenis  before  eleven.  The  road  fron 
Modane  to  Lanslebourg  a  continual  ascent  and  descen 
along  the  side  of  the  mountains,  the  Arche  roUing  belo-vi 
in  a  very  narrow  rocky  channel.  At  Lanslebourg  one  if 
surrounded  with  the  porters  of  the  mountain,  but  we  hac 
agreed  with  the  voiturier  for  our  transport,  and  hac 
nothing  to  do  with  the  bargain  which  after  much  cla- 
mour was  made  with  them.  At  half-past  twelve  thret 
chairs  were  prepared  for  my  sister,  myself,  and  our  maid 
a  mule  for  my  father  and  another  for  one  of  the  servants 
while  the  other  was  left  to  come  over  with  the  carriage. 

Just  before  we  set  out,  a  chair  arrived  from  the  othei 
side  of  the  mountain  with  a  gentleman  whom  I  imme- 
diately knew  to  be  Cozens*  the  painter's  son,f  and  surprised 
him  by  saluting  him  by  his  name,  as  he  was  stepping  ou1 
of  his  chair.  An  unexpected  meeting  in  such  a  place, 
even  with  a  person  in  whom  one  is  little  interested  or  ac- 
quainted, is  very  pleasant. 

Left  Lanslebourg  ;  stopped  at  La  Saverne,  on  the  plain 
of  Mont  Cenis,  for  twenty  minutes,  to  rest  the  chairmen ; 
and  arrived  at  Novaleze,  the  village  on  this  side  the 
mountain,  before  5  p.m.  The  pace  at  which  these  chair- 
men carry  one,  and  the  dexterity  with  which  they  take 
the  poles  from  one  another  without  stopping,  is  trulj 
astonishing ;  down  the  steepest  and  ruggedest  part  of  the 
road  they  went  for  two  leagues  without  intermission, 
much  quicker  than  my  father  could  possibly  follow, 
though  carrying  no  weight,  and  taking  always  a  shortei 
way  than  the  winding  of  the  road  allowed  them  to  do. 

*  Alexander  Cozens,  by  birth  a  Kussian,  -was  a  landscape  painter,  bui 
chiefly  practised  as  a  drawing-master ;  he  was  also  the  author  of  some  worki 
connected  with  art.    Died  1786. — Edwards'  Anecdotes  of  Painting. 

t  John  Cozens,  son  of  Alexander  Cozens,  followed  the  same  profession  ai 
his  father.  He  produced  some  drawings  of  great  merit,  executed  by  i 
process  that  may  be  considered  as  tinted  chiaro  oscuro,  and  which  has  serve( 
as  a  foundation  to  the  manner  since  adopted  by  Mr.  Turner.  In  the  yea: 
1794  he  became  insane,  and  died  1799. — Ibid. 


1783]  ST.    AMBKOISE.  37 

The  road  is  in  no  respect  dangerous,  though  in  some 
parts  amazingly  steep,  but  the  way  is  always  wide  enough 
to  admit  half  a  dozen  chairs  or  mules  abreast,  and  the 
chairs  are  carried  so  near  the  ground,  that  were  the 
porters  to  fall  (which  they  never  do)  one  could  hardly  be 
hurt.  The  views  of  the  surrounding  Alps  noble,  and 
the  cascade  formed  by  the  torrent  of  Cenis  one  of  the 
finest  I  ever  saw.  Though  much  snow  had  fallen  on  the 
mountain  about  ten  days  before,  a  few  small  spots  only 
remained  on  the  northern  side. 

The  auberge  at  Novaleze  the  dirtiest  and  worst  we 
have  yet  been  in. 

Tuesday,  2^th. — At  St.  Antoine  began  to  lose  the 
mountains  and  get  into  the  plain  of  Lombardy.  The 
mulberry  begins  here  to  be  cultivated ;  the  trees  are  all 
pollarded  and  kept  low,  to  force  young  shoots  for  leaves, 
and  are  far  from  picturesque.  Slept  at  St.  Ambroise,  a 
large  village  situated  under  a  high  rock,  on  the  summit 
of  which  is  a  beautiful  castle,  formerly  a  monastery ;  at 
present  there  is  but  one  prStre  or  monk,  who  performs 
service  in  the  chapel  there. 

Wednesday,  2\st.  —  Left  St.  Ambroise;  arrived  at 
Turin  between  twelve  and  one.  The  road  from  Eivoh  to 
Turin  (two  leagues)  through  one  continued  avenue  of 
elms.  The  Duke  of  Savoy's  palace  at  Eivoli  a  great, 
ugly  brick  building. 

Mr.  Pitt,*  and  Mr.  Ashetons,f  Sir  James  Graham,J 
and  Mr.  Brand  §  supped  with  us. 

*  Mr.  Pitt's  name,  though  conatantly  mentioned  in  Miss  Berry's  journal 
during  this  first  tour,  never  occurs  again  till  in  the  year  1809,  when  staying 
in  the  neighhourhood  of  West  Moulsey,  she  finds  her  old  acquaintance,  Mr. 
Thomas  Ktt,  residing  near  there  with  his  grown-up  family. 

t  Of  the  Mr.  Ashetons  it  is  difficult  to  ohtain  any  account.  The  Rev. 
Thomas  Asheton,  Rector  of  St.  Botolph,  and  the  friend  of  Horace  Walpole 
and  Mason,  died  1775,  leaving  two  sons.    Query,  if  them. 

X  Sir  James  Graham,  Bart.,  of  Netherby  (father  of  the  late  Eight  Hon. 
Sir  James  Graham),  created  a  baronet  in  1782 ;  married,  1785,  Catherine, 
eldest  daughter  of  .lohn  Earl  of  Galloway ;  died  1824. 

§  The  Rev.  Thomas  Brand  took  a  high  degree  in  mathematics  at  Cam- 


38  MISS  BEREY's  JOUENAL.  C1783 

Thursday,  22nd. —  Saw  the  palace  and  the  Great 
Theatre.  The  palace  is  built  of  brick  and  intended  to  be 
stuccoed,  which  not  being  yet  done  gives  it  a  mean, 
unfinished  appearance ;  it  is  divided  into  fine  suites  of 
summer  and  winter  apartments.  Much  gilding  and  a 
great  deal  of  looking-glass,  and  a  number  of  pleasing 
pictures : — A  Youth  caressing  a  Dog,  by  Cignani,  beautiftd ; 
and  a  Group  of  Cows,  by  P.  Potter,  nature  itself;  the 
Femme  Hydropique,  by  Gerard  Dow,  for  which  the  late 
king  gave  1,500Z.  sterhng,  did  not  strike  me  much;  I 
think  I  have  seen  many  of  the  cabinet  pictures  in 
Flanders  much  more  highly  finished ;  the  same  subject, 
in  the  gallery  at  Dusseldorf,  far  superior  to  it. 

The  Great  Theatre  joins  to  the  palace  by  a  long 
gallery.  There  are  only  performances  in  it  at  the  car- 
nival, or  on  the  occasion  of  some  prince  visiting  the 
Court  of  Turin,  when  it  is  illuminated  with  2,000  hghts 
in  the  boxes,  and  must  make  a  brilliant  appearance  ;  we 
saw  it  by  dayhght,  and  all  in  rubbish.  It  is  considerably 
larger  than  our  Opera  House  in  London,  contains  182 
boxes,  in  six  rows,  exclusive  of  the  king's,  which  is  orna- 
mented with  glass,  and  occupies  the  centre  of  the  second  and 
third  rows.   During  the  carnival  they  say  it  is  always  full. 

The  buildings  and  streets  of  Turin  disappointed  me ; 
they  are,  to  be  sure,  at  right  angles,  and  the  buildings 
regular,  but  the  finest  and  newest  streets  have  almost  a 
ruinous  appearance,  from  being  of  that  rough  sort  of 
brickwork,  with  the  holes  of  the  scaffolding  left,  intended 
to  be  covered  with  stucco,  but  it  wiU  be  long,  if  ever, 
before  it  is  done.  The  Strada  del  Po,  the  finest  street,  is 
in  this  condition,  and  it  takes  off  the  beauty  which  its 
regularity,  height,  arcades  on  each  side,  and  gate  at  the 
bottom  would  otherwise  give. 

bridge ;  married,  in  1798,  the  daughter  of  Dr.  Wharton,  of  Old  Park,  Co. 
Durham ;  died  Rector  of  Wath,  near  Ripon,  and  Canon  Residentiary  of  the 
Cathedral  of  Ripon.    His  wife  survived  him  many  years. 


'1783]  TURIN.  39 

The  palace  of  the  Dukes  of  Savoy  is  the  only  building 
that  has  a  front  much  ornamented.  The  king's  palace  is 
like  the  streets,  all  unstuccoed  and  unfinished.  The  town 
has  a  great  air  of  business,  bustle,  and  population ;  the 
streets  are  fuU  of  men  walking  about  in  full  dress,  for 
every  creature  here  above  the  commonest  shopkeepers 
wears  a  bag,  a  sword,  and  a  suit  of  clothes.  Went  in  the 
evening  to  the  Theatre  de  Carignan,' where  an  opera  bufia 
is  performed  all  the  summer.  It  appears  as  wide,  but  not 
so  deep,  as  Drury  Lane ;  the  Prince  of  Carignan's  box 
occupies  the  place  of  the  king's  at  the  other  house.  The 
king  never  comes  to  this.  The  dancing  consists  almost 
entirely  of  feats  of  agility  worthy  of  Sadler's  Wells, 
continued  vaulting  into  the  air,  and  the  higher  they 
jump  the  more  hravos  or  bravas  they  receive  from  the 
dehghted  pit.  The  dresses  elegant  and  various,  and  the 
stage  well  filled. 

Friday,  23rd. — Day  rainy.  In  the  evening  paid  our 
comphments  to  Mr.*  and  Mrs.  Trevor,  to  whom  we  had  a 
letter  from  Count  Walmoden. 

Saturday,  24:th. — Saw  the  museum  at  the  University. 
The  museum,  besides  the  famous  Isiac  table,f  contains 
some  pretty  Eoman  busts,  and  a  number  of  lamps,  small 
bronze  figures,  and  earthenware,  most  of  them  found  at 
Industria,J  the  remains  of  the  Eoman  town  that  was 

*  Mr.  John  Trevor,  Envoy  Extraordinary  to  tlie  King  of  Sardinia  in 
February  1783,  and  Minister  Plenipotentiary  to  the  same  court  in  June  1789. 

■(■  A  tablet  of  bronze  of  about  4  ft.  by  3  ft.,  with  figures  engraved  of  Egyp- 
tian deities  and  hieroglyphics.  It  went  to  Paris  with  other  stolen  goods, 
and  has  been  restored  to  Turin. 

f  Near  Verolongo,  but  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  Po,  is  Montea  del  Po, 
occupying  the  site  of  the  Roman  city  of  Industria.  This  city,  mentioned 
by  Pliny  and  other  ancient  writers,  had  been  in  a  manner  lost.  Many  anti- 
quarians supposed  that  Casale  had  risen  upon  its  ruins ;  but  in  1744  the 
iscovery  of  Roman  remains  on  this  spot,  and  some  fragments  of  inscrip- 
tions, led  to  the  supposition  that  this  was  the  site,  and  farther  excavations 
were  made.  The  result  proved  that  this  soil  covered  a  very  rich  mine  of 
antiquities,  and  produced  many  of  the  finest  articles  in  the  museum  at 
Turin. — Murray's  handbook. 


40  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1783 

discovered  near  Turin,  some  very  clear  glass  cups,  and 
a  glass  bottle  corked,  containing  a  liquor  they  take  to 
have  been  milk.  The  chapel  of  the  Saint  Sudario  joins 
the  palace  to  the  cathedral.  The  cathedral  is  an  ugly 
old  building,  hung  with  bad  tapestry ;  the  chapel  of  the 
S.  S.  is  singular  and  beautiful,  it  is  hned  through  with 
black  marble,  and  supported  on  black  marble  pillars. 
The  holy  cloth  is  kept  in  a  large  crystal  case,  with  a 
brass  grating  before  it,  upon  an  altar. 

Sunday,  2bth. — Left  Turin ;  slept  at  Casale.  The  road 
through  the  rich  flat  of  Piedmont  very  populous,  and  a 
considerable  appearance  of  comfort.  Came  the  first  three 
or  four  stages  as  fast  as  we  could  have  posted  in  England. 
At  Casale  a  clean  auberge. 

Monday,  2Qth. — The  people  broke  the  carriage  in 
pushing  it  out  of  the  inn  yard,  which  delayed  our  de- 
parture till  near  10  a.m.     Slept  at  Novi. 

Tuesday,  27th. — ^Passed  the  Bochetta,  between  Novi 
and  Ottaggio.     The  morning  was  cloudy;  when  at  the 
summit  of  the  hiU  we  came  into  a  beam  of  bright  sun- 
shine,  while   rain   and    thick   clouds   were    below    us. 
The  road  makes  a  thousand  turns  round  the  side  of  the 
mountain  to  avoid  different  gullies  and  torrents  from  the 
mountains  ;  it  is  aU  paved,  and  in  some  places  supported 
against  the  rock  by  masonry  and  piles  of  wood.     In  one 
part  it  had  fallen  in,  and,  though  sufficiently  repaired  for 
carriages  to  ■  pass,  was  rather  frightful   and   dangerous. 
The  lower  part  of  the  Apennines  is  covered  with  chestnut 
trees  ;  higher  up  and  near  the  top  there  is  neither  wood 
nor  cultivation,  but  bleak  and  bare,  without  either  the 
beauty  or  sublimity  of  the  Alps.     Erom  Campomarone  to 
Genoa  (eleven  miles)  a  magnificent  road,  made  entirely 
at  the  expense  of  the  Marquis  Cambiaso,  in  consequence 
of  a  vow  made  when  his  wife  was  ill  that  if  ever  she 
recovered  he  would  make  such  a  road ;  it  is  very  broad, 
with  a  row  of  elm  trees  on  each  side  and  a  very  low  stone 


1783]  GENOA.  41 

wall ;  it  was  finished  only  in  1776.  Nothing  can  be  more 
like  fairyland  than  the  whole  road  between  Campoma- 
rone  and  Genoa  ;  the  sides  of  the  hills  are  covered  with 
country-houses,  gardens,  and  vineyards,  forming  the 
gayest  scenes  imaginable ;  for  above  three  miles  before 
arriving  at  Genoa  it  is  one  continual  row  of  houses,  which 
join  to  the  faubourg  of  San  Pietro  d'  Arena.  The  view  of 
the  town,  the  hills  behind  it,  the  harbour,  and  the  moles, 
from  the  point  of  the  Lanterna  on  entering  the  town, 
most  striking  and  beautiful. 

Wednesday,  28th. — Sent  our  letter  to  the  consul ;  re- 
ceived a  visit  from  his  partner,  Mr.  Brame ;  walked 
through  the  principal  streets.  The  Strada  JSTuova  a  row 
of  palaces,  but  so  narrow  that  much  of  the  magnificence 
of  its  efiect  is  lost ;  and  yet,  except  the  Strada  BoUi,  it  is 
the  widest  street  in  the  town.  The  rest  are  no  broader 
than  a  court  in  London,  paved  almost  entirely  with  flat 
stones,  and  very  pleasant  for  walking.  A  street  of  sil- 
versmiths, the  shops  nearly  as  showy  as  those  in  London. 
From  the  narrowness  of  the  streets  carriages  are  hardly 
ever  used,  except  when  the  famihes  are  going  into  the 
country.  All  the  people  of  fashion  in  town  go  in  chairs, 
with  two  or  three  footmen ;  the  gentlemen  often  walk, 
their  chair  and  footmen  always  following  them ;  the 
chairs  sometimes  very  handsome.  Mr.  Pitt  and  the 
Mr.  Ashetons,  Sir  James  Graham,  and  Mr.  Brand  arrived 
in  the  evening,  and  all  took  up  their  lodgings  in  the  same 
inn. 

Thursday,  29th. — ^Went  all  out  in  a  felucca  of  eight 
oars  to  view  the  town  from  the  sea.  I  think  upon  the 
whole  it  is  not  more  striking  than  on  entering  it  by  land 
from  the  point  of  the  Lanterna.  My  father,  my  sister, 
and  myself  went  afterwards  to  the  Albergo  dei  Poveri,  an 
immense  buUding  which  serves  both  for  a  hospital  and 
house  of  correction.  An  end  to  one  wing  is  still  wanting 
to  make  it  regular.     It  is  built  upon  rock,  which  juts  out 


42  MISS   BEERT'S   journal.  [1783 

immediately  behind  the  building.  It  contains  1,080  per- 
sons— 780  women,  and  300  men  and  boys.  The  boys 
are  put  out  to  trades ;  the  women,  if  they  do  not  marry 
or  find  a  service,  may  remain  there  all  their  hves.  Grreat 
defalcations  made  from  its  revenue  by  those  who  have 
the  administration  of  it.  There  are  sis  of  them,  not 
places  for  Hfe,  but  appointed  at  pleasure  by  the  reigning 
people  in  power.  The  revenues  of  the  house  are  large 
enough  to  admit  of  aU  the  people  being  perfectly  well 
fed,  but  they  are  not,  and  have  a  very  scanty  allowance 
both  of  bread,  wine,  and  meat. 

Saw  the  church  of  the  Annunciata,  entirely  covered 
in  the  inside  with  gilding,  painting,  and  marble,  in  a  very 
gaudy  taste. 

Went  to  the  opera.  There  is  a  sort  of  gallery  or  bal- 
cony before  the  first  row  of  boxes,  very  convenient  for 
the  gentlemen,  and  what  I  never  saw  before. 

Friday,  30?A. — Saw  the  Palazzo  Brignole,  Ohiesa  Cari- 
gnano.  Doge's  palace,  and  the  Doge  himself,  attended  by 
all  the  senators,  coming  from  the  council-chambers.  The 
two  new  council-chambers  most  magnificent  and  elegant. 

Saturday,  21st. — ^Palazzo  Durazzo,  Palazzo  Balbi,  and 
the  Church  of  St.  Filippo  Neri. 

Sunday,  November  \st. — Gardens  of  Andrea  Doria, 
Palazzo  Dominico  Serra,  the  new  Grande  Salle  very  mag- 
nificent in  gilding  and  glass. 

Madame  Durazzo  has  200  livres  of  Genoa  an  hour 
(29  hvres  in  a  louis). 

The  house  of  Cambiasi,  consisting  of  three  famihes, 
have  1,800,000  livres  a  year  rent  among  them.  No  hotel 
or  auberge  allowed  to  keep  wine  in  their  houses  ;  the 
state  are  the  wine-merchants  and  bakers  of  the  town. 

More  monks  of  every  sort  in  Genoa,  and  more  con- 
tinual services  going  on  in  their  churches,  than  I  have 
seen  in  any  other  town  in  Italy.     Left  Genoa. 

Monday,  Srd. — Left  Campomarone.    Between  Ottagio 


178S]  NOVI.  43 

and  Novi  they  gave  us  six  sucli  tired  horses  that,  going 
uphill,  they  refused  three  or  four  times  to  draw,  and,  in 
spite  of  aU  our  efforts,  stood  still  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour 
at  a  time ;  this,  together  with  fording  the  river,  which  was 
very  much  swelled  with  the  'i'ain  of  the  night  before,  pre- 
vented our  getting  to  Novi  till  three  o'clock.  More  than 
an  hour  was  taken  up  in  getting  our  baggage  put  on,  and 
we  did  not  leave  Novi  till  past  four,  in  a  heavy  rain,  to  go 
to  Tortona,  with  the  Scrivia  to  pass.  By  the  time  we 
arrived  at  the  bank  of  the  river  it  was  dark,  and  the  rain 
continued  to  pour.  We  called  in  vain  for  the  boatmen  ; 
the  boat  was  there,  but  the  men  were  gone  home  for  the 
night.  Our  postihons  were  desired  to  carry  us  to  the 
first  house  that  would  take  us  in  ;  it  was  about  half  a  mile 
off — the  Eivalto  di  Scrivia,  a  poor  village  of  a  dozen 
houses.  After  hard  knocking  for  about  five  minutes,  we 
at  last  got  admittance  into  a  sort  of  auberge.  Here  we 
found  a  place  to  sit  in,  which  had  acorns  spread  in  one 
part  of  the  floor  and  a  wine-trough  in  another ;  it  was, 
however,  decently  clean,  and  the  people  civil.  We  got  a 
fire  made — felt  ourselves  thankful  to  get  housed — and 
were  soon  very  comfortable.  Above  we  found  two  beds 
for  ourselves  and  Hannah,  and  my  father  had  a  mattress 
put  upon  the  table  in  the  room  below.  Eained  all  night. 
Tuesday,  4th. —  Left  Eivalto  di  Scrivia.  When  we 
arrived  at  the  passage  of  the  river,  we  had  the  greatest 
reason  to  be  thankful  that  the  absence  of  boatmen  had 
prevented  our  attempting  to  cross  it  in  the  dark.  Two 
days  and  a  night's  rain  had  swelled  a  shallow  stream  into 
a  broad  and  rapid  river,  and  the  boat,  a  small  and  bad  one, 
was  unaccustomed  to  carry  carriages,  which,  except  in  cases 
Hke  the  present,  always  ford  the  stream.-  We  passed  our- 
selves first,  then  our  six  horses ;  and  afterwards  our  two 
servants,  with  the  assistance  of  half  a  dozen  other  men, 
were  employed  for  nearly  two  hours  in  getting  the  coach 
put  in  and  taken  out  of  the  boat,  we  looking  on,  and 


44  MISS  beret's  journal.  [1783 

expecting  every  moment  it  was  to  be  broken  in  pieces. 
By  good  luck,  however,  it  escaped  both  from  the  embarka- 
tion and  afterwards  from  some  of  the  worst  road  I  ever 
saw  on  this  side  the  ferry.  The  road  was  close  upon  the 
edge  of  the  river,  and  portions  of  it  had  been  newly 
carried  away  by  the  rapidity  of  the  water ;  it  was  also 
full  of  great  holes,  where  trees  had  been  dug  up,  and 
large  stumps  of  others  which  had  been  cut  down.  We 
got  out,  and  the  servants  supported  the  carriage  on  each 
side.  I  never  was  better  pleased  than  when  I  saw  it 
upon  smooth  ground,  with  only  the  loss  of  a  trifling 
screw. 

At  Novi  we  left  all  mountains,  and  found  ourselves  in 
the  rich  plain  of  Lombardy — great  cornfields,  and  vine- 
yards with  mulberry  trees  planted  in  rows  round  them ; 
the  vines  in  rows,  at  a  considerable  distance  from  one 
another,  and  corn  between  them.  The  roads  broad  and 
good.     Arrived  at  Broni.     Clean  auberge. 

Wednesday,  bth. — Arrived  at  Piacenza  about  midday. 
The  road  still  a  rich  plain  of  uninterrupted  cultivation 
of  corn  and  vine  ;  notwithstanding  which  the  inhabitants 
of  all  the  small  towns  and  villages  are  idle  and  wretched 
to  the  last  degree. 

StaiTe  in  the  midst  of  Nature's  bounty,  curs' d, 
And  midst  tlie  loaded  vineyard  die  of  thirst, 

is  a  true  and  poetical  description  of  the  effects  of  the 
slavery  and  idleness  in  which  their  rehgion  and  govern- 
ment keep  them. 

The  moment  a  carriage  stops  at  the  post  it  is.  surrounded 
by  a  crowd  of  idle  wretches  wrapped  up  in  large  cloaks, 
which  serve  to  cover  the  rags  beneath,  and  who,  having 
apparently  no  other  occupation  than  that  of  walking  up 
one  street  and  down  another,  seem  happy  in  having  some- 
thing more  than  their  accustomed  walls  to  gaze  at ;  every 
creature  who  passes  through  the  street  joins  this  set,  so 


1783]  PUCENZA.  45 

that,  before  the  horses  are  put  to  and  the  former  postihons 
paid  (about  which  there  is  always  a  squabble),  one  has 
been  as  thoroughly  stared  at,  and  as  closely  examined,  as 
at  the  entrance  of  a  masquerade  in  Bondon.  Two  miles 
from  Piacenza,  the  Trebia  is  crossed  in  a  boat.  The  water 
was  considerably  swelled  by  the  quantity  of  rain  that 
had  fallen,  and  crossing  rivers  is  always  troublesome ;  the 
boats  are  small  and  bad,  the  boatmen  awkward,  and  the 
postilions  noisy  and  quarrelsome.  Piacenza  is  a  great 
half-inhabited-looking  town;  the  streets  are  tolerably 
wide  and  in  general  straight,  but  consisting  of  mean 
irregular  houses,  interspersed  with  the  long  dead  walls  of 
monasteries,  and  here  and  there  a  palace  going  to  decay. 
The  Strada  Grande,  which  is  of  a  great  length,  broad,  and 
tiree  a  cordon,  is  overrun  with  grass,  and  looks  more 
like  the  approach  to  a  great  town  than  a  street  in  the 
town  itself.  The  Piazza  Grande,  where  are  the  statues  of 
Alexander  Farnese  and  his  son,*  is  the  green  market, 
consequently  very  dirty,  and  consists  entirely  of  mean 
shops.  The  equestrian  statues  are  noble,  whether  they 
are  done  by  John  of  Bologna  or  his  scholar  Francesco 
Mocchi.f  That  of  Eanuccio  Farnese  struck  me  upon  the 
whole  as  the  finest. 

The  cathedral  is  a  great  building  supported  on  stone 
pillars.  The  pictures  by  L.  Caracci  are  so  black  that 
one  can  hardly  make  out  the  subject,  far  less  the  beauties. 
In  the  cupola,  painted  in  fresco  by  Guercino,  one  can 
admire  the  grandeur  and  grace  of  some  of  the  heads,  but 
they  are  too  high  to  give  pleasure  upon  a  cursory  view. 

♦  Alexander  Farnese,  third  Duke  of  Parma  and  Placentia,  was  the  eldest 
son  of  Octavius  Farnese  and  Margaret  of  Austria ;  born  1555  ;  married,  at 
ten  years  old,  to  Mary,  niece  of  the  King  of  Portugal.  He  was  wounded  at 
Oandebec,  1592,  and  died  from  the  eflfects  of  his  wound  at  the  age  of 
forty-seven. 

Kanuccio  Farnese  married  Margaret  Aldobrandini ;  died  1622. 

t  These  statues  were  designed  by  Francesco  Mocchi,  a  scholar  of  John  of 
Bologna. — Handbook. 


46  MISS   BEEEY'S  JOUENAL.  [1783 

The  churcti  of  St.  Augustin,  built  by  Vignola,*  new  and 
elegant,  has  five  aisles,  supported  on  Doric  pillars  which 
struck  me  as  being  too  low.f  They  took  us  to  the  church 
of  St.  John  to  see  a  monument  of  one  of  the  family  of 
Scoto,  J  which  is  not  worth  the  trouble  of  the  walk. 

Thursday,  Qth. — Left  Piacenza;  arrived  at  Parma. 
The  roads  good,  through  the  same  rich  plain,  except  im- 
mediately in  the  neighbourhood  of  Parma,  all  corn  land 
and  vineyards,  much  less  pasture  than  one  would  expect 
to  see  in  so  great  a  dairy  country;  the  post  here  well 
served.  Pive  miles  from  Parma  crossed  the  Taro,  but 
without  any  trouble ;  the  stream  is  narrow,  the  boat  large, 
and  the  people  used  to  the  business.  § 

Friday,  7  th. — Saw  the  church  of  St.  Antoine,  built  by 
the  Pope  for  a  convent  of  nuns ;  it  is  small  but  very  pretty. 
It  has  two  arched  roofs,  the  first  of  stone  perforated,  and 
so  hght  that  it  is  with  difficulty  one  can  beheve  it  is  not 
of  wood;  through  the  perforations  are  seen  the  paintings 
of  the  second  roof,  which  represent  our  Saviour,  angels, 
&c.  &c.,  in  the  clouds :  it  has  a  good  efiect,  though  perhaps 
more  Hke  a  coup  de  thedtre  than  the  decorations  of  a 
church.  The  church  of  San  Sepolcro  has  a  picture  of  Cor- 
reggio — the  Virgin,  our  Saviour,  and  Joseph,  with  angels 
in  the  air  offering  palms;  Joseph's  head  beautiful;  the  Ma- 
donna struck  me  as  without  any  dignity  or  much  grace ; 
the  Bambino  not  like  an  infant,  and  in  a  very  distorted 
attitude.  Also  a  picture  of  the  Holy  Family  of  Parmegiano, 
the  Bambino  beautiful.  The  church  of  St.  John  large, 
dark,  and  dirty ;  the  cupola  painted  by  Correggio  so  dark 

*  Giacomo  Barozzi  da  Vignola,  bom  1507  at  Vignola  in  Modena ;  much 
patronised  by  Cardinal  Alexander  Famese ;  appointed  architect  of  St.  Peter's 
on  the  death  of  Michael  Angelo,  1564 ;  he  died  1573. 

f  '  Now  desecrated  and  closed,  and  in  danger  of  demolition.' — Murray's 
Handbook. 

I  Church  of  San  Giovanni  in  Canale,  founded  by  the  Knights  Templars, 
There  is  a  very  fine  tomb  of  the  Count  of  Montalbo,  Orazio  Scotti,  by 
Algardi. — Murray's  Handbooh. 

§  A  magnificent  bridge  was  begun  by  Marie  Louise  in  1816,  and  completed 
in  1821.— iJii. 


1783]  PAEMA.  47 

and  small  that  one  could  hardly  have  seen  the  pictures  the 
day  they  were  put  up,  far  less  now  when  they  are  faded 
and  dirty.  The  two  pictures  of  Correggio  in  the  same  church 
of  a  dead  Christ  and  the  martyrdom  of  a  monk  were  too 
iDrown  and  faded  for  me  to  discover  their  beauties ;  in 
the  first  the  drawing  strikingly  incorrect,  both  of  the  arm 
of  the  Christ  and  of  the  Madonna. 

The  palace  is  a  great  unfinished  brick  building,  the 
windows  small  and  shabby;  a  space  remains  in  front  where 
a  new  palace  was  intended  to  be  built. 

The  Eoyal  Academy  of  Painting  and  Sculpture  is  at- 
tached to  the  palacfe.  In  the  gallery  they  have  models  of 
all  the  remains  of  antiquity  for  the  use  of  the  students, 
and  some  few  ancient  statues.  A  female  figure  in  dra- 
pery, though  without  either  head  or  arms,  most  beautiful, 
found  at  Velleia,*  and  a  bust  of  Vitellius  in  white  marble, 
much  smaller  than  life,  which  had  all  the  expression  of 
painting. 

The  chef  d'oeuvre  of  Correggio  is  likewise  preserved 
here  (the  Madonna  and  Child,  with  St.  Jerome  and  Mary 
Magdalen) ;  it  is  the  first  picture  of  his  I  have  seen  that  gave 
me  real  pleasure ;  it  is  in  excellent  preservation,  the  colours 
fresh.  The  Madonna's  head  is  said  to  be  too  dark,  but 
the  longer  one  looks  at  it  the  more  beauty  and  grace  is  to 
be  discovered;  the  head  of  the  angel  beautiful;  the  Child 
hke  a  child,  though  neither  a  dignified  nor  lovely  child.  In 
another  apartment  of  the  Academy  is  preserved  the  patent 
or  charter  of  Trajan  to  the  Velleians,  found  at  Velleia;  it 
is  upon  a  copper  plate  about  6ft.  long  with  a  copper  border 
like  a  frame  round  it;  it  is  broken  into  a  number  of  pieces, 
but  is  perfectly  legible,  though  the  engraving  of  the  cha- 
racters is  what  we  should  now  call  very  bad.     There  are 

*  Velleia,  though  it  must  have  heen  a  city  of  consideratle  note,  is  nowhere 
directly  mentioned  in  any  existing  ancient  -vmtera.  The  subterranean  trea- 
sures were  first  ohscurely  known  in  the  17th  century.  In  1760,  the  Infante 
Don  Philip,  then  Duke  of  Parma,  ordered  excavations  to  be  scientifically 
begun.    The  excavations  have  not  been  regularly  continued  since  1760. 

Murray's  Handbook. 


48  MISS  berry's  journal.  [1783 

likewise  a  number  of  Koman  antiquities,  such  as  lamps,  in- 
scriptions, &c.,  &c.,  &c.,  all  found  at  Velleia. 

The  cathedral  large  and  dark ;  the  cupola  by  Correggio, 
like  the  other,  so  high  and  so  much  spoilt  that  I  could 
neither  see  nor  admire  it.  A  head  of  Correggio  by  himself 
The  church  called  La  Steccatta,  belonging  to  the  King  of 
Naples,  magnificent  in  the  decorations  of  the  altar:  the 
cupola  by  Parmegiano,  a  transfigiiration  of  the  Virgin, 
God  the  Father  receiving  her,  surroimded  by  an  infinity 
of  angels ;  the  colours  were  less  gone  than  those  of  Correg- 
gio's,  and  the  grouping  seemed  grand,  but  it  is  much  too 
high  to  be  examined  with  pleasure.  The  Baptistery,  a 
very  old  Gothic  building,  octagon,  with  a  roof  very  hke, 
but  not  so  pretty  as,  the  Chapter  House  at  York. 

Being  a  fast  day,  we  could  get  nothing  but  birds  in  the 
town,  and  not  many  of  them. 

The  Great  Theatre  (the  largest  in  Europe)  a  great  ruin; 
it  is  above  fifty  years  since  there  has  been  any  represen- 
tation in  it,  and  in  aU  probability  there  will  never  be  an- 
other, as  it  would  cost  more  to  clean  and  repair  it  than 
ever  the  state  of  Parma  will  have  to  bestow.  It  seems  an 
attempt  to  unite  an  ancient  amphitheatre  with  a  modem 
theatre ;  the  space  usually  occupied  by  the  parterre  is  flat, 
and  paved  like  an  arena ;  when  the  theatre  was  in  use,  they 
told  us,  water  used  to  be  introduced  and  sea-fights  repre- 
sented. Pound  it  are  rows  of  seats,  one  above  another, 
for  spectators,  and  above  them  two  rows  of  arches — the 
boxes,  and  above  them  a  gallery.  The  distance  of  the 
stage  from  the  boxes  is  great,  and  yet  we  could  perfectly 
well  hear  a  man  speaking  in  an  ordinary  voice.  It  could 
contain  12,000  or  14,000  people.  Mr.  Pitt  and  the  Mr. 
Ashetons  arrived ;  Sir  James  Graham,  Mr.  Brand,  and 
Captain  Coussmaker  in  the  evening. 

Saturday,  8th. — Left  Parma.  The  road  good  through  a 
continued  fiat  to  Modena.  The  vines  were  trained  up 
high  trees,  generally  elm,  planted  in  rows  in  the  fields  ; 


1783]  MODENA.  49 

the  vines  hanging  in  festoons  from  one  to  another,  and 
twisting  up  almost  every  tree  by  the  roadside.  When 
the  fruit  is  ripe  the  eifect  must  be  beautiful.  On  enter- 
ing the  states  of  Modena,  the  population  seems  to  be 
greater,  and  the  people  more  in  comfort,  than  those  of 
Parma,  who  bear  great  marks  of  poverty  and  wretched- 
ness. Their  soldiers  are  the  best-dressed  and  most  com- 
fortable-looking people  among  them;  there  are  about 
2,000  between  Parma  and  Piacenza,  by  far  the  best-look- 
ing troops  we  have  seen  in  Italy.  Modena  is  a  pretty 
town,  and  clean  for  Italy.  The  front  of  the  duke's 
palace  is  handsome.  The  four  orders  of  architecture  sup- 
port a  sort  of  clumsy  pediment  in  the  middle.  Walking 
in  the  garden  (a  Dutch  parterre)  behind  the  palace,  we 
saw  the  duke's  carriage  waiting  to  take  him  up  at  the 
garden  door;  it  was  one  of  the  very  oldest,  plainest, 
shabbiest  chariots  I  ever  saw,  and  would  not  have  sold 
for  fifty  shillings ;  the  horses  were  hke  old  broken-down 
hacks,  and  the  harness  and  coachman  exactly  of  a  piece 
with  them.  We  saw  him  and  another  gentleman  get  into 
the  carriage,  behind  which  two  servants  mounted,  whom 
for  liveries  and  appearance  any  country  parson  in  England 
would  have  been  ashamed  to  own ;  yet  in  his  stables  we 
saw  above  ninety  good-looking,  well-fed  horses.  The 
duke*  is  old,  rich,  and  close ;  his  only  legitimate  child  is 
married  to  the  Duke  of  Milan.f  He  hves  with  a  mistress 
by  whom  he  has  a  son ;  his  duchess  (a  Princess  Massa 
Carrara)   has  been  long  parted  from  him,  and  lives  at 


*  Ercole  Rinaldo,  the  last  Duke  of  tie  House  of  Este.  He  married  Maria 
Theresa  Cibo,  sovereign  princess  of  Massa  Carrara.  He  was  deprived  of  his 
dominions  hy  the  French  invasion.  A  principality  was  offered  to  him  in 
the  Brisgau,  but  he  would  not  accept  this  compensation,  and  died  in  retire- 
ment at  Treviso,  October  1803. — Murray's  Handbook. 

t  Archduke  Ferdinand  of  Austria,  son  of  the  Emperor  Francis  and  the 
Empress  Maria  Theresa,  married  Mary  Beatrice  of  Este,  daiighter  and  heire'ss 
of  Ercole  Einaldo ;   died  1806.     The  duchy  was  secured  to  her  by  the 
treaty  of  Versailles.     She  died  at  Versailles,  1829. 
VOL.  I.  E 


50  MISS   BEERY's   JOURXAL.  [1783 

Eeggio.*  Saw  the  orphan  hospital,  a  plain  handsome 
building,  clean  and  proper  in  the  inside,  contains  300 
boys  and  300  girls ;  the  boys  kept  till  they  are  sixteen, 
the  girls  twenty ;  some  of  them  we  saw  employed  in 
gauze  and  riband  weaving,  and  preparing  silk.  Opposite 
to  this  orphan  house  there  is  another  large  handsome 
building,  which  contains  under  the  same  roof  an  hospital 
for  the  state  in  general,  and  another  for  the  troops.  The 
troops  ill-clothed  and  shabby.  The  cathedral  a  very  ugly 
Grasco-Gothic  building. 

~  Sunday,  9  th.  —  Intended  to  have  set  off  early  for 
Bologna,  but  all  the  post-horses  were  stopped  for  the 
Duchess  of  Parma  and  her  suite  going  to  Naples ;  were 
obliged,  therefore,  to  spend  another  day  at  Modena. 

Monday,  10th. — Left  Modena,  arrived  at  Bologna;  stUl 
the  same  rich,  flat  country,  vines  aU  twining  up  high  elm 
trees,  and  hanging  in  festoons  from  one  to  another.  Mr. 
Pitt  and  Mr.  Ashetons  arrived  at  Bologna  with  us ;  Cap- 
tain Coussmaker  in  the  evening. 

Tuesday,  11th. — Walked  to  the  Chiesa  di  Santa  Maria 
di  Luca ;  it  is  a  league  from  the  town,  upon  the  top  of  a 
hill  called  Monte  della  Guardia ;  the  walk  is  up  the  steepest 
part  of  the  hill  by  a  number  of  steps,  and  the  whole  way 
under  a  colonnade.  This  great  work  was  begun  in  1674, 
and  carried  on  at  the  expense  of  all  orders  of  people  at 
Bologna,  in  days  when  the  belief  and  confidence  in  the 
wonders  worked  by  this  pilgrimage  were  so  great,  that 
not  only  all  rich  individuals  contributed  according  to  their 
ability  in  building  three  or  four  or  more  arches,  but 
societies  of  artisans  and  menial  servants  associated  together 
to  save  their  souls  by  building  an  arch.  In  every  one  is 
the  arms,  device,  or  name  of  the  person  or  society  of 
persons  who  built  it.     Several  of  them  near  the  top  are 

*  The  Diicliesa  of  Parma  was  buried  at  Reggio.  A  fine  monumental 
bust  was  erected  to  her  memory  in  1820,  by  her  daughter  Mary  Beatrice. 

Murray's  Handbook. 


17S3]  BOLOGXA.  51 

inscribed  Da  vendore — that  is  to  say,  for  so  much  money 
you  may  have  the  honour  of  placing  your  name  and  arms 
on  the  wall,  and  the  reputation  of  having  contributed  to 
the  holy  work.  The  price  of  this  was  formerly  fifty 
sequins,  but  has  since  fallen  to  ten. 

St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul,  by  Titian ;  Abram  and  Hagar, 
by  Guercino ;  a  Group  of  Children,  by  Albano  ;  and  a 
Man  receiving  his  Sight  at  the  Tomb  of  a  Saint,  a  large 
picture  by  CigoH,  all  in  the  Palazzo  Sampieri,*  are  the 
pictures  which  pleased  me  most  in  Bologna.  The  palaces 
at  Bologna  are  cold,  half-furnished,  uncomfortable-looldng 
places ;  indeed,  they  never  show  but  the  suites  of  apart- 
ments which  contain  the  pictures,  and  which,  I  believe, 
are  very  seldom  used  by  the  famihes  who  inhabit  them ; 
many  of  them,  too,  have  sold  all  their  originals,  but  have 
still  the  walls  of  their  apartments  covered  with  bad  copies 
adorned  with  the  names  of  great  masters  of  whom  they 
once  possessed  the  originals. 

The  serious  opera  is  performed  in  a  small  theatre.  In 
the  new  theatre  we  saw  the  tragedy  of  Tamerlane,  but  as 
the  piece  was  not  printed,  I  could  not  tell  whether  it  had 
any  resemblance  to  ours  of  the  same  name ;  what  most 
delighted  the  people  was  a  battle  upon  the  stage,  which 
lasted  nearly  a  quarter  of  an  hour  with  unremitted  ardour, 
and  concluded  with  the  slaughter  of  eight  or  ten  men 
left  dead  upon  the  stage.  All  Italian  actors,  I  am  told, 
are  very  bad,  because  dramatic  performances  are  not  the 
taste  of  the  upper  ranks,  who  rehsh  and  encom-age 
nothing  but  the  opera.  These  were  called  superlatively 
bad ;  they  had  much  less  action  than  I  expected. 

Bologna  is  one  of  the  towns  in  Italy  where  there  are 
the  most  frequent  attempts  to  murder  and  stab  people — 

*  The  famous  pictures  of  its  once  celebrated  gallery  have  been  sold  ;  the 
greater  part  have  been  transferred  to  the  Brera  at  Milan.  Its  fine  ceilings 
and  chimney-pieces,  by  the  Caracci  and  Guercino,  are  well  preserved. — See 
Murray's  Handbook. 

E  2 


52  MISS   BEKRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1783 

our  books  of  travel  said  much  above  a  hundred  every 
year.  Everybody  we  questioned  upon  the  subject  owned 
there  might  be  above  fifty  or  sixty.  We  tried  in  vain  to 
buy  a  stiletto,  or  what  is  called  from  its  length  a  sept  and 
demi,  but  their  sale  is  prohibited,  and  we  could  not  meet 
with  one. 

Bought  a  piece  of  crape  at  the  manufacturer's  at  two 
paoh  and  a  half  the  braccia,  about  two  shilhngs  the 
Enghsh  yard.  The  peasants  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Bologna  have  an  air  of  poverty  in  spite  of  the  richness 
of  the  country  and  the  epithet  of  Bologna  la  grasse,  to 
which  the  Italians  add,  ma  non  per  chi  passa. 

Monday,  VJth. — Slept  at  Feligara;  the  hills  quite  barren 
and  having  the  appearance  of  old  volcanic  matter,  or  of 
some  effect  of  fire. 

Tuesday,  18iA. — Passed  the  mountain  on  the  side  of 
which  is  Pietra  Mala  ;  before  it  was  hght  it  seemed  from 
the  road  like  two  broad  steady  flames  joined  together, 
clear  and  bright  as  that  of  a  candle  rising  from  the 
ground,  and  might  at  a  distance  in  the  night-time  be 
mistaken  for ,  a  forge  or  large  fire.  Broke  one  of 
the  springs  of  our  carriage  about  thirty  miles  from 
Plorence,  came  with  it  the  whole  way  tied  up  with 
leather  straps  and  cords.  Had  the  happiness  of  finding 
a  dozen  letters  for  me,  besides  those  to  my  father,  on  the 
table  in  our  apartment.  The  delight  of  hearing  of  the 
welfare  of  most  of  our  friends,  of  receiving  letters  after 
being  so  long  deprived  of  them,  of  hearing  of  the  safe 
arrival  and  happiness  of  my  grandmother  in  Ireland, 
joined  to  the  comfort  of  finding  ourselves  in  an  excellent 
inn,  surrounded  by  English  people,  after  a  long  tedious 
day's  journey  in  a  bad  day,  with  a  broken  carriage,  my 
father,  myself,  and  the  maid  all  ill,  will  make  me  ever 
remember  with  pleasure  the  evening  of  our  arrival  at 
Florence. 

Monday,  December  Ibth. — Left  Florence  at  10  o'clock 


1783]  SIENXA.  53 

A.M.,  with  a  voiturier  and  four  mules,  who  agreed  to 
carry  us  to  Eome  in  five  days  and  a  half  for  thirty 
sequins,  and  arrived  at  Eaggibonsi.  The  view  of  Florence 
three  or  four  miles  from  the  hills  most  beautiful. 

Tuesday,  \&th. — Dined  at  Sienna ;  saw  the  cathedral, 
the  hospital,  and  the  library.  The  front  of  the  cathedral 
is  Gothic,  much  ornamented,  but  in  very  bad  taste ;  the 
acanthus  leaves  of  the  Corinthian  capital  are  placed  upon 
the  top  of  cluster  pillars  and  a  crowd  of  Gothic  ornaments. 
The  library  adjoining  the  church  contains  some  finely 
illuminated  missals.  The  marble  group  of  the  three 
Graces,*  standing  upon  a  pedestal  in  the  middle  of  it,  are 
in  my  opinion  clumsy,  bad  workmanship,  and,  though 
antique,  never  could  have  been  called  good.  The  walls 
are  covered  with  very  old  fresco  paintings,  which  they 
say  were  designed  by  Raphael,  and  painted  by  Perugino 
and  Pinturiccio ;  they  are  as  fresh  as  if  done  yesterday, 
and  the  drawing  may  be  good,  but  they  are  stiff.  The 
hospital — we  only  looked  into  the  wards ;  they  were  mostly 
full,  but  seemed  very  clean  and  orderly.  Left  Sienna, 
arrived  at  the  auberge  at  Buono  Convento.  Here  we  were 
ushered  through  the  stable  (the  end  of  which  formed  the 
Idtchen)  up  some  broken  brick  steps  into  a  room,  the  only 
one  in  the  house  which  contained  a  place  for  fire  ;  it  was 
furnished  with  a  long  table  and  benches,  at  the  end  of 
which  three  or  four  women  were  at  work  by  the  Hght 
of  a  lamp.  From  hence  we  ascended  some  more  steps  to 
see  our  bed-rooms.  The  walls  were  only  white  enough 
to  make  the  dirt  upon  them  more  visible,  the  floors  much 
worse  paved  than  any  stable  I  ever  saw  in  England,  and 
to  the  full  as  dirty,  and  the  beds  with  quilts  that  did  not 
touch  the  edge  any  way.  After  the  view  of  these  com- 
fortable chambers  we  returned  to  the  room  below  ;  with 
much  difiiculty  we  got  a  fire  made  with  wet  wood.    The 

*  This  group  was  copied  by  Canova.     Raphael  made  a  sketch  of  it,  still 
preserved  in  the  Academy  at  Venice. 


54  MISS   BERBY'S   JOURXAL.  E17S3 

women  continued  working  at  the  end  of  the  room,  and 
were  joined  by  several  others  and  by  a  man,  whom  at  last 
they  left  sleeping  upon  one  of  the  benches.  As  this  room 
was  a  general  passage  to  all  the  upper  part  of  the  house,, 
there  were  men,  women,  childVen,  dogs,  and  cats  con- 
tinually going  to  and  fro  ;  it  was  like  Noah's  ark,  on  the 
side  of  the  unclean  animals.  We  begged  the  people 
would  not  trouble  themselves  to  bring  any  other  supper 
than  eggs,  and  upon  which,  with  the  help  of  some  ches- 
nuts  and  apples,  we  made  a  very  good  supper,  and  had 
three  hours'  sound  sleep  (in  our  clothes)  upon  a  bed  which 
would  perhaps  have  turned  our  stomachs  in  England. 

Wednesday,  17th. — ^Left  Buono  Convento  at  2  a.m.,  in 
order  to  reach  Aquapendente,  forty-four  miles  distant,  at 
night.  Dined  at  Eicorsi  in  a  hayloft,  underneath  which 
was,  as  usual,  the  stable  and  kitchen.  Before  we  came  to 
Aquapendente,  there  was  a  very  steep  hill  to  ascend ;  it 
was  slippery  with  the  frost,  and  the  mules,  being  tired, 
were  unable  either  to  draw  the  carriage  or  to  keep  their 
feet.  We  all  got  out  to  walk.  After  walking  about  half 
a  mile  without  either  seeing  or  hearing  anything  of  the 
carriage,  there  being  hardly  light  for  us  to  pick  our 
steps,  and  nobody  to  show  us  the  way  either  to  the 
town  or  to  the,  inn,  we  thought  it  advisable  to  turn  back, 
and  found  the  carriage  exactly  in  the  same  situation  as 
Avhen  we  left  it.  The  mules,  assisted  by  three  others, 
could  not  move  it ;  and  after  standing  nearly  half  an  hour 
in  the  dark  and  cold,  preaching  to  the  people  not  to  break 
the  carriage  (which  they  seemed  in  a  fair  way  of  doing), 
we  were  obliged  to  leave  it  to  their  mercy,  and,  taking  one 
of  the  servants  and  a  lamp  from  the  carriage,  made  the 
best  of  our  way  to  the  town.  We  kept  ourselves  warm 
by  walking,  but  when  we  arrived  we  knew  not  which 
way  to  turn,  and  were  obliged  to  knock  at  the  first  door 
for  information.  The  people  were  civil,  and  offered  us  a 
guide,  by  whose  assistance  we  at  last  reached  a  miserable 


■1783]  ROME,  55 

auberge,  where,  instead  of  a  civil  waiter,  we  were  saluted 
by  the  barking  of  a  large  hungry  mastiff,  who  would  not 
suffer  us  to  come  up'  the  stairs.  At  last,  however,  we 
made  good  our  entry  into  an  apartment,  which,  after  a 
long  walk  in  a  cold  night,  was  welcome  if  not  comfortable, 
and  thus  ended  the  adventures  of  a  tedious  day. 

Thursday,  l%th, — Left  Aquapendente ;  arrived  in  twelve 
hours  at  Viterbo,  five  miles  from  Aquapendente  ;  passed 
through  Nuovo  San  Lorenzo,*  a  regular  village  or  small 
town  built  by  Pope  Ganganelli.  It  is  the  only  new  build- 
ing of  that  sort  I  have  yet  seen  in  Italy ;  a  neat  octagon, 
traversed  by  the  road,  and  open  to  another  street,  at  the 
end  of  which  is  a  church,  and  opposite  to  that  another 
dedicated  to  St.  Lorenzo.  In  the  octagon,  the  view  from 
thence  of  the  Lake  Bolseno  beautiful.  The  road  from 
Monteflascone  to  Viterbo  very  good. 

Friday,  IQth. — The  road  from  Viterbo  to  Eonciglione 
the  whole  way  through  an  ugly,  wretched  country,  appa- 
rently without  either  cultivation  or  inhabitants  ;  bare  hills 
covered  with  fern,  except  those  surrounding  a  lake.  Ob- 
served broad-leaved  laurel  growing  in  the  hedges,  and 
yesterday  a  species  of  jasmine.  The  auberge  very  bad  as 
usual. 

Saturday,  20th. — Arrived  at  Eome  at  twelve  o'clock. 
The  approach  to  it  by  no  means  agreeable.  All  the 
houses  in  the  faubourg  without  the  gates  wretched.  Found 
the  lasciar  passare  lying  for  us  at  the  gate  ;  a  note  from 
Mr.  Brand  directing  us  to  the  lodgings  he  had  taken  for 
us  at  Madame  Trufina's,  Strada  San  Sebastianello.  They 
consisted  of  an  ante-chamber,  dining-room,  two  bedcham- 
bers for  ourselves,  besides  rooms  for  the  servants  above, 
neatly  and  elegantly  furnished  for  twenty  sequins  a  month, 
including  the  use  of  linen  and  silver. 

*  Built  by  Pope  Pius  VI.  at  Ms  own  cost,  as  an  asylum  for  the  inha- 
bitants of  the  old  town,  which  wa9  afflicted  with  malaria. — Mmray's  Hand- 
book. 


56  MISS  berry's  JOURN'AL.  [17 

In  the  evening  Mr.  Coussmaker,  Mr.  Pitt,  the  Mr.  Ash 
tons,  Sir  J.  Graham,  and  Mr.  Brand  called  upon  us. 

Sunday,  21st. — Went  to  St.  Peter's.  The  approach  i 
it  most  magnificent  and  striking,  not  from  the  immens 
size  of  the  building,  which,  it  has  been  often  and  mo 
justly  observed,  does  not  at  first  strike  you  as  very  extrs 
ordinary,  but  from  its  regularity  and  the  beauty  and  ricl 
ness  of  its  front.  The  same  is  observable  in  the  inside 
the  grandeur  of  the  coup  d'osil  does  not  seem  to  procee 
from  its  immense  length,  but  the  magnificence  and  syn 
metry  of  the  ornaments.  Walked  through  the  great  aisle 
merely  to  get  a  general  idea  of  the  whole.  Sent  oi: 
letters  from  Miss  Gore  to  Baroness  Dieden.  In  the  evei 
ing  to  the  Comtesse  Scarowska,*  Madame  Navasittzoff,  an 
Mons.  Santini  ;  Sir  George  and  Lady  Warren,f  Mr.  Cousi 
maker,  Baron  and  Baroness  Dieden,  Mr.  Hallet,  Mr.  Pe 
tingal,  Mr.  Eepington,  Sir  J.  Graham,  and  Mr.  Brand. 

Monday,  22nd. — Went  to  the  Campidoglio.  In  th 
evening  visited  Lady  Knight,J  Madame  Scarowska,  Lad 
Warren. 

Tuesday,  23rd. — In  the  morning  at  St.  Peter's,  and  t 
see  Angelica  Kaufinaan's  §  pictures.  In  the  evening,  at  th 
Princess  Santa  Croce's  conversazione,  we  were  presented  b 

*  It  is  probable  that  Miss  Berry  may  have  -written  this  name  of  Scaro-wsl 
for  that  of  Skavronsky,  well  known  in  the  history  of  Russia ;  and  in  175 
the  Russian  minister  at  Naples  was  Count  Paul  Skavronsky. 

f  Sir   George  "Warren,   made   K.B.   1761 ;  married   Jane,   daughter 
Thomas  Revel,  Esq.,  East  Mitoham,  Sun-ey.    Their  only  daughter  and  he 
married,  in  1777,  Viscount  Bulkeley ;  died  1826. 

X  Mother  of  Miss  Cornelia  Knight,  whose  '  Memoirs  '  were  published  ■ 
1861. 

§  Mary  Angelica  Kauffinan,  born  1740,  at  Coire  in  Switzerland.  SI 
was  instructed  in  painting  by  her  father,  who  took  her  for  further  improve 
ment  to  Italy.  From  Venice  she  accompanied  Lady  Wentworth  to  Englan 
where  she  received  the  most  liberal  patronage,  and  became  a  Member  of  tl 
Royal  Academy.  She  married,  1781,  A.  Zucchi,  a  Venetian  artist ;  died 
Rome,  1807.  During  Joseph  II.'s  visit  to  Rome,  he  purchased  two  pictur 
from  this  celebrated  artist. — BiograpMe  TJniverselle. 


]7S3]  VISIT   ST.  PETEE'S.  57 

Lady  Warren  to  Cardinal  Bernis.*  The  emperor  f  there ; 
he  had  arrived  about  midday  in  Eome  without  any  cou- 
rier, entirely  unexpected  either  by  the  pope  or  by  his 
ov/n  minister.  Half  an  hour  after  he  arrived  he  had  a 
long  conference  with  the  pope,  and  went  with  him  and 
prayed  in  St.  Peter's.  Two  cushions  were  put  down  for 
them,  side  by  side  ;  the  emperor  put  his  aside,  and  knelt 
upon  the  bare  stones.  His  countenance  is  lively  and 
pleasing,  and  his  manner  easy  and  affable ;  his  whole 
deportment,  however,  is  not,  I  think,  without  a  degree  of 
pride  which  would  prevent  one's  ever  forgetting  the 
emperor  in  Comte  Falkenstein.  Supped  at  Lady  War- 
ren's with  a  number  of  English.  Began  Italian  with  Signor 
Dalmazzoni,  at  six  sequins  a  month,  to  come  every  day 
to  one  or  other  of  us. 

Thursday,  2bth. — Went  to  St.  Peter's  with  the  Coun- 
tess Scarowska  to  see  the  pope  perform  high  mass.  A 
part  of  the  choir  was  divided  from  the  rest  by  hangings 

*  Bernis,  Francis  Joachim  de  Pierres,  Count  of  Lyons,  and  a  cardinal  and 
statesman  of  France,  bom  at  Marcel  de  I'Ai'declie,  1715,  of  an  ancient  family, 
patronised  by  Cardinal  de  Fleury,  then  prime  minister,  but  refused  promo- 
tion on  account  of  his  indifferent  morals.  '  You  can  have  no  expectation  of 
promotion  while  I  live,'  said  the  Cardinal.  '  Sir,  I  can  wait,'  replied  the 
young  abb^,  making  a  profound  bow.  He  was  afterwards  introduced  by 
Madame  Pompadour  to  Louis  XV.  He  was  ambassador  from  France  to 
Venice ;  but,  falling  out  of  favour,  resigned  his  mission,  and  went  into 
exile ;  returned  to  France  in  1764,  and  made  archbishop  of  Alby ;  and,  five 
years  afterwards,  was  sent  ambassador  to  the  court  of  Rome.  Dm-ing  his 
residence  there,  his  house  was  the  general  rendezvous  of  strangers  of  dis- 
tinction, and  many  English  travellers  bore  testimony  to  his  hospitality.  In 
1791  the  aunts  of  Louis  XVI.,  driven  from  their  country  by  the  Revolution, 
took  up  their  abode  for  a  time  with  hiin.  The  Revolution  robbed  him  also 
of  his  possessions,  as  he  refused  to  take  the  oaths  then  required.  The  court 
of  Spain  settled  a  pension  on  him.  He  died  at  Rome,  November  1794,  in 
the  80th  year  of  his  age.  His  poems  gave  him  admission  into  the  French 
Academy  before  he  rose  in  the  world.  Frederick  the  Great  ridiculed  his 
poetry  in  the  following  line  :  '  Evitez  de  Bernis  la  sterile  abondance.'  Vol- 
taire had  a  high  opinion  of  Bernis'  talents  ;  their  correspondence  was  pub- 
lished in  1799.  The  cardinal's  works,  in  verse  and  in  prose,  have  been  often 
printed. — Extracted  from  Chalmers'  Biographical  Dictionary. 

t  The  Emperor  of  Germany,  Joseph,  second  son  of  Francis  and  Maria 
Theresa. 


58  MISS   berry's   journal.  [17S3 

of  crimson  velvet,  fringed  with  gold,  at  the  upper  end  of 
which  was  the  pope's  throne,  under  a  canopy  of  the  same 
materials,  and  opposite  to  it  the  altar  under  the  great 
baldequin.  On  one  side  was  another  great  chair,  up 
several  steps,  under  a  canopy,  in  which  the  pope  first 
made  his  appearance  and  dressed  himself  before  he  went 
to  the  throne.  The  floor  was  covered  with  green  cloth, 
and  the  steps  up  to  the  altar  with  a  very  fine  carpet, 
embellished  with  the  present  pope's  arms ;  and  on  each 
side,  from  the  chair  where  he  was  dressed  up  to  the 
throne,  were  three  rows  of  benches  for  the  cardinals, 
bishops,  and  prelates.  The  cardinals  sat  in  the  second, 
and  under  them  the  prelates,  who  each  held  the  mitre  of 
the  cardinals  under  whom  they  sat. 

The  emperor  and  the  King  of  Sweden,*  who  had 
arrived  the  night  before,  were  both  there.  There  was  a 
gallery  prepared  for  them,  but  they  did  not  choose  to 
make  use  of  it,  and  stood  together  against  one  of  the 
pillars  of  the  great  baldequin  facing  the  pope's  throne. 
The  emperor's  deportment  was  the  most  serious  and 
respectful  that  can  be  imagined ;  he  spoke  very  httle, 
was  attentive  to  what  was  going  on,  knelt  when  the 
rest  of  the  people  knelt,  crossed  himself  twice,  and  had 
every  external  mark  of  decent  devotion.  The  King  of 
Sweden  talked  a  great  deal,  was  more  eager  to  see  every 
part  of  the  show,  knelt  more  awkwardly,  and  bowed  less 
low.  It  is  impossible  for  me  to  remember  in  their  order, 
or  attempt  to  describe,  the  various  manoeuvres  of  the 
grandest  and  best-acted  pantomime  that  can  be  imagined. 
The  pope,  after  he  had  had  a  robe  of  some  sort  of 
light  white  silver  tissue  and   several  other  habiliments 

*  Gustavus  III.,  born  1746,  ascended  the  throne  1771.  A  conspiracy 
was  formed  against  him  by  Counts  Horn  and  Ribbing,  Colonel  Lilienhorn, 
and  a  nobleman  named  Ankerstroem,  who  undertook  to  murder  him ;  he 
chose  a  masked  ball  at  Stockholm  as  the  best  opportunity  for  carrying  out 
his  intention,  and  on  the  16th  of  March,  1792,  he  shot  the  king  through  the 
body.     He  expired  on  March  29th. 


1"83]  HIGH   MASS   AT   ST.  PETEE'S.  59 

put  upon  him  in  the  chair  on  one  side,  and  a  mitre 
(exactly  hke  one  of  gilt  paper)  upon  his  head,  went  up 
to  his  throne,  his  train  borne  by  four  prelates.  Here 
he  chanted  a  part  of  the  service  in  a  very  audible  voice, 
one  man,  upon  his  knees,  supporting  the  book  before 
him  ;  another,  kneeling  (though  it  is  broad  daylight), 
holding  a  large  lighted  taper;  a  third  standing  by  to 
prompt  him,  in  case  Ms  infallibility  should  go  wrong  ; 
and  a  fourth  to  turn  the  leaves  of  the  book,  for  he  is  al- 
lowed to  do  no  one  thing  for  himself.  His  mitre  is  taken 
off  his  head  always  before  he  begins  to  pray  or  read,  and 
replaced  when  he  has  done.  His  petticoats  are  settled 
about  his  feet  every  time  he  gets  up  or  sits  down ;  his 
gloves  are  pulled  off  and  put  on  for  him ;  and  when  he 
held  out  his  hands  to  give  a  blessing,  the  sleeve  of  his 
robe  was  held  out  of  his  way.  Two  priests  of  the  Greek 
Church  read  a  part  of  the  service,  standing  on  one  side, 
and  holding  their  book  in  their  hands,  and  then,  after 
kneeling  two  or  three  times,  kissed  the  pope's  foot  (as  did 
the  prelates),  and  then  seated  themselves  round  the  lowest 
step  of  his  throne.  The  cardinals,  when  they  approached 
him,  he  crossed  and  embraced.  The  only  man  seated 
near  him  was  the  cardinal  archbishop  assistant,  who  sits 
upon  a  sort  of  stool  with  a  low  back  close  by  the  throne. 
Three  times  in  the  course  of  the  ceremony  the  pope 
washed  his  hands.  Water  was  brought  him  in  a  gold 
basin,  covered  with  a  white  satin  mantle,  and  preceded 
by  two  people  with  maces  in  their  hands,  and  followed 
by  two  more  with  napkins.  After  chanting  and  praying 
by  turns  several  times,  and  performing  various  other  cere- 
monies, he  went  to  the  altar,  elevated  the  host,  and  took 
the  sacrament  himself.  In  the  meantime  the  cardinal- 
assistant  went  round  with  the  incense  to  all  the  other  car- 
dinals ;  to  each  separately  he  made  a  bow,  which  was 
returned  ;  then  giving  him  three  or  four  puffs  of  the 
incense,  another  mutual  bo\y,  and  then  on  to  the  next. 


60  MISS   BERKY'S   JOURXAL.  [1783 

When  he  had  gone  round,  he  gave  the  incense  to  some 
bishop  or  prelate,  who  went  through  the  same  ceremony 
with  him.  The  pope  then  returned  to  his  throne,  where 
the  wafer  and  wine  were  brought  to  him,  and  he  admi- 
nistered the  sacrament  first  to  the  cardinals,  represented  by 
so  many  of  them ;  then  to  the  Eoman  princes,  represented 
by  Prince  Colonna,  whose  duty  is  always  to  be  by  the 
throne  of  the  pope ;  and  then  to  the  populus  Bomanus^ 
represented  by  four  people  (of  what  sort  I  know  not)  in 
yellow  and  red  robes — quantum  mutatus  ah  illis !  After 
this  he  read  a  Latin  homily,  which  lasted  about  ten 
minutes  ;  he  looked  very  little  at  his  book,  and  delivered 
himself  with  great  expression  and  vehemence.  He  then 
went  again  to  the  altar  and  prayed,  had  the  tiara  or  triple 
crown  put  upon  his  head,  prayed  again,  and  then  was 
seated  in  a  chair  placed  upon  poles,  and  carried  by  ten  or 
twelve  men  dressed  in  crimson,  preceded  by  his  guards, 
down  the  middle  aisle  of  the  church.  By  this  time  he 
was  so  completely  tired  with  the  long  operations  he  had 
gone  through,  that  he  could  hardly  lift  up  his  hand  to 
give  his  benedictions  to  the  crowd  which  surrounded  him. 

There  are  two  rows  of  benches  for  ladies  placed  on 
one  side  within  the  circle  of  guards  ;  the  gentlemen  stand 
on  each  side  about  the  pillars  of  the  baldequin  ;  every- 
body is  obliged  to  have  their  heads  dressed,  and  the 
ladies  are  all  in  veils.  We  saw  so  ill  from,  the  benches, 
that  we  got  permission  to  go  up  into  one  of  the  galleries 
over  the  four  great  niches  of  the  dome,  where  we  had  a 
perfect  view  of  everything  that  was  going  on. 

This  gallery,  which  appeared  from  the  body  of  the 
church  as  if  fifty  steps  would  have  conducted  us  to  it, 
was  at  a  very  considerable  height ;  the  people  in  the  body 
of  the  church  looked  quite  little  from  it ;  but  the  view  of 
that  noble  building,  with  an  immense  crowd  of  people, 
though  not  a  quarter  filling  the  great  aisle,  was  a  magnifi- 
cent spectacle,  and  gave  one  some  idea  of  its  enormous 


1783]  THE    PALAZZO   COLONJTA.  61 

size.  Mass  was  performed  at  the  same  time  at  almost 
every  chapel  in  the  church,  but  they  seemed  to  have  no 
more  to  do  with  the  business  that  was  going  on  at  the 
great  altar  than  if  they  had  been  in  another  part  of  the 
town. 

Went  afterwards  to  Santa  Maria  Maggiore,  where  a 
piece  of  the  creche  in  which  our  Saviour  was  born  is 
always  exposed  for  so  many  days  at  Christmas  on  the 
great  altar,  in  a  fine  gilt  case,  in  which  through  glass  you 
see  the  pieces  of  holy  wood ;  it  is  in  general  kept  in  a 
subterraneous  chapel,  and  is  carried  with  great  pomp  and 
a  long  function  at  midnight  on  Christmas  Eve,  and  placed 
on  the  great  altar.  The  church  is  beautiful ;  the  great 
aisle  put  me  something  in  mind  of  the  Assembly  Eoom 
at  York,  though  it  is  in  much  superior  taste  ;  the  church 
being  dressed,  the  beautiful  marble  pillars  were  all 
covered  with  crimson  damask. 

Went  to  the  church  of  a  convent  at  the  Capitol,  where 
was  a  representation  of  our  Saviour  in  the  manger  and 
the  adoration  of  the  shepherds,  by  very  well-dressed 
puppets  half  as  large  as  life ;  the  church  was  darkened, 
and  the  scenery  behind  the  show  all  lighted  up  in  the 
exact  style  of  a  punchinello  theatre.  Eeturned  home  as 
heartily  tired  with  staring  and  standing  as  ever  I  remem- 
ber to  have  been  in  my  life. 

Mr.  Eepington,  Sir  James  Graham,  Mr.  Brand,  Mr. 
Pitt,  Mr.  Ashetons  dined  with  us — an  English  Christmas 
dinner. 

Friday,  26fA. — Went  to  Moore,  the  landscape  painter,* 
to  the  Palazzo  Colonna;  the  gallery  magnificent,  orna- 
mented with  statues  and  busts  alternately,  and  a  vast 
number  of  pictures,  some  of  the  pictures  beautiful.     In 

.  *  Jacob  Moore,  a  native  of  Edinburgh.  He  went  to  Rome  about  the 
year  1773,  and  there  acquired  a  great  reputation.  His  works  were  much 
overrated  when  compared  to  the  productions  of  Claude  I-orraine. — Edwai'ds's 
Anecdotes  of  Painters. 


62  MISS   BERRl'S   JOURNAL.  [1/83 

the  evening  a  conversazione  and  concert  at  Cardinal  de 
Bernis'.  As  the  emperor  and  king  were  both  to  be  tliere, 
the  crowd  assembled  was  immense ;  the  street  was  illumi- 
nated near  his  house,  and  the  house  completely  so  on  the 
outside  from  top  to  bottom  ;  large  rooms  were  crowded. 
The  king  had  dined  there  and  came  early ;  the  emperor 
not  till  late,  stayed  above  an  hour,  and  then  seized  an 
opportunity  when  he  Avas  speaking  to  no  one,  and  darted 
off  faster  than  anybody  could  attempt  to  follow  him.  He 
was  as  usual  in  his  green  regimentals,  undistinguished  by 
any  star,  and  spoke  to  everybody  he  knew  most  affably, 
not  much  to  the  king,  but  a  great  deal  to  the  cardinal. 
There  was  a  supper  for  the  king,  some  of  his  suite ;  very 
few  ladies,  and  no  EngUsh. 

Saturday,  27th.  —  Saw  the  Pantheon,  the  Stanze  di 
Eafaelli  in  the  Vatican,  and  St.  Peter's  for  the  fourth 
time.  The  portico  of  the  Pantheon  so  surrounded  with 
beggars  and  wretched  objects  of  every  sort,  that  it 
is  with  the  greatest  difficulty  one  can  stand  to  admire 
the  size  of  the  columns ;  the  shape  of  the  Eotuuda  is 
beautiful. 

The  Stanze,  painted  by  Eaphael,  astonished  me  more 
than  I  expected,  perhaps  because  I  had  been  told  they 
would  not  strike  me  at  first.  Fresco  paintings  have 
always  a  lightness  and  beauty  peculiar  to  themselves  ;  and 
these  have  such  a  superiority  in  grouping,  expression,  and 
grace,  as  must  strike  the  most  ignorant  beholder  who  will 
take  the  trouble  to  consider  them. 

The  room  in  which  is  the  School  of  Athens  is  that 
which  has  suffered  most  by  time  and  ill-usage.  It  is  said 
to  have  been  used  as  a  guard-room  for  the  Duke  of  Bour- 
bon's soldiers,  and  that  they  made  a  fire  in  the  middle  of 
the  room,  there  being  no  chimney.  A  group  of  Apollo, 
surrounded  by  all  the  most  eminent  poets  of  antiquity 
and  those  of  his  own  time  in  Italy,  most  beautiful ;  it  is 
painted  in  a  space  which  is  cut  by  the  aperture  of  a  large 


1783]      THE   EMPEROR   OF   GEEMAXY   AT    ST.   PETER'S.  63 

window.  It  is  wonderful  how  he  managed,  on  all  these 
occasions,  to  group  and  connect  his  figures  so  as  to  make 
them  aU  appear  concerned  in  the  action  he  means  to  repre- 
sent. The  Angel  delivering  St.  Paul  from  Prison,  painted 
in  the  same  situation,  has  an  astonishing  effect  of  light  and 
shade  ;  the  glory  and  supernatural  light  which  surrounds 
the  angel,  seen  through  the  prison  bars,  has  the  exact 
effect  of  a  transparent  painting,  and  it  is  with  difficulty  one 
can  persuade  oneself  it  is  not  so.  The  paintings  under 
Eaphael's  pictures,  in  chiaro  oscuro,  all  done  after  his 
design,  and  wonderfully  executed. 

This  suite  of  rooms  have  no  other  furniture  whatsoever, 
and  are  dark  and  dirty ;  they  are  those  the  pope  passes 
through  every  day  in  going  from  the  chapel  to  his  apart- 
ments. He  passed  while  we  were  there  ;  we  pulled  off 
our  riding-hats,  made  an  inchnation  towards  kneehng,  and 
received  a  particular  benediction. 

Walked  in  St.  Peter's  ;  the  oftener  one  enters  this  build- 
ing, the  more  one  is  struck  with  the  magnificence  of  the 
whole,  and  the  proportion  and  beauty  of  the  component 
parts.  Went  down  to  the  tomb  of  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul ; 
it  is  lined  with  the  finest  marbles,  and  there  are  six  lamps 
always  burning  within  the  cupboard  where  the  silver-gilt 
box  is  kept,  in  which  are  the  ashes  of  the  two  apostles. 
The  emperor,  with  one  attendant  only,  was  walking 
about,  staring  like  ourselves  ;  having  seen  us  the  night 
before,  he  came  up  and  spoke  to  us  for  about  ten 
minutes.  The  people  about  soon  discovered  who  he 
was,  and  he  had  immediately  a  train  of  three  or  four 
hundred  beggars  after  him,  which  speedily  drove  him  out 
of  the  church ;  he  had  given  sequins  to  some  of  them, 
which  raised  the  whole  community,  and  he  had  a  crowd 
for  ever  round  his  lodgings,  an  indifferent  house  at  the 
corner  of  the  Piazza  di  Spagna.  He  refused  to  lodge  at 
his  own  minister's,  and  would  neither  dine  nor  sup  with 
anybody. 


64  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1783 

Sunday,  28^A. — Went  to  the  Colosseum  ;  it  is  sur- 
rounded by  turf,  and,  though  within  the  walls  of  Eome, 
seems  to  be  quite  in  the  country.  Its  size,  though  I  had 
seen  models  and  views  of  it,  and  expected  it  great,  sur- 
prised me — one  can  easily  conceive  it  holding  '  uncrowded 
nations  in  its  womb.'  The  arena  is  covered  with  turf, 
and  there  is  a  large  cross  in  the  middle,  and  I  know  not 
how  many  little  chapels  all  round  it,  to  sanctify  and  make 
it  holy  ground.  The  Arch  of  Constantine  is  close  by,  the 
bassi  rehevi  upon  the  upper  part  very  little  damaged, 
and  most  beautiful ;  the  ground  is  so  much  raised  about 
it,  that  half  the  bases  of  the  columns  are  buried. 

Walked  from  thence  by  the  Arch  of  Titus,  through  the 
Campo  Vaccino  (the  Forum  of  the  Eomans),  to  the  Arch 
of  Severus ;  the  ground  here  is  so  much  raised,  that  in 
Severus's  Arch  half  the  shafts  of  the  columns  are  buried, 
and  the  three  pillars  of  Jupiter  Tonans,  just  by  it,  are  not' 
a  fourth  part  out  of  the  ground.  In  the  Campo  Vaccino 
one  more  especially  feels  oneself  in  ancient  Eome,  sur- 
rounded at  every  turn  by  monuments  of  Eoman  grandeur. 
The  three  admired  columns  of  Jupiter  Stator  stand  in  the 
midst  of  much  dirt ;  neither  their  base  nor  plinth  is  above 
ground.  They  have  put  iron  round  and  between  them, 
that  they  may  as  long  as  possible  escape  the  injuries  of 
time. 

Monday,  22th. — Walked  through  the  Vatican  hbrary  ; 
the  keeper  not  being  there,  we  could  only  look  with  as- 
tonishment at  the  range  of  apartments  in  which  it  is  con- 
tained.   The  rooms  are  all  plain,  one  excepted,  painted  in 

fresco  by ,*  and  the  books  are  all  in  painted  wooden 

presses. 

The  Sistine  Chapel  is  where  the  pope  hears  mass  every 
Sunday.  The  ceiling  is  painted  by  Michel  Angelo  with 
stories  from  the   Old  Testament,    and   the  whole  side 

*  Scipione  Cajetani,  Paris  Nogari,  Cesare  Nebbia. 


1783]  TBAJAN'S  COLnMN.  65 

of  the  chapel  is  covered  with  his  famous  Last  Judgment, 
it  has  almost  lost  its  colours  ;  and  though  the  ideas  and 
imagination  of  such  a  piece  -are  astonishing,  and  the  ana- 
tomy of  the  figures  immediately  strike  one  as  remarkable, 
one  wonders,  but  is  not  charmed. 

In  the  evening,  the  Opera  Aliberti.  Theatre  much 
ornamented,  and  cleaner  than  most  Italian  theatres  ;  the 
scenery  excellent.  Had  I  not  before  known  that  no 
women  are  admitted  upon  the  stage  in  Eome,  I  should 
not  perhaps  have  found  it  out ;  the  men  who  act  there 
are  so  well  dressed,  and  made  up  with  red  and  white, 
and  are  so  much  less  awkward  than  might  be  expected ; 
the  danseuses  detestable.  King  of  Sweden  sat  above  half 
an  hour  in  our  box. 

Tuesday,  ZOth. — ^Went  to  the  top  of  Trajan's  Column, 
160  steps.  They  are  hewn  out  of  the  same  block  with 
the  Pillar,  and  neither  dark  nor  dirty.  The  base  of  the 
column  is  above  twenty  feet  below  the  surface  of  the 
street  where  it  stands.  It  is  enclosed  with  a  modern 
brick  wall,  like  a  well,  round  it,  the  base  beautifully 
ornamented  with  military  trophies ;  and  the  basso-relievos 
upon  the  pillar,  in  spite  of  the  injuries  of  time,  won- 
derful. 

Palazzo  Eospigliosi.  On  the  ceiling  of  a  casino  in  the 
garden  is  Gmdo's  famous  Aurora,  painted  in  fresco ;  it  is 
in  good  preservation,  and  its  grace,  gaiety,  and  appear- 
ance of  motion  exceed  either  imagination  or  description. 
In  another  room  in  the  same  casino,  a  large  picture 
by  Domenichino — David,  Saul,  and  a  group  of  females  ; 
the  figure  of  David  dignified  and  beautiful.  In  the 
palace,  Guido's  Andromeda  chained  to  the  Eock ;  heads  of 
the  Twelve  Apostles,  and  our  Saviour  by  Eubens ;  and 
the  Five  Senses  of  Carlo  Cignani,  expressed  by  a  female 
figure  with  five  children — one  she  is  suckhng,  another 
holds  a  rose  to  her  nose,  a  third  rings  a  httle  beU  at  her 
ear,  &c.     Opera  at  the  Argentina. 

VOL.  I.  F 


66  MISS   BEKRY'S   journal.  [1783 

Saw  the  ancient  granite  Obelisk,  which  is  taken  from 
the  mausoleum  of  Augustus,  and  going  to  be  erected 
between  the  two  horses  on  Monte  Cavalli,  with  a  foun- 
tain before  it;  and  for  which  purpose  the  horses  have 
been  turned,  from  standing  thus  |  |  ,  side  by  sidcj  to 
stand  /  \ .  *  Workmen  were  polishing  the  piUar,  and 
mending  it  where  it  had  been  broken. 

Went  through  the  Colouna  Gardens.f  There  remain 
in  the  gardens  two  immense  blocks  of  white  marble, 
pieces  of  a  frieze  and  cornice  belonging  to  the  ancient 
building,  the  size  and  workmanship  of  which  may  serve 
to  give  an  idea  of  its  former  magnificence. 

*  Mr.  Murray  states,  in  Ms  '  Hand'book  of  Rome/  that  this  obelisk  was 
here  erected  in  1786,  by  Antinori,  in  the  pontificate  of  Pius  VI.  He  also 
mentions  that  '  the  statues  were  restored  and  placed  as  we  now  see  them  by 
Antinori,  in  the  time  of  Pius  VI.'  It  would  appear,  by  Miss  Berry's 
jonmal,  that  both  changes  were  made  in  1783. 

t  The  Colonna  Palace  was  begun  by  Otto  Oolonna.  He  was  elected  pope 
on  St.  Martin's  Day,  and  took  the  name  of  Martin  V. 


1784]  PKESENTEB   TO   THE   POPE.  67 


JOURNAL. 

1784. 

Thursday,  January  1,  1784. — Presented  to  the  Pope 
by  the  Princess  Santa  Croce,  together  with  the  Marquise 
Montefermeil  and  the  Comtesse  Stolberg,  a  Danish  cha- 
noinesse.  We  were  all  full  dressed  with  black  gauze  veils. 
We  were  to  have  been  in  St.  Peter's  before  twelve  o'clock, 
but  one  of  the  ladies  not  being  ready,  we  did  not  get 
there  tiH  near  one,  and  were  therefore  obliged  to  wait  in 
the  chapel  of  the  St.  Sacramento  tiU  the  Pope  had  done 
his  prayers  in  the  church.  He  passes  through  this  chapel 
every  day  to  the  Vatican :  when  he  came  we  stood  in  a 
row,  Princess  Santa  Croce  made  a  curtsey,  then  went 
down  upon  her  knees,  and  made  a  motion  with  her  hands 
as  if  to  touch  his  foot :  he  immediately  said  '  Alza,  alza,' 
and  she  rose.  We  then,  one  after  another,  did  the  same 
as  she  named  our  names  :  he  then  stood  and  talked  to  us, 
or  rather  to  her,  in  ItaUan  for  seven  or  eight  minutes, 
asked  if  we  could  speak  Itahan,  supposed  we  were  learn- 
ing it,  we  should  find  it  easy,  how  long  we  had  been 
here,  &c.  As  we  were  none  of  us  good  Italians,  most  of 
these  questions  were  addressed  to  and  answered  by 
Princess  Santa  Croce.  He  then  said  he  would  not  de- 
tain us  longer ;  we  made  low  curtseys,  and  he  departed 
without  giving  us  the  blessing  which  I  expected.  He  was 
attended  by  a  number  of  monsignors,  &c.,  who  permitted 
nobody  to  come  into  the  chapel  but  ourselves. 

Dined  at  the  Senator's :  a  large  party.  After  coffee, 
Sante  played  and  sang  some  of  the  airs  out  of  his  own 
Olympiade  with  wonderful  expression  and  taste. 

p2 


68  MISS   BBEHY'S   JOUKKAL.  [l784 

Friday,  2nd. — In  the  morning,  the  Villa  Borghese ; 
the  outside  covered  with  ancient  basso-relievos  and  statues 
in  niches,  the  inside  so  rich  in  statues,  mosaics,  marbles, 
pictures,  and  every  species  both  of  ancient  and  modern 
magnificence  that,  at  the  first  cursory  view,  one  is  dazzled 
and  lost  in  the  number  of  things  worthy  of  observation. 
The  ornamenting  the  rooms  all  done  by  the  present 
prince,  who  though,  I  am  told,  not  a  man  of  taste,  has 
now  a  sort  of  pride  in  making  it  the  first  thing  of  the 
kind  in  Europe,  and  lays  by  a  sum  of  money  to  be  yearly 
expended,  during  his  hfetime,  in  its  embellishment ;  and 
he  is  employing  all  the  celebrated  modern  artists  to  fit  up 
rooms  for  him.  Hamilton*  is  doing  one  with  the  story 
of  Paris,  beginning  with  his  birth  and  finishing  with  his 
death.  Moore  another,  with  landscapes.  Hackertf  another, 
in  the  same  way.  The  painting  and  fitting  up  of  the 
Fighting  Gladiators' room  cost  36,000  crowns,  and  that  of 
the  gallery  52,000  crowns.  The  gardens  perfectly  adapted 
to  the  climate,  fine  avenues  of  evergreen  oaks  and  fountains, 
all  ornamented  with  numbers  of  ancient  statues  :  they  are 
much  frequented  as  a  pubhc  walk :  the  day  we  were  there, 
three  or  four  carriages  were  waiting  at  the  doors.  The 
prince  never  goes  there  but  to  look  how  the  workmen  are 
going  on  ;  lives  almost  entirely  in  Bome.  In  the  evening. 
Cardinal  Bernis'  conversazione. 

Saturday,  Srd. — Went  to  St.  John  Lateran — the  aisles 
too  narrow.     The  Borghese  Chapel  most  beautiful.     The 

*  Gavin  Hamilton  was  descendeij  from  an  ancient  Scottish  family.  He 
resided  at  Rome  the  gi'eater  part  of  his  life.  He  was  distinguished  as  a 
promoter  of  art,  a  collector  of  antiquities,  and  as  an  artist.  His  best  pic- 
tures are  taken  from  the  Iliad.  He  published  an  interesting  work,  entitled 
'  Schola  Italica  Pittura,'  to  show  the  progress  of  ait  from  the  time  of  Leo- 
nardo da  Vinci  to  that  which  succeeded  the  school  of  the  Caracci  in  1797. — 
Bryants  Dictionary  of  Painters. 

t  James  Philip  Hackert,  a  Prussian  painter  and  engraver,  born  1734, 
studied  landscape  under  Le  Sueur,  went  to  Italy  in  1766,  resided  many  years 
at  Rome,  where  he  painted  views  of  the  environs.  The  King  of  Naples  ap- 
pointed him  his  principal  painter. — Ihid. 


1784]  ST.    JOHN   LATEEAN.  69 

Scala  Santa,  in  a  separate  building  near  the  church,  with 
a  chapel  at  the  top,  which  no  woman  ever  enters,  and 
which  is  generally  locked.  We  saw  two  poor  men,  one 
like  a  countryman,  the  other  Uke  a  servant  out  of  place, 
ascend  the  stairs  with  every  mark  of  humiliation  and 
great  inward  contrition  and  misery;  they  said  a  short 
prayer  at  every  step,  and  kissed  every  place  marked  by  a 
cross  where  they  suppose  the  blood  had  fallen :  but,  to 
the  disgrace  of  this  enlightened  age,  or  rather  of  the 
Eoman  Catholic  religion,  this  ceremony  is  stiU  performed 
by  people  who  ought,  by  their  education,  to  be  above 
such  fooleries  or  supposing  them  agreeable  to  the  Creator. 
The  Princess  D.  and  her  daughter  (a  young  girl)  were  seen 
by  the  King  of  Sweden  ascending  these  steps  upon  their 
knees,  praying,  kissing  the  cross,  &c.,  their  footman  be- 
hind going  through  the  same  operation.  It  must  be  re- 
membered, however,  that  the  Princess  D.  is  a  notorious 
bigot,  and  for  these  some  years  past  has  been  entirely 
governed  by  a  mean  and  ignorant  priest,  who  has  made 
himself  more  master  of  the  palace  than  the  prince  him- 
self, and  amassed  a  considerable  fortune,  and  yet  is  such  a 
perfect  blackguard  that  he  does  not  even  make  his  ap- 
pearance when  there  is  company  in  the  house. 

Sunday,  4:th. — Palazzo  JCistiniani :  the  suites  of  apart- 
ments shown  are  not  better  kept  than  an  auberge ;  fine 
pictures,  all  dust,  against  bare  walls,  without  frames,  and 
good  busts  in  little  niches,  in  windows  where  they  cannot 
be  seen,  and  placed  without  any  order  upon  the  floor 
round  the  room  :  a  Saint  fed  by  Eavens,  beautiful,  by 
Guido ;  St.  John  writing  his  Gospel,  by  Domenichino — •■ 
the  book  supported  by  an  angel,  the  drapery  fine^the 
face  of  St.  John  fuU  of  enthusiasm ;  a  smaU  group  of  the 
Murder  of  the  Innocents,  by  one  of  the  Caracci,  ill  drawn, 
but  the  expression  wonderful — one  could  not  look  at  it 
without  pain.  In  the  wall  on  the  staircase,  a  basso- 
rehevo,  Amalthea  feeding  the  infant  Jupiter  out  of  her 


70  MISS   BEEEY'S   JOUENAL.  [1784 

cornucopia  :  the  figure  and  drapery  of  Amalthea  and  the 
ease  and  nature  of  the  infant  beautiful. 

To  the  Pantheon — a  second  time  :  the  ancient  brass  and 
other  metal,  which  covered  the  upper  part  between  the 
top  of  the  pillars  of  the  recesses  to  the  arch  of  the  rotunda 
remained  till  Pope  Barberini  had  it  stripped  off,  and  was 
going  to  apply  it  to  his  own  private  use ;  but  the  clamour 
was  so  great  that  he  was  obliged  to  put  the  money 
into  the  public  treasury.  The  following  words  appeared 
upon  Pasquin  on  the  subject :  '  Quod  non  fecerunt  Bar- 
bari  fecerunt  Barharini.'  Supped  at  the  Maltese  ambas- 
sador's. 

Monday,  bth. — Saw  the  pictures  and  drawings  of  La- 
bruzzo*,  a  young  Italian  landscape  painter;  his  drawings 
seem  good,  his  pictures  too  green  and  gaudy.  Supped  at 
Cardinal  Bernis'. 

Tuesday,  Qth. — In  the  evening  a  conversazione  at  the 
Princess  Doria's,  at  which  was  present  the  Duchess  of 
Parma  f  (who  had  arrived  in  Eome  from  Naples  the 
night  before),  as  well  as  the  King  of  Sweden :  the  whole 
first  story  was  open  and  lighted  up,  the  company  for  the 
most  part  in  the  galleries,  which  were  filled  but  not 
crowded  by  so  great  a  number  of  people.  We  were 
presented  to  the  duchess  by'  the  Princess  Santa  Croce. 
She  is  tall,  well-made,  like  the  emperor,  but  not  near  so 
well-looking,  iU  and  oddly  dressed,  rather  masculine  in 
her  voice  and  manner,  mixed  with  a  considerable  degree 
of  hauteur.  The  king  and  she  played  a  great  pool  at 
commerce,  and  afterwards  went  to  a  supper  at  Cardinal 
Bernis'. 

Wednesday,  7th. — ^Went  with  Mr.  Moore,  the  painter, 

*  Pietro  Labruzzi,  or  Labrosse,  bistorisal  and  landscape  painter,  brother  of 
Carlo  Labruzzi,  also  an  artist. 

t  Maria  Amelia,  daughter  of  the  Emperor  Francis  and  the  Empress  Maria 
Theresa,  sister  to  the  Emperor  Joseph  II.,  here  mentioned,  and  to  the  Queen 
of  Naples.  Married  the  Duke  of  Parma ;  died  1815.  Duke  of  Parma  died 
1802. 


1784]  eaphael's  ascension.  71 

to  Mr.  Dernot's,  a  history-painter,  to  Mr.  Hamilton's,  &c., 
and  to  a  painter  of  fans.  Bought  two  of  the  ruins  of 
Eome  for  a  sequin  apiece.  Mr.  Pitt,  Mr.  Asheton,  and 
Mr.  Moore  dined  with  us. 

Thursday,  Sth. — The  evening,  supper  at  the  Portuguese 
ambassador's. 

Friday,  9th. — St.  Peter  in  Montorio,  where  is  Eaphael's 
famous  picture  of  the  Ascension.  Like  all  Eaphael's 
pictures,  the  longer  you  consider,  the  more  you  admire 
it.  In  a  side  altar  of  the  same  church  is  a  picture  by 
Fiamengo  (the  putting  our  Saviour  into  the  sepulchre) ; 
the  light  and  shade  of  the  body,  and  the  expression  of 
the  two  men  supporting  it,  wonderful.  The  church 
belongs  to  a  convent  of  Franciscans,  in  which  there  are 
no  less  than  eighty.  In  a  court  of  the  convent  is  a  little 
round  temple,  with  a  colonnade  round  it  supported  on 
granite  piUars,  erected  by  Philip  III.,  King  of  Spain,  on 
the  spot  where  'tis  said  St.  Paul  was  crucified.*  The 
building'  is  pretty  much  Uke  a  temple  in  a  garden  in 
England. 

Saturday,  10th. — Saw  the  pictures  in  the  Capitol ; 
many  seemed  to  me  very  bad.  Guido's  Fortune  flying 
over  the  Globe — a  boy  endeavouring  in  vain  to  retain 
her,  a  crown  in  one  hand,  a  sceptre  and  palm  leaves  in 
the  other — beautiful ;  the  Wolf  suckhng  Eomulus  and 
Eemus — Eubens — the  wolf  life  itself  ;  a  St.  Sebastian, 
Guido — the  expression  of  enthusiasm  and  beauty  in 
the  face,  exquisite ;  Guido's  Bacchus  and  Ariadne — the 
figures  of  Ariadne,  Venus,  and  the  head  of  Bacchus  ex- 
quisite. This  picture,  hke  many  of  his,  has  certainly  been 
left  unfinished ;  some  of  the  boys  in  the  background  are 
all  of  one  colour,  and  the  ground  and  rocks  are  a  sort  of 
grey,  instead  of  their  natural  colours.  It  is  said  the  original 
of  this  picture  was  lost  on  board  a  ship,  in  being  trans- 

*  This  is  stated  in  '  Murray's  Handbook '  to  have  been  built  by  Ferdinand 
of  Spain. 


72  MISS   BEEEY'S  JOUENAL.  [1784 

ported  from  some  place  to  another,  and  that  this  was  a 
copy  made  by  Guido  assisted  by  his  pupils.  The  Sibylla 
Persica,  by  Guercino— beautiful,  but  not  so  charming  as 
that  at  Florence. 

In  the  evening,  the  Teatro  della  Valle,  where  there  is 
an  Italian  comedy  of  three  acts,  and  an  intermezzo  of 
music,  that  is  to  say,  an  opera  bufia  between  the  acts ; 
the  music  was  some  of  the  prettiest  of  the  Idnd  I  ever 
heard.  The  comedy,  if  one  might  judge  from  the  bursts 
of  laughing  it  excited,  very  droll ;  but  between  the  noise 
made  in  the  house  and  my  imperfect  knowledge  of  the 
language,  I  lost  much  of  it. 

Villa  Borghese.  Apollo  and  Daphne  in  the  hall ;  Catius, 
a  basso-relievo,  exquisite;  Silenus  embracing  an  infant 
Bacchus  ;  Centaur  with  Cupid ;  Fighting  Gladiators — one 
'  arm  broke  in  two  places,  the  other  at  the  shoulder ;  a 
Muse  leaning  upon  a  pillar  of  rock  ;  basso-relievo  of 
Venus  and  Cupid  rising  from  the  sea,  &c.  &c.  The  gal- 
lery hned  and  paved  with  the  finest  marbles.  Busts  of 
Juba,  Berenice,  Cleopatra,  Lucius  Verus. 

The  painting  the  gallery  in  the  Farnese  Palace  is  sup- 
posed to  have  partly  caused  the  death  of  Caracci.  With- 
out fixing  any  price  he  set  about  it,  and  employed  both 
himself  and  all  his  best  pupils — Domenichino,  Albano, 
&c.  &c. — nearly  seven  years  in  perfecting  the  work, 
never  doubting  that  the  Farnese  family,  who  had  em- 
ployed him,  would  settle  a  pension  upon  him,  or  keep 
him  in  their  service.  When  finished,  instead  of  paying 
him  according  to  the  excellence  of  the  work,  some  greedy 
people  without  taste  advised  them,  as  no  prices  had  been 
agreed  on,  to  make  a  valuation  of  his  labour  and  time, 
and  pay  him  as  you  would  pay  a  house  painter.  This  ill 
usage  is  said  to  have  so  deeply  affected  him,  that  he  took 
to  drinking,  and  never  painted  anything  great  afterwards.* 

*  He  was  paid  only  500  gold  crowns,  or  1207.,  for  his  labours. — Murray' a 
Handbook, 


1784]  VISIT   TO   THE   FAENESE   PALACE.  73 

Sunday,  11th. — Saw  the  Farnese  Palace;  the  apart- 
ments dismantled;  nothing  remains  but  a  few  ceilings 
painted  in  fresco,  which  could  not  be  removed ;  that  of 
the  gallery,  certainly  the  most  perfect  I  ever  saw,  by 
A.  Caracci,  assisted  by  Domenichino,  &c. ;  not  only  all  the 
great  compartments,  but  all  the  smaller  divisions,  thermes, 
ornaments,  &c.,  exquisitely  painted.  The  imitations  of 
stucco  figures  wonderful.  Of  the  large  pictures,  the 
Triumph  of  Bacchus  and  Ariadne,  Hercules  and  lole, 
Aurora  in  her  Car  with  Cephalus,  Mercury  giving  the 
Apple  to  Paris,  those  that  pleased  me  most.  In  the  court 
of  this  palace  are  the  two  famous  statues  of  the  Flora  and 
the  Hercules  Parnese  ;  they  are  both  much  larger  than  hfe. 
The  Flora,  an  easy  graceful  figure,  and  the  drapery  which 
is  beautiful,  shows  the  whole  form  without  affected  plaits.* 
The  Hercules,  though  appearing  overcharged  in  the 
muscles  for  a  man,  may  justly  represent  a  demi-god  im- 
mortalised on  account  of  his  strength.  There  is  another 
Hercules  exactly  in  the  same  attitude  on  the  other  side 
the  door,  called  the  JSTemean  Hercules,  from  having  the 
mane  of  the  lion  on  his  club.  This  is  said  to  be  a  modern 
one,  made  before  the  other  was  found  from  Pliny's  de- 
scription :  if  true,  'tis  wonderful  how  exactly  the  artists 
have  agreed  in  their  ideas.  The  ancient  Hercules  was 
found  f  without  legs.  Guglielmo  della  Porta  was  employed 
to  restore  them  ;  in  which  he  succeeded  so  perfectly  that, 
when  the  original  legs  were  afterwards  found,  M.  Angelo 
declared  it  was  unnecessary  to  replace  them,J  and  they 
stUl  remain.  §  The  Toro  Farnese  is  in  a  shed  behind  the 
palace,  much  too  small  to  allow  it  to  be  seen  to  advantage  ; 

*  Found  in  the  ruins  of  the  Batha  of  Caracalla ;  now  in  the  Museo 
Borbonico  at  Naples. 

t  Found  va.  the  ruins  of  the  Baths  of  Caracalla  in  1540. 

X  Della  Porta  executed  and  added  the  missing  limbs,  from  models  in  terra 
cotta  by  Michael  Angelo.  The  original  legs  were  discovered  twenty  years 
later  in  a  well ;  they  are  now  restored  to  the  statue. 

§  Removed  to  Naples  in  1786. 


74  MISS   BEEEy'S   JOUEKAL.  [1784 

it  was  intended  to  have  been  put  in  the  gardens,  but  the 
palace  being  no  longer  inhabited,  it  has  never  been  re- 
moved. The  block  of  marble  most  astonishing.  Saw  the 
Farnesina,  a  lesser  palace  of  the  King  of  Naples,  which  is 
exactly  in  the  same  state  of  ruin  as  the  other ;  the  ceiling 
of  the  vestibule,  painted  by  Eaphael  and  his  pupils,  beau- 
tiful as  to  design  and  grouping ;  but  Carlo  Maratti,*  who 
was  employed  to  repair  them,  put  so  deep  a  ground  of 
blue  that  it  has  given  the  pictures  a  harshness  of  outhne 
not  natural  to  them.  In  another  room  is  the  Venus  Cal- 
lapyge,f  a  much-admired  statue  :  the  attitude  to  me  is 
not  a  pleasant  one,  the  drapery  very  pretty.  A  Head  in 
chalk  by  M.  Angelo,  sketched  upon  the  wall  in  the  same 
room. 

Tuesday,  IZth. — Dined  with  the  Countess  Scarowsky, 
and  set  off  all  together  at  2  o'clock  p.m.  for  Naples,  with 
a  voiturier  :  we  paid  sixteen  sequins  for  four  mules  for 
our  carriage. 

Arrived  at  Prince  Ghigi's  palace  at  Lerici,  eighteen  miles 
from  Eome,  at  7  o'clock,  permission  having  been  obtained 
from  the  prince  for  us  to  have  beds  and  everything  we 
should  want  there.  It  is  a  noble  house,  dehghtfuUy 
situated  a  mile  beyond  Albano  ;  the  rooms  are  furnished 
almost  like  an  English  villa,  and  surrounded  by  a  large 
deer-park  full  of  fine  wood. 

Wednesday,  lAth. — Left  the  palace,  dined  in  our  car- 
riages at  Torre  di  Quattro  Ponti,  where  the  nmles  stopped 
to  rest  at  a  miserable  inn.  The  new  road  to  Terracina 
is  excellent.  Terracina  (the  Ansur  of  the  ancients)  is  a 
beautiful  town,  close  upon  the  sea-shore,  with  fine  whitq 
rocks  rising  behind  it. 

Thursday,  Ibth. — Dined  at  Mola  di  Gaeta,  situated  im- 

*  Carlo  Maratti.  bom  1625,  pupil  of  Andrea  SaccU ;  died  president  of  the 
Academy  of  St.  Luke,  at  Rome,  at  tlie  age  of  eighty-eiglit,  in  171.3. 
t  Now  in  the  Museum  at  Naples. 


1784]  CAPUA — KAPLES.  75 

mediately  upon  the  sea,  which  here  forms  a  fine  bay, 
hills  rising  behind  it,  and  surrounded  by  fine  orange 
gardens,  and  large  ohve  trees  growing  almost  to  the  water 
edge.  The  auberge  wretched:  all  the  poor  people  in  the 
town  were  trooping  into  a  room  there,  where  a  man  was 
showing  the  representation  of  a  saint  in  wax  :  it  was  the 
figure  of  a  poor  wretched  sickly-looking  man,  almost  in 
rags,  standing  with  a  book  in  his  hand,  most  admirably 
done  in  wax  ;  there  was  a  hght  burning  before  him,  and 
all  the  poor  people  were  on  their  knees  at  a  rail  round  the 
figure. 

Arrived  at  Sta.  Agata  before  7.  The  whole  way  from 
Terracina  most  beautiful,  the  mountains  all  covered  with 
myrtle-bushes ;  the  road,  great  part  of  the  way,  through 
hedges  composed  of  myrtle,  laurestinas,  arbutus,  phyllarea, 
a  broad-leaved  jasmine,  and  a  bush  I  was  not  acquainted 
with.  Picked  crocuses  and  anemones  by  the  road-side,  and 
observed  in  a  grass-field  the  polyanthus,  narcissus  in  full 
bloom,  and  in  the  hedges  several  eglantine  roses  in  blow. 

Friday,  \&ih. — Dined  at  Capua  ;  all  the  rooms  in  the 
auberge  having  an  abominable  smell ;  we  mounted  up  a 
sort  of  ladder  from  the  upper  story  to  the  top  of  the 
house,  where  we  had  chairs  and  a  table  brought,  and 
dined  en  pleine  air  :  the  sun  shone,  and  it  was  so  warm, 
that  the  water  we  were  drinking  soon  became  unpleasantly 
heated. 

Arrived  at  Naples  about  5  p.m.  The  country  near  it 
all  in  the  highest  cultivation,  fine  corn-fields,  full  of  vines 
trained  up  large  elm-trees,  and  often  twisted  in  festoons 
from  one  to  another.  The  approach  to  Naples  has  every 
appearance  of  that  to  a  populous  and  great  metropohs. 
Above  two  miles  from  it  you  enter  a  string  of  houses  which 
join  to  the  suburb;  the  road  is  fuU  of  carriages,  and  people 
and  everything  looked  gay  and  busthng.  We  had  written 
to  have  lodgings  taken  for  us,  and  to  have  a  letter  left  at 


76  MISS  BEERY'S  JOUEKAL.  [1784 

the  gate,  saying  where  we  were  to  go  ;  but  gates  there 
are  none,  so  we  entered  the  town,  not  knowing  where  to 
go,  and  were  obliged  to  wait  in  the  Grande  Place  till 
Stuart  found  some  of  the  English  servants  :  from  them 
we  learnt  that  our  letter  had  never  been  received,  and  no 
lodgings  taken  for  us,  but  that  we  could  have  apartments 
in  the  house  where  Sir  G.  Warren  was  lodged.  It  was  by 
this  time  dark  ;  it  was  above  a  mile  and  a  half  off,  and  I 
began  to  think  we  should  never  arrive  there.  Sir  G.  and 
Lady  Warren  came  to  see  us ;  Mr.  Brand  and  Sir  J.  Graham, 
Mx.  Pitt,  and  the  Ashetons. 

Saturday,  17th.  —  Out  all  the  morning  looking  for 
lodgings,  of  which  there  were  few  unengaged,  and  all 
very  bad :  fixed  at  last  in  the  H6tel  de  France,  St.  Lucia, 
the  rooms  dirty  and  indifferently  furnished.  In  the 
evening  Mr.  Clark  and  Lady  Warren  called.  Left 
our  three  letters  to  Marchese  Ferrante,  Duchessa  Castel 
Pagano,  and  Princessa  Belmonte.  Called  on  Madame 
Scarowsky. 

Sunday,  18th.— A  most  violent  storm  of  wind  and  rain  ; 
it  blew  in  and  broke  all  the  windows  in  our  apartments, 
which  looked  to  the  sea ;  we  were  obliged  to  shut  the 
blinds  and  dress  by  candlelight.  Dined  at  Lord  Tylney's  * 
with  most  of  the  Enghsh  who  were  in  Naples,  it  being 
our  queen's  birthday.  Came  home  after  dinner  and  put 
on  our  bahuts,  and  went  with  Lady  Warren  to  Princess 
Belmonte's  box  at  the  Florentine  theatre,  where  an  opera 
bufFa  is  represented.  The  house  is  small,  but  gay 
and  light,  almost  every  box  having  candles  in  it.  The 
opera :  most  pleasing  music  of  the  Hvely  sort.  After  it 
was  over,  to  a  masked  ball  at  the  great  theatre.  The  pit, 
boarded  over,  makes  a  magnificent  salle,  which  is  illumi- 

*  RicliardCliildTylney,  Viscount  Castlemain,  Baron  Newtown;  succeeded 
in  1750,  and  was  the  son  of  Richard,  first  Earl,  and  of  Dorothy,  daughter 
of  Francis  Tylney,  of  Rotherwick,  co.  Southampton.  The  name  was 
changed  from  Child  to  Tylney,  1735 ;  title  extinct.  Seat,  Wanstead 
House. 


1784]  CAPO   DI   MONTE.  77 

nated  by  a  vast  number  of  chandeliers  and  large  wax 
candles  placed  before  looking-glass,  round  the  whole  six 
rows  of  boxes.  As  the  weather  was  very  bad,  there  were 
not  above  300  or  400  people  exclusive  of  those  in  the 
boxes,  which  were  almost  all  occupied.  After  taking  a 
turn  below  stairs,  we  went  up  to  Princess  Behnonte's  box, 
and  then  supped,  near  thirty  people,  in  a  salle  behind,  of 
which  Prince  Belmonte,  as  being  grand  maitre  to  the 
king,  has  the  use. 

Monday,  IQ^A.^In  the  morning,  went  with  a  num- 
ber of  Enghsh  to  Capo  di  Monte.  The  hill  is  so  steep 
that,  having  only  two  horses  to  the  carriage,  we  were 
obliged  to  walk  up.  No  beauty  about  the  architecture  ; 
within  is  a  labyrinth  of  quite  unfurnished  rooms,  of 
which  the  bare  walls  are  covered  with  innumerable  pic- 
tures, some  good,  some  bad,  and  many  indifferent,  all 
without  frames,  placed  without  order,  and  most  wretchedly 
neglected ;  a  portrait  of  Parmigiano's  Maid,  by  him- 
self, a  most  pleasing  picture ;  the  Deposition  in  the 
Sepulchre,  by  A.  Caracci ;  a  Magdalen,  by  Guido ;  and  a 
Saint,  by  Guercino.  In  this  palace  is  the  collection  of 
medals,  some  fine  cameos  and  intaglios,  and  the  famous 
Agate  Cup,  with  the  Medusa's  head  on  one  side  and  figures 
on  the  other,  the  workmanship  of  which,  and  the  natural 
beauty  of  the  stone,  exceeds  description.  There  is  hke- 
wise  a  large  collection  of  drawings,  and  so  many  pictm-es, 
that  before  I  had  got  above  half  through  the  apartments 
I  lost  all  power  of  observing  anything  particularly.  In 
the  evening,  called  on  Madame  Scarowsky ;.  went  to 
Princess  Belmonte's  assembly;  myself  the  only  Enghsh 
person  in  the  room. 

Tuesday,  20^A.— A  violent  storm  of  rain  and  wind ; 
this  is  the  fourth  day  of  the  continuance  of  incessant  rain, 
accompanied  by  the  highest  wind  I  ever  heard. 

Wednesday,  21st. — The  rain  and  wind  continuing  as 
violent  as  ever,  we  did  not  attempt  stirring  out ;  in  the 


78  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1784 

evening  called  on  Madame  Eeventlow,  Lady  Warren,  and 
Madame  Scarowsky. 

Thursday,  22nd. — Went  to  the  courts  of  justice  ;  heard 
pleadings  in  three  civU  and  one  criminal  court.  The  last 
very  interesting,  as  the  plaintiff  spoke  very  distinctly,  and 
I  understood  for  the  most  part  what  he  said.  They  all 
spoke  with  great  vehemence  and  gesticulation,  but  ge- 
nerally very  ungraceful ;  all,  however,  with  fluency  and 
without-  any  hesitation  or  stammering.  There  are  said 
to  be  40,000  people  belonging  to  the  law  in  Naples ; 
go  to  the  courts  of  justice,  and  one  can  easily  believe  it. 
The  crowds  of  wretched  starved  faces  to  be  seen  there  in 
bands  and  black  gowns  is  astonishing :  it  was  with  diffi- 
culty, though  attended  by  several  gentlemen,  we  could 
push  our  way  through  them.  In  the  courts  that  were 
sitting  the  judges  were  very  pohte  to  us  :  we  stood  behind 
their  chairs,  between  their  table  and  the  bar.  Women,  I 
fancy,  very  rarely  make  a  part  of  their  audience,  for 
every  creature  seemed  to  look  round  vrith  astonishment 
at  us. 

In  the  evening,  called  on  Madame  Scarowsky  ;  went  to 
the  Teatro  di  Fondo  vdth  Princess  Belmonte ;  it  was  three 
boxes  laid  together  ;  they  can  at  any  time  take  down  the 
partitions,  which  are  only  hooked  on.  The  Teatro  di 
Fondo  is  a  comic  opera,  performed  for  the  benefit  of  a 
fund  pensioning  the  widows  of  officers.  The  music 
pretty,  but  none  of  the  voices  remarkable. 

Friday,  2^rd. — In  the  morning,  at  the  Museum  at 
Portici.  We  had  time  only  to  take  a  cursory  view  of  the 
rooms.  The  household  utensils,  &c.,  &c.,  are  prettily 
arranged.  We  spent  the  longest  time  amongst  the  pic- 
tures, all  of  them  pieces  of  the  wall  at  Herculaneum  and 
Pompeii,  which  have  with  great  care  and  pains  been  cut 
out  and  placed  in  cases  with  glass  before  them.  They 
are  to  me  an  incontestable  proof  that  the  ancients  had 
carried  the  art  of  painting  to  almost  as  high  a  degree  of 


17S4]  THE   MUSEUM   AT   POETICI.  79 

perfection  as  that  of  sculpture.  The  expression,  grace, 
and  grouping  of  their  figures  are  astonishing.  Their 
drawing  is  for  the  most  part  not  strictly  correct ;  but  we 
must  suppose  that  the  first-rate  artists  were  not  employed 
to  paint  the  walls  in  a  little  country  town.  The  two 
equestrian  statues  in  stone  of  Balbus  and  his  son,  who 
were  proconsuls  of  Herculaneum,  and  who  on  account  of 
their  good  administration  had  these  statues  erected  for 
them  in  the  town,  were  found  very  little  damaged.  They 
are  now  placed  in  the  open  arcade  of  the  palace  at 
Portici  opposite  one  another.  They  are,  in  the  ease  and 
spirit  both  of  the  horse  and  rider,  most  beautiful  eques- 
trian statues ;  both  exactly  in  the  same  dress  and  atti- 
tude. 

In  the  evening  to  the  Academy.  This  is  a  great 
meeting,  but  the  company  are  divided  into  so  many 
rooms  at  play,  that  the  music  room  is  never  too  crowded ; 
it  is  upon  an  easy,  excellent,  plan ;  nobody  sitting  in 
rows,  even  in  the  music  room,  but  in  httle  parties  and 
circles,  as  they  find  it  agreeable.  Too  much  noise  niade 
to  hear  the  music. 

Saturday,  24?A. — At  shops  in  the  morning. 

Evening,  at  home.  Mr.  Pitt  and  Mr.  Asheton  called, 
&c.  &c. 

Sunday,  26th. — ^In  the  morning  to  see  the  Cathedral,  a 
very  bad  sort  of  Gothic,  without  any  beauty  whatsoever. 
The  Chapel  of  St.  Januarius  wonderfully  fine,  but  being 
Sunday  there  were  so  many  people  there  that  we  could 
not  well  see  it.  The  Church  of  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul, 
in  the  front  of  which  are  two  columns ;  they  formerly 
made  part  of  the  pediment  of  the  temple  of  Castor  and 
Pollux,  which  was  overturned  by  an  earthquake  in  1686. 
They  are  white  marble  fluted,  with  fine  Corinthian  capi- 
tals. In  the  front  of  the  building  are  two  torsos  of 
ancient  statues,  belonging  to  the  same  temple,  and  which 
the  Neapolitans  have  stupidly  sunk  in  the  wall.     In  the 


80  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1784 

evening,  at  a  small  concert  given  by  Count  Eosanmofsky, 
the  Eussian  minister.  Millico*  and  La  Balducci  sang. 
Afterwards  to  the  Festino  ;  supped  in  Princess  Belmonte's 
box. 

Monday,  2%ih. — In  the  morning,  Portici.  Evening,  the 
Florentine  Theatre ;  the  opera  ('  Che  d'  Altrui  si  veste 
presto  si  spogHa'),  the  prettiest  of  comic  operas,  and  La 
Cottellina  the  first  comic  actress. 

Tuesday,  27th. — In  the  morning  to  the  Grotto  del  Cane, 
a  small  hollow  in  the  side  of  the  mountain,  shut  up  with 
a  door ;  a  peasant  keeps  the  key,  and  has  a  dog  always 
ready  to  undergo  the  experiment  of  being  put  into  the 
vapour.  This  poor  animal  has  already  had  three  years 
of  it,  and,  at  a  moderate  computation,  he  has  been  killed 
a  hundred  times  a  year.  In  about  three  or  four  minutes' 
time,  being  held  down  to  the  steam,  he  is  in  violent  convul- 
sions, and  immediately  afterwards  has  every  appearance 
of  being  dead:  upon  being  brought  again  into  the  air, 
his  lungs  begin  to  play  violently,  and  in  four  or  five 
minutes'  time  he  is  perfectly  recovered.  The  steam  rises 
about  seven  or  eight  inches  from  the  ground ;  above  that, 
gunpowder  wiU  take  fire,  a  candle  burn,  and  the  air  is 
not  pernicious.  The  steam,  and  the  ground  from  whence 
it  rises,  is  so  warm  that  standing  on  it  is  like  being  over 
the  steam  of  warm  water. f  The  Lake  Agnano  (near 
the  Grotto  del  Cane)  is  indisputably  the  crater  of  an  old 
volcano  :  it  is  one  of  the  finest  situations  imaginable, 
surrounded  with  sloping  hiUs  beautifully  clothed  with 
wood.  It  is  full  of  water-fowl  of  every  kind,  kept  for 
the  diversion  of  the  king ;  it  is  the  punishment  of  the 
galleys  for  hfe  if  anybody  fires  a  gun  in  that  neighbour- 
hood.    Walked    from    thence  to  Astroni,  the  crater  of 

*  Giuseppe  Millico,  well  known  aa  a  singer  and  as  a  composer,  bom  1760. 
In  1774  he  sang  in  London  with  great  success.  In  1780  he  was  attached  to 
the  court  of  Naples  as  singer  to  the  king, 

t  Grotto  del  Cane,  Far.  therm.  74°. 


1784]  HOT   SPRINGS   OF  THE   PISCIAKELLI.  81 

another  volcano ;  it  is  now  walled  in,  and  made  a  park 
for  the  king's  hunting.  It  is  a  hollow,  four  miles  round, 
covered  with  fine  wood,  and  the  hiUs  rising  precipitately 
on  every  side.  The  inner  cone,  always  observable  in 
volcanos,  stiU  remains  in  the  middle  of  the  hoUow,  and  is 
now  covered  with  fine  trees. 

From  thence  to  what  the  Neapohtans  called  the 
Pisciarelli.  In  the  side  of  the  mountain,  at  every  cre- 
vice, there  gushes  out  a  smoking  vapour,  so  hot  that 
it  is  impossible  to  keep  the  hand  near  it.  At  one  cavity, 
larger  than  the  rest,  is  heard  the  water  boihng  up  with 
the  greatest  violence,  as  if  it  were  close  to  the  ear,  and 
there  runs  from  it  a  small  stream  of  boihng  hot  water. 
There  are  several  httle  puddles  in  which  Fahrenheit's 
thermometer  rose  to  the  height  of  boiling  spirits.  The 
edges  of  all  the  crevices  from  whence  the  vapour  issues 
are  encrusted  with  nitre,  and  the  boiling  water  is  of  a 
white  milky  colour. 

In  the  evening  at  the  Academy.  The  baU  nights  are 
upon  the  same  easy  footing  as  the  concert — everyone 
making  their  own  little  party. 

Wednesday,  2^ih. — In  the  morning  with  Madame  Sca- 
rowsky  to  see  two  Precipios.  These  are  representations 
of  the  Nativity  of  our  Saviour,  the  Adoration  of  the  Magi, 
&c.  &c.,  by  httle  figures  about  eight  inches  high,  made 
of  terra  cotta  coloured  to  the  life,  and  dressed  more  neatly 
than  I  ever  saw  a  miUiner's  model.  These  are  made 
about  Christmas  time  by  societies  of  people,  or  some- 
times by  individuals,  as  a  sort  of  act  of  devotion  ;  every- 
body has  liberty  to  come  and  see  them.  They  remain 
till  the  next  Christmas,  when  they  newly  group,  add  to, 
and  differently  arrange  the  same  figures.  It  is  impossible 
to  give  an  idea  how  much  these  things  please  by  the 
expression  thrown  into  the  figures,  the  neatness  of  their 
dress,  and  the  perfect  proportion  between  them  and  the 
objects  about  them — buildings,  ruins,  caves,  cattle,  horses, 

VOL.    I.  G 


82  MISS   BEREY'S   journal.  [1784 

fruit,  pots  and  pans,  &c.,  &c.  The  perspective,  too,  is 
wonderful,  for  the  scene  is  generally  carried  on  upon  the 
flat  tops  of  two  or  three  houses,  and  you  see  a  distant 
view,  apparently  as  far  as  your  eye  can  reach,  of  build- 
ings, figures,  and  cattle,  all  in  nice  proportion ;  the  fore- 
ground figures  admirably  grouped,  and  much  expression 
and  spirit  both  in  their  faces  and  attitudes.  In  the  even- 
ing, Theatre  St.  Carlo. 

Thursday,  29th. — In  the  evening  went  with  Princess 
Belmonte  to  pay  our  respects  to  the  grande  maitresse  of 
the  ceremony — an  attention  always  observed  before  one 
is  presented. 

Friday,  SOth. — Set  out  between  8  and  9  a.m.  for  Pom- 
peii,* with  Sir  George  and  Lady  Warren,  Mr.  Musgrave,  Mr. 
Coussmaker,  Mr.  Brand,  and  Mr.  Clerk.  Spent  four  hours 
and  a  half  in  visiting  the  interesting  remains  of  this  town, 
which  are  a  good  deal  dispersed,  as  they  have  dug  first 
at  one  end  and  then  at  another,  and  left  the  middle  stiU 
covered  with  its  shower  of  ashes,  upon  the  top  of  which 
are  now  flourishing  vineyards. 

This  inscription  is  upon  a  stone  tablet  on  the  lesser 
theatre  at  Pompeii : — 

C.    QUINCTIITS   C.    F.    TADQ. 

M.    POKCITJS   M.    F. 

DUO    TIE.    DEO.    DECK. 

THEATRUM.    TECTUM 

FAC    LOCAE   FIDEMQ.   PEOB. 

Inscription  upon  a  funeral  monument,  close  on  the 
road-side,  nearly  opposite  the  entrance  into  the  Casino  at 
Pompeii.^  The  last  hne  in  much  smaller  letters  than  the 
other  two,  except  the  T  marked  larger  in  Magister : — 

M.    ARBIUS    S.    L.    DIOMEDES 
SIBI.    SUIS.    MEMOEIjE 
MAGISTeK.   TAG.   ANG.   FELIX   SUB.    UKB. 

*  Pompeii  was  destroyed  a.d.  79.    Excavations  were  first  begun  in  1755. 


1784]  PRESENTATION   TO   THE   QUEEN.  83 

Dined  under  the  trees.  The  peasants  of  a  little  cottage 
in  the  vineyard  brought  us  a  bench  and  chairs,  some 
wine,  water,  and  two  or  three  plates  and  an  omelette. 
It  was  one  of  the  finest  days  I  ever  beheld.  The  road 
to  Pompeii  is  very  pleasant,  quite  round  the  Bay  of 
Naples.  About  seven  miles  from  Naples  crossed  a  stream 
of  lava,  above  half  a  mile  broad,  which  ran  from  Vesu- 
vius in  1760,  from  seven  mouths,  on  the  south  side  of  the 
great  mountain.  It  has,  as  yet,  hardly  a  quarter  of  an 
inch  of  soil  upon  it,  and  is  perfectly  bare,  black,  and 
rugged,  giving  one  a  clear  idea  of  the  perfect  devastation 
these  dreadful  streams  carry  along  with  them,  and,  at  the 
same  time,  of  the  length  of  time  it  requires  to  re-fertihse 
the  soil. 

Saturday,  2,1st. — Eeceived  a  note  from  Princess  Bel- 
monte  at  9  in  the  morning,  saying  we  were  to  be  presented 
to  the  queen*  at  four  thkt  day.  Neither  gowns  nor  trim- 
mings were  begun  to  be  made.  Set  the  mantua-maker 
and  milliner  to  work  directly,  and  we  were  ready  before 
four  in  gowns,  which  were  untouched  at  10  o'clock  in 
the  morning.  Went  with  Princess  Belmonte  and  Ma- 
dame Eeventlow  (who  was  likewise  to  be  presented)  to 
the  palace,  where  we  waited  for  about  a  quarter  of  an 
hour  in  an  antechamber,  when  Princess  Belmonte  waa 
called  forward  to  the  queen,  who  stood  just  within  the 
door  of  an  apartment,  two  distant  from  us.  After  she 
had  spoken  to  her  for  a  minute  or  two,  she  returned 
and  took  in  Madame  Eeventlow,  who  had  an  audience 
of  about  ten  minutes  ;  when  she  came  back,  we  went  in 
together,  and  stayed  near  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  The 
queen  spoke  a  great  deal  to  us ;  she  is  very  gracious  in 
her  manner,  and  very  ready  at  the  conversation  necessary 

*  Caroline,  wife  of  Ferdinand  TY.,  daughter  of  the  Emperor  Joseph  II. 
and  the  Empress  Maria  Theresa. 

6  2 


84  MISS    BEEKY'S   JOTJENAL.  [1784 

upon  such  an  occasion.  She  was  quite  alone,  the  attending 
ladies  being  in  an  outward  room,  and  stood  the  whole 
time  just  at  the  door.  After  we  came  out,  Lady  Ehza- 
beth  Poster  *  was  presented  by  Princess  Perrohta,  and 
Madame  Scarowsky  and  her  niece  by  the  Duchesse  Castel 
Pagano  ;  but  they  had  much  shorter  audiences  than  ours. 
Eeturned  home ;  changed  our  dress,  and  went  to  St. 
Carlo. 

Sunday,  February  \st. — In  the  evening  at  the  Floren- 
tine Theatre,  afterwards  to  the  Pestino ;  supped  in  Prin- 
cess Belmonte's  box  with  the  King  of  Sweden ;  waited 
upon  by  soldiers,  which  is  likewise  the  custom  at  all  the 
courts,  dinners,  and  entertainments.  They  were  very 
shabbUy  dressed,  which  one  would  suppose  soldiers  often 
about  the  person  of  a  king  ought  not  to  be. 

Monday,  2nd. — Dined  at  Mr.  Morier's,  in  the  evening 
St.  Carlo,  and  afterwards  to  a  supper  for  the  King  of 
Sweden  at  the  Eussian  minister's. 

Tuesday,  Srd. — A  bah  at  court,  at  which  everybody  is 
obhged  to  be  in  domino,  most  of  which  were  bespoken 
in  such  a  hurry  that  they  were  not  brought  home  till  the 
moment  before  they  were  wanted.  The  suite  of  apart- 
ments was  magnificent  and  well  hghted ;  the  queen  sat 
for  about  an  hour  in  the  dancing-room,  and  then  went 
into  another  room  and  played  vingt-un  with  the  King  of 
Sweden,  foreign  ministers.  Lady  Warren,  Princess  Bel- 
monte,  &c.,  &c.  The  King  of  Naples  was  very  little  in 
the  ball-room,  but  played  macao  in  another  room.  Lord 
Tylney  was  of  his  party.  Before  the  queen  went  to 
cards  she  walked  round  the  room  and  spoke  to  us  aU, 
and  after  cards  were  over  she  again  walked  about  the 
dancing-room,  and  spoke  much  to  everybody.     The  king 

*  Daughter  to  Frederick  Augustus  Hervey,  Lord  Bishop  of  Derry,  and 
fourth  Earl  of  Bristol.  Married  first  to  John  Thomas  Foster,  Esq. ;  se- 
condly, to  William,  fifth  Duke  of  Devonshire,  Oct.  1809.  Died  30th  March, 
1824. 


1784]  CASEETA,  85 

too  returned  to  the  ball-room,  but  spoke  very  little  to 
anybody.  There  was,  a  supper,  to  which  no  strangers 
were  asked  but  the  King  of  Sweden  and  his  suite. 

Wednesday,  Ath. — Supper  for  the  King  of  Sweden  at 
Prince  Belmonte's  after  the  opera;  between  forty  and 
fifty  people  there. 

Thursday,  hth. — Supper  at  the  Imperial  minister's 
after  the  opera. 

Friday,  %ih. — The  Accademia,  at  which  there  was  both 
a  concert  and  a  bah.  The  Queen  of  Naples  and  the 
King  of  Sweden  were  there.  There  could  not  be  less 
than  a  thousand  people.  The  queen  moved  about 
a  good  deal,  and]  spoke  to  everybody.  There  was  after- 
wards a  private  supper  at  court  for  the  king  and  his 
suite. 

Saturday,  7th. — Set  out  for  Caserta  with  Sir  G.  and 
Lady  Warren,  Mr.  Musgrave,  Mr.  Eepington,  and  Mr. 
Clerk.  The  palace  there — the  largest,  I  believe,  in  Eu- 
rope— the  architecture  not  in  good  taste.  In  the  great 
front  the  pediment  is  too  smaU.  The  grand  staircase  is 
under  the  centre  of  arches,  which  unite  the  four  quad- 
rangles of  which  the  building  is  composed,  and  is  mag- 
nificent. Not  an  eighth  part  of  the  building  finished  in 
the  inside ;  they  are  going  on  with  it  by  slow  degrees. 
The  furniture  of  the  king  and  queen's  apartments  neat 
and  elegant,  all  covered  with  Enghsh  carpets.  The 
theatre  of  the  palace,  which  was  the  part  first  finished, 
very  gay  with  gilding  and  painting.  The  great  chapel 
not  finished ;  it  is  all  magnificence  of  marble  and  paint- 
ing, but,  like  everything  else,  in  bad  taste.  The  pedestal 
of  the  columns  almost  half  their  length. 

It  rained  so  iminterruptedly,  that  though  we  went  to 
the  aqueduct,  it  was  impossible  for  the  ladies  to  get  out 
of  the  carriages.  It  is  thrown  over  a  deep  valley  five 
miles  from  Caserta,  to  convey  the  water  from  Spezzia, 
thirty-one  miles  distant  from  the  palace.     It  was  finished 


86  MISS  BEEBY'S  JOUENAL.  [1784 

in  1752,  by  the  present  Eng  of  Spain,*  and  consists 
of  three  rows  of  arches,  on  the  top  of  which  the  water 
runs  in  a  covered  channel.  Eat  our  cold  dinner  in  a 
clean  apartment  in  the  palace  belonging  to  a  civil  woman, 
who  gave  us  plates,  &c.,  &c. 

Eeturned  to  Naples  before  7  p.m.  in  a  continued 
deluge  of  rain.  The  road  from  Naples  to  Caserta  excel- 
lent, and  through  a  very  rich  country,  producing  at  the 
same  time  wine  and  corn — the  vines  growing  up  and 
twisted  from  tree  to  tree,  and  the  corn  growing  beneath. 
The  trees  planted  for  the  vines  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Naples  are  poplars,  placed  so  near  one  another  that  in 
summer  a  vineyard  must  be  a  complete  forest.  Went 
to  a  supper  at  the  Marchese  Lambucca's,  the  first  minister 
of  finance  ;  it  was  numerous— more  Itahans  there  than  at 
any  of  the  other  suppers. 

Monday,  9th. — In  the  morning,  Virgil's  tomb.  The 
ground  on  which  it  stands  is  laid  out  in  vineyards ;  it  is 
situated  upon  the  very  edge  of  the  rock,  and  as  the 
grotto  of  Pausilippo  is  supposed  to  be  much  deeper  now 
than  it  was  formerly,  it  might  at  one  time  have  been,  like 
most  ancient  tomlDs,  by  the  road-side  ;  everything  about 
it  is  romantic  and  beautiful.  The  tomb  is  of  ancient 
brickwork,  and  there  are  still  withiu,  little  niches  for  the 
deposition  of  sepulchral  urns,  though  it  is  highly  pro- 
bable much  more  ignoble  ashes  than  those  of  Virgil  have 
reposed  there,  for  there  is  no  satisfactory '  reason  given 
for  supposing  this  to  be  his  tomb,  and  the  want  of  faith 
took  away  much  of  my  enthusiasm  in  seeing  it.  Upon 
the  summit,  which  is  reached  by  a  broken  ladder,  is  a 
variety  of  shrubs  and  plants,  among  which  the  laurel 
certainly  does  not  flourish.  Whether  it  disdains  by  its 
evidence  to  confirm  a  falsity,  or  is  constantly  destroyed 
by  the  too  great  veneration  of  the  pilgrims  to  this  spot,  I 
cannot  take  upon  me  to  determine. 

*  Ctailes  in.,  aon  of  PhiUp  V.    Died  1788. 


1784]  THE   CATACOMBS.  87 

The  church,  of  Sanazzar,  where  is  the  tomb  of  the  poet 
Sanazzar,*  upon  which  is  a  tortured  epitaph  by  Bembo.f 
The  tomb  badly  executed.  In  the  evening,  supper  at,  the 
Portuguese  minister's. 

Tuesday,  lOiA. — Theatre  St.  Carlo,  and  a  supper  at 
Lord  Tylney's,  to  which  all  the  Englishmen  were  in- 
vited. 

Wednesday,  llth. — Supper  at  the  Maltese  minister's. 

Thursday,  12th. — Dined  at  the  Eussian  minister's  villa 
at  Portici.  The  King  of  Sweden  and  his  suite  went  that 
day  to  Pompeii,  and  the  dinner  was  prepared  for  him  on 
his  return.  The  house  is  ornamented  with  prints  almost 
hke  an  Enghsh  vUla,  and  the  party  remarkably  pleasant, 
perhaps  because  it  was  without  form,  and  we  were  aU  in 
riding  habits  and  great  coats.  When  we  returned  be- 
tween eight  and  nine,  paid  a  visit  to  Princess  Belmonte, 
who  was  sick  and  received  company :  she  was  then  upon 
a  couch,  but  the  night  before  the  King  of  Sweden  and 
aU  his  siiite  had  been  to  pay  their  compliments  to  her 
in  bed. 

Saturday,  14:th. — In  the  morning  to  see  the  Catacombs, 
and  an  immense  building  called  the  Studio  PubbHco,  to 
which  aU  the  museum  from  Portici,  and  all  the  books, 
pictures,  medals,  cameos,  &c.,  &c.,  from  Capo  di  Monti 
are  to  be  removed.    The  library  is  nearly  finished. 

The  Catacombs,  interesting  and  curious  ;  not  a  doubt 
can  remain  in  one's  mind  "but  that  they  were  at  first  the 
necessary  excavations  made  for  building  and  repairing  a 
great  city,  and  afterwards  continued  to  form  subterraneous 
passages ;  a  custom  much  in  vogue  in  a  country  where  the 
heat  of  the  chmate  rendered  them  particularly  useful, 

*  Jacobo  Sanezzaro,  poet ;  bom  at  Naples,  1458.  His  family  of  Spanish, 
origin.  His  cMef  work  in  Italian  is  the  'Arcadia/  and  in  Latin,  ' De  Partu 
Virginia.'    Died  1530. 

t  Cardinal  Bembo.  Bom  at  Venice,  1470.  The  author  of  a  -work  on  the 
Italian  language,  and  other  works  in  prose  and  verse.    Died  at  Venice,  1552. 


88  MISS  berry's   journal.  [1784 

and  the  matter  they  had  to  penetrate  was  particularly 
soft :  one  of  the  passages  is  said  to  have  gone  from 
Naples  to  a  distance  of  fifteen  miles  :  they  are  aU  now 
bricked  up,  and  one  entrance  only  left,  as  they  used  to 
be  a  refuge  for  thieves,  &c.,  &c.  The  sides  of  the  walls 
are  full  of  niches  for  cofiins  of  all  sizes.  By  the  infinite 
numbers,  one  would  suppose  that  a  nation  had  been 
buried  there.  The  silence  and  darkness  which  reigns  in 
these  souterrains,  together  with  the  idea  of  their  being 
a  place  of  tombs,  make  a  strong  impression  upon  the 
mind.  A  large  cave,  used  for  rope-making,  is  a  great 
excavation  in  sohd  tufa. 

Sunday,  \bth. — ^Puzzuoh,  with  Baron  Amfelt  and  Mr. 
De  la  Grange.  The  road  from  Naples  excellent,  ahnost 
the  whole  way,  along  the  edge  of  the  Gulf  of  PuzzuoH, 
the  most  beautiful  view  imaginable :  upon  the  right  hand 
the  Cape  Misenum,  on  the  left  the  islands  of  Nicita  and 
the  Lazzaretto.  At  Puzzuoh,  the  Temple  of  Jupiter  Se- 
rapis ;  an  amphitheatre  ;  an  ancient  statue  in  the  street, 
and  the  pedestal  of  another,  with  some  pretty  figures  in 
basso-rehevo,  much  defaced  ;  three  or  four  marble  Corin- 
thian columns,  the  remains  of  a  temple  of  Juno,  which 
now  form  a  part  of  the  waU  of  the  principal  church ; 
the  mole,  or,  as  it  is  vulgarly  called,  the  Ponte  di  Cahgula. 
The  Temple  of  Serapis  is  a  curious  relic  of  antiquity; 
great  pieces  of  the  marble  frieze  are  proofs  of  its  former 
magnificence.  The  three  standing  pillars  which  remain 
are  unequal  both  in  their  height  and  circumferences, 
though  no  part  but  the  capital  is  wanting  to  make  them 
complete.  About  the  middle  of  the  columns  there  is  a 
space  of  five  or  six  feet  much  corroded,  and  fuU  of  those 
holes  and  perforations  which  we  know  are  made  by  a 
soft  sea-worm,  and  which  gives  reason  to  suppose  that  at 
some  period  this  temple,  though  now  half  a  quarter  of  a 
mile  from  the  sea,  must  have  been  overflowed  when  the 
lower  part  of  the  columns  were  buried  in  the  earth.    The 


1784]  THE   SOLFATEERA.  89 

rest  of  the  columns  of  the  temple  that  are  thrown  down 
and  lying  about  have  all  the  same  marks  of  having  been 
in  part  exposed  to  the  effects  of  the  sea. 

The  amphitheatre  is  as  large  as  the  Colosseum  at  Eome ; 
nothing  now  remains  but  the  outer  walls  and  the  colon- 
nade where  the  animals  were  kept,  which  are  a  quarter 
of  a  mile  round ;  the  arena  is  now  a  vineyard ;  all  the 
seats,  &c.,  are  entirely  destroyed. 

Went  from  Puzzuoh  to  Solfaterra,  upon  a  hill  above 
it.  It  is  the  crater  of  an  ancient  volcano,  which  preserves 
its  form  entire,  but  has  ceased  burning :  its  sides  stiU 
§moke  through  many  crevices,  and  there  is  one  large  hole 
under  which  can  be  heard  the  water  running  and  boiling ; 
the  same  surely  which  boils  up  at  the  Pisciarelli,  upon  the 
other  side  of  the  hills  which  form  the  mouth  of  this 
crater.  A  large  stone  thrown  with  violence  upon  the 
groimd  makes  a  report  exactly  like  distant  artillery, 
proving  the  ground  to  be  hoUow.  The  middle  of  the 
crater  is  still  without  cultivation,  perfectly  flat,  and  white 
like  the  floor  of  a  room. 

Tuesday,  17th. — Ball  at  court.  The  three  eldest  prin- 
cesses and  the  eldest  prince  were  present,  and,  in  comph- 
ment  to  the  King  of  Sweden,  in  the  Swedish  dress. 

Wednesday,  18th. — Went  to  Baia  with  the  King  of 
Sweden.  The  day  turned  out  too  ba;d  to  make  a  torn"  of 
the  antiquities  that  remain  there,  and  what  we  did  see 
was  in  continued  rain.  The  king's  good  humour,  con- 
versation, and  Kttle  attention  to  the  weather,  and  the 
necessary  inconveniences  attending  it,  very  pleasing. 
Supped  at  the  Eussian  minister's. 

Thursday,  19th. — To  the  Lago  d'  Agnano  and  the 
Pisciarelli  in  a  phaeton,  with  my  father  and  sister.  In 
the  evening,  the  Florentine  Theatre ;  at  the  Pestino,  in 
Princess  Belmonte's  box,  to  see  a  ballet  by  ladies  and 
gentlemen. 

Friday,  20th. — In  the  morning  at  Cuma,  with  Sir  G. 


90  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1784 

and  Lady  Warren,  Mr.  Musgrave,  Mr.  Eepington,  Mr. 
Coussmaker,  Mr.  Brooke  and  Parkinson,  Mr.  Pitt  and 
Mr.  Asheton.  Went  all  in  open  carriages,  and  dined  upon 
the  side  of  the  bank  overlooking  Lake  Avernus. 

Saturday,  21sf. — In  the  morning  at  Castel  St.  Elmo,  a 
castle  upon  a  rock  behind  the  town ;  the  view  on  aU  sides 
superb,  particularly  that  towards  Baia  and  the  Gulf  of 
Puzzuoli.     In  the  evening,  a  ball  at  court. 

Sunday,  22nd The  Corso,  which  was  crowded;  the 

view  up  the  Toledo  of  all  the  balconies  and  windows, 
crowded  with  heads,  striking.  Drank  tea  with  Madame 
Eeventlow.  Florentine  Theatre  and  afterwards  Festino,  at 
which  there  was  a  grand  ballet  of  twenty-four  cavahers 
and  twelve  ladies,  meant  to  represent  some  of  the  gym- 
nastic games  of  Greece.  They  were  very  well  dressed, 
and  performed  their  parts  well.  The  conqueror  pre- 
sented' his  crowns  of  victory  to  the  queen  ;  he  was  very 
gracefully  raised  upon  the  backs  of  the  others  to  reach 
her  box. 

Tuesday,  24:th. — ^Went  to  the  Festino,  at  which  there 
were  two  ballets,  one  before  supper  and  the  other  after. 
In  that  before  supper  the  queen  was  dressed  as  Ceres, 
accompanied  by  Princess  Belmonte  as  Minerva,  and  the 
Duke  St.  Clemmenti  as  Mars,  and  two  groups  of  peasants, 
the  one  supposed  to  be  Neapolitans,  the  other  Swedes : 
these,  after  dancing  together,  the  queen  seemed  to  unite ; 
and  then  Ceres,  Minerva,  and  Mars  placed,  each  of  them, 
a  garland  upon  the  spear  of  Mars,  which  Ceres  pointed 
him  to  offer  to  the  King  of  Sweden ;  they  were  accord- 
ingly handed  up  to  his  box  upon  the  point  of  the  spear. 
The  garlands  were  wreaths  of  artificial  flowers  with  a 
motto  twisted  in  with  each  of  them : — Au  Sauveur  de 
sa  Patrie.  Au  Protecteur  des  Beaux  Arts.  A  V Alliance 
perpkuelle.  There  were  besides  some  complimentary 
verses  printed  upon  white  satin.  After  supper,  both  the 
kings  performed  in  a  ballet,  which  consisted  of  eighteen 


1784]  VESUVIUS.  91 

men  and  six  bears.  They  were  supposed  to  represent 
the  hunters  of  Lapland.  Their  dresses  were  very  elegant 
and  at  the  same  time  in  character,  and  both  kings,  men, 
and  bears  performed  their  parts  admirably.  It  concluded 
by  handing  up  to  the  queen  in  her  box  some  garlands  of 
flowers,  and  a  large  parcel  of  Swedish  gloves.  During 
the  whole  time  we  were  in  the"  Eang  of  Sweden's  box, 
imder  which,  as  next  to  the  queen's,  they  danced.  The 
crowd  below  was  monstrous,  and  the  whole  six  rows  of 
boxes,  presenting  a  front  of  faces  all  round  that  magnifi- 
cent house,  were  striking.  After  the  queen's  ballet  there 
was  a  shower  of  verses.* 

Wednesday,  2bth. — Set  out  at  8.30  a.m.  for  Vesuvius, 
with  Mr.  Musgrave,  Mr.  Coussmaker,  and  Mr.  Clerk. 
Went  to  Eesina  in  our  carriages.  Went  down  into  Hercu- 
laneum.  -f-  Nothing  is  to  be  seen  but  the  theatre,  as  they 
have  filled  up  as  they  went  on  digging.  It  is  aU  buried 
seventy-five  feet  in  a  sohd  body  of  tufa  :  part  of  the  ar- 
cades and  the  orchestra  are  cleared  out,  and  narrow  pas- 
sages through  the  stone,  that  one  can  walk  the  length  of 
what  was  the  stage,  and  into  some  of  the  dressing-rooms, 
where  some  pretty  stucco  painting  yet  remains.  Out  of 
this  theatre  one  of  the  equestrian  statues  of  the  Balbi, 
now  at  Portici,  was  taken.  There  was  likewise  a  statue 
at  each  end  of  the  orchestra.  The  inscription  upon  the 
pedestal  still  remains  ;  they  show  hkewise  the  impression 
of  the  head  of  a  bust  in  the  tufa,  so  sharp  it  might  almost 
serve  for  a  mould.     From  Eesina  we  rode  for  about  two 

*  It  is  rather  strange  that  these  extraordinary  exhibitions  of  kings  and 
queens,  nobles  and  ladies,  dancing  on  the  stage  to  a  public  audience,  shotdd 
be  mentioned  in  Miss  Berry's  journal  unaccompanied  by  any  observations. 
The  ceremonious,  formal  court  of  George  III.  and  Queen  Charlotte  certainly 
could  not  have  familiarised  her  with  the  idea  of  such  performances !  It 
must,  therefore,  be  supposed  that  it  was  sufficiently  the  habit  at  Naples  not 
to  draw  forth  any  remarks  on  the  want  of  dignity  and  decorum  of  such 
.amusements. — Sd. 

f  Herculaneum  was  destroyed  a.d.  79,  and  re-discovered  in  1713  by  the 
sinking  of  a  well. 


92  MISS  berry's  journal.  [1784 

hours  upon  mules,  then  one  must  either  walk  or  be  carried 
in  a  chair  on  the  shoulders  of  four  men.  My  sister  and 
I  "were  obhged  to  adopt  the  last  mode.  We  afterwards 
walked,  but  the  excessive  steepness  of  the  ascent  and  the 
cinders  on  which  one  has  to  tread,  whence  one  loses  more 
than  half  one's  steps,  is  a  fatigue  which  seems  to  pump  the 
breath  out  of  the  body  in  five  minutes'  time.  Arrived  at 
the  top,  we  were  most  amply  repaid  for  any  trouble  the 
ascent  had  cost.  We  were  two  hours  at  the  edge  of  the 
crater.  During  the  whole  of  that  time  it  threw  up  red- 
hot  stones  and  scoriae,  and  the  wind  for  the  most  part 
blowing  the  smoke  the  other  way,  we  saw  continual 
volumes  of  flame,  and  looked  quite  down  to  the  mouth  of 
the  crater.  The  surface  of  the  present  cone  of  Vesuvius 
is  entirely  the  production  of  the  last  eruption  :  it  is  fuU  of 
large  cracks,  out  of  all  of  which  issue  continued  smoke. 
We  crossed  several  of  them  in  walking  round  the  edge  of 
the  crater  to  that  part  where  the  last  eruption  broke 
through.  We  dined  upon  the  very  edge  of  the  crater, 
where  we  could  look  down  into  the  fiery  gulph  and  enjoy 
the  noble  fireworks  with  which  it  continued  to  treat  us. 
The  smoke  which  the  wind  every  now  and  then  brought 
over  to  our  side  was  so  ftdl  of  sand,  that  it  much  incom- 
moded our  eyes,  and  was  so  impregnated  with  sulphur 
that  it  made  us  all  cough.  I  descended  from  the  crater 
to  where  our  mules  awaited  us  on  foot,  in,  I  believe,  half 
an  hour's  time.  The  descent  is  most  rapid,  but,  as  the 
material  on  which  one  treads  is  soft,  with  the  help  of  a 
stick  or  taking  hold  of  an  arm,  one  can  jump  forward 
without  much  fatigue.  The  views  of  Naples  '  and  its 
environs  and  of  the  Campagna  Felice  from  the  top  and 
sides  of  Mount  Vesuvius  are  most  beautiful.  The  dif- 
ferent lavas  that  have  run  from  the  mountain  we  counted 
to  the  number  of  seven  or  eight,  and  looking  thus  down 
upon  them  their  course  is  to  be  seen  like  that  of  rivers 


1784]  A  KBAPOLITAN   BATTUE.  93 

upon  a  map.  Ee turned  to  Naples  between  six  and  seven. 
All  the  English  drank  tea  with  us. 

Thursday,  26^A. — ^Went  to  Astroni,  where  the  King  of 
Naples  himself,  without  the  assistance  of  any  general 
officer,  reviewed  his  regiment  of  Liparoti ;  the  exercise 
was  very  tolerably  performed,  the  manual  exercise  per- 
formed to  music,  beautiful.  I  am  told  the  manoeuvres 
were  old-fashioned.  AJfter  the  review  was  over,  the  men 
put  off  their  regimentals,  got  on  short  jackets,  and,  with 
hatchets  in  their  hands,  went  up  the  sides  of  the  hills,  and 
enclosing  a  great  space,  drove  all  the  boars  and  deer 
down  to  where  the  crowd  was.  As  they  came  down  the 
hill  they  were  fired  at  from  different  stands  of  hurdles, 
where  were  the  King  of  Sweden,  queen,  &c.  At  the 
same  time  they  were  followed  by  a  number  of  dogs,  and 
when  fear  drove  them  into  the  plain  below,  pursued  by 
several  of  the  Swedes,  &c.,  on  horseback,  with  spears. 
A  more  barbarous  amusement  never  was  practised  by  the 
savages  of  America.  The  creatures,  who  are  in  great 
quantities,  are  monstrously  fat  and  almost  tame,  being  fed 
every  day  at  a  particular  place  by  the  gamekeepers. 
They  have  no  possible  means  either  of  escaping  or  oppo- 
sing their  numerous  enemies,  but  are  driven  to  certain 
inglorious  slaughter,  without  any  sort  of  risk  or  danger 
upon  the  part  of  their  barbarous  pursuers.  They  first 
enclosed  one  side  of  the  hiU  and  then  the  opposite  one. 
The  hunt  was  not  called  successful,  and  they  killed  forty- 
eight  boars  and  three  deer.  The  King  of  Naples  is  a 
very  bad  shot.  The  King  of  Sweden  never  either  hunts 
or  shoots  ;  he  stood  the  whole  time  by  the  queen,  and 
now  and  then  fired  a  piece  without  any  hopes  of  killing. 

After  the  hunt  was  over,  everybody  was  asked  to 
dinner  in  three  large  marquees,  in  one  of  which  were  the 
two  kings,  the  queen,  the  ministers,  the  Enghsh  ladies, 
&c.,  in  aU  about  thirty  people.     After   dinner  we  all 


94  MISS   BERRY'S   JOURNAL.  [1784 

returned  to  Naples,  the  queen  very  politely  desiring  us  to 
go  up  the  hill  in  one  of  the  court  caleches,  as  our  own 
carriage  was  left  on  the  outside  of  the  park.  The  weather 
remarkably  fine,  and  the  day  altogether  very  pleasant.  The 
view  of  a  number  of  people,  carriages,  and  the  tents  in 
that  fine  plain  surrounded  by  wooded  hills,  charming. 

Friday,  21  th. — ^Employed  all  day  in  paying  farewell 
visits  and  packing.     Went  to  Dr.  CeriQo's  garden. 

Saturday,  28^A. — -Left  Naples.  Dined  at  Capua ;  lay 
at  St.  Agata,  where  we  met  Comte  Levis  *  and  his  son  and 
the  three  Chevahers  de  Malthe  all  going  to  Eome,  and 
the  Spanish  ambassador,  Comte  Hareha,  on  his  road  to 
Naples.     Supped  altogether. 

Sunday,  March  1st. — Lay  at  Terracina. 

Monday,  2nd. — Dined  upon  the  grass  at  Torre  di 
Quattro  Ponti.  Came  by  the  new  road  made  by  the 
present  pope  through  the  Pontine  Marshes,  which  he  is 
attempting  to  drain.  The  road  is  excellent,  with  a  canal 
for  several  miles  on  each  side.  There  are  very  good 
houses  built  for  the  post  at  certain  distances,  but  they  are 
not  yet  inhabited.     Lay  at  Velletri. 

Tuesday,  3rd. — Arrived  at  Eome.  Our  lodgings  at 
the  Scufierina's,  the  corner  of  the  Piazzo  di  Spagna.  AU 
our  friends  in  the  evening. 

Friday,  6th. — In  the  evening,  Cardinal  Bernis'. 

Sunday,  8th. — In  the  evening  with  the  Princess  Santa 
Croce  at  Madame  PeUuccia's,  where  there  is  every  Sunday 
a  dance.  Both  people  of  fashion  and  some  of  the  bour- 
geoisie go  to  it.  The  dancing  is  aU  in  the  Italian  manner, 
and  most  laughable. 

Monday,  9th. — ^Dined  at  Cardinal  de  Bernis'.  Went 
in  the  evening  to  see  the  Colosseum  by  moonlight.  It 
looks  larger  by  this  fight  than  at  any  other  time,  and  the 
strong  fights   and   shades  on  its  broken  parts  have  a 

*  MarSchal  de  Levis,  afterwards  Due  de  Levis. 


1784]  PUBLIC   BUILDINGS   AND   ANTIQUITIES.  95 

■wonderful  effect.     It  is,  upon  the  whole,  one  of  the  most 
striking  and  interesting  objects  one  can  imagine. 

Tuesday,  l^ih. — ^Began  to  visit  the  different  parts  of 
Eome   regularly,  seeing   what  is   worth   notice   in  the 
different  rioni  one  after  another.     Began  by  the  Eione 
de'  Monti,*  Villa  Negroni.    The  gardens  extensive,  in  the 
Italian  taste ;  entirely  gone  to  ruins.     In  the  house  front- 
ing the  Piazza  dei  Termini,  one  pretty  draperied  statue  of 
a  woman  with  a  diadem ;  in  the  vestibule  of  the  other, 
two  figures  sitting  in  consular  chairs,  one  called  Marius, 
the  head  a  little  stooping,  and  a  very  thoughtful  expres- 
sion of  countenance — Hfe  itself;  a  Neptune   striding   a 
Triton,  spirited.     In  a  waste  part  of  the  garden  they  have 
dug  and  are  digging  for  antiquities.     The  whole  soU,  at 
about  ten  or  twelve  feet  deep,  is  a  mass  of  old  materials 
and  buildings.     They  have  got  out  a  number  of  broken 
columns,  pieces  of  marble,  and  some  medals.     When  we 
saw  them  digging,  they  had  got  thirty-five  palmi  deep, 
and  had   come   to   partition  walls   of  apartments   and 
arches.     They  are  to  go  ten  palmi  deeper,  when,  if  they 
do  not  find  more  marble  and  other  valuable  materials, 
they  will  begin  again  in  some  other  part.     The  sale  of 
the  old  bricks  they  find,  in  aU  these  adventures,  pays  the 
charge  of  digging. 

The  Arch  of  Galhenus,  plain  and  not  very  interest- 
ing; its  only  ornament  are  two  Corinthian  pilasters  on 
each  side,  the  whole  of  white  marble ;  the  size  of  the 
blocks  astonishing.  They  say  what  remains  is  only  the 
middle.  In  the  vineyard  belonging  to  the  Convent  of 
Sta.  Croce  in  Gerusalemme  are  some  ruins,  which  are 
called  a  temple  of  Venus  and  Cupid.  Nothing  remains  but 
some  broken  arches,  the  walls  of  an  immense  thickness. 
The  remains  of  the  Amphitheatre  Castrense  is  hkewise 
in  this  garden  ;  but  as  we  were  women,  they  would  not 
let  us  in  to  see  it. 

*  Rome  is  divided  into  fourteen  rioni  or  quarters. 


96  MISS  BBERY'S  journal.  [17S4 

The  Temple  of  Minerva  Medica  is  a  picturesque  and 
beautiful  ruin,  standing  in  a  vineyard ;  more  than  half  of 
its  cupola  remains,  but  none  of  its  marble  ornaments. 

The  Porta  Maggiore,  formerly  Porta  Prsenestina,  one  of 
the  ancient  gates  of  Eome,  is,  like  all  the  others,  built  of 
immense  blocks  of  travertine.  The  road  -within  not 
running  straight  to  it,  and  a  number  of  shabby  buildings 
being  placed  against  it,  entirely  takes  off  all  its  effect. 
In  the  same  vineyard  with  the  Temple  X)i  Minerva 
Medica  are  two  ancient  sepulchres ;  one,  from  the  in- 
scriptions,* known  to  be  that  of  the  family  of  Lucius 
Arruntius,  the  consul.  On  the  arched  roof  there  stOl 
remain  some  stucco  ornaments  and  fresco  painting.  The 
other  has  been  that  of  the  slaves,  freedmen,  &c.,  &c.,  of 
the  same  family.  It  is  without  ornament :  round  the 
"waU  are  little  niches  in  rows,  in  each  of  which,  built  into 
the  waU,  is  an  earthen  pot  for  their  ashes,  aU  of  which 
still  remain  ;  and  underneath  is  a  httle  marble  tablet  with 
the  name  of  the  person. 

Wednesday,  11th. — The  Madonna  degh  Angeh  is  the 
finest  church  I  have  seen  at  Eome  after  St.  Peter's,  built  in 
the  ruins  of  the  Thermes  of  Titus.  It  is  a  Greek  cross : 
four  enormous  red  granite  pillars  support  the  roof,  and 
stand  in  their  original  places  ;  but  as  the  floor  has  been 
considerably  raised  by  time  and  the  faU  of  rubbish,  &c., 
the  bases  of  the  columns  were  buried;  and  they  have 
been  obhged  to  put  bases  round  the  column,  which  are 
not  therefore  in  exact  proportion ;  but  the  eye  is  not 
ofiended. 

The  Pontana  di  Mose  is  grand,  from  the  abundance  of 
water  which  rushes  out  of  three  large  apertures.  The 
design  of  the  whole  rather  heavy. 

Palazzo  Albani,  a  Judith  with  the  head  of  Holofernes, 
by  Caravaggio,f  wonderful  for  nature  and  effect. 

*  This  inscription  was  found  over  the  entrance  in  1736. 

■j-  Polidoro  i  Caravaggio,  bom  1495,  originally  a  mason's  labourer,  em- 


1784]  PUBLIC   BUILDINGS   AND   ANTIQUITIES.  97 

Palazzo  Eospigliosi.  The  lovely  Andromeda  of  Guido  * 
improves  upon  one  the  oftener  and  longer  one  looks  at 
it.     The  Twelve  Apostles  of  Eubens — noble  heads. 

Thursday,  12,th. — Chiesa  St.  Pietro  inVincoli.  Nothing 
remarkable  but  'the  mausoleum  of  Pope  Juhus  II.  Moses, 
in  the  middle  niche,  by  Michael  Angelo,  in  a  noble  style ; 
though  the  head  has,  as  has  been  often  observed,  more  the 
air  of  a  river-god  than  of  a  legislator. 

Of  the  remains  of  the  Thermes  of  Titus  we  could  only 
get  admittance  to  see  the  Sette  Sale,  which  are  nine  large 
iminteresting  arched  vaults,  formerly  the  reservoirs  of 
water. 

The  Orti  Farnesiani  have  been  very  pretty  in  the 
style  of  statues,  fountains,  &c.,  but  are  now  entirely 
neglected.  They  occupy  the  Palatine  Hill,  where  stood 
formerly  the  Palace  of  the  Emperors.  In  a  terrace  in  the 
gardens  they  have  thrown  together  a  number  of  pieces  of 
friezes,  capitals  of  pillars,  &c.,  found  in  digging  among 
the  ruins,  which  give  one  the  highest  idea  of  their  excel- 
lent taste  and  workmanship  in  marble.  On  every  side 
one  is  surrounded  with  the  remains  of  the  magnificent 
buUding  they  once  adorned. 

Here,  too,  one  is  shown  what  are  called  the  Baths  of 
Livia  ;  they  are  now  underground,  and  one  descends  into 
little  chambers,  the  roofs  of  which  are  covered  with 
dehcate  stucco  ornaments,  and  painted  with  a  running 
pattern  of  gold  and  httle  round  and  lozenge-shaped  pic- 
tures at  equal  distances :  these  have  been  carried  away. 
One  still  sees  the  hollow  in  the  wall  where  the  pipes  lay 
for  conveying  the  water. 

The  Church  of  St.  Cosmo  and  St.  Damiano,  they  say, 
was  a  temple  to  Komulus  and  Eemus  ;  and  one  is  taken 
down  to  a  subterraneous  church  below  it,  and  shown  the 

ployed  in  the  Vatican,  1512,  as  one  of  Raphael's  assistants ;  murdered  at  the 
instigation  of  his  own  servant  for  the  sake  of  his  money,  1543. 

*  Guido  Reni,  bom  near  Bologna,  1515 ;  died  1642. 
VOL.  I.  H 


98  MISS   BEERY'S   journal..  [1734 

"Walls  of  old  brickwork  wHich  might  or  might  not  belong 
to  a  temple  to  Eomulus.  Its  great  door  is  of  ancient 
bronze,  the  only  one  that  exists  ;  it  has  holes  at  regular 
distances  near  the  edge,  where  probably  some  ornaments 
have  been  fastened.  It  was  in  this  church  that  the 
ancient  plan  of  Eome,  cut  in  marble,  was  found  ;  it  is  now 
placed  in  the  wall  all  up  the  staircase  at  the  Capitol,  but 
in  such  broken  pieces  that  nobody  has  been  able  to  put 
it  in  any  manner  distinctly  together. 

Villa  Aldobrandini.  The  gardens  pretty.  In  a  pavi- 
lion in  the  garden  is  the  famous  old  painting  called  the 
Nozze  Aldobrandini.  After  seeing  all  the  paintings  at 
Portici,  it  did  not  strike  me  so  much  as  I  expected ;  the 
colours  are  much  more  gone  than  many  of  them,  and  the 
drawing,  I  think,  not  more  correct  than  some. 

Friday,  \Zth. — In  the  evening,  Cardinal  Bernis',  who  is 
to  have  a  concert  every  Friday  and  a  supper  every  night 
whilst  the  King  of  Sweden  stays.  A  large  party  of  Enghsh 
dined  with  us. 

Saturday,  14:th. — Palazzo  Barberini.  It  is  a  labyrinth 
of  rooms ;  they  say  there  are  no  less  than  4,000,  in  which 
there  are  too  many  good  things  mixed  with  too  many 
bad  to  see  them  with  any  pleasure. 

The  Church  of  St.  Eomualdo.  The  altar-piece  describes 
this  saint — who,  it  seems,  was  a  hermit — expatiating  to 
four  of  his  followers  on  the  charms  of  solitude.  All  the  five 
figures  are  in  white,  the  dress  of  his  order.  It  is  esteemed 
one  of  the  chefs  d'ceuvre  of  Andrea  Sacchi,  and  is  quite 
superior  to  any  of  the  rest  of  his  works. 

Sunday,  Ibth. — ^Villa  Albani.  The  apartments  orna- 
mented with  an  immense  quantity  of  ancient  marble  and 
statuary.  Cardinal- Archbishop  Albani*  had  the  best 
opportunities  of  procuring  them,  as  he  was  a  man  of 
taste  and  learning,  knew  their  value,  and  had  hired  for  ten 

*  It  was  built  by  that  cardinal  in  the  middle  of  the  last  centiuy,  and 
plundered  by  the  French  during  the  invasion  under  Napoleon. 


1784]  PUBLIC   BUILDINGS   AND   ANTIQUITIES.  99 

years  the  ground  at  Tivoli  where  stood  the  famous  Villa 
of  Adrian,  from  which  source  he  drew  almost  all  the 
ancient  magnificence  with  which  he  adorned  his  villa. 
In  a  small  passage-room  on  the  ground-floor  is  an  ala- 
baster column  in  one  piece,  twenty  English  feet  high. 
A  basso-relievo  of  Antinous  crowned  with  flowers — ex- 
quisite. 

Monday,  16^A. — Pope's  Palace  at  Monte  Cavalli.  In 
the  first  great  salle  is  Guercino's  famous  picture  of  Sta. 
PetroniUa.  The  chapel  entirely  in  fresco  by  Guido,  and 
also  the  altar-piece — an  Annunciation. 

Tuesday,  17  ih. — Went  with  Mr.  Bononi  to  visit  some 
of  the  principal  antiquities,  with  which  he  is  perfectly 
acquainted,  having  measured  them  all  for  Mr.  Adams  in 
England.  Saw  a  bit  of  the  old  aqueduct,  which  conveys 
what  is  called  the  '  aqua  vergine  ;'  *  it  is  buried  up  to  the 
cornice,  which  is  now  enclosed  in  the  Httle  back-yard  of 
a  mean  house.  The  cornice  is  stone,  and  is  supposed  to 
be  of  as  high  antiquity  as  the  Eepublic. 

Beautiful  remains  of  the  Temple  of  Minerva ;  aU  the 
ornaments  exquisitely  worked. 

Arch  of  Titus.  The  figures  of  Victory  over  the  arch 
have  been  worked  out  of  the  stone  after  they  wiere 
put  up,  being  in  one  piece  with  them  ;  an  ornament  of 
leaves  begun  to  be  worked  upon  the  cornice  of  the  arch 
left  unfinished.  Arch  of  Constantine.  Chiefly  composed 
of  basso-relievos  and  ornaments  taken  from  the  arches  of 
Trajan.  They  relate  to  his  actions  and  victories ;  those 
executed  in  the  time  of  Constantine  miserable. 

St.  Stefano  Eotondo.  This  is  in  truth  an  ancient 
building,  and  called  a  temple  of  Janus,  but  with  greater 
probability  supposed  to  be  a  church,  built,  about  the 
time  of  Constantine,  out  of  the  debris  of  other  temples 
dedicated  to  paganism,  which  were  then  no  longer  re- 

*  Constructed  ]yy  Agrippa  for  the  use  of  tis  baths. 
u  2 


100  MISS   BKEEY's   JOUENAL.  [1784 

spected.  Everything  bears  marks  of  its  having  been  put 
together  with  old  materials. 

The  Vivarium  of  Domitian  are  arched  recesses,  where 
the  wild  beasts  for  the  use  of  his  amphitheatre  are  sup- 
posed to  have  been  kept.  Near  this  place  is  an  ancient 
rustic  fa9ade  of  arches,  upon  which  the  upper  stories 
of  a  monastery  are  now  built.  It  is  called  the  remains 
of  the  Curige  Hostilii,  or  Courts  of  Justice  built  by  TuUus 
HostUius. 

Thursday,  I'^th. — With  Mr.  Bononi.  Therm es  of  Titus, 
Temple  of  Vesta,  &c.,  &c.  Pontius  Pilate's  House ;  a 
small  building  which  has,  received  this  name  (volgare), 
I  know  not  for  what  reason.  It  is  composed  of  a 
number  of  beautiful  and  richly-ornamented  fragments  of 
other  buildings,  piUars,  friezes,  cornices,  put  together  in 
the  most  Gothic  manner,  without  any  regard  to  sym- 
metry, proportion,  or  unity,  and  was  probably  so  put  at 
a  time  when  the  fine  fragments  of  which  it  is  composed 
were  more  easily  come  at  for  building  than  new  bricks. 

Theatre  of  Marcellus  ;  the  first  stone  theatre  in  Eome. 
Arch  of  St.  Severus ;  erected  to  him  by  the  goldsmiths. 
It  is  too  small,  and  hardly  deserves  the  name  of  an  arch, 
but  is  prettily  ornamented. 

Friday,  10th. — To  the  Tarpeian  Eock.  I  believe  one 
might  almost  be  thrown  down  with  impunity,  the  lower 
part  is  so  much  raised  and  the  upper  part  so  much  sunk. 
It  is  aU  covered  with  mean  houses,  so  that  there  is  no 
particular  spot  to  which  one  can  address  one's  veneration. 

Temple  of  Concord.  Frieze  in  the  inside  of  the  Temple 
of  Concord  the  same  as  that  of  Lord  Shelburne  in 
Berkeley  Square,  but  larger,  which  one  can  hardly  be-.' 
lieve.  Tomb  of  Caius  Sextus.  When  built,  without  the 
walls,  half  endosed  by  those  of  Aurelian. 

Mons  Testaccio  ;  a  hill  near  151  feet  high,  and  more 
than  three-quarters  of  a  mile  round,  entirely  composed  of 
ancient  fragments  of  earthenware.    As  it  is  not  mentioned 


1784]  PUBLIC   BUILDIXGS   AND   ANTIQUITIES.  lOl 

by  any  ancient  authors,  all  the  antiquaries  are  puzzled 
how  to  account  for  its  existence,  and,  in  my  opinion,  leave 
it  an  enigma.  Some  say  all  the  potters  in  Rome  hved  near 
this  place,  and  that  this  hill  is  composed  of  their  rubbish  ; 
but  to  suppose  that  they  would  all  bring  it  to  the  exact 
same  place,  or  that  all  together  it  would  make  so  con- 
siderable an  eminence,  seems  ridiculous.  Mr.  Byres  says 
there  is  good  reason  to  believe  that  it  did  not  exist  in  the 
time  of  Aurelian ;  for  that  if  it  had,  the  emperor  would 
certainly  have  made  use  of  it  in  building  his  walls,  in- 
stead of  sending,  as  it  is  known  he  did,  to  Tivoli  for 
broken  bricks  and  rubbish.  He  supposes  it  to  have  been 
placed  there  some  time  between  the  reigns  of  Constantine 
and  Justinian ;  that  as  in  those  later  times  they  became 
more  curious  and  informed  upon  the  subjects  of  physic 
and  natural  philosophy,  some  enlightened  persons  might 
have  convinced  the  government  of  the  unwholesomeness 
of  keeping  their  wine  in  earthenware,  which  was  sup- 
posed to  be  one  of  the  great  causes  of  so  frequently 
giving  the  gout  and  other  obstructions,  and  prevailed 
upon  the  emperor  to  issue  an  order  commanding  all  the 
earthen  wine-vessels  in  Eome  to  be  broken  and  deposited 
in  this  place,  which  was  waste  ground  near  the  banks  of 
the  Tiber. 

Church  of  St.  Paolo  fuori  le  Mura  ;*  built  by  Con- 
stantine— large  and  noble. 

Sunday,  22nd. — St.  Peter's.  Saw  the  Pope  pray  for 
five  minutes,  standing,  with  his  head  at  the  St.  Peter's  foot. 

Monday,  2Srd. — Tomb  of  Bibilus.  Nobody  was  al- 
lowed to  be  buried  within  the  gates  of  Eome  but  the 
emperors  and  vestals.  Bibilus,  an  sedile  of  the  people, 
was  alone  allowed  this  honour,  on  account  of  his  good 
administration.  The  tomb  still  remains,  now  forming  a 
part  of  the  wall  of  a  house.     Tomb  of  Scipio  ;  lately  dis- 

*  Burnt  down  16th  July,  1824,  and  now  rebuilt. 


102  MISS   BEERY'S   journal.  [1784 

covered.*  'Arch  of  Drusns,  without  the  old  walls  of 
Eome,  withia  those  of  Aurelian.  Tomb  of  Cecilia  Me- 
tella,  called  Capo  di  Bove,  from  the  ornaments  of  bulls' 
heads  in  the  frieze  round  the  mausoleum.  Eoom  in  the 
middle,  the  shape  of  an  inverted  funnel. 

Thursday,  26th. — Went  at  nine  o'clock  to  the  King  of 
Sweden's  Palace,  to  see  the  Pope  pass  in  procession,  with 
all  the  cardinals,  &c.,  from  St.  Peter's  to  the  Church  of 
the  Madonna  sopra  Minerva.  He  was  in  a  great  state 
coach,  with  two  cardinals — drawn  by  six  white  horses,  not 
driven  by  a  coachman,  but  by  two  postilions  with  great  wigs, 
and  their  hats  off.  Several  of  the  Eoman  princes  attended 
him  on  horseback,  and  the  chief  officers  of  his  household 
and  a  number  of  monsignores  mounted  on  mules.  After 
the  procession  had  passed  the  King  of  Sweden's,  and  we  had 
all  partaken  of  the  breakfast  prepared  there,  we  went  with 
Princess  Santa  Croce  to  a  shop  in  the  Piazza  di  Minerva  to 
see  the  procession  arrive  at  the  church.  We  then  went  into 
a  sort  of  covered  box  in  the  church  itself,  prepared  for 
the  King ;  but  he  stood  most  part  of  the  time  in  the  front 
of  the  crowd.  After  the  function  was  over,  which  lasted 
above  two  hours,  we  aU  went  into  a  gallery  opposite  to 
the  church  belonging  to  the  Eoman  College,  from  whence 
we  saw  the  Pope  again  resume  his  carriage.  All  the 
Italians  were  remarking  how  little  the  crowd  took  notice 
of  the  Pope  or  demanded  his  benedictions  :  it  would  seem 
a  happy  omen  that  he  is  going  out  of  fashion  even  with 
the  lowest  orders  of  people. 

Saturday,  28th. — With  Mr.  Bononi  to  a  sculptor's  who 
is  maldng  a  monument  for  Pope  Ganganelli.  He  is  a 
young  man  who  was  the  son  of  a  peasant  near  Venice. 
Untaught,  he  did  wonders  in  the  way  of  sculpture ;  he  has 

*  The  sarcophagus  was  first  opened  in  1781,  upwards  of  2,000  years  after 
the  death  of  Scipio  Barbatus.  The  skeleton  was  found  entire,  with  a  ring 
upon  one  of  its  fingers.  The  ling  was  brought  to  England  in  the  Earl  of 
Beverley's  collection. 


1784]  PUBLIC   BUILDINGS   AND    ANTIQUITIES.  103 

been  but  two  years  in  Eome,  and  has  already  made  such 
progress  as  surprises  everybody  of  his  profession.  A 
Theseus  sitting  triumphantly  over  the  Minotaur — might 
almost  rival  some  of  the  chefs  d'oeuvre  of  antiquity.* 

Tuesday,  30?A. — Church  of  St.  Eusebio.  In  the  ceihng  is 
a  picture,  by  Mengs,  of  the  saint.  It  was  the  first  public 
work  done  by  Mengs,  and  what  first  gained  him  reputa- 
tion.    It  is  much  in  the  style  of  Sir  Joshua  Eeynolds. 

To  the  Capitol.  The  colossal  foot  in  the  court-yard, 
supposed  to  have  belonged  to  the  statue  of  Nero  which 
stood  before  the  Flavian  Amphitheatre,  and  gave  it  the 
name  of  the  Colosseum,  exactly  the  length  of  Mr.  E. 
Conway's  height,f  and  the  great  toe  the  thickness  of  his 
body.  In  the  apartments  of  the  officers  called  '  gh  con- 
servator! '  (who  are  four  cavaliers  elected  every  month,  to 
settle  the  ^price  of  aU  the  eatables  in  Eome — bread,  meat, 
wine,&c. — according  to  the  quantity  that  comes  to  market) 
is  the  famous  bronze  Wolf  suckling  Eomulus  and  Eemus, 
said  to  have  been  struck  with  Ughtning  when  Julius 
Cassar  was  killed.  Upon  the  lower  part  of  its  two  hind 
legs  is  a  cavity  certainly  made  by  fire  ;  but  what  fire,  and 
when  ?  No  matter ;  I  like  to  believe  any  stories  that  tend 
to  a  supposition  that  the  Almighty  sometimes  deigns  to 
interest  Himself  in  the  fate  of  mortals. 

Wednesday,  ZVst. — With  Mr.  Eonconi,  Mr.  Conway, 
and  General  O'Hara,  %  to  the  upper  parts  of  St.  Peter's. 
We  spent  five  hours  in  this  wonderful  building. 

Thursday,  April  1st. — To  several  artists' : — Mr.  Tres- 
-  ham,§  who  has  pubhshed  a  series  of  drawings,  the  history 

*  This  young  ai-tist  was  no  other  than  Oanova. 

t  The  Hon.  and  Rev.  Edwai-d  Conway,  son  of  the  Earl  of  Hertford, 
Canon  of  Christ  Church ;  died  1785. 

X  General  O'Hara  was  the  intimate  friend  of  Marshal  Conway  and  his 
family,  and  is  frequently  mentioned,  and  always  favourably,  in  Horace 
Walpole's  letters.  He  was  a  distinguished  oificer,  and  died  in  command  at 
Gibraltar,  1802.  Miss  Berry's  acquaintance  with  him  appears  to  have  com- 
menced at  this  time. 

§  Henry  Tresham,  Esq.,  R.A.,  a  native  of  Ireland.     He  repaired  at  an 


104  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1784 

of  Sappho  ;  to  a  statuary  in  the  Corso,  who  is  repairing  a 
statue  of  Venus  lately  found,  for  the  Pope ;  to  Mr.  Ilewit- 
son,  a  statuary- — several  good  busts,  portraits,  but  Eome  is 
not  the  place  in  which  to  admire  modern  busts.  After- 
wards to  Lady  E.  Foster,  to  hear  Bianchi  *  play  over  some 
of  the  airs  of  his  last  opera. 

Friday,  2nd. — In  the  hall  of  the  Palazzo  Spada  is  a 
statue  of  Pompey,  the  same,  it  is  said,  at  the  foot  of  which 
Caesar  fell.  It  is  colossal,  but  not  very  good.  In  the 
gallery,  the  Eape  of  Helen,  by  Guido.  The  idea  of  Helen 
carrying  her  dog,  squirrel,  and  dwarf  along  with  her, 
ridiculous  and  mean.  Death  of  Dido,  by  Guercino,  a  fine 
picture,  but  much  spoilt :  the  canvas  seems  to  have  been 
originally  primed  with  black,  and  all  the  shades  are  ter- 
ribly dark. 

Sunday,  Ath. — Palm  Sunday.  Into  the  King  of  Swe- 
den's box  in  the  Sistine  Chapel,  to  see  the  Pope  bless 
and  deliver  the  palms  :  those  given  to  the  cardinals  were 
curiously  twisted  together  like  a  large  staif.  The  function 
altogether  is  a  long  and  tiresome  one. 

Tuesday,  Qth. — The  statues  in  the  Capitol.  Statue  of 
Pyrrhus  in  the  vestibule,  remarkable  for  the  fine  work- 
manship of  the  armour ;  it  may  be  called  a  general  in 
complete  uniform.  The  legs  were  shockingly  restored — 
too  short  by  half  for  the  figure — and,  by  its  fresh  and 
perfect  appearance  in  every  part,  I  should  suppose  a  great 
deal  of  it  had  been  worked  over.     The  Dying  Gladiator, 

early  age  to  Italy.  His  drawings  in  pen-and-ink  and  black  clialk  were  better 
than  bis  oil  pictures.  He  was  considered  a  great  connoisseur  in  art,  and 
purchased  for  1001.  Etruscan  vases,  turned  out  by  Mr.  Hope,  half  of  which 
were  purchased  by  Mr.  Rogers  for  800^.,  and  the  remainder  by  Lord  Carlisle. 
He  was  a  member  of  the  Academies  of  Rome  and  Bologna.  He  died  1814. 
*  Francesco  Bianchi,  musician,  born  at  Cremona,  1752 ;  composed  about 
fifty  operas  and  two  oratorios;  appointed  Vice-Maestro  di  Capella  at  St 
Ambrogio,  Milan,  and  also  to  a  post  in  the  Scala,  1784.  Came  to  London, 
1793  ;  was  engaged  at  the  King's  Theatre  till  1800.  Committed  suicide  at 
Hammersmith,  Nov.  1810.  There  is  a  monument  to  him  in  Kensington 
Qhurchyavd. — From  Dictionary  of  Universal  Biography,  Glasgow. 


1784]  TUB   COLOSSKUM,  105 

perhaps  the  statue  of  antiquity  that  most  interests  upon 
repeated  examination  ;  not  only  the  face,  but  every  part 
of  the  body  expresses  a  man  dying  in  great  pain  with 
calm  resignation.  View  it  first  even  from  behind,  one 
would  know  it  was  not  a  figure  reposing.  It  excels, 
too,  in  being  a  representation  of  vulgar  nature ;  it  is 
neither  a  god  nor  a  gentleman,  but  it  is  a  man  and 
nature.  The  expression  is  the  more  wonderful  as  it  is 
by  no  means  highly  finished.  It  was  found  between  the 
Pincian  and  Quirinal  Hills. 

Wednesday,  7th. — Colosseum.  Eighty  arcades  in  the 
circumference  of  it,  four  entrances  dividing  it  into  four 
equal  parts,  the  arcades  all  going  to  a  centre,  excepting 
the  four  entrances,  which  are  made  parallel.  That  for  the 
emperors,  upon  the  north  side,  consisted  of  three  arches 
finely  ornamented,  some  of  which  yet  remain.  Prom 
thence  there  was  a  bridge  over  to  the  Thermes  of  Titus. 
In  all  the  upper  colonnades,  against  the  piers  of  the 
arches,  the  marks  of  where  stone  balustrades  were  for- 
merly fixed  are  still  visible.  The  windows  are  alternately 
built  up  and  left  open ;  by  some  supposed  to  have  been 
closed  boxes  for  the  noble  ladies,  where  they  could  see 
without  being  much  seen.  The  truth  of  the  matter  is, 
there  are  a  number  of  parts  in  these  noble  remains  which 
all  the  antiquaries  are  puzzled  to  make  out.  Each  has 
his  supposition,  and  I'un  vaut  Men  I'autre.  There  is 
every  visible  proof  of  its  having  been  built  in  a  great 
hurry,  which  we  know  from  history  it  was.  In  the  con- 
struction of  the  walls  there  are  several  pieces  of  stone  cut 
round,  and  others  that  have  been  in  other  buildings. 

In  the  Vatican  Library,  40,000  manuscripts,  28,000 
printed  books.  A  fund  of  600  crowns  for  buying  from 
year  to  year  the  best  editions  of  books.  The  four  cases 
for  the  medals  in  an  apartment  in  the  Vatican  Library 
cost  3,000  sequins. 
,   In  the  evening,  to  the  King  of  Sweden's  box  in  the 


106  MISS   BEKEY'S   JOUBNAL  [1784 

Sistine  Chapel,  to  hear  the  '  Miserere.'  There  is  a  long 
service  chaunted  before  it  begins.  Charming  as  it  is,  it 
did  not  perhaps  quite  answer  my  expectations ;  because 
when  one  sets  one's  imagination  to  work,  one  can  always 
surpass  anything  that  really  exists,  The  scene  around, 
too,  is  not  imposing  ;  it  is  small,  and  crowded  with  people, 
who  are  many  of  them  moving  about  and  making  a  noise. 

Afterwards,  to  see  the  pilgrims  sup.  There  are  many 
hundreds  both  of  men  and  women,  who  sup  separately. 
Among  the  men  I  saw  two  cardinals  ;  and,  attending  the 
women,  some  of  the  finest  and  gayest  ladies  in  Eome,  in 
a  sort  of  undress,  with  a  cloth  apron  before  them, 
changing  the  plates  of  ragged  wretches  who  scarce  know 
how  to  hold  a  knife  and  fork. 

Thursday,  Sth. — ^At  nine  o'clock,  to  the  Sistine  Chapel, 
where  there  was  a  long  function  ;  after  which  we  went  to 
the  windows  of  Cardinal  Negroni's  apartments  to  see  the 
Pope  give  the  benediction  from  the  middle  window. 
The  crowd  in  the  Piazza  was  less  than  I  expected,  but 
the  sight  altogether  is  a  noble  one.  Afterwards,  in  an 
apartment  of  the  Vatican,  the  Pope,  in  imitation  of  Our 
Saviour,  washes  the  feet  of  twelve  poor  priests,  who  are 
to  represent  the  Apostles.  The  Apostles,  however,  this 
year  were  counted  by  what  they  call  in  England  a  baker's 
dozen,  for  there  were  thirteen  of  them.  They  were 
ranged  upon  a  bench  along  the  side  of  the  room,  dressed 
from  head  to  foot  in  very  pretty  white  flannel  dresses. 
The  Pope,  after  some  short  prayers,  comes  in  a  simple 
dress  of  white  linen,  and  washes  one  of  each  of  their  feet 
(which,  however,  are  made  thoroughly  clean  beforehand), 
dries  it  with  a  finely  folded-up  towel,  and  kisses  it.  He 
afterwards  gives  the  man  the  towel,  and  a  nosegay,  made 
of  some  white  flowers ;  then  washes  his  own  hands,  and 
goes  out  to  prepare  to  serve  them  at  table. 

Their  table  is  in  another  apartment,  very  prettily  ar- 
ranged.   They  are  all  seated  on  one  side.    The  Pope  walks 


1784]  CEREMONIES   AT   THE   VATICAN.  107 

down  the  other  side,  and  hands  them  over  all  their  plates, 
one  after  another,  five  successively  to  each  person — a  very- 
good  maigre  dinner  of  soup,  fish,  and  vegetables,  served 
upon  plate.  He  afterwards  pours  out  wine  and  water  for 
every  one  of  them  to  drink.  His  figure,  standing  at  the 
top  of  the  table  in  his  white  dress,  with  a  girdle  round 
his  waist,  waiting  till  they  had  eaten  some  off  their  plates, 
was  not  unhke  that  of  a  jolly  cook  with  his  apron  before 
him ;  though  it  must  be  owned  that  this  Pope  performs 
all  these  ceremonies  with  as  much  grace  and  dignity  as 
such  operations  will  admit  of. 

Afterwards  we  went  to  another  apartment,  where  the 
cardinals  dined  together.  Their  table  I  thought  not  so 
pretty  as  the  pilgrims'.  There  were  a  number  of  covers, 
but  only  eight  dined. 

In  the  evening,  to  hear  the  '  Miserere'  again :  I 
thought  it  better  to-night  than  last  night.  Afterwards,  to 
the  Paidine  Chapel,  which  is  magnificently  hghted  up  in 
commemoration  of  Our  Saviour's  sepulchre.  The  altar 
was  a  perfect  blaze  of  light  up  to  the  ceiling.  The 
painting  of  the  dead  body  on  the  fore-part  of  the  altar 
has  a  fine  effect.  From  thence  to  St.  Peter's,  to  see  the 
illumination  of  the  cross :  though  eighteen  feet  high,  it 
looks  small  and  not  magnificent  in  that  building.  One 
sees,  too,  the  ropes  that  fasten  it,  which  takes  off  from 
the  idea  of  its  being  suspended  in  the  air  ;  but  the  light 
it  throws  upon  the  different  parts  of  the  church  is  charm- 
iug.  The  great  shadows  give  one  a  just  idea  of  the  size 
of  everything  around.  The  baldequin  in  particular  looked 
twice  as  high  by  this  hght  as  it  had  appeared  before. 
The  church  was  full  of  people ;  and  every  half-hour 
three  priests  from  a  little  balcony  in  one  of  the  great  piers 
of  the  cupola  showed  the  relics  when  everybody  was  on 
their  knees.  They  were  at  such  a  height,  that  it  was  impos- 
sible to  see  anything  but  the  looking-glass  which  surrounds 
them. 


108  MISS   berry's  JOUR^^AL,  [1784 

Friday,  9th. — At  9  o'clock  A.M.  a  long  function  in  the 
Sistine  Chapel,  which  concludes  with  uncovering  the 
crucifix,  which  is  covered  in  all  Eoman  Catholic  churches, 
and  laying  it  upon  a  cushion  on  the  steps  before  the  altar, 
when  first  the  Pope,  and  then  the  cardinals,  all  without 
their  shoes,  walk  up,  kneel  before  it  and  kiss  it ;  then 
foUow  a  long  train  of  monsignores  and  priests  of  all  sorts, 
who  do  the  same  thing,  but  with  their  shoes  on.  I  could 
not  find  out  the  reason  of  this. 

To  the  King  of  Sweden's  apartments,  to  see  the  series 
of  gold  and  silver  Swedish  medals  he  is  to  present  to  the 
Pope,  contained  in  three  large  and  elegantly  inlaid  wooden 
boxes. 

In  the  evening,  the  '  Miserere  '  again  ;  and  afterwards 
St.  Peter's,  which  continues  illuminated  with  the  cross  two 
nights. 

To  the  Academy  of  Arcadians,  which  was  a  great 
crowd  of  abbati  in  a  room  much  too  small  for  the  com- 
pany. The  subject  for  that  evening  was  the  Passion  of 
Our  Saviour.  I  heard  a  number  of  sonnets  read :  one 
treated  the  subject  in  a  ludicrous  style,  and  the  whole  room 
went  into  repeated  roars  of  laughter.  Eeturned  home 
tired  to  death  with  the  pleasures  of  the  day. 

Saturday,  10th. — Villa  Ludovisi.  A  standing  Mercury, 
easy  and  elegant.  Famous  group  of  Arria  and  P^tus,  one 
of  the  most  interesting  groups  I  have  seen  in  Eome.  The 
drooping  figure  of  Arria  supported  only  by  the  arm  of 
Psetus,  admirable :  the  expression  of  resolution  in  his  face 
excellent ;  it  is  an  attitude  evidently  chosen  by  the  sculptor 
for  great  expression  of  muscle ;  a  man  could  not  natu- 
rally think  of  kiUing  himself  by  running  his  sword  in  at 
his  collar-bone. 

Sunday,  11th. — ^High  Mass  by  the  Pope  in  St.  Peter's; 
in  my  opinion,  the  finest  of  all  the  church-shows.  The 
crowd  in  the  church  I  think  greater  than  on  Christmas- 
day.     Afterwards  to  Cardinal  Negroni's  apartments,  to 


1784]  THE   VILLA   COESINL  109 

see  the  benediction  given.  The  number  both  of  people 
and  carriages  in  the  place,  and  as  far  as  one  could  see 
towards  the  bridge,  was  much  greater  than  on  Thursday. 
Altogether  'tis  a  striking  sight ;  but  one  loses  the  Pope 
in  the  grandeur  of  the  scene  around  him.  Man !  man !  is 
too  small  an  animal  to  attempt  bleSsing  the  world  from 
St.  Peter's ! 

Monday,  \'2th. — In  the  evening  to  Cardinal  Salviati's,  to 
see  the  Girandola.  The  King  was  there,  and  it  was  a  most 
numerous  and  briUiant  conversazione,  all  the  ladies  being 
in  gala,  it  being  the  eve  of  the  Pope's  coronation,  which 
during  this  reign,  luckily  for  the  strangers,  happens 
early  in  the  year ;  the  great  gerhe  de  feu  with  which  the 
Girandola  begins  and  ends  is  noble,  and  may  perhaps, 
as  it  is  said,  give  one  some  faint  idea  of  an  irruption  of 
Vesuvius :  the  intermediate  figures  of  fire  are  not  par- 
ticularly fine. 

Wednesday,  \Uh — Villa  Corsini.  Gallery : — a  portrait 
of  Eembrandt,  by  himself.  Jesus  Christ  and  the  Woman 
of  Samaria,  by  Guercino :  the  figure  of  Our  Saviour 
beautiful ;  the  woman  well  paiated,  but  vulgar.  Venus 
dressing,  by  Albani,  excellent.  A  Herodia  with  the  head 
of  John  the  Baptist,  by  Guido  :  the  countenance  of  the 
head  beautiful,  but  the  coiffure  too  much  like  a  modern 
nightcap.  A  bedchamber  in  which  Christina,  Queen  of 
Sweden,  died.*  Innocent  X.,  by  Velasquez,  a  good  por- 
trait. A  Madonna  and  Child  by  Murillo,  charmingly 
painted.     Supped  with  Cardinal  Bernis. 

Friday,  IQth. — ^Artists,  with  Mr.  Moore.  The  French 
Academy  a  noble  institution :  the  rooms  for  the  students 
are  lined  with  beautiful  Gobelins  tapestry ;  they  are  full 
of  models  of  all  the  finest  statues  of  antiquity.  Anybody, 
as  well  as  the  French  artists,  may  draw  from  them. 

*  Christina,  Queen  of  Sweden,  daughter  of  Gustavus  Adolphua,  born  1626. 
She  abdicated  the  throne  in  1654 ;  died  at  Rome  in  1689 ;  was  buried  in 
St.  Peter's,  the  Pope  himself  writing  her  epitaph. 


110  MISS   berry's  journal.  [1784 

Sunday,  \%th. — In  the  morning  to  St.  Peter's — the 
Sistine  Chapel — to  see  the  two  daughters  of  the  Vene- 
tian ambassador  confirmed.  The  ceremony,  much  Hke 
ours,  was  performed  by  the  Pope  himself;  and  after- 
wards he  said  mass  and  administered  the  sacrament  to 
them  hke  any  other  simple  priest.  They  continued  kneel- 
ing before  the  altar  during  the  whole  ceremony.  Their 
dress,  which  was  very  elegant — all  white,  with  large  white 
veils  —  gave  them  a  very  graceful  appearance.  They 
were  attended  by  all  their  friends.  Princess  Santa  Groce 
officiated  as  thek  mother,  and  knelt  by  them  at  the 
altar. 

In  the  evening,  an  illumination  of  St.  Peter's.  We  went 
between  seven  and  eight  o'clock  to  the  Piazza,  where 
there  was  a  crowd  of  people  :  it  was  then  illuminated 
with  lanthorns,  which  cast  a  dim  steady  hgM  on  every 
part  of  it ;  they  even  contrive  to  place  them  in  capitals  of 
Corinthian  pillars ;  and  when  every  part  is  thus  surrounded 
by  a  line  of  fire,  they  say  it  looks  almost  like  a  traced 
drawing.  About  nine,  upon  the  signal  of  a  bell  tolling, 
in  two  minutes'  time  (by  all  our  watches),  the  church, 
from  the  top  of  the  cross  to  the  end  of  the  colonnade, 
was  in  a  blaze  of  fight.  A  more  magnificent  spectacle 
can  hardly  be  imagined ;  it  greatly  exceeded  my  expecta- 
tions :  the  whole  Hazza,  even  beyond  the  colonnade,  is  as 
light  as  day,  and  the  magnificent  building  is  seen  to  the 
greatest  advantage.  The  lanthorns  continued  after  the 
great  illumination,  with  the  pans  of  fire.  After  taking 
two  or  three  turns  round  the  Piazza,  we  went  to  the 
Trinitk  di  Monte ;  but  the  wind  was  so  high  that  a  number 
of  the  lamps  of  the  dome  and  colonnade  were  extin- 
guished. From  the  Trinitk  di  Monte  I  returned  to  the 
Piazza  of  St.  Peter's,  hoping  to  have'  another  look  at  the 
fa9ade  in  its  splendour,  but  already  the  wind  had  extin- 
guished nearly  half  of  the  pans  of  fire  :  the  Piazza,  which 
half  an  hour  before  we  had  seen  full  of  people  and  of; 


17S4]  MUSEUM   CLEMEXTIXITM.  Ill 

carriages  now  was  deserted.     '[|]was  a  melancholy  scene  of 
quickly  past  grandeur. 

Monday,  l^th. — To  the  Pope's  manufactory  of  printed 
linen.  About  a  hundred  men  employed  ;  but  they  cannot 
make  it  answer,  and  they  say  it  must  be  given  up  :  it  is  a 
pity,  for  they  have  great  conveniences  in  the  building  for 
carrying  on  any  manufacture,  and  their  patterns,  particu- 
larly those  for  furniture,  taken  from  the  Arabesques,  very 
elegant ;  the  best,  printed  upon  tolerably  fine  calico,  cost 
about  five  shillings  a  yard  Enghsh.  King  of  Sweden  left 
Eome. 

Tuesday,  2^th. — ^ViUa  Albani.  A  Jupiter  Serapis  in 
basalt ;  noble  character — reckoned  one  of  the  best  things 
in  the  collection. 

Wednesday,  'Alst. — ^Almost  all  the  EngHsh  in  Eome 
dined  together  at  the  VUla  Madonna,  belonging  to  the 
Medici  family,  about  two  miles  from  Eome  :  it  is  a  most 
dehghtful  situation,  but  is  quite  gone  to  ruia.  There 
were  twenty-three  or  twenty-four  at  dinner. 

Thursday,  22nd. — ^Museum  Clementinum.  The  cortile 
of  the  Belvidere  is  an  irregular  octagon  court,  with  an 
arcade  round  it,  in  the  niches  of  which  are  the  famous 
Apollo,  the  Laocoon,  a  Venus  and  Cupid,  the  torso  of  M. 
Angelo  (not  in  a  niche),  a  Hercules  holding  an  Infant  in 
his  hand,  a  mutilated  figure  called  Antinous  (the  coun- 
tenance that  of  Meleager,  and  only  called  otherwise  be- 
cause found  at  Adrian's  Villa),  and  a  Lucius  Verus.  The 
countenance  of  the  Apollo  most  remarkable  ;  it  is  not  so 
handsome,  I  think,  as  the  Antinous,  but  it  has  an  unex- 
ampled and  inimitable  dignity  about  it  which  marks  a 
god.  The  marble,  too,  is  uncommonly  happy ;  it  has  a 
fine  poHsh  upon  it,  which  seems  to  suit  the  elegance  of 
the  figure.  Altogether  it  does  not  astonish  at  first  sight. 
It  must  be  viewed  and  reviewed  to  be  enjoyed,  Hke  aU 
chefs  d'oeuvre  in  art.  The  Laocoon,  even  upon  considera- 
tion, astonishes  more  than  it  charms.  The  expression  in  the 


112  MISS   berry's   JOURXAL.  [1784 

father's  face  and  muscles  wonderful :  the  sons  have  been 
observed,  with  justice,  to  be  little  men,  not  boys  ;  but  the 
dehcacy  of  their  limbs  is  beautiful :  the  arm  of  the  father, 
which  is  above  his  head,  with  the  serpent  round  it,  was 
restored  by  Bernini,  and  is  only  plaster  ;  those  of  the  sons 
are  in  marble,  and  badly  done.  The  torso  may  be  fine  ; 
it  can  give  nobody  but  a  statuary  or  an  anatomist  plea- 
sure. The  Antinous,  or  rather  Meleager,  a  sweet  figure ; 
one  arm  is  broken  at  the  shoulder,  and  the  other  at  the 
wrist,  and  they  are  not  yet  restored.  The  armour  of  the 
Lucius  Verus  magnificent. 

In  the  long  vestibule  is  a  collection  of  all  sorts  of 
animals  in  marble ;  and  in  a  niche  at  the  end  is  the  statue 
of  Meleager,  with  the  dog  and  boar's  head  :  it  is,  in 
my  opinion,  one  of  the  most  beautiful  of  antiquity. 
Among  the  animals,  a  greyhound,  admirable. 

In  an  octagon  room  built  by  the  present  Pope,  the  Nine 
Muses,  found  about  eight  years  ago  in  Adrian's  Villa.  The 
Tragic  Muse  very  fine,  crowned  with  vines,  mask  and 
sword  in  her  hand,  leaning  with  her  arm  upon  her  knee, 
which  is  supported  on  a  rock. 

Friday,  2Brd. — Set  off  at  7  o'clock  A.M.,  with  Mr.  Mar- 
chant,  for  Tivoli.  Stopped  to  look  at  the  large  bed  of 
reeds  with  a  very  thick  coat  of  petrifaction  over  them ; 
almost  aU  lying  upright.  Arrived  at  Tivoli :  were  lodged 
at  the  house  of  an  Abbate  Franci.  "Went  on  foot,  with 
Donati,  the  cicerone  of  the  place,  to  the  Villa  d'  Este. 
The  house  was  built  in  the  year  1549,  by  a  cardinal  of 
that  family;*  belongs  to  the  Duke  of  Modena;  nobody 
has  lived  in  it  since  the  old  Duke  of  Modena  [Francis 
III.]  in  the  year  1745.  The  gardens  are  pretty  terraces 
fringed  with  trees,  one  below  another,  but  are  most  re- 
markable for  the  number  of  fountains,  jets  d'eau,  and 
artifices  with  water,  that  they  contain.     A  number  of 

*  Cardinal  Ippolito  d'Este  II.,  son  of  Alphonso,  Duke  of  Ferrara. 


1784]  PALAZZO   MATTEI — VILLA   BOEGHESE.  113 

Dutch  tricks  with  concealed  pipes,  which  they  call  the 
girandola,  is  really  pretty — a  large  body  of  water  thrown 
up  a  considerable  height  in  one  great  gerbe.  From 
thence  to  Mec^nas'  villa,  delightfully  situated  upon  the 
brink  of  the  hiU  just  over  the  cascatelle.  Nothing  remains 
but  two  stories  of  arches. 

Sibyls'  Temple.  The  pillars  of  Tiburtine  stone,  which 
is  all  a  petrifaction  of  reeds,  still  visible  m  the  pillars, 
though  covered  with  a  thick  coat  of  plaster. 

Saturday,  24^A.-^Made  the  tour  of  the  valley  upon  asses, 
saw  the  Temple  of  the  Goddess  Tossia,  octagon  on  the 
outside.  Dined  at  the  inn  with  Sir  G.  and  Lady  Warren, 
Mr.  Eepington,  and  Mr.  Brooke.  About  3  p.m.  set  out  for 
Eome  ;  on  our  way  went  to  Adrian's  villa,  about  two  miles 
from  Tivoh,  and  farther  on  to  a  lake  about  a  quarter  of  a 
mile  from  the  road,  which  is  sulphurous  and  always  warm- 
ish. In  it  are  several  floating  islands — that  is  to  say,  collec- 
tions of  reeds,  mud,  &c.,  large  and  strong  enough  for  four 
or  five  men  to  stand  upon.  There  was  a  man  upon  one  of 
them  in  the  middle  of  the  lake  when  we  were  there,  whom 
the  wind  in  a  httle  time  brought  to  the  edge,  where  we 
were  standing. 

Monday,  26iA,^Palazzo  Mattel,  In  the  gallery  a  bust 
of  Cicero,  the  only  one  in  Eome  with  the  ancient  name 
on  it ;  the  nose,  mouth,  and  chin  are  aU  modern,  and 
as  it  does  not  resemble  that  in  the  Capitol,  or  that  at 
Florence,  which  are  both  Jlner  busts,  its  authenticity  is 
disputed. 

Villa  Borghese.  The  Apollo  and  Daphne,  maniere,  but 
the  transformation  of  Daphne  charmingly  treated,  her 
figure  better  than  the  Apollo,  which  has  little  of  the  manly 
beauty  of  the  antique.  Bernini*  was  only  twenty-two 
when  he  executed  this  group. 

*  Giovanni  Lorenzo  Bemrni,  bom  1598,  acquired  a  considerable  reputa- 
tion as  painter,  architect,  ?ind  sculptor.  His  talent  was  very  early  developed. 
At  eio'bt  years  old,  be  actually  designed  a  group,  whicb  afterwards  proved 

VOL.    I.  I 


114  MISS   BBEEY'S  JOUBNAL.  Cl784 

Tuesday,  27th. — Museum  Clementinum.  In  the  evening 
to  see  the  statues  by  torchhght.  Nobody  that  has  not 
seen  it  can  have  an  idea  of  the  excellent  effect  of  this 
light,  thrown  upon  them  at  pleasure;  every  statue  ap- 
peared much  more  beautiful  than  I  had  ever  seen  it  by 
daylight. 

Wednesday,  28th. — Capitol,  to  seethe  statues  by  torch- 
light ;  the  effect  is  equally  good ;  it  is  the  only  method  of 
having  a  true  idea  of  the  beauty  of  these  admirable  statues, 
for  both  here  and  in  the  museum  they  are  mostly  Ul-placed 
as  to  hght. 

Thursday,  29th. — Artists  all  the  morning. 

Friday,  hOth. — Cardinal  de  Bernis  in  the  evening. 

Saturday,  May  1.— With  Bononi  to  Palazzo  Altieri.  In 
the  first  room  a  machine  for  perpetual  motion,  with  two 
balls.     I  understand  its  principle,  but  cannot  describe  it. 

Monday,  ^rd. —  Dined  at  the  villa  of  M.  Santini,  with 
Comte  Scarowsky,  his  mother,  her  niece.  Prince  Esterhazy, 
&c.  In  the  evening  the  whole  music  of  the  Tresca- 
tava  was  performed  ;  Comte  Scarowsky  the  first  violin. 

Tuesday,  Ath. — Palazzo  Barberiui.  The  famous  Giocato- 
ri  of  Caravaggio  ;  the  colouring  and  the  nature,  and  above 
all  the  expression  of  this  picture,  strike  me  as  inimitable. 
The  Magdalen  of  Guido,  sitting,  looking  up  to  two  angels 
in  the  air.  .  A  portrait  of  Eaphael  by  himself  on  wood, 
sweet  expression  of  countenance,  but,  from  time,  the  tints 
grown  all  equally  brown.  There  is  not  one  bad  picture  in 
this  room — a  very  uncommon  circumstance  even  in  Eome. 
A  number  of  excellent  portraits  by  Titian ;  farther  on, 
a  dead  Christ  supported  under  the  arms  by  the  Madonna, 
M.  Angelo  Buonarroti ;  the  attitude  and  expression  won- 
derful; it  makes  one  shudder.  Two  large  and  two  small 
landscapes  by  C.  Lorrain,  both  much  cracked,  but  beau- 

his  best  work — '  Apollo  and  Daphne.'  His  fluttering  mannerism  in  sculpture 
was  on  the  whole  injurious  to  the  taste  in  art  of  his  time.  Died  1680. Im- 
perial Dictionary  of  Universal  Biography, 


1784]  VILLA  ALDOBKAOT)mi,  ETC.  115 

tiful.     An  ancient  bronze  figure  of  S.  Severus ;  ancient 
bronze  wliole  figures  are  rare. 

Set  out  at  8  o'clock  to  Frescati.  In  the  Villa  Monte 
Dragone,  which  belongs  to  P.  Borghese,  a  colossal 
bust  of  Antinous,  one  of  the  most  perfect  remains  of 
antiquity,  not  even  the  nose  restored,  the  countenance 
very  fine,  the  hair  rather  afiected,  or  at  least  very  fop- 
pishly arranged,  two  httle  curls  hanging  at  each  ear. 
Behind  the  Villa  Dragone  are  some  remains  of  buildings, 
called  the  Tusculum  of  TuUy,  and  on  the  other  side  of  the 
villa  that  of  Fortius  Cato. 

Villa  Aldobrandini,  fine  situation.  At  the  back  of  the 
house  is  a  circular  fa9ade  of  buUding,  in  which  there  are 
fountains  and  Gioco  d'  Acqua.  A  room  on  one  side, 
called  the  ladies'  bath,  with  a  trumpery  representation  of 
Farnassus  at  the  end  of  it;  a  sort  of  rock,  on  which 
are  Httle  figures  of  the  Muses  and  Apollo,  with  the  pipes 
of  an  organ  in  their  .mouths,  which  plays  by  the  water. 
Dined  upon  our  cold  dinner  in  a  room  at  the  Villa  Brac- 
ciano,  which  is  finely  situated,  well  kept,  the  rooms  fur- 
nished vnth  printed  cahcos,  and  has  the  appearance  of  a 
comfortable  English  country  house. 

After  dinner,  stopped  in  our  way  to  Castel-Gandolfo  at 
a  village  called  Grotto  Ferrato,  to  see  a  chapel  of  a  church 
belonging  to  a  monastery,  paiated  in  fresco  by  Domeni- 
chino;  one  of  the  subjects  a  miracle  performed  on  a 
demoniac  by  a  monk  of  the  monastery.  It  is  one  of  the 
finest  pictures  I  know,  the  simphcity  and  expression  of 
the  figures,  and  particularly  of  the  boy  possessed,  most 
interesting  ;  he  is  stretched  backwards  on  his  tip-toes,  in 
the  arms  of  his  father,  with  his  eyes  distorted  upwards. 

Wednesday,  6th. — Arrived  at  Mr.  Jenkins'  house  at 
Castel-Gandolfo. 

Thursday,  Qth. — ^Walked  to  Albano,  to  the  Doria  villa, 
formerly  Fompey's  ;  the  Barberini  villa,  formerly  Domi- 
tian's ;  in  the  gardens  the  remains  of  a  very  long  colon- 

i2 


116  MISS  berry's   JOURI^AL.  [1784 

nade,  with  niches.  Walked  down  to  the  lake  to  the 
emissary,  a  stone  channel  cut  through  the  hill  by  the 
Eomans,  to  prevent  the  water  rising  above  a  certain 
height.  The  man  who  showed  it  set  two  or  three  little 
candles  upright  upon  a  board,  which,  as  it  sailed  through 
the  channel,  we  saw  for  near  half  a  mile.  The  lake  was 
formerly  encompassed  with  a  low  stone  parapet,  seven  miles 
round.  It  served  for  a  numachia  for  Domitian's  villa, 
who  there  had  mock  sea-fights. 

Sunday,  9th. — In  the  morning  walked  to  the  Ponte 
Molle,  where  the  battle  between  Constantine  and  Maxen- 
tius  was  fought. 

Monday, l^th. — Palazzo  Colonna.  Titian's  famous  Venus 
and  Adonis ;  its  companion,  the  Ganymede,  carried  up  to 
heaven  by  the  eagle,  spirited  and  admirable.  Luther  and 
Calvin,  by  Titian  ;  wonderful  portraits.  A  cabiaet  of 
ebony,  with  ivory  basso-relievos,  representing  scripture 
histories,  a  most  dehcate  and  exquisite  work  of  the  kind  ; 
it  was  bought  from  our  Charles  I.  In  the  gallery,  the 
statue  of  Germanicus,  with  his  hand  up  ready  to  throw  it 
out,  as  playing  at  moro,  a  game  which,  it  is  said,  he 
invented  to  amuse  his  army.  The  Madonna  finding  the 
dead  Body  of  Jesus  (Guerciao),  the  best  painted,  best 
treated,  and  most  affecting  of  that  sort  I  have  seen;  it 
is  striking  for  the  simplicity  of  the  composition,  the  dead 
body  sitting  supported  by  a  stone,  and  the  animated 
attitude  and  grief  of  the  Madonna ;  the  drapery  is  rich 
and  simple ;  the  scene  of  the  cave  or  sepulchre,  and  the 
distant  view  of  the  cross,  upon  a  wild  heath,  all  conspire 
to  add  to  the  melancholy  and  wonderful  effect  of  the 
picture. 

In  another  apartment,  the  famous  portrait  of  the  Cenci, 
in  the  dress  in  which  (they  say)  she  was  executed ;  it  is 
called  by  Guido,  but  is  not  in  his  manner;  the  real 
painter  is  probably  unknown.  The  expression  of  the  face 
j-S  most  beautiful,  and  the  history  makes  it  affecting.    I 


1784]  FAREWELL   VISITS.  117 

never  saw  one  of  all  its  numerous  copies  that  gave  a  tale 
the  tone,  expression,  or  grace  of  the  countenance. 

In  the  evening  drank  tea  at  Villa  Madonna  with  Mr. 
Conway,  Mr.  Campbell,  Mr.  Meares,  Mr.  Bemington,  Mr. 
Giffard,  Mr.  Byres,  and  Mr.  Tresham, 

Wednesday,  12th. — Borghese  Palace.  Among  the  pic- 
tures, Domenichino's  Sibyl,  or  St.  Cecilia,  a  small  St. 
Catherine,  standing  leaning  agains't  the  wheel,  by  Eaphael, 
Titian's  Three  Graces  binding  Cupid,  were  amongst  those 
that  struck  me  most.  The  boys  are  more  graceful  than 
the  Graces. 

In  the  afternoon,  to  the  Villa  Marafosci,  to  see  a  statue 
of  a  sleeping  figure,  called  an  Endymion,  lately  found  in  a 
cava  at  Adrian's  villa.  The  figure  is  lying  at  length  and 
in  perfect  repose. 

Thursday,  IZth. — Went  to  see  Prince  Piombini's  col- 
lections of  gems.  Among  a  great  many  bad  ones,  there 
are  some  few  very  pretty :  a  large  head  of  Augustus  in 
cameo,  a  group  fighting  for  the  dead  body  of  Patroclus, 
in  intagho. 

The  EngHsh  dined  with  us  in  the  evening. 

Friday,  14^A. — In  the  evening  to  Madame  d'Albany's.* 

Monday,  YIth. — In  the  morning  went  to^  take  leave  of 
the  Museum  Clementinum ;  saw  the  sarcophagus  of  St. 
Helena,  the  mother  of  Constantine,  which  is  repairing  for 
the  Pope :  the  design  of  the  sculpture  is  odd.  Armed 
men  on  horseback  galloping  over  the  heads  of  prisoners 
on  their  knees. 

Tuesday,  l^th. —  To  take  leave  of  and  the  Capitol,  the 
Colosseum,  with  Canova  the  sculptor.f 

*  Louisa  Maximiliana  de  Stolberg,  afterwards  known  by  the  name  of 
Countess  d'Albany,  wife  of  the  Pretender,  after  the  death  of  Charles  Ed- 
ward in  1788.  She  travelled  in  Italy  and  France,  and  with  her  Alfieri  the 
poet,  to  whom  she  was  supposed  to  be  married.  She  resided  at  Paris  until 
driven  by  the  Revolution  to  take  refuge  in  England.  (JValpoWs  Letters, 
p.  316.)  In  1820  she  was  supposed  to  be  married  to  John  Fabr^,  a  French 
painter  of  talent. — P.  322.    Cunningham's  edit,  of  H.  Walpole's  Lettei'S. 

f  Antonio  Canova,  the  son  and  grandson  of  a  sculptor,  was  born  1757,  at 


118  MISS  BEEBT'S  journal.  [1784 

In  the  evening,  to  take  leave  at  Madame  d' Albany's, 
at  Princess  Santa  Croce's,  and  at  Lady  Murray's. 

Wednesday,  19th. — La  the  evening,  St.  Peter's  to  take 
leave.  All  our  English  friends  with  us  tiU  past  10  ; 
afterwards  called  upon  Madame  Scarowsky  and  Lady 
Ehzabeth  Foster. 

Thursday,  20th. — ^Left  Eome  between  4  and  5  o'clock 
A.M.  with  a  voiturier  for  Florence  by  Terni.  Arrived  at 
Civita  Castellano ;  it  is  a  small  town  and  fortress  of  the 
Pope's,  in  a  most  romantic  situation.  This  was  the 
PhalissEe  of  the  ancients,  which  stood  a  siege  of  two  years 
by  Lucius  Camillus ;  it  is  strongly  fortified  by  nature. 
The  Pope's  garrison  in  the  present  fortress  consists  only 
of  thirty  men. 

Friday,  21st. — ^Arrived  at  Terni.  General  O'Hara  and 
Mr.  Conway  passed  us  upon  the  road  ;.  spent  the  evening 
with  us. 

Saturday,  22nd. — The  General  and  Mr.  Conway  break- 
fasted with  us  between  4  and  5  o'clock,  and  set  out 
with  us  immediately  afterwards  in  two  caleches  to  see  the 
cascade ;  it  is  five  miles  from  Terni.  From  the  rock  there 
is  a  good  view  of  it,  and  one  little  lodge  with  steps  down 
the  hill  was  built  for  the  present  Pope,  but  he  has  never 
been  there  yet.  The  country  all  about  the  cascade  is  most 
romantic.  We  returned  in  our  caleches  to  Papigno,  a  village 
in  the  road  to  Terni,  from  whence  we  set  out  on  foot  to 
view  the  cascade  from  below  ;  it  is  a  walk  of  four  good  miles 
there  and  back  again ;  it  was  hot  and  was  rather  fatiguing, 
but  we  were  well  compensated  not  only  by  the  grand  ap- 
pearance of  the  cascade,  but  by  the  beauty  of  the  walk 

Possagno,  a  village  at  the  foot  of  tlie  Venetian  Alps.  He  was  an  orphan  at 
three  years  old,  and  was  instructed  in  his  art  by  his  grandfather.  He  first 
visited  Rome  in  1780.  His  first  work  there  was  '  Theseus  conquering  the 
Minotaur.'  From  that  time  his  fame  was  established.  He  settled  at  Rome 
in  1783.  His  genius  secured  him  the  admiration  of  the  civilised  world,  and 
his  kind  and  gentle  virtues  the  respect  and  admiration  of  all  who  knew  Mm. 
He  died  at  Venice  October  1822. 


1784]  ARRIVAL  AT   PERUGIA.  119 

itself.  The  banks  are  weU  wooded  down  to  the  water's 
edge,  or  rather  into  the  water,  which  runs  round  the  roots 
of  many  of  the  trees,  forming  httle  islands.  Counting 
from  the  level  of  the  valley,  it  falls  367  feet  (according  to 
the  people  of  the  place),  but  not  in  one  fall ;  after  the  first 
great  pitch  it  runs  sloping  over  two  great  shelves  of  rock. 
A  more  beautiful  subject  for  the  pencil  can  hardly  be  con- 
ceived: the  froth  rises  like  thick  smoke  far  above  the 
top,  and  at  the  water's  edge.  We  should  have  been  wet 
to  the  skin  had  we  stayed  five  minutes.  Eeturned  to  our 
carriages  at  Papigno,  much  fatigued  with  the  heat ;  got 
back  to  Terni  about  11  o'clock.  The  people  had  told  us 
it  would  take  three  hours  to  see  the  cascade ;  we  were 
much  above  six.  Mr.  Conway  and  General  O'Hara  set  off 
for  Fohgno,  and  we  for  Spoletta. 

Sunday,  23rd — Dined  at  Foligno.  SawEaphael's  altar- 
piece  in  the  church  of  the  Franciscans;  the  composition 
is  arranged  in  the  regular  form  and  manner  of  his  master, 
P.  Perugino ;  in  the  middle,  the  Madonna  and  Child  in 
the  heavens  —  two  saints  on  each  side,  one  kneeling  and 
one  standing,  and  a  cherubim  supporting  a  tablet  in  the 
middle.  Stopped  at  Chiesa  Nuova,  near  the  town  of 
Assisi,  to  see  an  immense  large  church  belonging  to  a 
convent  of  Franciscans,  in  which  there  are  no  less  than 
142  of  that  order.  In  the  middle  of  the  church  is  a  little 
chapel,  where  St.  Francis  used  to  pray,  and  near  the  choir 
another  httle  hovel,  where  he  died,*  which  is  the  reason 
the  church  was  placed  here.  Arrived  at  Perugia  between 
7  and  8  p.m.  Perugia  is  a  more  comfortable-looking  town 
than  any  I  have  seen  in  the  Pope's  dominions. 

Monday,  2ith. — ^Walked  into  the  cathedral  at  Perugia  ; 
it  is  a  large  half-Gothic  building,  the  roof  now  painting 
very  prettily  in  fresco  by  a  native  of  the  town.  The  lake 
is   a  noble  piece  of  water — the  people  say  forty  miles 

*  St.  Francis  of  Assisi,  tlie  founder  of  tke  order  of  Franciscans,  bom 
1183;  died  1224. 


120  MISS   BEEKY'S   journal.  [1784 

round ;  there  are  three  islands,  on  one  of  which  is  a 
convent. 

Arrived  at  Camucia,  a  poor  inn  in  a  poor  village,  under 
the  hill,  upon  which  Cortona  stands. 

Tuesday^  2bth. — Breakfasted  at  Arezzo  ;  the  houses  and 
people  have  a  better  appearance  than  those  in  the  Pope's 
dominions.     Arrived  at  Levane ;  inn  very  bad. 

Wednesday,  26^A.— Arrived  at  Pian  della  Ponte  in  six 
hours;  the  auberge  most  wretched.  The  landlady's 
daughters  two  very  handsome  girls,  in  the  little  hats, 
white  loose  sleeves,  and  graceful  dress  of  the  country. 
Arrived  at  Florence  about  7  p.m. 

Thursday,  27th. — Went  to  the  gallery  and  some  shops 
in  the  morning.  In  the  evening  Miss  Gore  came  and  sat 
with  us,  afterwards  carried  us  to  Teatro  Nuovo ;  Lady 
Cowper's  box. 

Florence  :  Saturday,  29^A.— Palazzo  Pitti.  Paul  III.,  by 
Titian,  an  admirable  portrait ;  its  pendant  a  Dutchman 
in  a  black  dress,  by  Vandyck,  ahnost  as  good  ;  they  are 
both  chefs-d'oeuvre.  A  portrait  of  a  woman  by  Titian, 
the  same  he  painted  as  his  famous  Venus.  In  the  third 
room,  Eaphael's  celebrated  Madonna  della  Sedia.  It 
pleased  me  still  more  now  than  it  did  before ;  both  the 
lines  and  colouring  of  it  are  beautiful.  Above  it,  Leo  X., 
with  two  cardinals,  by  the  same  painter,  in  a  colour- 
ing as  rich  and  deep  as  Titian's.  Four  bourgmestres,  or 
councillors,  sitting  at  a  table,  by  Eubens,  one  of  the 
clearest  and  most  hvely  pictures  I  ever  saw.  Julius  II., 
by  Eaphael,  wonderftiUy  coloured.  Cardinal  Bentivo- 
glio,  by  Vandyck,  a  fine  portrait,  the  countenance  one 
of  the  most  penetrating  I  ever  beheld.  Under  it  a  por- 
trait by  Paul  Veronese,  in  a  black  robe  hned  with  fur, 
which  is  wonderfully  well  expressed  in  a  very  rude  manner. 
A  portrait  of  a  young  boy  of  the  House  of  Medici, 
Vandyck,  beautiful  countenance.  A  Madonna  and  Child 
in  her  arms,  attended  by  two  saints  on  each  side,  and  two 


1784]  GINOEl'S   CHINA  MANUPACTOEY.  121 

angels  in  front  reading  a  scroll,  by  Eaphael — in  his  first 
manner,  in  my  opinion,  more  pleasing  than  his  second, 
though  in  general  the  grouping  of  the  figures  is  arranged 
with  the  regularity  of  dishes  upon  a  table.  The  Eeturn 
of  the  Prodigal  Son,  by  Bronzino,  a  fine  picture  :  the 
father  is  receiving  him  out  of  a  boat — an  uncommon  idea 
of  the  subject.  Calvin  and  Luther,  by  Georgone  di  Castel- 
franco,  finely  painted,  though  turned  brown. 

In  the  evening  Lady  Cowper  and  Miss  Gore  carried  us 
to  Sir  H.  Mann's. 

Sunday,  30^A. — Walked  in  the  cascini  with  Miss  Gore, 
afterwards  to  the  Pergola  theatre. 

Monday,  ?t\st. — In  the  morning  to  Ginori's  china 
manufactory,  about  five  miles  from  Florence.  The  road 
to  it  is  through  a  country  cultivated  like  a  garden,  with 
every  sign  of  plenty  and  comfort  in  the  people.  The 
painting  of  the  china  is  neatly  executed,  though  not  in 
general  happy  in  their  patterns.  The  clay,  too,  is  heavy. 
About  eighty  men  employed  in  the  manufactory.* 

Dined  at  Lord  Cowper's. 

Tuesday,  June!.- — Miss  Gore  called  for  us  in  a  phaeton. 
Went  to  a  vUla  upon  the  side  of  a  hiU  about  three  miles 
from  Florence,  which  belonged  to  the  late  Lady  Orford,f 
and  which  she  left  to  her  cavalier  servente.  It  is  elegantly 
furnished,  and  kept  in  as  nice  order  as  any  country  house 
in  England ;  it  has  a  charming  view  over  the  whole  vale 
of  Arno  ;  it  is  one  stretch  of  the  richest  cultivation,  thickly 

•  In  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century,  when  the  Duke  of  Lorraine  ac- 
quired the  dukedom  of  Tuscany,  Charles  Marquis  Ginori  established  on  his 
own  account,  after  the  example  of  the  petty  sovereigns  of  Gernaany,  a  large 
manufactory  of  pottery  (ten-aglia)  and  porcelain,  at  Doceia,  near  Florence, 

which  met  with  great  success At  the  sale  at  Strawberry  Hill  there 

were  many  specimens  which  had  been  sent  home  by  Sir'  Horace  Mann  to 
Horace  Walpole  about  1760;  it  was  described  and  sold  as  Oriental. — Pottery 
and  Porcelain,  by  J.  Marryat,  p.  211-12. 

■f  Lady  Orford,  daughter  of  Samuel  RoUe,  Esq.,  of  Haynton,  county 
Devon,  married  in  1724  to  Robert,  second  Earl  of  Orford,  who  died  1751 ; 
married,  secondly,  the  Hon.  Sewallis  Shirley ;  became  Baroness  Clinton ; 
died  1781. 


122  MISS  BEEET'S  JOUEKAL.  [1784 

spotted  "with  white  houses  and  villages  as  far  as  the  eye 
can  reach. 

In  the  afternoon  went  with  Miss  Gr.  and  Prince  Chymee 
to  the  Sta.  Maria  Novella  to  see  an  illumination  on  account 
of  the  first  celebration  of  a  new  saint's  day  ;  it  was  the 
best-dressed  church  I  ever  saw,  entirely  covered  with 
new  crimson  damask  and  gold  lace,  and,  being  a  sort  of 
half-Gothic  architecture,  did  not  lose  by  its  finery. 

Wednesday,  2nd. — Breakfasted  at  Lord  Cowper's,  in 
the  cabinet,  an  apartment  of  five  small  rooms  elegantly 
fitted  up  with  the  finest  instruments  for  experiments  in 
all  the  different  branches  of  natural  philosophy :  one  is 
dedicated  to  electricity,  a  second  a  laboratory,  a  third  for 
optics,  a  fourth  for  hydraulic  experiments,  a  fifth  for  air. 
Took  leave  of  Lady  Cowper  and  Miss  Gore. 

Set  out  post  for  Leghorn  ;  great  part  of  the  way  along 
the  banks  of  the  Arno,  and  the  whole  of  it  through  a 
most  richly  cultivated  country.  Lastra,  the  first  post  on 
this  side  Florence,  is  where  a  vast  many  straw  hats  are 
made,  but  they  are  also  made  in  Florence  and  through 
the  whole  country  between  that  and  Leghorn.  At 
Florence  only  you  can  buy  good  ones. 

Thursday,  Zrd. — Travelled  all  night;  arrived  at  Leg- 
horn. In  the  evening  to  the  new  Mole,  which  I  was  told 
by  some  of  our  navy  people  is  very  badly  constructed ; 
the  streets  are  noisy  and  busthng,  full  of  shops  and 
people ;  put  me  so  exactly  in  mind  of  Portsmouth,  Ply- 
mouth, or  any  other  seaport  town  in  England,  that  I  could 
not  fancy  myself  in  Italy. 

Friday,  Uh. — All  the  morning  at  shops  :  they  are  very 
good,  but  not  cheap.  Dined  at  Otto  Franc's  the  banker's ; 
went  after  dinner  with  Mrs.  Franc  to  a  coral  manufactory. 
This  is  a  great  business  at  Leghorn,  carried  on  by  the 
Jews,  who  work,  cut,  and  pohsh  the  coral,  and  send  it  to 
England  and  other  places  to  go  to  the  East  Indies  ;  saw 
some  beautiful  natural  specimens  as  it  comes  out  of  the 
water.    The  price  enormous  when  cut  and  polished  and 


1784]  FALLING-  TOWER   OF   PISA.  123 

made  into  beads.  We  saw  a  long  string  of  large  beads, 
which  they  said  was  worth  more  than  1,200^.  sterling. 

Saturday,  bth. — Went  aboard  the  English  men-of-war 
laying  in  the  harbour,  for  all  of  which  we  had  letters  to 
the  captains  from  Florence.  Went  out  in  the  barge  of 
Capt.  Waghorn,  of  the  Trusty,  the  commodore's  ship,  of 
50  guns ;  admirably  fitted  up  for  accommodation,  the 
commodore's  lady  having  accompanied  him  in  the  cruise. 
Went  on  board  the  Thetis,  Capt.  Blankett,  a  beautiful 
38-gun  frigate,  and  the  Eattlesnake,  of  12  guns,  Capt. 
Melcomb. 

Lieutenant  Forbes,  of  the  Trusty,  and  Mr.  Preston,  of 
the  Sphinx,  dined  with  us.  Left  Leghorn  for  Pisa  ;  the 
road  good,  and  part  of  it  through  a  country  like  the  New 
Forest  between  Lymington  and  Lyndhurst.  The  inn  at 
Leghorn  good,  kept  by  an  Englishwoman,  Mrs.  Cain. 

The  Piazza  Grande,  a  fine  long  square,  with  well-buUt 
houses,  and  much  appearance  of  business  and  population. 

Sunday,  Qth. — The  part  of  Pisa  near  the  Arno  is 
beautiful ;  the  three  bridges  all  handsome.  The  Lung 
Arno  is  gay,  and  there  are  fine  long  streets  with  good 
houses,  but  they  look  perfectly  deserted.  In  Leghorn 
there  are  48,000  inhabitants ;  in  Pisa,  which  is  above 
twice  as  large,  there  are  only  16,000. 

The  falling  tower,  which  is  a  belfry,  is  a  foolish  bizarre 
idea,  of  which  the  architects  of  Italy  some  centuries  ago 
seem  to  have  been  very  fond.  Their  total  want  of  fitness 
occasions  rather  a  disagreeable  sensation  than  otherwise  ; 
that  of  Pisa  has  a  clumsy  look  too,  from  being  much  too 
thick  for  its  height.  The  Campo  Santo  is  a  fine  long 
square  surrounded  by  a  broad  Gothic  arcade,  built  by 
Giovanni  Pisano,  finished  in  the  year  1283.  The  earth 
in  the  iniddle,  they  think,  was  brought  from  Jerusalem. 
It  is  a  burying-place,  where  every  noble  Pisan  had  a  vault; 
but  the  present  Grand  Duke  *  has  prohibited  anybody 

*  Peter  Leopold  succeeded  Lis  brother  as  Emperor  of  Austria,  1790. 


124  MISS   BERRY'S   JOURNAL.  [1784 

being  buried  withia  the  town.  The  walls  of  the  arcade 
are  curiously  painted  with  scripture  subjects  by  very  old 
artists,  the  best  by  Benozzi,  a  Florentine  painter  who  died 
in  1478,  of  some  of  which  I  had  seen  copies  in  England. 
In  the  afternoon,  went  in  a  biroccio  to  Pisa  baths,  four  miles 
distant,  the  road  through  a  rich  country ;  there  is  a  canal 
by  its  side  exactly  hke  one  in  Holland,  the  water  above  the 
level  of  the  road.  At  the  baths  is  a  very  large  corps  de 
logis,  which  is  let  out  in  different  apartments.  The  great 
buUding  and  the  baths  were  begun  by  the  viceroy  or 
governor  of  Tuscany  in  the  time  of  the  late  emperor. 
The  pubhc  bath  is  lined  with  fine  marble,  has  a  little 
gallery  with  marble  balustrades,  in  which  one  can  walk. 
I  tasted  the  water ;  it  is  a  little  warmer  than  new  milk, 
and  has  no  disagreeable  taste.     Eeturned  to  Pisa. 

Monday,  7th. — ^Left  Pisa ;  crossed  the  Serchio  in  a 
boat.  Between  Sarzanna  and  Lerici  crossed  another  river 
in  a  small  inconvenient  boat.  It  was  a  hohday,  and 
on  the  bank  by  the  river,  under  the  shade  of  festoons  of 
vines  hanging  from  tree  to  tree,  was  a  group  of  peasants 
dancing  to  the  music  of  a  vioHn  and  tambour  de  basque. 
This  sounds  charming,  and  the  scene  around  was  truly  so. 
I  went  up  to  the  dancers,  hoping  to  see  that  real  gaiety 
and  allegresse  in  all  their  motions — that  unaffected  un- 
spoilt beauty  and  grace  in  their  persons,  which  one  is 
told  is  only  to  be  met  with  in  the  native  dances  of 
peasants,  and  in  comparison  with  which  our  beauties  in 
ball-rooms  are  cold  and  insipid;  but  truth,  irresistible 
truth,  with  her  broad  mirror,  too  often  destroys  every  gay 
fictitious  image  half-formed  in  my  imagination.  If  real 
beauty  and  unaffected  gaiety  are  not  to  be  found  in  a  ball- 
room, I  am  sure  they  did  not  exist  among  these  peasants : 
they  were  most  of  them  old  and  very  plain,  and  danced 
with  such  a  dullness  and  gravity  that  one  would  have 
supposed  they  had  been  celebrating  funeral  games. 

Arrived  at  Lerici :  it  is  a  poor  town  close  upon  the  sea, 


1784]  AEEIVAL  AT   GENEVA.  125 

inhabited  by  felucca  people.  We  came  to  Lerici  at  an 
unlucky  time,  for  there  were  very  few  feluccas,  many 
having  been  taken  to  Toulon  with  the  King  of  Sweden. 
After  some  difficulty,  we  made  a  bargain  for  two  small 
ones  for  eight  sequins ;  each  boat  had  five  rowers,  but 
were  too  small  to  be  comfortable.  The  one  we  were  in 
just  admitted  the  body  of  the  carriage  put  across  the 
boat,  in  which  we  all  sat ;  the  train  of  the  carriage  was 
in  the  other  with  one  of  the  servants.  Sailed  before  8 
o'clock  P.M.  ;  we  were  aU  monstrously  sick  all  night, 
though  there  was  biit  a  moderate  wind. 

Tuesday,  8th. — Landed  at  Genoa  about  10  :  our  boats 
did  not  sail  well. 

In  the  evening  took  a  httle  walk  in  the  town ;  the 
palaces  struck  me  as  magnificent,  even  after  those  of 
Eome. 

Wednesday,  9th. — Walked  through  the  mercantile  part 
of  the  town,  saw  the  Palazzo  Durazzo.  Three  noble 
large  pictures  by  Luca  Giordano,  the  subject  from  Tasso. 
Two  rooms  hung  with  silk,  painted  (they  say)  with  the 
juice  of  herbs,  by  Eomanetti,  the  design  from  scrip- 
ture history,  good.  The  Capo  d'  Opera  of  P.  Veronese 
— the  Woman  washing  Our  Saviour's  Feet — a  great  num- 
ber of  figures  admirably  grouped  together,  the  heads 
charmingly  painted,  but  the  draperies,  though  gaily 
coloured,  in  my  idea  want  relief;  all  the  figures  in  the 
group  round  our  Saviour  seem  equally  prominent.  Left 
Genoa  ;  lay  at  Campo  Marrone. 

Thursday,  lO^A. —  Passed  the  Scrivia  (where  we  had 
been  so  plagued  in  the  winter),  a  gue,  without  the  least 
trouble ;  also  crossed  the  Po  upon  a  pont  volant.  On 
entering  Pavia  crossed  the  Tesin  on  a  bridge  with  a  tiled 
roof,  supported  upon  awkward  sort  of  square  stone 
pillars.  It  was  a  great  gala  day,  the  Fete-Dieu ;  I  was 
amazed  to  see  the  number  of  carriages  the  town  of  Pavia 
mustered  together. 


126  MISS  BEKEY'S  JOUENAL.  [1784 

Friday,  llth. — Walked  into  the  courts  of  the  Univer- 
sity, two  handsome  quadrangles.  Went  to  the  botanic 
gardens,  made  within  these  four  years ;  it  is  arranged  after 
the  Linnsean  system ;  a  number  of  the  South  Sea  plants. 

N.B. —  The  gardener  told  me  that  exotic  ericas  would 
not  live  at  Pavia ;  that  they  had  often  tried  to  no  pur- 
pose. 

The  present  barrack  for  the  troops  is  a  great  brick 
building,  half  Gothic,  half  Grecian,  formerly  the  palace 
of  the  Lombard  kings.  Left  Pavia — arrived  at  Milan. 
Found  at  the  Auberge  Imperiale  Sir  G.  and  Lady  War- 
ren, Mr.  Brooke,  and  Mr.  Parkinson. 

Saturday,  12th. — Went  to  the  cathedral,*  which  is  an 
enormous  large  Gothic  of  five  aisles  ;  it  is  yet  unfinished, 
and,  though  they  are  laying  out  money  upon  it  every  year, 
will  probably  ever  continue  so ;  it  is  a  mixture  of  Grecian 
and  Gothic,  both  bad,  and  rendered  worse  by  being  united. 
The  numberless  statues  on  the  outside  are  a  great  de- 
formity, and  entirely  take  off  the  lightness  and  beauty  of 
Gothic  pillars  and  pinnacles  ;  only  a  little  bit  of  the  floor 
is  paved  with  marble,  the  rest  very  irregularly  with  brick 
and  small  stones. 

Monday,  lUh. — Li  the  evening  the  Marchesina  Litta 
called  upon  us  and  carried  us  to  the  corso  and  to  the 
theatre  ;  it  is  httle  less  than  St.  Carlo  at  Naples.  The  old 
Marchesa  Litta's  box  had  on  its  summer  dress  :  dimity  or 
white  linen,  with  a  border ;  looking-glasses,  doors,  &c. 
Belonging  to  the  theatre  is  a  salle  redoute,  three  or  four 
rooms  handsomely  furnished,  where  there  is  always  a  faro 
table,  and  people  at  play.  This  theatre  was  built  by  sub- 
scription, and  I  understand  the  fonds  of  all  the  boxes  was 
very  considerable  —  that  of  the  Marchesa  Litta  a  large 
one,  1,000  Louis,  besides  a  rent  of  200  or  300  hvres  a  year. 

*  The  first  stone  was  laid  by  Giovanni  Galeazzo  Visconti,  March  15, 
1386.  The  central  tower  and  spire  were  completed  in  1772.  The  works 
were  continued  by  Napoleon  in  1806. 


1784]  AKRIVAL  AT   TURIN.  127 

Tuesday,  Ihth. — In  the  morning  went  to  the  Echo 
Simonetta ;  it  is  at  the  country  house  of  a  Marches  a 
Simonetta,  about  two  miles  from  town.  The  house  has 
two  wings ;  from  a  window  in  the  upper  story  of  one  the 
echo  is  heard.  We  fired  several  pistols :  they  say  it 
repeats  40  times,  which  I  can  easily  beheve  ;  but  I  have 
heard  far  clearer  echoes,  as  this  returns  no  sound  dis- 
tinctly, and  when  given  more  than  one  word  at  a  time  all 
is  confusion. 

Afterwards  to  the  Sta.  Maria  deUe  Grazie.  In  the 
refectory  the  Last  Supper,  by  L,  da  Vinci,  covering  the 
whole  end  of  the  room.  It  is  by  far  the  finest  picture  of 
his  I  have  seen — ^the  only  one  of  composition:  it  is  perhaps 
more  hke  three  groups  put  together  than  one,  but  the 
heads  are  fine,  and  struck  me  both  in  expression  and 
colouring,  like  Eaphael. 

Thursday,  17  th. — Left  Milan  ;  lay  at  Novara. 

Friday,  18th. — On  leaving  Novara,  just  without  the 
gates  of  the  town,  our  axle-tree  snapped  in  two  and  over- 
turned the  carriage.  A  parapet  wall  at  the  side  of  the 
road  broke  the  faU  of  the  coach  and  prevented  its  coming 
entirely  to  the  ground.  As  it  fell  gently,  we  were  none 
of  us  hurt,  and  got  out  with  tolerable  ease,  and  returned 
quietly  to  our  inn,  from  which  I  did  not  expect  to  get 
away  for  a  couple  of  days  ;  but  the  blacksmith  fixed  it 
together,  and  enabled  us  to  set  out  before  3  in  the  after- 
noon.    Arrived  at  Chevasso,  two  posts  from  Turin. 

Saturday,  19th. — Arrived  at  Turin.     Found  that  Mr.  • 
and  Mrs  Trevor  were  out  of  town,  Mr.  Conway  ill  in  the 
auberge. 

Sunday,  20th. — In  the  evening,  out  of  the  gates  to  the 
Valentino,  a  small  campagne  of  the  king's,  most  delight- 
fully situated  upon  the  very  edge  of  the  Po,  which  here 
keeps  within  its  banks.  A  gentle  hill  rises  on  the 
opposite  side,  covered  with  trees  and  vines,  and  spotted 
with  white  houses.     This  place,  approached  by  different 


128  MISS  BEEET'S   JOUENAL.  [1784 

avenues  of  trees,  is  the  corso  for  the  carriages  every 
evening,  and  a  prettier  one  can  hardly  be  imagined. 
After  several  turns  here,  they  go  to  another  avenue  vrithin 
the  walls  near  the  citadel,  where  the  promenade  finishes ; 
it  is  generally  quite  full  of  carriages  and  walkers  on  each 
side — the  carriages  not  near  so  handsome  as  those  of 
Milan. 

To  Mrs.  Trevor's  box  in  the  great  opera  house,  which 
after  Naples  and  Milan  did  not  strike  me  much.  Both 
the  opera  and  ballets  were  by  far  the  grandest  and  best- 
dressed  I  have  anywhere  seen.  In  the  ballet  not  less 
than  200  people  appeared,  aU  superbly  dressed,  and  36 
horses  in  two  troops,  differently  caparisoned  and  well 
arranged.  After  an  attack  of  the  cavalry  and  a  long 
engagement  of  the  infantry,  they  aU  joined  in  a  triumphal 
procession,  in  which  the  general  appeared  in  a  quadiiger, 
drawn  by  four  handsome  brown  horses,  who  performed 
their  parts  to  admiration. 

Monday,  21st. — Evening  to  theCarignano  theatre,  where 
there  is  an  Italian  comedy;  in  Prince  Usoupoff's  box,  the 
Eussian  minister,  whom  we  had  known  at  Naples  and 
Eome. 

Tuesday,  22nd. — Intended  leaving  Turin  at  4  in  the 
morning,  but  were  delayed  by  the  axle-tree  of  our  carriage 
wanting  again  to  be  repaired.  Lay  at  Suze.  There  were 
so  many  bugs  in  the  bed  that  I  found  it  impossible  to 
shut  my  eyes,  and  before  1  o'clock  in  the  morning  got 
up,  dressed  myself,  waited  till  4,  when  we  set  off. 

Wednesday,  23rd — Arrived  at  Novaleze  about  6.  Set 
out  in  chairs  to  cross  the  mountain  between  7  and  8, 
arrived  at  the  hospital  at  the  top  about  10,  took  a 
lone  walk  about  the  edges  of  the  lake.  The  whole  plain 
is  enamelled  with  flowers,  of  which  there  is  a  much 
greater  variety  than  I  ever  saw  elsewhere.  I  had  heard 
much  of  this,  but  their  beauty,  variety,  and  profusion 
exceeded  all  my  expectations.  The  Prete  in  the  mean- 
time prepared  us  an  excellent  dianer — two  very  large 


1784]     ST.  JEAN   DE   MAURIENNE — GENEVA — CHAMOUNI.      129 

trout,  spinach,  salad,  and  a  great  bowl  of  the  finest  cream, 
besides  some  foreign  rarities  for  a  dessert,  such  as  candied 
fruit,  biscuits,  and  nuts. 

Left  I'Hopital  about  3  p.m.,  and  arrived  at  Lanslebourg 
about  5.  The  Due  de  Chablais'  gardes  de  corps  going 
to  Evian  before  him  had  got  the  best  rooms,  but  we  had 
no  bugs,  thank  heaven !  The  difference  of  the  chmate  on 
this  side  the  mountain  and  the  other  is  wonderful.  At 
Turin  it  was  midsummer  for  the  heat ;  here  I  felt  most 
uncomfortably  cold :  glad  of  all  the  covering  they  gave 
to  my  bed,  and  found  a  hnen  habit  much  too  Hght  a 
dress. 

Thursday,  lUh Lay  at  St.  Jean  de  Maurienne. 

Friday,  25th. — On  this  side  St.  Jean  de  Maurienne  the 
vine  begins  again  to  be  cultivated,  and  about  Aiguebelle 
the  mountains  begin  to  be  less  stupendous  and  the  valley 
somewhat  wider.  Lay  at  Chambery.  The  inn  there  and 
at  Aiguebelle  clean  and  neat. 

Saturday,  2Qth. — Lay  at  Frangi. 

Sunday,  21th. — Arrived  at  Geneva  before  12.  In 
the  evening  Sir  James  Graham  and  Mr.  Brand  called : 
took  a  long  walk  with  them. 

Monday,  2%th. — Went  out  between  6  and  7  to  Mont 
Saleve,  a  high  rock  about  three  miles  from  Geneva, 
with  Sir  James  and  Mr.  Brand.  Went  to  Vevay  in  a 
carriage ;  from  thence  mounted  a  very  steep  ascent  on 
foot.  An  old  woman  in  the  neighbourhood  furnished  us 
with  an  excellent  breakfast,  which  we  ate  under  a  great 
shelving  out  of  the  rock.  In  the  evening,  my  father  and 
I  went  to  the  play  with  Sir  James  Graham,  Mr.  Brand, 
Sir  James  HaU,  and  Mr.  Dawkins. 

Tuesday,  2^th. — Set  out  for  Chamouni  in  a  hired  post- 
chaise.  Sent  our  own  carriage  vdth  the  servants  and 
bacfcrao-e  to  Lausanne.  Dined  on  bread  and  butter  at 
Bonneville  (the  inn  much  improved).     Lay  at  Sallenches. 

VOL.    I.  K 


130  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1784 

At  the  other  auberge  were  General  O'Hara,  with  Lady- 
Pembroke,  and  a  large  party  returning  from  Chamouni. 

Wednesday,  oOth. — Left  Sallenches  in  a  char-k-banc ; 
Agnes  and  my  father  on  horseback.  Stopped  at  Asservo, 
the  mining  village.  Arrived  at  Chamouni.  Were  delayed 
in  crossing  the  torrent  between  Sallenches  and  Asservo,  it 
having  made  very  great  debordemens.  These  deborde- 
mens  are  a  curious  phenomenon,  which  I  wish  much  to  hear 
accounted  for.  They  do  not  come  from  the  source,  and 
are  neither  occasioned  by  great  rains  or  the  melting  of 
snows,  happening  often  in  dry  cool  weather,  as  this  had 
done.  A  quantity  of  water,  httle  less  thick  than  hquid 
mud,  accompanied  by  large  stones,  is  thrown  out  of 
cavities  in  the  rock,  far  beneath  the  source  of  the  stream, 
which  falls  perfectly  clear  from  the  top  of  a  mountain. 
These  streams  of  mud  take  various  courses  in  the  broad 
stony  channel  of  the  torrent,  and  in  colour  and  appear- 
ance put  me  something  in  mind  of  miniature  representa- 
tions of  streams  of  lava. 

Thursday,  July  1. — Set  out  early  for  the  Montanvert, 
with  Victor  and  Paschard  for  our  guides,  and  near  a 
dozen  children,  who  followed  us  up  with  milk  and  straw- 
berries to  sell  at  the  top.  Arrived  at  the  little  hovel 
called  Blair's  Hospital.*  Here  we  refreshed  ourselves 
with  our  provisions.  This  httle  place,  though  on  the 
summit  of  that  part  of  the  mountain  from  which  one 
descends  to  the  great  Mer  de  Glace,  is  covered  with 
rhododendrons,  and  there  is  very  good  pastiu-age  for 
the  cattle  brought  up  there  in  the  summer.  From  hence 
we  made  a  steep  descent  to  the  moraine  f  of  the  Mer  de 
Glace.     It  has  been  justly  called  a  sea,  for  it  has  exactly 

*  An  inn  or  pavilion  affording  sleeping  accommodation  Las  succeeded  to 
the  rude  hut,  composed  of  a  boulder  stone  and  dry  wall  turfed  over,  beneath 
wbioli  Saussure  slept,  and  to  the  regularly-built  cabin  called  Chateau  de 
Blair,  from  the  Englishman  who  erected  it,  1778-81. — Hurray's  Handbook. 

+  The  rocks  and  stones  that  are  thrust  forward  by  the  ice  and  form  an 
embankment  to  the  glacier. — Ibid. 


1784]  CHAMOUNI.  131 

the  appearance  of  a '  violently-agitated  ocean  suddenly 
arrested.  When  upon  it  the  waves  (if  one  may  call  them 
so)  are  little  mountains,  over  whose  heads  one  cannot  see, 
and  one  walks  in  valleys  and  upon  the  side  of  these  hills 
of  ice.  Eeturned  to  Blair's  Hospital,  where  we  again 
reposed  before  our  descent.  The  rafters  of  this  httle 
hovel,  though  it  has  only  been  erected  seven  or  eight 
years,  are  so  covered  with  Enghsh  and  French  names  and 
verses,  that  one  can  hardly  distinguish  the  one  from  the 
other.  Came  down  the  mountain  on  that  side  next  the 
source  of  the  Arveron,  and  arrived  at  Chamo'uni  about 
4  o'clock.  The  ascent  I  thought  very  little  of.  One  makes 
nearly  half  of  it  on  mules,  and  the  rest,  though  extremely 
steep,  I  did  not  find  so  fatiguing  as  I  expected ;  but  the 
descent  is  much  more  rapid,  and  should  only  be  attempted 
by  those  who  are  used  to  walking  and  to  mountains. 

Friday,  2nd. — In  the  morning  rode  to  the  Glacier  de 
Boissons.  Walked  to  the  top  of  the  moraine.  The  ice 
is  many  feet  lower  than  it  was  last  August,  when  we 
walked  across  this  glacier.  The  guides  of  Chamouni 
make  this  observation  general,  and  assured  us  all  glaciers 
are  much  lower  at  present  than  they  were  any  part  of 
last  year.  Eeturned  to  Chamouni ;  crossed  several  tor- 
rents on  the  backs  of  the  mules,  which  upon  any  other 
creatures  or  at  any  other  place  would  probably  have 
frightened  me. 

In  the  afternoon,  took  a  dehghtful  walk  in  the  woods 
opposite  Chamouni.  If  anything  could  inspire  an  un- 
poetic  imagination  it  would  surely  be  the  scenes  which 
surround  this  dehghtful  valley  ;  and  let  me  add,  too,  the 
simple,  plain,  ingenuous  manners  of  its  inhabitants.  I  am 
anything  but  romantic,  God  knows !  and  am  far  from 
supposing  that  there  anywhere  exists  a  society  of  men 
free  from  the  mean  passions  and  frailties  incident  to 
human  nature  ;  but  the  inhabitants  of  Chamouni  appear 
to  me  more  in  good  fellowship  with  one  another,  more 

K   2 


132  MISS   berry's   JOUEjSUL.  [1784 

charitable  and  benevolent,  and  less  envious,  tricky,  and 
avaricious,  than  any  other  society  of  people  that  has  fallen 
under  my  observation; — better  informed  they  certainly  are, 
for  the  greater  part  of  the  men,  following  in  the  summer 
the  profession  of  guide  to  strangers  who  visit  the  glaciers, 
all  of  whom  are  of  the  better  sort,  and  many  of  them 
travelhng  with  philosophical  views,  they  have  acquired 
ideas  and  language  entirely  above  their  station,  and  which 
upon  the  subject  of  the  natural  history  of  their  mountains 
would  indeed  do  credit  to  anyone.  During  the  winters, 
which  are  very  long,  the  children  are  all  taught  to  read 
and  write.  In  the  summer  there  is  no  more  school,  and 
they  are  constantly  employed,  as  soon  as  they  can  crawl, 
in  carrying  their  cattle  up  the  mountains  to  pasture 
during  the  day  and  bringing  them  down  in  the  evening, 

Saturday,  2>rd. — Left  Chamouni  at  7  A.M.,  upon  mules, 
and,  accompanied  by  our  two  guides,  ascended  the 
Col  de  Balme,  to  the  highest  point  to  which  one  can 
ride.  It  is  all  turf  and  pasturage  for  cows  to  the  very 
top.  Immediately  below  the  summit  we  stopped  at  a 
ch&let,  a  number  of  wooden  huts  near  together,  re- 
sembling both  outside  and  inside  the  views  and  descrip- 
tions of  houses  in  the  South  Sea  Islands.  Here  we  dined 
on  the  turf,  the  people  of  the  chalet  bringing  us  out  most 
delicious  cream  in  a  large  pail,  from  which  we  all  served 
ourselves  with  a  ladle  into  httle  wooden  bowls.  The  muleS 
in  the  meantime,  with  their  saddles  on,  grazed  by  our 
sides.  In  the  chMet  were  four  men,  chosen  to  take  the 
charge  of  160  cows  belonging  to  different  villages  during 
the  summer.  In  the  highest  parts  of  the  mountain  they 
make  two  large  cheeses  every  day.  From  the  top  of  the 
Col  de  Balme  one  may  indeed  be  said  to  have  a  view  of 
the  Alps,  being  entirely  surrounded  by  summits  of  moun- 
tains, one  rising  behind  the  other  on  every  side  as  far  as 
the  eye  can  reach.  Here  we  were  obhged  to  quit  the 
mules  and  descend  on  foot  for  above  two  hours.    The 


1784]  BEX — LAUSANNE.  133 

descent  is  very  steep  to  the  valley  and  village  of  Tours, 
which  consists  of  just  a  few  wooden  huts,  and  the  valley 
so  narrow  that  they  are  often  shut  up  by  snow  for  weeks 
in  the  winter  from  the  rest  of  the  world. 

Here  we  again  mounted  the  mules,  and  rode  for  more 
than  an  hour  up  the  opposite  side  of  the  vaUey.  From 
thence  there  is  a  continued  descent  to  the  plain  of  Mar- 
tigny.  Here  we  again  walked  for  another  hour,  and  re- 
mounted the  mules  in  the  plain  about  a  league  from 
Martigny,  where  we  arrived  tired,  but  not  fatigued,  with 
a  dehghtful  day's  journey  through  the  most  picturesque 
and  romantic  country  I  ever  saw.  The  inn  at  Martigny 
much  less  dirty  than  I  expected. 

Sunday,  ith. — Intended  to  have .  gone  to  Bex  in  a 
caleche  belonging  to  the  innkeeper ;  but  his  horses  were 
pasturing  on  the  mountains,  and  were  not  to  be  caught. 
After  having  despatched  several  messengers  in  search  of 
them  (all  of  whom  seemed  to  have  lost  themselves  in  the 
pursuit),  we  found  it  was  too  late  to  await  their  return. 

Set  off  on  the  Ghamouni  mules  for  Bex,  only  four 
leagues'  distance  ;  but  we  could  only  go  at  a  foot's-pace, 
and  were  unexpectedly  detained  by  a  great  fall  of  rock, 
which  had  destroyed  the  old  road.  We  got  too  far 
entangled  amidst  great  masses  of  rock  to  return,  but 
were  obliged  to  dismount,  and  both  our  mules  and  our- 
selves scrambled  over  as  well  as  we  and  they  could. 

Arrived  at  Bex.  The  whole  road,  particularly  near  St. 
Maurice  and  Bex,  most  beautiful.  Went  in  a  char-k-banc 
to  the  salt  works — I  mean  the  gradation  houses — ^which 
are  about  half  a  league  distant.  We  were  too  late  to  see 
the  Souterrains. 

Monday,  6th. — Arrived  about  7  at  Lausanne,  which 
we  approached  with  joy. 

Left  Lausanne.  Stopped  at  Secheron,  expecting  to  find 
Miss  Gore  ;  she  had  left  that  morning  for  Spa. 

It  was  during  this  visit  to  Lausanne  that  Miss  Berry  first 


134  MISS   BERRY'S   JOURNAL.  [1784 

became  acquainted  with  Madame  de  Stael;  there  is  no  mention 
of  her  in  the  journal,  but  in  a  little  memorandum-book  con- 
taining '  Notes  of  my  acquaintance  with  Madame  de  Stael,'  the 
following  entry  is  made  of  this  year:  'I  saw  her  first  at 
Lausanne  in  1 784.  We  had  returned  from  Italy  in  the  June 
of  that  year.     I  was  twenty,  and  she  was  sixteen  years  old.     At 

a  soiree  given  by  the to  the  Prince  Henri  de  Prusse — 

the  young  English  there,  to  her  utter  surprise,  much  neglecting 
her  from  the  boldness  of  her  manners.' 

Thursday,  August  12^A.— Left  Geneva.  Stopped  be- 
tween Collonges  and  Bellegarde,  to  see  where  the  Ehone 
is  said  to  lose  itself  in  the  ground.  It  is  nothing  more  than 
the  river  running  for  about  150  yards  under  large  masses  of 
rocks  ;  there  is  a  wooden  bridge  thrown  over  just  at  this 
point,  from  whence  you  see  it  both  run  in  and  out.  The 
surrounding  scene  is  picturesque  and  pretty  enough.  A 
httle  farther  on,  and  immediately  upon  the  high-road, 
one  passes  a  bridge  over  a  large  rivulet,  which  bursts  at 
once  from  under  a  rock,  and  which  seems  to  me  both 
more  curious  and  prettier  than  the  '  Perte  du  Ehone.' 

Arrived  at  Mantua. 

Friday,  13^A. — ^Left  Mantua.  The  road  round  the  httle 
lake,  on  which  the  town  is  situated,  very  pretty.  Arrived 
at  Lyons. 

Saturday,  lith. — Mr.  Gifiard  and  Mr.  Eemington  sat 
with  us  m  the  morning.  Went  to  the  theatre  in  the 
evening.  The  play  was  '  Alzire,'  which  character  was 
performed  by  Madame  Vestris  ;*  she  spoke  it  well,  but 
her  action,  in  my  opinion,  both  inelegant  and  affected. 

Sunday,  Ibth. — Walked  before  breakfast  upon  the  Quai 
du  Eh6ne — a  fine  long  range  of  buildings,  inhabited  by 
manufacturers  and  low  people,  consequently  very  dirty, 

*  Madame  Vestris,  wife  of  Paco  Vestris,  brotlier  of  the  celebrated  dancer 
of  that  name.  She  first  appeared  in  1768,  was  highly  successful  as  a  tragic 
actress,  and  was  well  known  for  her  vehement  quarrels  with  two  other 
actresses  of  the  name  of  Saimal,  in  which  the  public  and  those  in  authority 
took  part. 


1784]  LYONS.  135 

even  on  the  outside.  In  the  evening  the  pubhc  walks 
were  crowded  with  smartly-dressed  people- — rouge,  gauze, 
and  ribbon  from  one  end  to  the  other. 

Monday,  l%th. — Went  in  the  morning  to  several  manu- 
facturers, to  silk  mills,  and  to  see  cut  velvet  wove — the 
most  complicated  of  all  the  looms.  A  weaver  working 
assiduously  from  5  in  the  morning  to  9  at  night  cannot 
make  above  half  a  yard  and  a  quarter  a  day  of  a  stuff  for 
Avhich  they  are  paid  by  the  mercers  eight  livres  a  yard. 
A  weaver  of  brocaded  gold-stuff,  working  the  same 
number  of  hours,  cannot  make  above  half  a  yard,  and  the 
payment  uncertain.  All  these  weavers,  lodged  up  in  the 
fourth  and  fifth  stories  of  dirty  stinking  houses,  surprised 
me  by  the  propriety  and  civility  of  their  manner,  and  their 
readiness  to  satisfy  all  our  questions. 

Tuesday,  17  th. — In  the  morning  at  different  manufac- 
turers. To  a  weaver  of  gold-lace.  Of  a  lace  about  two 
inches  brodd,  a  person  working  well  can  make  about  two 
yards  or  two  yards  and  a  half  a  day,  for  which  they  are 
paid  eight  or  ten  louis  a  yard  by  the  merchant  who  gives 
them  the  gold  to  work.  To  a  great  manufacturer  of 
gauze.  There  are  two  horses  up  in  the  fifth  story  of  the 
houses,  turning  silk  mills,  which  wind  I  know  not  how 
many  bobbins  at  once.  The  women  who  watch  these, 
to  arrange  thein,  and  take  up  the  threads  that  break,  are 
there  from  5  in  the  morning  tiU  9  at  night  for  twelve 
sous. 

Wednesday,  18th. — At  the  manufactory  of  all  the  very 
rich  stuffs  for  furniture  and  for  very  fine  embroidery.  A 
very  richly-embroidered  satin  suit  of  clothes  for  men, 
about  seventeen  or  eighteen  louis.  We  saw  the  pattern 
of  one  velvet,  with  false  stones  set  in  silver,  like 
diamonds  disposed  upon  it  like  embroidery,  which  they 
had  made  for  Prince  Potemkin,  and  had  cost  1,000  louis ; 
it  must  have  been  frightfully  heavy.  They  showed  us 
velvet  for  hangings  ;  a  white  ground  with  bunches  of 


136  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1784 

flowers  and  a  running  pattern  wove  in  it,  every  skein  of 
silk  bemg  dyed  for  that  pattern,  and  so  arranged  in  the 
loom  that  it  is  wove  like  a  piece  of  velvet,  without  any 
pattern  at  all.  It  was  at  eight  louis  a  yard.  In  the 
evening  the  theatre. 

Friday,  2^th. — Embarked  on  the  Saone  in  a  large  boat 
with  our  carriage  and  servants,  for  Avignon.  These  boats 
are  nothing  more  than  so  many  fir  planks,  nailed  together 
in  the  rudest  manner  that  can  be  imagined.  They  float 
down  by  the  rapidity  of  the  stream  at  the  rate  of  between 
three  and  four  mUes  an  hour,  assisted  by  two  or  three 
oars,  which  are  just  fir-trees  made  a  little  flat  at  one  end ; 
they  never  return  up  the  river,  but  are  sold  for  timber 
when  they  reach  the  place  of  their  destination.  Our 
boat  cost,  the  people  told  us,  four  louis  ;  we  gave  seven 
for  the  hire  of  it  to  Avignon,  navigated  by  three  men,  so 
that  it  is  surely  a  very  good  adventure  for  the  owner.  The 
banks  of  the  Ehone  are  beautiful.  On  both  sides,  with- 
in the  first  three  or  four  leagues  of  Lyons,  they  are 
covered  with  campagnes,  and,  farther  on,  with  villages, 
vineyards,  and  much  picturesque  inequahty  of  ground. 

Stopped  at  Vienne,  a  small  town,  or  rather  village, 
where  a  very  handsome  quay  is  just  finished  to  the 
Ehone.     Dined  in  the  coach.     Travelled  all  night. 

Saturday,  2\st. — Passed  Valence,  a  considerable  town. 
At  7  went  ashore,  and  breakfasted  at  Pouzan,  an  incon- 
siderable village.  The  banks  of  the  river  less  pretty  lower 
down  ;  the  hills  more  distant  from  the  edge  of  the  river 
and  less  wooded.  Between  4  and  5  p.m.  passed  under 
the  Pont  St.  Esprit,  a  beautiful  bridge  of  twenty-six  elliptic 
arches.*  Though  very  long,  it  has  the  appearance  of 
lightness,  there  being  a  small  arch  in  the  upper  part  of 
every  pier.  It  is  a  work  worthy  the  Eomans,  though 
begun  in  the  dark  times  of  1265  and  finished  in  1309. 
It  was  built  by  the  ofierings  made  to  a  famous  shrine  of 

*  It  was  the  only  bridge  over  the  Rhone  till  1806. 


1784]  AYIGNOX — VAUCLUSE.  137 

the  St.  Esprit,  which  had  performed  many  miracles, in  order 
to  preserve  the  devoted  pilgrims  who  crossed  the  Ehone 
from  the  accidents  which  were  occasioned  by  the  rapidity 
of  the  stream.  The  evening  was  so  rainy,  with  continued 
thunder  and  lightning,  that  about  7  o'clock  the  boat- 
men thought  it  better  to  stop  at  a  small  inn,  or  rather 
farm-house,  than  to  proceed  in  the  dark,  as  we  should 
not  have  arrived  till  midnight  at  Avignon.  The  room 
we  had  to  sleep  in  was  just  large  enough  to  contain  four 
beds  and  a  table;  the  latter  we  were  obliged  to  move,  in 
order  to  place  a  mattress  upon  the  floor,  as  all  the  beds 
were  plentifully  stocked  with  bugs. 

Sunday,  22nd. — Arrived  at  Avignon.  Walked  about 
the  town.  It  is  in  a  low,  flat,  unpleasant  situation,  en- 
closed in  a  very  pretty  embattled  wall,  with  towers  at 
certain  distances.  Without  the  walls  are  public  walks, 
with  rows  of  trees. 

In  a  chapel  belonging  to  an  hospital  for  mad  people 
are  some  pictures,  by  Mignard  and  other  French  artists, 
and  a  Judith  with  the  head  of  Holofernes,  by  Eubens. 
Bound  a  court  are  the  cachots  of  the  lunatics.  They  had 
each  a  hole  in  their  door,  through  which  one  could  see 
and  speak  to  them.  Their  rooms  were  very  good,  with 
a  window  near  the  ceiling,  and  a  clean-looking  bed. 

Monday,  22>rd. — Went  in  a  caleche  to  the  fountain  of 
Vaucluse,  fifteen  miles  distant  from  Avignon,  through  a 
perfectly  flat  country,  vineyards,  or  stubble  fields-,  without 
a  tree,  except  little  stunted  mulberries.  Vaucluse  is  at 
the  foot  of  those  mountains  which  bound  this  great  plain, 
and  appears  surrounded  by  them.  We  walked  about 
half  a  mile  up  the  course  of  the  stream,  between  the 
rocks.  From  these  rocks  the  stream  bursts  forth  from  a 
number  of  very  strong  springs.  What  is  called  the  source 
is  a  pool  of  the  clearest  water,  in  a  large  cavern  in  the 
rock.  The  people  as  usual  call  it  unfathomable  ;  indeed, 
it  would  be  very  difiicult  to  try,  for  one  sees  through  the 


138  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1784 

clearness  of  the  water  that  it  is  a  great  gouffre,  Hned  with 
escarped  rocks.  It  certainly  communicates  with  the 
stream,  which  rises  from  springs  300  or  400  yards'  dis- 
tance :  for  at  certain  times  of  the  year — the  people  said 
generally  about  Easter — the  water  in  the  cave  rises  so 
high  as  to  run  over  the  rocks  in  front  and  join  the  stream 
below.  The  rise  cannot,  I  think,  be  less  than  twenty  per- 
pendicular yards. 

Walked  up  to  the  ruins  of  an,  old  castle  on  the  rock, 
above  the  village,  from  whence  there  is  a  pretty  view  of 
the  little  valley  through  which  the  stream  passes,  which 
is  kept  green  by  its  waters,  and  is  bordered  by  some 
poplar  trees;  everything  else  around  barren  and  rocky. 
The  people  of  the  village  call  this  ruin  (the  remains 
of  some  httle  fortress)  le  chateau  de  Madame  Laure,  and 
a  little  hovel  near  it  la  maison  de  Mons.  Petrarque. 

Tuesday,  2ith. — Arrived  at  Nismes.  Just  before  we 
reached  the  last  post  we  went  about  a  mile  and  a  half 
out  of  the  way  to  see  what  is  called  the  Pont  du  Gard.  It 
is  a  beautiful  Eoman  aqueduct  thrown  over  the  valley  ; 
it  is  composed  of  three  rows  of  arches,  immediately  over 
which  is  the  channel  for  the  water.  This  aqueduct  now 
serves  for  a  bridge  over  the  Eiver  Gard.  In  the  year 
1743  the  arches  of  the  lower  piers  were  doubled,  that  is  to 
say,  they  applied  a  bridge  to  the  side  of  the  aqueduct,  the 
arches  of  which  are  equal  in  height  to  the  first  row  of  the 
aqueduct,  and  has  not  a  bad  effect.  In  this  monument, 
as  in  almost  all  others  of  the  Eomans,  there  are  wonderful 
and  unaccountable  irregularities,  such  as  large  rude  stones 
sticking  out  every  here  and  there,  and  the  cornice  of  the 
arches  being  never  the  same  height. 

Wednesday,  2bth. — All  the  morning  seeing  the  town  of 
Msmes  and  the  Eoman  antiquities.  All  the  streets  are 
small,  dirty,  and  not  paved ;  but  it  looks  lively,  well- 
peopled,  and  busy.  There  is  a  great  manufactory  here 
of  silk  stockings  and  cotton  stuffs,  and   shops  well  fur- 


1784]  IsISMES.  139 

nislied  of  all  kinds.  The  fountain  is  built  upon  ruins  of 
Eoman  baths :  there  was  not  a  drop  of  water  in  it,  on 
account  of  the  great  drought  from  which  they  have  been 
lately  suffering.  There  has  been  no  considerable  rain  for 
six  months. 

The  Amphitheatre  is  a  fine  remain  of  Eoman  grandeur  ; 
it  is  nearly  as  large  in  dimensions  and  much  less  in  ruins 
than  the  Colosseum  at  Eome,  but  it  has  not  that  magni- 
ficent and  imposing  air,  being  raised  only  two  stories  of 
arcades,  and  the  inside  is  all  fiUed  with  mean  houses, 
crossed  by  httle  narrow  dirty  streets,  so  that  one  cannot 
imagine  oneself  in  the  interior  of  an  amphitheatre  till, 
mounting  the  corridor  of  the  first  story,  there  one  gets  out 
at  the  vomitokes  to  the  seats,  of  which  twelve  of  the 
highest  rows  still  exist  ;*  it  is  more  an  ellipse  than  that  at 
Eome,  and  could  contain,  as  they  say,  15,000  persons.  The 
outward  wall  has  lost  nothing  of  its  height,  and  one  sees 
where  they  placed  poles  to  stretch  a  covering  to  protect 
the  spectators  from  the  sun  or  weather.  There  is  every 
appearance  that  this  building  was  constructed,  or  at  least 
finished  in  haste :  in  about  half  of  the  exterior  the  friezes, 
the  cornices,  the  capitals  of  the  columns,  are  only  as  it  were 
sketched  through  ;  in  the  other  half  they  are  verj'-  well 
carved.  The  architecture  is  neither  of  the  Tuscan  nor  of 
the  Doric  order,  but  between  the  two  ;  it  has  all  that 
grandeur,  that  simple  and  manly  taste,  that  always  dis- 
tinguishes the  works  of  the  Eomans ;  it  is  not  known  by 
whom,  or  at  what  time,  this  amphitheatre  was  built. 

La  Maison  Quarree  is  the  most  perfect  and  most  orna- 
mented model  of  a  Eoman  temple  that  has  escaped  the 
ravages  of  time  :  it  is  of  Corinthian  order,  and  built  of  the 
stone  that  is  found  in  the  environs  of  Nismes  ;  it  is  perfectly 
well  preserved,  the  roof  excepted,  which  was  probably  re- 
newed when  it  was  turned  into  a  Christian  church.     The 

*  The  buildings  ■which  obstructed  it  both  within  and  without  are  now 
xemoTed. 


140  MISS   BEERY's   JOUENAL.  [1784 

columns  are  fluted  and  the  frieze  carved ;  all  the  ornaments 
are  beautifully  worked  and  in  excellent  taste ;  nothing  is 
misplaced,  nothing  overcharged.  There  is  upon  th.Q  fron- 
ton the  most  beautiful  female  Greek  I  ever  saw ;  on  the 
frieze  of  the  fa9ade  there  are  still  to  be  seen  the  mark  of 
the  nails  that  fastened  the  letters  of  the  inscription,  and 
by  the  examination  of  which  M.  Seguier  thinks  he  has 
found  the  words  that  composed  it,  and  given  it  to  the 
public.  The  idea  is  certainly  very  ingenious ;  but  as  one 
might  easily  be  mistaken,  and  it  is  often  necessary  to  have 
recourse  to  the  imagination  to  supply  what  is  deficient,  it 
is  difficult  to  feel  sure  of  the  correctness  of  such  an  ex- 
planation. The  Maison  Quarree  as  well  as  the  Amphi- 
theatre are  in  the  middle  of  the  town;  there  is  not 
enough  space  to  obtain  a  good  view  of  them.  It  is  a 
small  church,  rather  mean ;  and  as  it  is  only  lighted  by  one 
window  above  the  door,  it  is  very  dark,  and  has  nothing 
of  the  grandeur  of  the  exterior.* 

There  is  also  at  Nismes  considerable  remains  of  an- 
other Eoman  temple,  near  to  the  public  fountain  ;  it  is 
generally  called  the  Temple  of  Diana.  There  still  re- 
main four  walls  and  three  recesses.  Some  people  have 
thought  that  this  temple  was  formerly  subterranean,  that 
is  to  say,  built  under  a  hill,  like  those  two  temples  seen 
on  Lake  Albano,  and  many  others  in  the  environs  of 
Naples.  The  interior  of  this  building  is  filled  -with  various 
remains  of  antiquity,  that  are  found  wherever  they  dig  at 
Msmes.  There  are  many  inscriptions,  the  remains  of 
many   statues,  some   fine   pieces  of  friezes  and  marble 

*  Originally  a  temple,  afterwards  a  Christian  church,  and  in  the  eleventh 
century  the  Hotel  de  Ville ;  still  later  it  was  converted  into  a  stable ;  and 
its  owner,  to  extend  his  space,  huilt  walls  between  the  pillars  of  the  portico, 
and  pared  away  the  flutings  of  the  central  columns  to  allow  his  carts  to 
pass  ;  it  then  became  attached  to  the  Augustine  convent,  and  was  used  as 
a  tomh-house  for  burial.  Its  next  changes  were  into  a  revolutionary 
tribunal  and  corn  warehouse,  and  finally  it  is  converted  into  a  m.useum. — 
Murray's  Handbook. 


1784]  LEAVE   MONTPELIEK   FOR   NISMES.  141 

cornices,  much  ornamented  and  beautifully  worked,  many- 
pieces  of  columns  of  different  kinds,  in  white  marble,  and 
of  an  enormous  size — giving  a  grand  idea  of  the  building 
of  which  they  made  a  part.  We  went  also  to  see,  in  the 
cellar  of  a  merchant,  a  very  beautiful  mosaic  in  black  and 
white,  without  figures,  but  like  marqueterie,  very  weU 
done.  It  was  found  in  building  the  house,  and  makes 
a  part  of  the  floor  of  the  cellar.  They  told  us  that 
others  had  been  found  in  other  places,  that  were  of 
many  colours  and  represented  figures. 

No  journal  has  been  preserved  of  the  four  months  spent  by 
the  Miss  Berrys  and  their  father  at  Montpelier.  Amongst 
those  who  were  residing  there  at  the  end  of  1784  and  at  the 
beginning  of  the  next  year,  1785,  were  M.  and  Madame  de 
Neckar  and  their  daughter.  'There,  in  their  first  exile,  and 
occupying,'  as  Miss  Berry  says,  '  a  country  house  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Montpelier,  whilst  we  lived  in  the  town.'  It  is 
clear,  however,  from  Miss  Berry's  next  entry  in  her  journal,  that, 
notwithstanding  this  proximity  to  what  might  have  been  an 
agreeable  society,  the  residence  at  Montpelier  left  no  pleasing 
recollection  on  her  mind. 

Friday,  December  ^\st. — "We  left  Montpelier  for 
Nismes.  I  leave  Montpelier  without  the  sUghtest  feeling 
of  that  regret  which  one  generally  experiences  on  leav- 
ing a  place  where  one  has  stayed  four  months,  and  that 
one  sees,  perhaps,  for  the  last  time.  That  is  the  advan- 
tage of  not  having  formed  friendships,  and  having  scarcely 
seen  any  one  person  that  I  could  regard  with  less  indif- 
ference than  another  ;  but  these  are  advantages  of  which 
I  am  hardly  ambitious,  and  I  would  rather  a  thousand 
times  be  enduring  at  this  moment  all  that  depression, 
sadness,  and  regret  which  one  suffers  in  parting  from 
dear  friends,  than  this  present  state  of  cheerless  indiffer- 
ence and  cold  tranquilhty. 

'  Monsieur ,  de  I'Academie  des  Sciences  k  Mont- 


142  MISS   BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1784 

pelier,  disant  k  Monsieur  d'Alembert  que  I'Acad^mie,  dont 
il  etait  membre,  se  plaisait  d'etre  consid&^e  comme  la 
fiUe  ainee  de  celle  de  Paris,  "  Ah !  c'est  une  brave  fille," 
reprit  Monsieur  d'Alembert,  "elle  ne  fait  point  parler 
d'elle."  ' 


143 


JOUENAL. 

1785. 

Saturday^  Jan.  \st. — We  revisited  La  Maison  Quarr^e 
and  tlie  Temple  of  Diana.  The  beauty  of  the  former 
struck  me  more  than  ever :  it  is  the  most  perfect  specimen 
which  has  escaped  the  ravages  of  time  and  weather ;  not  a 
stone  is  wanting ;  all  is  so  well  worked,  all  the  parts  so  well 
fiUed,  so  ornamented,  without  the  least  overloading,  that 
one  is  never  tired  of  admiring  the  pure  taste  which  reigns 
throughout.  On  seeing  it  a  second  time,  I  am  confirmed  in 
my  opinion  that  this  temple  has  been  subterranean,  with 
the  facade  only  above  ground.  Even  now  it  is  placed 
with  its  bank  against  the  rock,  which  could  not  have  been 
less  considerable  than  it  is  now,  and  probably  was  much 
more  so. 

In  the  afternoon  received  an  unexpected  visit  from 
Comte  Melzi,  a  Milanese,  whom  we  had  seen  at  Madame 
Litta's  at  Milan ;  he  sat  the  whole  evening  with  us. 
The  meeting  was  agreeable :  we  spoke  of  Italy,  pictures, 
fine  arts  ;  he  has  observation  and  taste  ;  he  is  now  going 
to  Spain,  where  he  has  a  sister  settled. 

Sunday,  2nd. — Left  Msmes.  We  passed  the  Ehone  in  a 
boat  from  Bocaire  to  Tarascon  ;  it  is  generally  passed  by  a 
bridge  of  boats,  but  it  was  taken  up,  the  river  having  been 
frozen,  which  happens  very  rarely. 

At  St.  Eemy  all  the  young  people  of  the  town  were 
dancing  in  the  faubourg.  For  the  first  time  in  my  life 
I  saw  small  bourgeois  servants  and  peasants  dancing  with 
natural  grace  and  signs  of  real  gaiety:  they  wanted  no  danc- 
ing-master to  show  them  the  figures.  For  half  an  hour  they 
danced  the  figure  of  a  quarree,  and  were  never  wrong  in 


144  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1785 

a  single  step,  and  always  with  a  grace  and  gaiety  that  one 
sometimes  vainly  looks  for  in  our  dress-ball  rooms.  Their 
band  was  a  tambourine  and  a  fife ;  they  danced  quarrees, 
a  Peregordine,  and  a  dance  they  called  the  matelot,  which 
was  very  like  our  English  country  dances. 

Tlie  peasant  women  in  this  part  of  Provence  have  a 
pecuHar  costume,  and  which  to  my  taste  is  very  pretty. 
The  corsage  and  sleeves  are  generally  of  scarlet  cloth, 
flowered  silk,  &c.,  and  the  petticoat  of  some  other  gay  co- 
lour, over  which  they  have  a  sort  of  loose  robe,  made  be- 
hind like  what  we  used  to  call  in  England  a  Polonaise  or 
Circassian.  It  hangs  loose  from  their  shape  behind,  and  is 
pinned  Hke  a  Polonaise  before ;  it  is  generally  black  and 
lined  with  scarlet  or  crimson  ;  their  petticoats  short,  and 
their  head-dress  a  sort  of  mob-cap,  generally  black. 

We  slept  at  Pont  Koyal,  a  lonely  post-house,  where 
everything  was  clean  ;  good  beds  and  honest  people. 

Monday,  Srd. — Arrived  at  Aix. 

Friday,  7  th. — In  the  morning  we  had  a  visit  from  Count 
de  Gallifel,  to  whom  we  had  a  letter  from  his  uncle  the 
Comte  de  Levis. 

Tuesday,  11th. — There  are  more  agreeable  walks  in  the 
environs  here  than  I  have  seen  in  France. 

Wednesday,  12th. — We  left  for  Marseilles  •  the  roads 
abominable.  The  narrow  wheels  of  the  loaded  charrettes 
of  this  country  would  spoil  the  best  road  in  a  short 
time,  and  the  more  so  from  the  heavy  weights  being  placed 
upon  two  instead  of  upon  four  wheels. 

The  country  between  Aix  and  Marseilles  is  not  half  so 
cultivated  or  rich  as  Languedoc,  but  more  diversity  of 
land,  rocks,  and  meadows,  more  ohve  trees,  fewer  vines, 
some  trees  in  the  valley,  some  pines  here  and  there  upon 
the  mountains.  In  the  environs  of  Marseilles  all  is  sur- 
rounded by  walls ;  we  travelled  between  two  walls  for 
more  than  a  league  on  approaching  the  town.  The  road 
was  filled  with  carriages,  and  all  betokens  a  commercial 
town  and  a  large  population. 


1785]  AKEIVAL  AT   ORANGE   AND   MONTSLIMAET.  145 

TJiicrsday,  ISth. — We  drove  round  the  town.  The  street 
■which  leads  from  the  port  to  the  cours,  and  the  cours 
itself,  are  almost  as  thronged  with  people  as  the  streets  of 
London.  The  cours  is  the  pubhc  walk  in  summer,  the 
port  is  that  of  winter ;  there  are  always  so  many  vessels, 
that  one  can  see  scarcely  anything  else  on  one  side,  and 
houses  on  the  other ;  and  as  this  is  the  place  where  all 
the  trade  of  the  town  is  carried  on,  the  pavement  is  too 
narrow  to  move  at  ease — it  is  a  perpetual  mob,  and  very 
unpleasant  for  those  who  go  there  only  to  walk. 

Saturday,  Ibth. — I  went  to  see  an  apartment  in  the 
Kue  de  Paradis,  which  suited  us  very  well ;  it  was  the  pri- 
vate house  of  a  Chevaher  de  Malthe  (M.  Eicard),  in  a 
good  quarter.  He  asked  fifteen  or  eighteen  louis  a  month  ; 
we  agreed  for  twelve. 

Wednesday,  March  9th.- — We  left  Marseilles,  returned  to 
Aix,  arrived  at  the  Pont  Eoyal  before  six.  The  weather 
dark,  rainy,  and  very  disagreeable ;  the  roads  no  better 
than  when  we  passed  in  the  month  of  January. 

Thursday,  lOth. — At  two  posts  from  Orange  there  was 
mud  half-way  up  the  wheels ;  they  had  had  rain  here  for 
the  last  five  days.  On  our  arrival  at  Orange,  we  walked 
to  see  the  ancient  triumphal  arch,*  situated  near  the  inn, 
in  a  field  at  the  side  of  the  road ;  it  is  much  upon  the  same 
plan  as  all  the  arches  in  Eome— a  large  arch  between  two 
small  ones ;  it  is  of  the  Corinthian  order,  and  the  fa9ade 
very  pretty,  but  it  bears  marks  dei  bassi  tempi.  There  is 
a  large  bas-relief  representing  an  encounter  of  cavalry 
above  the  middle  arch  on  each  facade,  occupying  the  part 
where  the  inscription  is  usually  placed  between. 

Friday,  Wth. — Arrived  at  Montehmart.  The  road  so 
extremely  bad,  that  we  went  for  the  most  part  of  the  way 
a  foot's-pace.  We  had  no  idea  of  sleeping  at  Montelimart ; 

*  The  generally-received  opinion  at  present  refers  this  arch  to  the  reign 
of  Marcus  Aurelius,  and  to  his  successes  on  the  Danuhe  and  in  Germany. — 
Murray's  Sandhook. 

VOL.  I.  L 


146  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1785 

but  one  of  the  postilions  having  quarrelled  with  Samuel, 
the  master  of  the  post  sent  to  ask  us  to  return  to  arrange 
the  dispute  :  it  was  then  too  late  to  start  again  for  Oriol. 
We  were  well  off  at  Montelimart. 

Saturday,  12th Arrived  at  St.  Valher.     The  country 

everywhere  very  fine ;  on  one  side  the  Ehone,  and  on 
the  other  rocks  and  very  picturesque  chateaux. 

Sunday,  ISth. — The  weather  had  entirely  changed 
since  last  night ;  it  began  to  snow,  and  continued  without 
the  sHghtest  intermission  during  all  the  day.  By  the  time 
we  arrived  at  Lyons  (at  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening)  there 
was  at  least  six  or  seven  inches  of  snow  upon  the  road 
and  in  the  streets.  I  have  rarely  felt  it  so  cold  in  England 
at  Christmas. 

Monday,  lAth. — ^We  stayed  at  home  to  rest ;  it  was 
too  cold  to  leave  the  fire. 

Tuesday,  Wednesday,  Thursday,  and  Friday. — We 
spent  the  morning  at  different  shops.  This  pastime  is 
nowhere  so  thoroughly  disagreeable  as  at  Lyons.  They 
do  not  show  their  best  stuffs — nothing  but  what  is  ab- 
solutely asked  for — and  for  everything  they  demand  an 
exorbitant  price,  and  even  with  the  least  dishonest  you 
must  haggle  during  half  an  hour  for  the  smallest  pur- 
chase. 

Tuesday  etiening  we  spent  very  agreeably  with  Lady 
E.  Foster,  who  by  the  merest  accident  we  found  was  at 
Lyons,  on  her  way  with  Lord  and  Lady  Harvey*  for 
Turin. 

Thursday. — Mr.  De  Denezy  and  a  Dutch  officer,  his 
travelling  companion,  dined  with  us,  and  in  the  evening 
we  called  on  Madame  Casanove  at  the  Hotel  d'Artois. 

Saturday,  19th. — We  left  Lyons  for  Paris.     The  frost 

*  Lord  Harvey,  eldest  son  of  Frederick,  fourth  Earl  of  Bristol,  died  1796. 
He  married  ElizabetH,  daughter  of  —  Drummond,  Esq.,  by  -whom  he  had 
a  daughter,  Elizabeth  Catherine  Caroline,  born  1780,  died  1803,  having 
married  Charles  Rose  EUis,  Esq.,  afterwards  Lord  Seaford. 


1785]  KEMAINS  AT   PARIS.  147 

continued,  but  as  we  advanced  we  found  less  snow,  and 
the  roads  pretty  good ;  but  so  many  people  left  Lyons  the 
same  day  we  did,  that  we  were  obliged  to  wait  at  each 
post  for  horses,  and  at  the  Maison  Blanche  there  were 
none :  thus  we  were  forced  to  sleep  at  the  H6tel  de 
Bourgogne. 

The  only  memorandum  left  of  the  time  now  spent  at  Paris 
is  the  following  entry  respecting  M.  de  Stael's  marriage : — 

'Pan's,  1785. — From  our  great  acquaintance  in  Italy 
with  the  King  of  Sweden,  Gustavus  III.,  we  became  very 
intimate  with  his  ambassador  at  Paris,  M.  de  Stael.  He 
spoke  to  me  in  aU  confidence  about  his  intended  mar- 
riage with  MdUe.  Neckar.  Asked  my  opinion,  and  con- 
sidted  me  on  the  subject;  but  the  match  was  settled.' 

Miss  Berry  remained  at  Paris  with  her  father  and  sister  from 
the  20th  of  March  till  the  June  following ;  and  it  is  much  to 
be  regretted  that  the  journal  here  ceases,  and  that  none  of  her 
letters  at  that  period  can  now  be  recovered.  The  melancholy 
with  which  Miss  Berry's  character  was  so  deeply  dyed  through 
life  is  strongly  exhibited  in  the  following  reflections.  Madame 
Eoland's  *  posthumous  works  were  published  by  her  daughter's 
husband  in  the  year  1800;  and  Miss  Berry  appears  to  have 
been  sufficiently  struck  with  the  similarity  of  their  feelings  at 
nearly  the  same  age  as  to  have  transcribed  the  following  passage 
as  a  parallel  to  her  own  reflections : — 

M.  B.  AT  22.  Mme.  Eoland  at  23. 

C'est  fait  done demes  voyages.  Helas  !  I'exercice  penible  de 

Me  voici  a  I'extremite  de  la  la  sensibilite,  pourroit-il  I'affai- 

France,  je  vois  de  loin  les  rives  blir  et  I'eteindre  chez  moi?  La 

de    ma    patrie;    trois    heures  sc6ne  magnifique  de  I'univers 

d'un  vent  favorable  et  je  m'y  paroit   couverte   d'un  voile   a 

*  Madame  Roland  fell  a  victim  to  the  guiUotine  NoTeml)er9,  1793,  at 
ihe  age  of  thirty-nine,  and  her  hushand  committed  suicide  seven  days 
afterwards.  Their  only  daughter  married  M.  Champagneux ;  the  first 
edition  of  Madame  Roland's  memoirs  was  published  by  him  in  1800,  under 
the  title  of  '  Appel  au  Peuple.' 

J.  2 


148 


MISS  BEERTS  JOURNAL. 


[1785 


retrouve.  Mais  ou  sont  ces 
douces  sensations,  ces  larmes 
de  joie,  ce  sentiment  profond 
et  tendre  que  j'ai  toujours 
espere  d'eprouver  dans  un 
moment  qui  devroit  toujours 
m'etre  cher  ?  Je  ne  les  eprouve 
pas.  Tu  ne  les  eprouves  pas  ! 
Malheureuse !  et  pourquoi  ? 
Comment  as-tu  pu  perdre  le 
plusdouXjle  plusnaturel,  leplus 
delicieux  de  tons  les  enthousi- 
asmes  ?  Tu  I'as  perdu  !  et  qu'as- 
tu  gagne  a  la  place  ?  Une  triste 
assurance  que  le  bonheur  n'est 
d'aucun  pays,  que  son  germe 
existe  en  nous-memes  et  que 
tu  ne  I'as  pas;  que  ton  ame 
fidre,  ta  sensibilite  immoderee 
I'ont  detruit;  que  tu  as  per- 
du les  aimables  faiblesses,  les 
douces  erreurs,  les  heureux 
prejuges  de  ton  age  et  de  ton 
sexe,  sans  avoir  acquis  cette 
force  d'ame,  ces  lumi^res 
sures  et  etendues — enfin,  cette 
vertu  superieure  qui  seule  peut 
se  passer  d'agremens,  et  seule 
capable  d'elever  nos  ames  au 
niveau  de  sa  propre  grandeur, 
sait  se  faire  aimer,  meme  de 
ceux   qui  ne  lui  ressemblent 

pas Je   te   parle 

franchementparcequejet'aime, 
je  sais  que  la  nature  t'avoit 
enrichie  de  tons  ses  dons,  je 
me  souviens  de  ton  enfance, 
je  connais  ton  ccEur,  je  me 
suis  aussi  apergue  de  la 
source,  du  principe  de  toutes 
tes  erreurs.  Tu  es  encore 
capable  de  beaucoup;  je 
veux  te  rendre  a  toi-meme,  te 
retirer    du     precipice    ou    tu 


mes  yeux  fatigues.  Je  ne  sais 
quel  brouillard,  semblable  a 
celui  des  matinees  de  I'au- 
tomne,  environne  et  confond 
les  objets  sur  lesquels  je  vou- 
drois  fixer  mes  regards ;  je 
ne  repois  deja  que  des  sensa- 
tions languissantes 

Mes  idees  se  succMent  sans 
chaleur ;  j 'existe  sans  passions 
et  sans  gout;  je  suis  devenue 
etrang^re  aux  transports  de 
I'enthousiasme,  aux  dechire- 
mens  de  la  compassion,  aux 
elans  de  I'amitie.  Eien,  ce 
me  semble,  desormais,  ne  pour- 
roit  me  causer  de  I'etonne- 
ment  ou  de  I'effroi!  Sans 
haine  du  genre  humain,  sans 
estime  pour  lui,  sans  desirs  et 
presque  sans  regrets,  j'use  de 
la  vie  avec  indifference,  et 
je  la  perdrois  sans  douleur., 
Triste  fruit  de  la  reflexion  et 
de  la  connaissance  des  hommes!' 
je  n'ai  encore  que  vingt-trois 
ans,  deja  les  plus  douces 
illusions  sont  evanouies  pour 
moi,  avant  que  j'ai  goute  toua 
leurs  charmes.  Trop  tot  eclairee 
par  des  epreuves  aflBigeantes, 
premunie  centre  les  sentimens 
qui  me  restoient  a  concevoirj 
j'ai  perdu,  avec  mes  plus  chores 
erreurs,  jusqu'a  la  faculte  d'etre 
abusee  davantage.  .  .  .  La 
nature  m'a  trahie;  I'amour 
vaudroit-il  mieux  qu'elle?  .  . 
.  .  .  Si  jamais  I'aigreur  ou 
le  degoiit  venoit  empoisonner 
mes  jours  et  dechirer  men 
cceur,  amitie  sainte !  divinite 
bienfaisante  a  qui  je  dois  mon 
bonheur,   bates-toi  de  me  re- 


1785] 


TRANSCKIPT. 


149 


t'achemines,  te  sauver  de  cette 

affreuse  apathie  ou  tes  erreurs, 

ton  esprit,  ta  sensibilite  meme 

te  conduisent.  —  (Written    in 

June  1785,  at  Dessin's  at  Calais,     p.  157.) 

while  waiting  for  a  wind.) 


concilier  avec  mes  semblables, 
avec  moi-meme  et  avec  la  vie. 
— {Rh&rie  du  Bois   de  Yin- 


cennes.    Mme.  Eoland,  vol.  iii. 


150 


LETTERS.  [1788 


LETTEES. 

1788-9. 

From  the  time  of  Miss  Berry's  return  to  England  in  June 
1785,  up  to  the  period  of  her  acquaintance  with  Horace 
Walpole  in  the  winter  of  1788,  there  is  no  journal  pre- 
served and  no  letters  to  be  found  that  can  throw  any 
hght  on  her  thoughts  or  pursuits  at  that  time  :  all  that  re- 
mains is  a  memorandum  of  their  yearly  movements,  from 
which  is  to  be  derived,  for  1786,  the  scanty  information  that 
they  went  to  Scotland,  and  on  their  return  from  Scotland 
stopped  en  route  in  Yorkshire ;  that  they  hired  a  house  in 
Somerset  Street,  and  were  met  in  London  by  their  grand- 
mother, who  came  from  her  daughter  Cayley. 

In  1787  :  '  Very  comfortable  in  London.  Summer:  Isle 
of  Wight.     Visit  the  Pepys.' 

In  1788  :  'In  the  winter  made  Mr,  Walpole's  acquaint- 
ance. Took  a  house  at  Twickenham  Common.  Went  to 
Yorkshire  to  the  Cayleys  at  Middleton.' 

It  was  in  the  winter  of  1788,  and  at  the  house  of  his 
friend  Lady  Herries,*  that  Mr.  Walpole  became  first  ac- 
quainted with  the  Miss  Berrys,  but  it  was  not  till  they 
were  his  neighbours  at  Twickenham  in  the  autumn  of 
the  same  year  that  any  mention  is  made  of  them  in  his 
pubhshed  letters ;  but  from  that  time  till  his  death  in  1797 
the  great  solace  and  interest  of  his  decHning  life  appears 
to  have  been  derived  from  his  constant  social  intercourse 
and  frequent  correspondence  with  the  young  ladies  upon 
whom  he  lavished,  at  times,  the  tender  epithets  of  wives, 
children,  friends.   It  is  in  Horace  Walpole's  letter  to  Lady 

*  Wife  of  the  banker  in  St.  James's  Street. 


1788]  HORACE   WALPOLE   TO   LADT   OSSOET.  151 

Ossory,  dated  October  11,  1788,  that  we  find  his  first 
impressions  of  his  new  acquaintances,  with  some  accomit 
of  their  history  and  circumstances. 

[If  I  have  picked  up  no  recent  anecdotes  on  our  common 
(writes  he),  I  have  made  a  much  more,  to  me,  precious  acquisi- 
tion. It  is  the  acquaintance  of  two  young  ladies  of  the  name 
of  Berry,  whom  I  first  saw  last  winter,  and  who  accidentally  took 
a  house  here  with  their  father  for  the  season,  &c.  &c.  Their 
story  is  singular  enough  to  entertain  you.  The  grandfather,*  a 
Scot,  had  a  large  estate  in  his  own  country — 5,000i.  a  year,  it  is 
said — and  a  circumstance  I  shall  tell  you  makes  it  probable. 
The  eldest  son  married  for  love  a  woman  with  no  fortune.  The 
old  man  was  enraged,  and  would  not  see  him.  His  wife  died, 
and  left  these  two  young  ladies.  The  grandfather  wished  for  an 
heir  male,  and  pressed  the  widower  to  remarry,  but  could  not 
prevail,  the  son  declaring  he  would  consecrate  himself  to  his 
daughters  and  their  education.  The  old  man  did  not  break 
with  him  again,  but,  much  worse,  totally  disinherited  him,  and 
left  all  to  his  second  son,  who  very  handsomely  gave  up  8001. 
a  year  to  his  elder  brother.  Mr.  Berry  has  since  carried  his 
daughters  for  two  or  three  years  to  France  and  Italy,  and  they 
are  returned  the  best-informed  and  the  most  perfect  creatures  I 
ever  saw  at  their  age. '  They  are  exceedingly  sensible,  entirely 
natural  and  unaffected,  frank,  and,  being  qualified  to  talk  on 
any  subject,  nothing  is  so  easy  and  agreeable  as  their  conversa- 
tion, nor  more  apposite  than  their  answers  and  observations. 
The  eldest,  I  discovered  by  chance,  understands  Latin,  and  is  a 
perfect  Frenchwoman  in  her  language.  The  younger  draws 
charmingly,  and  has  copied  admirably  Lady  D.'s  Gipsies,  which 
I  lent,  though  for  the  first  time  of  her  attempting  colours.  They 
are  of  pleasing  figures.  Mary,  the  eldest,  sweet,  with  fine  dark 
eyes,  that  are  very  lively  when  she  speaks,  with  a  symmetry  of 
face  that  is  the  more  interesting  from  being  pale ;  Agnes,  the 
younger,  has  an  agreeable  sensible  countenance,  hardly  to  be 
called  handsome,  but  almost.  She  is  less  animated  than  Mary, 
but  seems,  out  of  deference  to  her  sister,  to  speak  seldomer,  for 
they  dote  on  each  other,  and  Mary  is  always  praising  her  sister's 

♦  Mr.  Walpole  was  mistaken  in  this.  It  was  their  granduncle,  not  their 
grandfather,  from  whom  Mr.  Berry  had  expected  to  inherit. 


152  LETTERS.  [1788 

talents.  I  must  even  tell  you  they  dress  within  the  bounds  of 
fashion,  though  fashionably ;  but  without  the  excrescences  and 
balconies  with  which  modern  hoydens  overwhelm  and  barricade 
their  persons — in  short,  good  sense,  information,  simplicity,  and 
ease  characterise  the  Berrys.  And  this  s  not  particularly  mine, 
who  am  apt  to  be  prejudiced,  but  the  universal  voice  of  all  who 
know  them.  The  first  night  I  met  them  I  would  not  be  ac- 
quainted with  them,  having  heard  so  much  in  their  praise  that 
I  concluded  they  would  be  all  pretension.  The  second  time,  in 
a  very  small  company,  I  sat  next  to  Mary,  and  found  her  an 
angel  both  inside  and  out.  Now,  I  do  not  know  which  I  like 
best ;  except  Mary's  face,  which  is  formed  for  a  sentimental  novel, 
but  it  is  ten  times  fitter  for  a  fifty  times  better  thing — genteel 
comedy.  This  delightful  family  comes  to  me  almost  every  Sun- 
day evening,  as  our  region  is  too  proclamatory  to  play  at  cards 
on  the  seventh  day.  ...  I  forgot  to  tell  you  that  Mr. 
Berry  is  a  little  merry  man,  with  a  round  face,  and  you  would 
not  suspect  him  of  so  much  feeling  and  attachment.  I  make  no 
excuse  for  such  minute  details;  for  if  your  ladyship  insists  on 
hearing  the  humours  of  my  district,  you  must  for  once  indulge 
me  with  sending  you  two  pearls  that  I  found  in  my  path.]* 

On  October  19  he  again  wrote  to  Lady  Ossory,  on  the 
subject  of  his  new  acquaintances. 

[It  stands  me  upon,  Madame,  to  hurry  my  answer,  when  I 
have  to  thank  you  for  your  very  pretty  and  very  flattering 
poetry.  Little  did  I  think  that  my  two  strawberries  would 
prove  muses  at  Farming  Woods.  I  sent  your  ladyship  an 
account  of  them  from  absolute  dearth  of  subjects,  when  you  had 
commanded  me  to  write  again;  and  when  I  had  done  so,  I 
repented,  and  thought  you  would  laugh  at  me  in  your  miud's 
mouth,  for  troubling  you  with  an  idle  description  of  two  girls 
with  whom  I  have  happened  to  get  acquainted.  Luckily  your 
ladyship  and  our  lord  were  at  that  moment  full  as  much  a 
man  and  woman  of  the  woods  as  any  marquis  in  Christendom; 
and  as  you  are  there  still,  I  shall  venture  to  proceed,  and  to  send 
you,  not  an  adequate  return  (as  far  as  my  part  goes)  for  your 

*  The  passages  included  in  brackets  have  been  before  published,  and  are 
here  inserted  to  give  continuity  to  the  narrative. 


1788]  HORACE  WALPOLE   TO    LADT   OSSOET.  153 

verses,  but  some  of  les  amusemens  des  eaux  de  strawberri; 
but  beseech  that  they  may  go  no  further,  for  trifles  that  egayent 
a  little  private  society,  are  ridiculous  if  they  get  abroad,  espe- 
cially from  a  septuagenary  rhymer. 

The  Berrys  were  to  come  over  and  see  my  printing  press.  I 
recollected  my  gallantry  of  former  days,  and  they  found  these 
stanzas  ready  set : — 

To  Mary's  lips  has  ancient  Eome 

Her  purest  language  taught, 
And  from  the  modern  city  home 

Agnes  its  pencil  brought. 

-  Eome's  ancient  Horace  sweetly  chants 
Such  maids  with  lyric  fire ; 
Albion's  old  Horace  sings  nor  paints — 
He  only  can  admire. 

Still  would  his  press  their  fame  record, 

So  amiable  the  pair  is ! 
But  ah !  how  vain  to  think  his  word 

Can  add  a  straw  to  Berrys ! 

The  next  morning  the  Latin  nymph  sent  me  these  lines : — 

Had  Eome's  famed  Horace  thus  addrest 

His  Lydia  or  his  Lyce, 
He'd  ne'er  complained,  to  him  their  breast 

So  oft  was  cold  and  icy. 

But  had  they  sought  their  joy  t'  explain. 

Or  praise  their  gen'rous  bard, 
Perhaps  like  me  they'd  tried  in  vain. 

And  felt  the  task  too  hard.] 

This  rejoinder  was  thus  acknowledged  by  Horace 
Walpole : — 

To  Miss  Mary  Berry,  on  her  Stanzas  in  answer  to  his  from 
the  Press  at  Strawberry  Hill. 

I  will  certainly  not  contend  when  I  am  so  glad  to  be  foiled, 
as  I  am  in  every  sense  of  the  word ;  for  you  perceive  my  great 
ambition  is  to  set  you  off;  and  since  clinquant  is  of  no  other 


154  LETTERS.  [1788 

use,  and  as  Strawberry  Hill  is  the  lowest  in  all  the  parish  of 
Parnassus,  I  hope  you  will  allow  me  the  honour  of  being  your 
PJiebus  entitled  office;  tho'  I  shall  be  the  reverse  of  all  De- 
puties, for  my  charge  will  be  a  sinecure,  as  my  Principal,  the  force 
Inspirer,  will,  I  am  persuaded,  always  execute  his  office  himself, 
and  leave  on  the  superannuated  list, 

Yr.  devoted  Servant, 

Ho.  Walpole. 

The  verses  addressed  by  the  Strawberry  Press  to  the 
Miss  Berrys  appear  to  have  provoked  others  on  their 
name,  of  which  these  lines,  by  Mr.  Eichard  Owen,*  of 
Cambridge,  is  an  example : — 

To  sound  your  praises  I  dare  not  try. 

My  pen  so  prone  to  err  is  ; 
I  tremble  whilst  I  write,  lest  I 

Should  add  a  goose  to  Berries. 

In  consequence  of  these  various  effusions.  Miss  Berry 
addressed  to  Horace  Walpole  the  following  letter,  en- 
closing her  playful  yet  modest  hues  on  the  same  theme. 

Twickenliam  Common :  Saturday  morning,  Nov.  1, 1788. 
As  an  apology  for  the  enclosed,  I  must  tell  you  that  your 
verses  to  us  have  occasioned  half  a  dozen  others  (some  of  them 
by  people  whom  we  never  saw),  in  which  our  Tiame  and  praises 
have  been  played  upon  a  thousand  different  ways.  Our  senti- 
ment upon  them  I  have  ventured  to  express  to  you  in  the  follow- 
ing lines.  Ehyming  seems  to  be  catching ;  but  I  fear  I  have 
got  the  disorder  of  a  bad  sort, 

I  have  the  honour  to  be  much  yours, 

M.  Bekkt. 

*  Eichard  Owen,  Cambridge.  This  gentleman,  of  an  opulent  and  ancient 
Gloucestershire  family,  was  distinguished  by  his  wit  in  conversation,  no  less 
than  by  his  taste  and  talents  in  literature.  He  wrote  a  burlesque  poem 
called  the  '  Scribleriad,'  and  was  a  principal  contributor  to  the  periodical 
paper  called  the  'World.'  He  died  aged  eighty-five,  at  his  seat  near 
Twickenham,  on  the  banks  of  the  Thames,  in  the  year  1802,  leaving  a 
widow,  two  sons,  and  a  daughter.  His  works  were  collected  and  re- 
published by  his  younger  son. — BiograpMeal  Notices  to  Vol.  II.  of  Diary 
and  Letters  of  Miss  Bumey. 


1788]  MISS   BEERY  TO   HORACE   WALPOLE.  155 


To  THE  Hon.  Hoeace  Walpole. 

Far  in  a  wood,  not  much  exposed  to  view. 
With  other  forest  fruit  two  Berries  grew ; 
Unheeded  in  their  native  shade  they  lay, 
Nor  courting  much,  nor  too  much  shunning  day. 
A  wandering  sage,  whose  footsteps  oft  had  roam'd 
Out  of  the  beaten  track  that  fashion  own'd, 
Observ'd  these  Berries  half-concealed  from  sight. 
And,  or  from  chance,  or  whim,  or  his  delight 
Of  bringing  unregarded  worth  to  light, 
Tasted  the  fruit,  and  in  a  lucky  hour. 
Finding  it  neither  vapid  yet,  nor  sour, 
A  sort  of  lively  rather  pleasant  taste, 
A  flavour,  which  he  thought  he  lik'd  at  last. 
Something,  perhaps,  upon  the  strawberry  cast. 
The  new-found  fruit  with  partial  care  he  prais'd, 
And  so  the  Berries'  reputation  raised. 
Others  their  taste  cried  up,  their  goodness  sung 
In  various  verse — their  name  and  virtues  rung : 
Some  call'd  them  food  for  gods  and  heroes  fit, 
While  some  forgot  their  theme  to  show  their  wit. 
The  Berries,  conscious  all  this  sudden  name 
Prov'd  not  their  value,  but  their  patron's  fame — 
Conscious  they  only  could  aspire  to  please 
Some  simple  palates  satisfied  with  ease ; 
But  if  with  nobler,  finer  fruit  compar'd, 
They  many  faults  and  few  perfections  shar'd — 
Wisely  determin'd  still  to  court  the  shade, 
To  those  that  sought  them  only  pleasing  made ; 
No  greater  honours  anxious  to  obtain. 
But  still  yowr  fav'rite  Berries  to  remain. 


The  following  verses  from  Mr.  Walpole  also  produced 
a  rejoinder  from  Miss  Berry  in  the  same  modest  tone  of 
self-depreciation : — 

To  Miss  Maet  Beekt. 

Thine  beauty,  learning,  eloquence. 
With  every  grace  of  social  sense. 


156  LETTERS.  [1788 

And  all  with  unaffected  ease, 

Without  pretensions  sure  to  please ; 

With  every  virtue  that  endears, 

Why  raise  my  wishes  less  than  fears  ? 

'Tis  nought  that  heaven  denied  thee  wealth  ; 

Ah  !  why  withhold  its  dearer  blessing — health  ? 

Eeplt. 

Tho'  pain  with  unrelenting  sway 

My  languid  frame  subdues, 
Can  I  with  common  thanks  repay 

The  wishes  of  thy  Muse  ? 

Ah  no  !  my  heart  no  languor  knows  ; 
In  every  feeling  strong, 
.  Dwells  with  delight  on  all  it  owes. 
Thy  converse,  friendship's  song : 

The  voice  of  praise  still  charms  my  ear, 

Yet  not  deceiv'd  I  see  ; 
Thy  lines  but  tell  in  language  clear 

\Miat  I  should  strive  to  be. 

An  Apology  for  Miss  Bekey's  Paleness,  in  imitation  op 
Wallek.    ByH.  W. 

True  on  her  cheek  the  Damask  rose 

Too  seldom  or  too  faintly  blows ; 
Less  does  the  venal  mimic  art 

To  that  fair  cheek  its  dyes  impart. 
E'en  Hebe's  bloom  would  ill  replace 

The  sensibility  and  grace 
That  sweetly  beams  from  Mary's  face : 

As  the  white  lily  would  but  lose 
If  tinged  by  Flora's  brightest  hues. 
Dec.  1789. 

Amongst  the  most  cherished  of  the  Miss  Berrys'  relations 
appears  to  have  been  their  cousin,  Miss  Bab.  Seton,  after- 
wards married  to  Mr.  Bannister.  The  following  verses 
addressed  to  the  '  Tea-Caddy,'  over  which  she  had  been 


1738]  MISS   SBTON'S   LINES  TO   THE   'TEA-CADDY.'  157 

presiding  during  a  three  months'  visit,  gives  a  pleasing  and 
pointed  description  of  the  society  she  had  just  quitted 
with  regret : — 

Dear  Caddy,  since  no  more  from  thee 
I  now  shall  draw  each  morning's  tea, 
This  envied  place  no  more  be  mine. 
And  I,  like  ministers,  resign ; 
Since  from  these  scenes  I  must  retire 
To  humble  Causham's  cottage  fire, 
Where  dog,  and  cat,  and  I,  and  mother. 
Sit  and  make  much  of  one  another ; 
Aiid  quit  this  house  where  best  I  see 
The  charms  of  true  society ; 
Where  flirting,  scandal,  affectation. 
Are  banished  from  the  conversation  ; 
Where  Pepy's  taste  refin'd,  discerning. 
Displays  the  charms  of  polish'd  learning. 
Makes  obsolete  all  jokes  on  college, 
And  separates  pedantry  from  knowledge  ; 
Where  Grarrick  charms  without  pretence. 
In  native  humour,  grace,  and  sense ; 
And  More — but  I'll  not  touch  her  name — 
'Tis  her  own  works  best  speak  her  fame ; 
Or  Walpole,  whose  most  liberal  spirit. 
Calls  from  oblivion  long-lost  merit, 
Eevives  the  painter  and  the  poet. 
Searches  for  genius,  but,  to  show  it. 
Writes  to  make  others'  laurels  known, 
While  wit  and  learning  plant  his  own ; — 
These  and  some  others  I  could  name, 
Whom  better  pens  will  give  to  fame, 
With  my  dear  Berrys'  form  a  set. 
Which  I  can't  quit  without  regret : 
For  tho'  (I  say 't  between  us  snugly) 
I  know  I  am  both  dull  and  ugly, 
And  that  with  these  to  say  one's  good, 
Still  makes  one  little  more  than  wood ; 
For  not  e'en  Walpole  ('twas  no  sham) 
Could  make  me  make  an  epigram : 


158  LETTEKS.  [1789 

But  yet  with  pleasure  I  confess 
I  love  the  wit  I  don't  possess — 
Love  to  see  others'  talents  shine, 
Nor  envy  tho'  I  wish  them  mine. 
But  now  three  months  too  quickly  o'er, 
I  can  enjoy  these  scenes  no  more, 
My  last  desire  you  can  perform. 
Which  is —  at  each  returning  morn. 
When  Agnes  comes  to  make  the  tea 
(Which  she  don't  do  so  well  as  me), 
When  by  her  side  she  places  you. 
Keep  me  in  mind  when  not  in  view, 
And  give  to  every  flowing  cup 
The  pow'r  to  make  each  difference  up ; 
Soften  the  fire  of  Mary's  eyes, 
Make  Agnes  calm  e'er  she  replies ; 
Add  (if  you  can)  one  charm  the  more 
Where  Nature's  done  so  much  before ; 
So  shall  no  breakfast  here  be  eaten. 
But  you  shall  make  them  think  of 

Seton. 
Teh.  23,  1788. 

It  was  during  the  autumn  of  this  year  that  Horace  Wal- 
pole  wrote,  '  for  the  amusement  of  Miss  Berry  and  Miss 
Agnes  Berry,'  his  'Eeminiscences  of  the  Courts  of  George  I. 
and  II.'  These  reminiscences  were  begun  on  October  31, 
1788,  and  finished  January  13,  1789,  and  were  the  result 
of  the  interest  shown  by  his  young  friends  in  his  stories 
of  bygone  days. 

There  is  no  trace  of  any  correspondence  this  year 
(1788)  between  Mr.  Walpole  and  the  Miss  Berrys,  when 
the  latter  were  on  a  visit  iu  Yorkshire,  and  the  first  of  the 
series  of  those  letters  that  have  been  pubhshed  is  dated 
February  1789  ;  and  in  this,  as  in  all  succeeding  letters, 
may  be  traced  the  constant  struggle  that  was  going  on 
in  his  mind  between  the  tenderness  with  which  he  dwells 
on  the  pleasure  of  their  society  and  the  fear  of  its  expres- 
sion making  him  ridiculous  as  the  septuagenarian  admirer 


1789]  HORACE   WALPOLE   TO   MISS   BERET.  159 

of  youtli  and  beauty.  His  letter  is  dated  February  2, 
17,  and  71 — alluding  to  his  own  age — and  concludes  with 
the  following  passage  : — 

[I  am  afraid  of  protesting  how  much  I  delight  in  your 
society,  lest  I  should  seem  to  affect  being  gallant ;  but  if  two 
negatives  make  an  affirmative,  why  may  not  two  ridicules  com- 
pose one  piece  of  sense  ?  And,  therefore,  as  I  am  in  love  with 
you  both,  I  trust  it  is  a  proof  of  the  good  sense  of  your 
devoted,  H.  Walpole.] 

On  March  25  he  writes  in  the  same  strain : — 

March  25, 1789. 
You  have  not  half  the  quickness  that  I  thought  you  had — 
or,  which  is  much  more  probable,  I  suspect  that  I  am  a  little 
in  love,  and  you  are  not,  for  I  think  I  should  have  understood 
you  in  two  syllables,  which  has  not  been  your  case.  I  had  sealed 
iny  note,  and  was  going  to  send  it  when  yours  arrived  with  the 
invitation  for  Saturday.  I  was  to  dine  abroad,  and  had  not 
time  to  break  open  my  note  or  write  it  again,  and  so  lifted  up 
a  corner  and  squeezed  in  I  will.  What  could  those  syllables 
mean,  but  that  I  will  do  whatever  you  please  ?  Yes,  you  may 
keep  them  as  a  note  of  hand,  always  payable  at  sight  of  your 
commands  or  your  sister's ;  for  I  am  not  less  in  love  with  my 
wife  Eachel  than  my  wife  Leah ;  and  tho'  I  had  a  little  for- 
gotten my  matrimonial  vows  at  the  beginning  of  this  note,  and 
was  awkward,  and  haggled  a  little  about  owning  my  passion, 
now  I  recollect  that  I  have  taken  a  double  dose,  I  am  mighty 
proud  of  it ;  and  being  more  in  the  right  than  ever  lover  was, 
and  twice  as  much  in  the  right  too,  I  avow  my  sentiments, 
hardiment,  and  am. 

Hymen,  0  Htmen^e  ! 

In  Miss  Berry's  memoranda  the  events  of  this  year  are 
entered. 

Introduced  by  Mr.  W.  to  Lady  Ailesbury  *  and  Mrs.  D.f  Visit 

*  Caroline,  widow  of  Charles  Bruce,  Earl  of  Aileshury  and  Elgin,  and 
only  daughter  of  Lieut. -General  John  Campbell,  fourth  Duke  of  Argyle, 
married  afterwards  to  Marshal  Henry  Seymour  Conway. 

t  Anne,  only  daughter  of  Lady  Ailesbury  and  Marshal  Conway,  bom 
1748  J   married,  June  1767,  to  John,  eldest  son  of  Joseph  Darner,  Lord 


160  LETTEES.  [1789 

the  Cayleys  in  Yorkshire.  Visit  at  Park  Place  *  and  at  Mr.  Mar- 
tin's. Go  to  Lymington  for  some  weeks ;  to  Yorkshire ;  after- 
wards to  house  at  the  end  of  Teddington. 

For  this  introduction  to  his  friend  and  relation,  Lady 
Ailesbury,  we  find  Mr.  Walpole  making  an  appointment 
in  his  letter  to  the  Miss  Berrys,  March,  20,  1789. 

[.  .  .  I  hope  you  are  not  engaged  this  day  se'nnight,  but 
Avill  allow  me  to  wait  on  you  to  Lady  Ailesbury,  which  I  will 
settle  with  her  when  I  have  her  answer.  I  did  mention  it  to 
her  in  general,  but  have  no  day  free  before  Friday  next,  except 
Thursday,  when,  if  there  is  no  othet  illumination,!  as  is  threat- 
ened, we  should  neither  get  thither  nor  thence,  especially  not  the 
latter  if  the  former  is  impracticable. 

Quicquid  delirant  Reges  plectuntur  Achivi.] 

The  intimacy  with  Mr.  Walpole  now  determined  the 
acquaintances,  the  friendships,  and  often  the  place  of  resi- 
dence of  the  Miss  Berrys.  His  friends  became  their  friends, 
his  neighbours  their  neighbours.  They  formed  an  integral 
part  of  the  society  collected  round  this  oracle  of  Hterature, 
wit,  and  taste ;  and  long  after  death  had  swept  away  all 
who  were  known  as  the  guests  of  Strawberry  Hill,  or  the 
recipients  of  Horace  Walpole's  letters,  the  Miss  Berrys 
alone  remained  as  a  link  between  those  other  days  and 
the  present  time.  It  was  fifty-two  years  after  the  period 
of  their  introduction  to  Mr.  Walpole  that  Miss  Berry, 
writing  to  rescue  his  character  from  misconception, 
says : — 

Of  the  means  necessary  for  this  purpose,  the  writer,  by 
the  painful  pre-eminence  of  age,  remains  the  sole  depositary, 

Milton,  afterwards  Earl  of  Doroh  ester.  Nine  years  after  their  marriage  he 
stot  himself  at  a  London  tavern,  and  she  was  left  a  widow  in  1776.  She 
ohtained  a  high  reputation  during  her  life  as  a  sculptress ;  amongst  those 
whose  portraits  she  executed  in  marble  were  Mr.  Fox,  Lord  Nelson, 
George  IV.,  Miss  Berry,  &c.     She  died  May  1826,  aged  eighty. 

*  The  seat  of  Marshal  Conway,  near  Henley,  Oxfordshire. 

t  Alluding  to  the  rejoicings  on  George  IIL  recovering  from  his  &st 
illness  in  1788. — Cunningham's  edit.,  vol.  ix.  p.  176. 


1789]  Darwin's  'botanic  garden.'  161 

and  being  so,  has  submitted  to  the  task  of  repelling  such  mis- 
conceptions.* 

The  next  letter  in  date  to  Miss  Berry  is  a  sample  of 
the  playful  manner  in  which  Mr.  Walpole  was  in  the  habit 
of  treating  the  trivial  occurrences  of  the  day. 

Suavissima  Maria,  P"      ' 

I  CO  aid  not  answer  y'^  note  yesterday,  for  I  was  at  dinner, 
as  I  do  not  wait  till  the  Great  Mogul,  Fashion,  gives  me  leave 
to  sit  down  to  table.  Besides,  I  was  to  go  to  the  play,  and  like 
to  see  the  beginning  as  well  as  the  end. 

I  pray  that  our  Papa  may  find  a  house  at  Twickenham. 
Hampton  Court  is  half  way  to  Switzerland. 

I  am  not  asked  to  Lady  Juliana's,  and  therefore  must  give 
you  up  for  this  week  as  vagrants;  but  when  you  are  passed 
back  to  y""  parish,  I  will  certainly  see  you,  especially  on  this  day 
se'nnight. 

In  the  middle  of  the  last  act  last  night  there  was  an  interlude 
of  a  boxing  match,  but  it  was  in  the  front  boxes.  The  folks  in  the 
pit,  who  could  not  see  behind  them  better  than  they  generally  can 
before  them  thro'  domes  and  pyramids  of  muslin,  hinted  to  the 
combatants  to  retire,  which  they  did  into  the  lobby,  where  a  circle 
was  made,  and  there  the  champions  pulled  one  another's  hair, 
and  a  great  deluge  of  powder  ensued ;  but  being  well  greased 
like  Grecian  pugilists,  not  many  curls  were  shed.     Adieu  ! 

About  a  fortnight  later  Mr.  Walpole  writes  as  follows 
on  the  subject  of  Dr.  Darwin's  poem, .'The  Botanic 
Garden : ' — 

[April  28,  at  night,  1789. 
.  .  .  I  send  you  the  most  delicious  poem  upon  earth.  If 
you  do  not  know  what  it  is  all  about,  or  why,  at  least  you  will 
find  glorious  similes  about  everything  in  the  world,  and  I  defy 
you  to  discover  three  bad  verses  in  the  whole  stock.  Dryden 
was  but  the  prototype  of  the  'Botanic  Garden'  in  his  charming 
'Flower  and  Leaf; '  and  if  he  had  less  meaning,  it  is  true  he  had 

*  See  Advertisement  to  vol.  vi.  of  '  Letters  by  Horace  Walpole,'  pub- 
lished 1840. 

VOL.  I.  M 


162  LETTERS.  [I7i 

more  plan,  and  I  must  own  that  his  white  velvets  and  gree 
velvets,  and  rubies  and  emeralds,  were  much  more  virtuous  gen 
tlefolks  than  most  of  the  flowers  of  the  creation,  who  seem  t 
have  no  fear  of  Doctors'  Commons  before  their  eyes.  This  i 
only  the  Second  Part ;  for  like  my  king's  eldest  daughter  in  th 
Hieroglyphic  Tales,  the  First  Part  is  not  born  yet.  No  mattei 
I  can  read  this  over  and  over  again  for  ever ;  for  though  it  is  s 
excellent,  it  is  impossible  to  remember  anything  so  disjointed 
except  you  consider  it  as  a  collection  of  short  enchantiuj 
poems — as  the  Circe  at  her  tremendous  devilries  in  a  church ;  thi 
intrigue  of  the  dear  nightingale  and  rose,  and  the  description  o 
Medea ;  the  episode  of  Mr.  Howard,  which  ends  with  the  mos 
sublime  of  lines.  In  short,  all,  all,  all  is  the  most  lovely  poetry 
And  then  one  sighs  that  such  profusion  of  poetry,  magnificen 
and  tender,  should  be  thrown  away  on  what  neither  interests  noi 
instructs,  and  with  all  the  pains  the  notes  take  to  explain,  ii 
scarce  intelUgible.  How  strange  it  is  that  a  man  should  have 
been  inspired  with  such  enthusiasm  of  poetry  by  peering  througl 
a  microscope,  and  peepiag  through  the  key-holes  of  all  the  sera- 
glios of  all  the  flowers  in  the  universe!  I  hope  his  disco- 
veries may  leave  any  impression  but  of  the  universal  polygamj 
going  on  in  the  vegetable  world,  where,  however,  it  is  mor« 
gallant  than  amongst  the  human  race  ;  for  you  will  find  that  thej 
are  the  botanic  ladies  who  keep  harems,  and  not  the  gentlemen, 
Still  /  will  maintain  that  it  is  much  better  that  we  should  have 
two  wives  than  your  sex  two  husbands.  So,  pray,  don't  mind 
Linnseus  and  Dr.  Darwin.  Dr.  Madan  had  ten  times  more 
sense.     Adieu !  * 

Your  doubly  constant 

Theltphthoeus.] 

Miss  Berry's  reply : — 

Somerset  Street,  Wednesday  morning. 

A  thousand  thanks  for  the  '  Botanic  Garden.'  The  first 
thirty  lines,  which  I  have  just  read,  are  delicious,  and  make  me 
quite  anxious  to  go  on ;  for  I  must  at  last  own  with  blushes 
what  I  have  hitherto  concealed,  perhaps  improperly,  from  my 
husband,  but  as  I  am  married,  it  must  at  last  come  out,  that  I 

•  Vide  edit.  1859,  vol.  ix.  p.  178. 


1789]  CARDINAL   DE   BEENIS.  163 

was  early  initiated  into  all  the  amours  and  loose  manners  of  the 
plants  by  that  very  guilty  character  Dr.  Solander,*  and  passed  too 
much  time  in  the  society  and  observance  of  some  of  the  most 
abandoned  vegetable  coquettes. 

I  hope  my  having  long  entirely  forsaken  all  such  odd  com- 
pany, and  lived  a  very  regular  life,  will  in  some  degree  apolo- 
gise to  you  for  my  having  been  early  led  astray.  We  rejoice  in 
the  hopes  of  seeing  you  to-morrow  evening. 

M.  Beeet. 

From  Miss  Berry  to  Mr.  Walpole  : — 

Somerset  Street,  Wednesday  niglit. 

You  will  oblige  us  by  honouring  this  portrait  of  Cardinal  de 
Bernis  with  a  place  among  your  prints ;  we  happen  to  have  two 
or  three  impressions  of  it. 

Could  I  borrow  for  a  moment  the  lively  language,  elegant 
expression,  and  polished  wit  which  in  conversation  animates 
these  vulgar  heavy  features,  I  would  thank  you  in  such  terms  as 
the  subject  deserves  for  your  company  last  night,  and  the  many 
pleasant  hours  we  have  passed  in  your  society ;  but  as  there  is 
no  borrowing  abilities,  even  upon  usury,  I 'must  content  myself 
with  reminding  you  that,  as  in  this  portrait,  a  most  heavy  un- 
promising countenance  conceals  an  active  intelligent  mind,  so 
the  homeliest  expression  of  thanks  often  accompanies  the  truest 
sense  of  obligation. 

M.  Beeet. 


Many  passages  in  the  letters  already  printed  having 
been  suppressed — some  probably  for  the  sake  of  brevity, 
and  some  perhaps  from  a  wish  on  the  part  of  the  Miss 
Berrys  to  avoid  a  too  frequent  repetition  of  their  ovra 
praises — may  now  without  scruple  be  pubUshed. 

At  the  end  of  June  the  Miss  Berrys  left  London  for 
Yorkshire,  and  Mr.  "Walpole  is  full  of  anxiety  and  alarm 
because  the  letter  to  be  written  on  their  journey  had  not 

*  Dr.  Solander,  a  Swedish  writer  on  Natural  History,  a  pupil  of 
Linnsua ;  born  1736,  died  1782. 

m2 


164  LETTERS.  [1789 

been  received,  and  full  of  affectionate  regret  for  the  loss 
of  their  compa,ny.  In  his  letter  dated  Strawberry  HiU, 
Tuesday,  June  23,  1789,  he  writes: — 

[I  am  not  at  all  consoled  for  my  double  loss :  my  only  comfort 
is  that  I  flatter  myself  the  journey  and  air  will  be  of  service  to 
you  both.  The  latter  has  been  of  use  to  me,  though  the  part  of 
the  element  of  air  has  been  chiefly  acted  by  the  element  of 
water,  as  my  poor  haycocks  feel !  Tonton  *  does  not  miss  you 
so  much  as  I  do,  not  having  so  good  a  taste ;  for  he  is  grown 
very  fond  of  me,  and  I  return  it  for  your  sakes,  though  he 
deserves  it  too,  for  he  is  perfectly  goodnatured  and  tractable ; 
but  he  is  not  beautiful,  like  his  '  god-dog,'  as  Mr.  Selwyn,  who 
dined  here  on  Saturday,  called  my  poor  late  favourite,f  especially 
as  I  have  had  him  clipped.  The  shearing  has  brought  to  light  a 
nose  an  ell  long ;  and  as  he  has  now  nasum  rhinocerotis,  I  do 
not  doubt  but  he  will  be  a  better  critic  in  poetry  than  Dr,  John- 
son, who  judged  of  harmony  by  the  principles  of  an  author,  and 
fancied,  or  wished  to  make  others  believe,  that  no  Jacobite  could 
write  bad  verses,  nor  a  Whig  good.] 

I  passed  so  many  evenings  of  the  last  fortnight  with  you, 
that  I  almost  preferred  it  to  our  two  honeymoons,  and  conse- 
quently am  the  more  sensible  to  the  deprivation  ;  and  how 
dismal  was  Sunday  evening,  compared  to  those  of  last  autumn ! 
If  you  both  felt  as  I  do,  we  might  surpass  any  event  in  the 
annals  of  Dunmow.  Oh !  what  a  prodigy  it  would  be  if  a 
husband  and  two  wives  should  present  themselves  and  demand 
the  flitch  of  bacon,  on  swearing  that  not  one  of  the  three  in  a 
year  and  a  day  had  wished  to  be  unmarried  !  For  my  part,  I 
know  that  my  affection  has  done  nothing  but  increase ;  though 
were  there  but  one  of  you,  I  should  be  ashamed  of  being  so 
strongly  attached  at  my  age ;  being  in  love  with  both,  I  glory 
in  my  passion,  and  think  it  a  proof  of  my  sense.  Why  should 
not  two  afiirmatives  make  a  negative,  as  well  as  the  reverse? 
and  then  a  double  love  will  be  wisdojn — for  what  is  wisdom  in 
reality  but  a  negative  ?  It  exists  but  by  correcting  folly,  and 

*  A  dog  of  Miss  Berrys',  left  in  Mr.  Walpole's  care  during  their  absence 
in  Yorksliire. — M.JB. 

t  The  dog  which  had  been  bequeathed  to  Mr.  Walpole  by  Mrs.  du  Def- 
land  at  her  death ;  likewise  called  Tonton. — M.B. 


1789]  THE    OPEEA   HOUSE   BUHNT   DOWN.  165 

when  it  has  peevishly  prevailed  on  us  to  abstain  from  something 
we  have  a  mind  to,  it  gives  itself  airs,  and  in  action  pretends 
to  be  a  personage,  a  nonentity  sets  up  for  a  figure  of  import- 
ance !  It  is  the  case  of  most  of  those  phantoms,  called  virtues, 
which,  by  smothering  poor  vices,  claim  a  reward  as  thief-takers. 
Do  you  know,  I  have  a  partiality  for  drunkenness,  though  I 
never  practised  it :  it  is  a  reality,  but  what  is  sobriety,  only  the 
absence  of  drunkenness.  However,  mes  chores  femmes,  I  make 
a  difference  between  women  and  men,  and  do  not  extend  my 
doctrine  to  your  sex.  Everything  is  excusable  in  lis,  and 
nothing  in  you.  And  pray  remember  that  I  will  not  lose  my 
flitch  of  bacon — though. 

[Have  you  shed  a  tear  over  the  Opera  House,  or  do  you  agree 
with  me  that  there  is  no  occasion  to  rebuild  it  ?*  The  nation 
has  long  been  tired  of  operas,  and  has  now  a  good  opportunity 
of  dropping  them.  Dancing  protracted  their  existence  for  some 
time,  but  the  room  after  was  the  real  support  of  both,  and  was 
like  what  has  been  said  of  your  sex,  that  they  never  Speak  their 
true  meaning  but  in  the  postscript  of  their  letters.  Would  not 
it  be  sufBcient  to  build  another  after-room  on  the  whole  em- 
placement, to  which  people  might  resort  from  all  assemblies? 
It  would  be  a  codicil  to  all  the  diversions  of  London ;  and  the 
greater  the  concourse,  the  more  excuse  there  would  be  for 
staying  all  night,  from  the  impossibility  of  ladies  getting  their 
coaches  to  drive  up.  To  be  crowded  to  death  in  a  waiting- 
room  at  the  end  of  an  entertainment  is  the  whole  joy;  for 
who  goes  to  any  diversion  till  the  last  minute  of  it?  I  am 
persuaded  that  instead  of  retrenching  St.  Athanasius's  Creed,  as 
the  Duke  of  Grafton  proposed,  in  order  to  draw  good  company 
to  church,  it  would  be  more  efficacious  if  the  congregation  were 
to  be  indulged  with  an  after-room  in  the  vestry ;  and  instead  of 
two  or  three  being  gathered  together,  there  would  be  all  the 
world  before  prayers  would  be  quite  over.] 

Wednesday. — I  calculated  too  rightly ;  no  letter  to-day !  yet 
I  am  not  proud  of  my  computation,  I  had  rather  have  heard  of 
you  to-day;  it  would  have  looked  like  keeping  your  promise, 
it  has  a  bad  air  your  forgetting  me  so  early ;  nay,  and  after 
your  scoffing  me  for  supposing  you  would  not  write  till  your 

*  On  the  night  of  the  17th,  the  Opera  House  was  entirely  destroyed  hy 
fire. —  Wright. 


166  LETTERS.  [1789 

arrival  I  don't  know  where.  You  see  I  think  of  you,  and  write 
every  day,  though  I  cannot  despatch  my  letter  till  you  have  sent 
me  a  direction.  Much  the  better  I  am  indeed  for  your  not 
going  to  Switzerland.     Yorkshire  is  in  the  glaciers  for  me,  and 

you  are  as  cold  as  Mr. .   Miss  Agnes  was  coy,  and  was  not  so 

flippant  of  promising  me  letters ;  well,  but  I  do  trust  she  will 
write,  and  then.  Madam,  she  and  I  will  go  to  Dunmow  without 
you. 

Apropos,  as  Mrs.  Cambridge's  beauty  has  kept  so  unfaded, 
and  Mr.  Cambridge's  passion  so  undiminished,  and  as  they  are 
good  economists,  I  am  astonished  they  have  laid  in  no  stock  of 
bacon,  when  they  could  have  it  for  the  asking. 

[Thursday  night. — ■ 

Despairing  beside  a  clear  stream 
A  shepherd  forsaken  was  laid. 

Not  very  close  to  the  stream,  but  within  doors  in  sight  of  it, 
for  in  this  damp  weather,  a  lame  old  Colin  cannot  lie  and 
despair  without  any  comfort  on  a  wet  bank.  ...  I  dread 
one  of  you  being  ill.  Mr.  Batt*  and  the  Abbe  Nicholls\  dined 
with  me  to-day,  and  I  could  talk  of  you  en  pais  de  eonnoissance. 
They  tried  to  persuade  me  that  I  have  no  cause  to  be  in  a  fright 
about  you,  but  I  have  such  perfect  faith  in  the  kindness  of  both 
of  you,  as  I  have  in  your  possessing  every  other  virtue,  that  I 
cannot  believe  but  some  sinister  accident  must  have  prevented 
my  hearing  from  you ;  I  wish  Friday  was  come  1  ] 

Friday,  2%ih. — Still  I  have  no  letter ;  you  cannot  all  three 
be  ill,  and  if  any  one  is,  I  should  flatter  myself  another  would 
have  written.  Next  to  your  having  met  with  some  ill  luck,  I 
should  be  mortified  at  being  forgotten  so  suddenly.  Of  any 
other  vexation  I  have  no  fear ;  so  much  goodness  and  good  sense 
as  you  both  possess,  would  make  me  perfectly  easy  if  I  were 
really  your  husband.  I  must  then  suspect  some  accident,  and 
shall  have  no  tranquillity  till  a  letter  puts  me  out  of  pain. 
Jealous  I  am  not,  for  two  young  ladies  cannot  have  run  away 
with  their  father  to   Gretna  Green.     Hymen,   0  Hymensee! 

*  Thomas  Batt,  Esq.,  then  one  of  the  Commissioners  for  auditing  the 
public  accounts. —  Wright. 

t  The  Eev.  Norton  Nicholls,  Rector  of Norfolk.— ilf.5.    The 

friend  and  correspondent  of  Gray. — Cunningham. 


1789]  WALPOLE'S   SOLICITUDE.  167 

bring  me  good  news  to-morrow,  and  a  direction  too,  or  you  do 
nothing. 

Saturday. — At  last  I  have  got  a  letter,  and  you  are  all  well ! 
I  am  so  pleased,  that  I  forget  the  four  uneasy  days  I  have  passed. 
At  present  I  have  neither  time  nor  paper  to  say  more,  for  our 
post  turns  on  its  heel  and  goes  out  the  instant  it  is  come  in. 
Do  not  be  frightened  at  the  enormity  of  this,  I  do  not  mean  to 
continue  so  fourpaginous  in  every  letter.  Mr.  C.  has  this  in- 
stant come  in,  and  would  damp  me  if  I  were  going  to  scribble 
more.     Adieu,  adieu,  adieu  all  three. 

Your  dutiful  son-in-law  and  most  affectionate  husband, 

H.  W. 

Addressed  to  Miss  Mary  Berry,  Thomas  Cayley's,  Esq., 
Middleton,  near  Pickering. 

Strawberry  Hill,  Juue  30,  1789. 

I  am  more  of  an  old  fondle-wife  than  I  suspected  when  I 
could  put  myself  into  such  a  fright  on  not  hearing  from  you 
exactly  on  the  day  when  I  had  settled  I  should ;  but  you  had 
promised  to  write  on  the  road ;  and  though  you  did,  your  letter 
was  not  sent  to  the  post  at  the  first  stage,  as  Almighty  Love  con- 
cluded it  would  be,  and  as  Almighty  Love  would  have  done ; 
and  so  he  imagined  some  dreadful  calamity  must  have  happened 
to  you.  But  you  are  safe  under  grandmaternal  wings,  and  I 
will  say  no  more  on  what  has  happened.  Pray  present  my  duty 
to  grandmama,  and  let  her  know  what  a  promising  young  grand- 
son she  has  got.  [Were  there  any  such  thing  as  sympathy  at  a 
distance  of  two  hundred  miles,  you  would  have  been  in  a 
mightier  panic  than  I  was ;  for  on  Saturday  se'nnight,  going  to 
open  the  glass  case  in  the  tribune,  my  foot  caught  in  the  carpet, 
and  I  fell  with  my  whole  weight  [si  weight  q.  a.]  against  the 
corner  of  the  marble  altar  on  my  side,  and  bruised  the  muscles 
so  badly,  that  for  two  days  I  could  not  move  without  screaming. 
I  am  convinced  I  should  have  broken  a  rib,  but  I  fell  on  the 
cavity  whence  two  of  my  ribs  were  removed  that  are  gone  to 
Yorkshire.  I  am  much  better  both  of  my  bruise  and  of  my 
lameness,  and  shall  be  ready  to  dance  at  my  own  wedding  when 
my  wives  return.] 

Philip,  who  has  been  prowling  about  by  my  order,  has  found 
a  clean  house,  but  it  is  on  Ham  Common — ^that  is  too  far  off; 


368  LETTERS.  [1789 

and  I  think  Papa  Berry  does  not  like  that  side  of  the  water, — 
and  he  is  in  the  right.  Philip  shall  hunt  again  and  again, 
till  he  puts  up  better  game :  and  now  to  answer  your  letter. 

[You  are  not  the  first  Eurydice  that  has  sent  her  husband  to 
the  devil,  as  you  have  kindly  proposed  to  me ;  but  I  will  not 
undertake  the  jauut:  for  if  old  Nicholas  Pluto  should  enjoin 
me  not  to  look  back  to  you,  I  should  certainly  forget  the  prohi- 
bition, like  my  predecessor.  Besides,  I  am  a  little  too  old  to 
take  a  voyage  twice,  which  I  am  so  soon  to  repeat,  and  should 
be  laughed  at  by  the  good  folks  on  the  other  side  of  the  water, 
if  I  proposed  coming  back  for  a  twinkling  only.  No,  I  chuse  as 
long  as  I  can 

Still  with  my  fav'iite  Berries  to  remain. 

So  you  was  not  quite  satisfied,  though  you  ought  to  have  been 
transported  with  King's  College  Chapel,  because  it  has  no  aisles 
like  every  common  cathedral.  I  suppose  you  would  object  to  a 
'  bird  of  paradise '  because  it  has  no  legs,  but  shoots  to  heaven 
in  a  trail,  and  does  not  to  rest  on  earth.  Criticism  and  compa- 
rison spoil  many  tastes ;  you  should  admire  all  bold  and  unique 
essays  that  resemble  nothing  else.  The  'Botanic  Garden,'  'The 
Arabian  Nights,'  and  King's  Chapel  are  above  all  rules ;  and 
how  preferable  is  what  no  one  can  imitate  to  all  that  is  imitated, 
even  from  the  best  models  !  Your  partiality  to  the  pageantry  of 
popery  I  do  approve ;  and  I  doubt  whether  the  world  will  not 
be  a  loser  (in  its  visionary  enjoyments)  by  the  extinction  of  that 
religion,  as  it  was  by  the  decay  of  chivalry  and  the  proscription 
of  the  heathen  deities.  Eeason  has  no  invention ;  and  as  plain 
sense  will  never  be  the  legislator  of  human  affairs,  it  is  fortunate 
when  taste  happens  to  be  regent.] 

But  now  I  must  talk  of  family  affairs.  I  am  delighted  that 
my  next  letter  is  to  come  from  wife  the  second.  I  love  her  as 
much  as  you,  and  I  am  sure  you  like  that  I  should.  I  should  not 
love  either  so  much,  if  your  affection  for  each  other  were  not  so 
mutual ;  I  observe  and  watch  all  your  ways  and  doings,  and  the 
more  I  observe  you,- the  more  virtues  I  discover  in  both — nay,  de- 
pend upon  it,  if  I  discover  a  fault,  you  shall  hear  of  it.  You  came 
too  perfect  into  my  hands,  to  let  you  be  spoilt  by  indulgence.  All 
the  world  admires  you,  yet  you  have  contracted  no  vanity,  adver- 
tised no  pretensions,  are  simple  and  good  as  nature  made  you,  in 


1789]  THE   MISS   BERETS'   DOG   '  TONTON.'  169 

spite  of  all  your  improvements— mind  you  and  yours  are  always, 
from  my  lips  and  pen,  of  what  grammarians  call  the  common  of 
two,  and  signify  hoth, — so  I  shall  repeat  that  memorandum  no 
more-  Your  friends  Lady  Harriet  Conyers  and  Lady  Juliana 
Penn  have  again  settled  in  our  environs,  the  former  within  a 
few  paces  of  Lady  Cecilia,*  in  the  parsonage  of  Hanworth,  where 
she  must  be  content  to  remain  in  an  evening  with  the  House  of 
St.  Albans,  who  are  not  quite  her  style  :  for  the  Heath  at  night 
will  terrify  all  the  lozenges  in  the  neighbourhood.  Your  friends 
are  charming,  but  will  not  comfort  me  for  what  I  have  lost ! 

Mrs.  Anderson,  who  you  know  arrived  too  late,  described  the 
adventure  of  Major  Dixon  to  the  Dss.  of  Gloucester,  and  diverted 
her  with  it  exceedingly ;  but  I  immediately  found  out  that  she 
had  related  it  as  if  he  had  talked  French  the  whole  time,  tho' 
not  a  word  had  passed  in  that  language.  This  showed  her  parts 
and  invention. 

What  a  confusion  of  seasons  !  the  haymakers  are  turning  my 
soaked  hay,  which  is  fitter  for  a  water  souchy,  and  I  sit  by  the 
fire  every  night  when  I  come  home.  Adieu !  I  dare  not  top  a 
fourth  page,  for  when  talking  to  you  I  know  not  how  to  stop. 

In  Mr-  Walpole's  letter  of  June  23,  he  tells  the  Miss 
Berrys  that  their  dog  Tonton,  left  in  his  care,  has  been 
clipped,  and  that  the  shearing  has  brought  to  light  'a 
nose  an  ell  long,'  and  that  he  has  now  '  nasum  rhino- 
cerotis.'     In  his  letter  of  July  9,f  he  says  : — 

Tonton's  nose  is  not,  I  believe,  grown  longer,  but  only  come 
to  light  by  being  clipped,  and  when  his  beard  is  recovered,  I 
dare  to  say,  he  will  be  as  comely  as  my  Jupiter  Serapis.  In  his 
taste  he  is  much  improved,  for  he  eats  strawberries,  and  is  fond 
of  them,  and  yet  they  never  were  so  insipid  from  want  of  sun  and 
constant  rain.     One  may  eat  roses  and  small  cherries,  and  not 

*  Henrietta  Cecilia  West,  eldest  daughter  of  John  Lord  De  la  Warr,  by 
the  Lady  Charlotte  M'Carthy,  daughter  of  Donogh,  Earl  of  Clancarty,  was 
bom  in  February  1727,  and  was  considered  one  of  the  finest  amateur 
musicians  of  her  day.  She  married  Colonel  Johnston  in  1762,  and  was  called 
by  her  friends  the  divine  Cecilia  and  St.  Cecilia. 

t  This  letter  was  again  addressed  to  the  Miss  Berrys  at  Mr.  Thomas 
Cayley's,  Middleton  :  the  short  passages  here  given  being  all  that  were 
omitted  when  published,  it  is  unnecessary  to  repeat  the  whole  letter. 


170  LETTERS.  [1789 

perceive  the  diffei'ence  from  want  of  flavour.  If  tulips  were  in 
season,  I  would  make  a  rainbow  of  them  to  give  other  flowers 
hopes  of  not  being  drowned  again.  ...  I  am  glad  you  are 
to  go  to  Mrs.  Cholmeley,  she  is  extremely  sensible  and  agree- 
able— but  I  think  all  your  particular  friends  that  I  have  seen 
are  so. 

Mr.  Walpole  had  undertaken  to  look  out  for  a  house 
for  his  friends  ;  in  his  letter  of  June  30,  he  speaks  of 
'  Philip's '  efforts  to  find  such  as  might  suit  them ;  and  on 
July  10,  he  again  writes  on  the  same  subject,  making 
many  lamentations  over  his  having  missed  an  opportunity 
of  securing  them  one  that  might  have  met  their  wishes. 

Strawberry  Hill,  July  10, 1789. 

How  angry  you  will  be  with  me,  and  how  insincere  you  will 
think  all  my  professions  !  Why,  here  is  Lady  Dudley's  house 
let  under  my  nose,  let  in  my  own  lane,  and  for  a  song! 
'  Pazienza,  mie  care  ! '  I  am  as  white  as  snow.  It  had  no  bill 
upon  it,  though  it  was  advertised,  but  not  in  my  newspaper, 
and  who  knows  truth  or  falsehood  but  from  their  own  paper? 
And  who,  of  all  the  birds  in  the  air,  do  you  think  has  got  it  ? 
Only  the  Pepys's.*  It  is  true  too,  that  had  I  had  any  inkling  of 
the  matter,  I  should  not  have  inquired  about  it,  for  the  rent 
asked  was  two  hundred  a-year — but  a  Master  in  Chancery, 
having  a  nose  longer  than  himself,  went  to  the  executors  and 
struck  a  bargain  of  70?.  for  four  months.  The  land  would  pay 
the  rent ;  but  then  you  must  have  got  your  hay  in  before  the 
rains,  and  you  must  have  been  wiser  than  I  to  have  done  that, 
and  in  hay  concerns  I  don't  know  that  the  heads  of  two  wives  are 
better  than  that  of  one  husband ;  and  after  all,  had  not  you  been 
shrewder  than  a  Master  in  Chancery,  it  would  have  cost  you 
three  hundred  pounds  extraordinary  before  you  could  have  shown 
your  faces,  as  I  am  sure,  at  least  /  should  chuse  to  have  my 
wives  appear.  Why,  there  is  poor  Mrs.  Pepys  with  not  a  rag 
of  linen  but  the  shift  on  her  back.  They  sent  their  whole 
history  by  water.  It  was  a  most  tempestuous  night ;  the  boat- 
men dreading  a  shipwreck,   cast  anchor  in   Chelsea  Eeach, 

*  William  Walter  Pepys,  Esq.,  afterwards  made  a  baronet,  fatber  to  tbe 
late  Lord  Chancellor  Cottenbam. 


1789]  STATE   OF   PARIS.  171 

intending  to  put  to  sea  next  morning — but  before  daybreak 
pirates  had  carried  off  the  whole  cargo  to  the  value,  Mr.  Cam- 
bridge* says,  of  said  three  hundred  pounds.  Now,  am  I  aa 
false  or  negligent  as  I  thought  I  was  ?  You  both,  and  Papa 
Berry  together,  could  not  be  so  mad  as  I  was  at  myself  at 
first,  when  I  suspected  that  I  had  missed  Palazzo  Dudley  for  you. 

As  I  keep  a  letter  constantly  on  the  anvil  going  on  for  you, 
I  shall,  before  this  gets  its  complement,  tell  you  what  I  know 
more.  The  House  of  Edgcumbe  set  out  in  perilous  haste  to 
prepare  the  Mount  for  the  reception  of  their  majesties  if  they 
are  so  inclined,!  but  were  stopped  at  Pool  for  want  of  post- 
horses,  all  being  retained  for  the  service  of  the  Court.  The 
royal  personages  arrived,  and  Lady  Mount  J  was  in  the  midst  of 
the  reiteration  of  her  curtsies,  when  the  mob  gathering  and 
pressing  on  her,  she  was  seized  with  a  panic,  clung  to  her  Lord, 
and  screamed  piteously,  till  a  country-fellow  said  to  her,  '  What 
dost  thee  make  such  a  noise  for?  Why,  nobody  will  touch 
thee.' 

Passons  a  Paris.  All  I  have  yet  learnt  further  is,  that 
the  populace  were  going  to  burn  the  house  of  Monsieur 
d'Espremesnil,  a  Royalist.  A  cobler,  getting  on  a  stand,  begged 
their  low-mightinesses  to  hear  four  reasons  against  wilful  fire- 
raising  :  the  first  was,  L'hotel  n'etoit  point  a  M.  d'Espremesnil ; 
second,  Les  livres  n'etoient  pas  a  lui ;  third,  Les  enfans  n'etoient 
pas  ^  lui;  fourth  and  last,  Sa  femme  etoit  au  public.  The 
pathetic  justice  of  those  arguments  saved  the  hotel,  and  Mon- 
sieur d'E.  keeps  all  those  goods  that  do  not  belong  to  him. 

I  am  sorry  we  have  refused  to  supply  their  wants ;  I  am  for 
heaping  coals  of  corn  on  the  heads  of  our  enemies — but  truth  is, 
it  looks  as  if  it  would  not  be  quite  prudent  to  be  so  generous. 
The  incessant  and  heavy  rains  are  alarming ;  the  corn  begins  to 
be  laid,  and  fair  weather  is  now  wanted  as  much  for  use  as  for 
pleasure.  It  costs  me  a  pint  of  wine  a  day  to  make  my  servants 
amends  for  being  wet  to  the  skin  every  time  I  go  abroad.    Lord 

*  Richard  Owen  CamlDridge,  Esq.,  then  living  in  the  house  on  the 
Twickenham  side  of  Richmond  bridge,  now  inhabited  by  Mr.  Bevan. 

t  King  George  III.  and  his  queen  were  then  on  a  progress  to  Ply- 
mouth. 

J  Emma,  Countess  of  Moimt  Edgecumbe,  daughter  of  Gilbert,  Archbishop 
of  York,  married  1761 ;  great-grandmother  of  the  present  earl. 


172  LETTERS.  [1789 

and  Ladj  Waldegtave*  have  been  with  me  for  two  days,  and 
could  not  set  their  foot  out  of  doors.  I  drank  tea  at  Mrs. 
G-arrick'sf  with  the  Bishop  of  London  and  Mrs.  Porteus,  Mr. 
Batt,  and  Dr.  Cadogan  and  his  daughter,  and  they  were  all  in 
the  same  predicament. 

Apropos  to  the  Bishop,  I  enclose  a  most  beautiful  copy  of 
verses  which  Miss  H.  More  wrote  very  lately  when  she  was  with 
him  at  Fulham,  on  his  opening  a  walk  to  a  bench  called 
Bonner's.  Mrs.  Boscawen  showed  them  to  me,  and  I  insisted  on 
printing  them.  Only  200  copies  are  taken  off,  half  for  her  and 
half  for  the  printer,  and  you  have  one  of  the  first.  How  unlike 
are  these  lines  to  the  chymical  preparations  of  our  modern 
poetasters,  cock  and  hen  !  who  leave  one  with  no  images  but 
of  garlands  of  flowers  and  necklaces  of  coloured  stones.  Every 
stanza  of  '  Bonner's  Ghost '  furnishes  you  with  a  theme  of  ideas. 
I  have  read  them  twenty  times,  and  every  time  they  improve 
on  me.  How  easy,  how  well  kept  up  the  irony !  how  sensible 
the  satire !  how  delicate  and  genteel  the  compliments !  I  hold 
Jekyll  and  Bonner^s  Ghost  perfect  compositions,  in  their  dif- 
ferent kinds — a  great  deal  to  say,  When  poetry  has  been  so  much 
exhausted. 

Wednesday,  15th. 

My  motive  for  sending  this  aWay  is,  not  to  delay  giving 
you  an  account  of  the  neWs  I  heard  this  morning.  Mr.  Mac- 
kinsyj  and  Lady  Betty  were  With  me  this  morning,  and  he 
showed  me  a  letter  he  had  just  received  from  Monsieur  Du- 
tens :  §  a  courier  arrived  yesterday  with  prodigious  expedition 
from  the  Duke  of  Dorset — Necker  had  been  dismissed  and  was 
thought  set  out  for  Greneva ;  an  offer  of  his  post  was  gone  to 
Breteuil,  who  is  in  the  country.     Everything  at  Paris  was  in 

*  Laura,  Countess  of  Waldegrave,  was  great-niece  to  Lord  Orford,  teing 
one  of  the  granddaughters  of  his  brothel,  Sir  Edward  Walpole. 

t  The  widow  of  David  Garrick,  then  inhabiting  the  house  he  had  built  at 
Hampton. 

I  James  Stuart  Mackenzie,  only  brother  to  the  Minister  Earl  of  Bute. 
He  was  married  to  the  Lady  Elizabeth  Campbell,  second  daughter  of  John 
the  first  Duke  of  Argyll.— ilf.5. 

§  A  French  Protestant  clergyman,  who  was  chaplain  in  the  family  of  the 
Duke  of  Northumberland,  and  had  been  Secretary  to  Mr.  Mackenzie  in  his 
mission  to  the  Court  of  Turin.  He  wrote  an  '  Itinerary  of  Europe '  (the  first 
book  of  that  kind),  '  Les  M^moires  d'un  Voyageur  qui  se  repose/  &c. — M.B. 


1789]  THE   FRENCH   REVOLUTION.  173 

the  utmost  confusion,  and  firing  of  cannon  for  four  hours  there 
had  been  heard  on  the  road.  All  this  is  confirmed  by  a  courier 
from  the  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Devonshire  who  were  setting  out 
precipitately :  that  messenger  had  been  stopped  three  times  on 
his  route,  being  taken  for  a  courier  from  that  Court,  but  was 
released  on  pretending  to  be  dispatched  by  the  Tiers  Etat. 
Madame  de  Calonne  told  Dutens  yesterday  that  the  newly 
encamped  troops  desert  by  hundreds — but  if  the  firing  of  cannon 
was  from  the  Bastile,  and  whence  else  it  should  proceed  I  know 
not,  it  looks  as  if  the  King  were  not  quite  abandoned.  Oh  !  but 
what  a  scene !  How  many  lives  of  quiet  innocent  persons  may 
have  been  sacrificed,  if  the  artillery  of  the  Bastile  raked  that 
multitudinous  city !  I  check  myself,  for  what  million  of  reflec- 
tions present  themselves. 

1^13  have  no  open  enemy  but  St.  Swithin ;  but  if  he  persists  in 
his  quarantaine,  he  will  be  a  very  serious  one.  The  Pepysian 
robbery  was  exaggerated ;  it  is  difficult  to  get  at  truth,  even  at 
a  stone's  throw  off. 

I  have  scarce  left  myself  any  room  for  conjugal  douceurs; 
but  as  you  see  how  very  constantly  you  are  in  my  thoughts,  I 
am  at  least  not  fickle — on  the  contrary,  I  am  rather  disposed 
to  jealousy.  You  have  written  to  Mr.  Pepys,  and  he  will  have 
anticipated  my  history  of  his  being  established  in  Palazzo 
Dudley ;  and  that  will  make  this  letter  more  and  more 
wrinkled — well !  he  cannot  send  you  '  Bonner's  Ghost,'  and  I 
shall  have  the  satisfaction  of  tantalizing  you  four  or  five  days 
longer — if  this  is  not  love,  the  deuce  is  in  it :  does  one  grudge  , 
that  the  beloved  object  should  be  pleased  by  any  one  but  one's 
self,  unless  beloved  object  there  be  ?  Do  not  be  terrified  how- 
ever; jealousy  most  impartially  divided  between  Two  can  never 
come  to  great  violence.  Wife  Agnes  has  indeed  given  me  no 
cause,  but  my  affection  for  both  is  so  compounded  into  one 
love,  that  I  can  think  of  neither  separately.  Frenchmen  often 
call  their  mistress  mes  Amours,  which  would  be  no  Irish  in  me. 
Apropos,  Lady  Lucan  told  me  t'other  day  of  two  young  Irish 
couple  who  ran  away  from  Dublin,  and  landed  in  Wales,  and 
were  much  surprised  to  find  that  Holyhead  was  not  Gretna 
Green.     Adieii !    Mes  Amours ! 

P.S. — Well,  are  not  you  charmed  with  '  Bonner's  Ghost ! ' 
Oh  !    I  forget ;  you  have  not  seen  it  yet — how  tantalizing ! 


174  LETTERS.  [1789 

Ex  Officina  ArbutianS,  July  19,  1789. 
Such  unwriting  wives  I  never  knew  !  and  a  shame  it  is  for  an 
Author,  and  what  is  more,  for  a  Printer,  to  have  a  Couple  so  un- 
lettered. I  can  find  time  amidst  all  the  hurry  of  my  shop  to  write 
small  quartos  to  them  continually.  In  France,  where  nuptiality 
is  not  the  virtue  the  most  in  request,  a  wife  will  write  to  her 
consort,  tho'  the  doux  billet  should  contain  but  two  sen- 
tences, of  which  I  will  give  you  a  precedent.  A  lady  sent  the 
following  to  her  spouse  :  '  Je  vous  ecris,  parceque  je  n'ai  rien  a 
faire ;  et  je  finis,  parceque  je  n'ai  rien  a  vous  dire.'  I  do  not  wish 
for  quite  so  laconic  a  poulet ;  besides,  your  Ladyships  ca»  write. 
Mrs.  Damer  dined  here  yesterday,  and  had  just  heard  from  you. 
Brevity,  Mes  Dames,  may  be  catching — don't  pretend  not  to  care, 
for  you  are  dying  for  news  from  France,  but  not  a  spoonfuU  shall 
you  have  from  me  to-day ;  and  if  I  was  not  a  man  of  honour, 
tho'  a  Printer,  and  had  not  promised  you  '  Bonner's  Ghost,'  I 
would  be  as  silent  as  if  I  were  in  Yorkshire.  Remember  too, 
that  Miss  Hannah  More,  tho'  not  so  proper  for  the  French 
Embassador's  Fete  as  Miss  Gunning,  can  teach  Greek  and 
Latin  as  well  as  any  young  lady  in  the  North  of  England, 
and  might  make  as  suitable  a  companion  for  a  typographer.  I 
will  say  no  more,  for  this  shall  be  a  short  note. 

Sunday  night,  late. 
I  break  my  word  to  myself,  tho'  you  do  not  deserve  it,  for  I  have 
had  no  letter  to-day  from  either  of  you,  and  now  can  have  none 
till  Tuesday;  but  I  am  just  come  from  Eichmond,  where  I  have 
seen  an  authentic  account  of  the  horrible  scene  at  Paris.  There 
had  been  dismal  accounts  for  three  days,  but  I  hoped  they  had 
been  exaggerated !  They  are  too  true.  The  Due  de  Luxem- 
bourg and  his  family  are  arrived  in  London,  having  escaped 
with  difficulty,  300,000  livres  being  set  on  his  head,  as  the 
same  sum  is  on  Marshal  Broglie's,  and  500,000  on  the  Comte 
d'Artois's.  The  people  rose  on  this  day  se'nnight,  seized  all 
the  arms  they  could  find,  searched  convents,  found  stores  of 
corn,  and  obliged  the  monks  to  deal  it  out  at  reasonable  prices. 
They  have  beheaded  the  Lieutenant  de  Police,  or  the  Prevot  des 
Marchands,  or  both,  and  attacked  the  Bastile,  which  the  gover- 
nor refused  to  surrender ;  and  on  the  populace  rushing  in,  he 
fired  on  them  with  four  gredt  guns  loaded  with  nails,  and  killed 
3  or  400,  but  they  mastered  him,  and  dragged  him  and  his 


1789]  PROGEESS  OF   THE   FKENCH   REVOLUTION.  175 

major  to  the  Place  de  Greve,  and  chopped  off  their  hands  and 
heads.  The  Bourgeoisie,  however,  have  disarmed  the  mob,  but 
have  seized  the  arsenal,  and  the  Hotel  de  Ville  and  the  treasure 
there,  which  they  destine  to  pay  the  sums  for  the  heads  of  the 
proscribed. 

On  Wednesday,  the  King  with  only  his  two  brothers  went  to 
the  Assemblee  Nationale,  and  offered  to  concur  with  them  in 
any  measures  for  restoring  order.  They  returned  him  an  answer 
by  80  Deputies,  but  the  result  is  not  known.  The  Duke  of  Dor- 
set's courier  is  not  arrived,  nobody,  it  is  supposed,  being  suffered 
to  go  out  of  the  city. 

Marshal  Broglie  is  encamped  before  Versailles  with  25,000 
men,  who  are  said  ready  to  support  the  King. 

You  will  want  to  ask  a  thousand  questions,  which  I  could  not 
answer — nor  will  I  when  I  can,  if  neither  of  you  will  write  to  me. 

I  dined  to-day  at  Mrs.  Walsingham's  with  the  Pen-hood,  and 
to-morrow  I  am  to  carry  thirty  Ghosts  to  the  Bishop  of  London. 
So  I  am  finishing  this  at  past  midnight,  and  shall  send  it  before 
I  go  to  Mr.  Ellis  to  be  franked. 

These  two  days  have  been  very  fine,  and  I  trust  have  restored 
Eiding  in  Yorkshire.  If  I  ever  do  receive  another  letter,  I  hope 
it  will  give  me  an  account  of  restored  health,  for  my  anger  is 
but  a  grain  of  mustard  in  comparison  of  my  solicitude.  Good 
night !  good  night ! 

Mr.  Walpole's  next  letter  was  addressed  to  tlie  Miss 
Berrys  at  Wheldrake,  York. 

[Strawberry  Hill,  July  29,  1789. 
I  have  received  two  dear  letters  from  you  of  the  28th  and  29th, 
and  tho'  you  do  not  accuse  me,  but  say  a  thousand  kind  things 
to  me  in  the  most  agreeable  manner,  I  allow  my  ancientry,  and 
that  I  am  an  old  fond,  jealous,  and  peevish  husband,  and  quar- 
rel with  you,  if  I  do  not  receive  a  letter  exactly  at  the  moment  I 
please  to  expect  one.  You  talk  of  mine ;  but  if  you  knew  how 
I  like  yours,  you  would  not  wonder  that  I  am  impatient,  and 
even  unreasonable  in  my  demands.  However,  tho'  I  own  my 
faults,  I  do  not  mean  to  correct  them.  I  have  such  pleasure  in 
your  letter  (I  am  sorry  I  am  here  forced  to  speak  in  the  sin- 
gular number,  which  by  the  way  is  an  Iricism),  that  I  vnll  be 
cross  if  you  do  not  write  to  me  perpetually.     .     .     .] 


176  LETTERS.  [1789 

The  first  object  in  my  thoughts  being  a  house  for  you,  which 
I  cannot  find  yet,  I  will  only  say  that  Lady  Cecilia  tells  me  that 
she, has  acquainted  you  that  that  at  Bushygate  may  be  had 
most  reasonably — pho  !  but  when  P^^at  the  end  of  September  I 
I  told  her  she  was  horridly  mistaken,  and  that  it  is  by  the  end 
of  August  you  will  want  one.  She  would  not  have  been  in  such 
an  error  if  she  had  calculated  by  a  certain  almanack  in  my 
heart,  Mr,  Conway  and  Lady  Ailesbury  are  to  be  with  her 
to-day,  and  Mrs.  Darner  to-morrow ;  but  by  Greneral  Conway's 
indecision,  and  not  knowing  when  they  should  come  this  way- 
wards,  I  shall  not  see  them  on  either  of  these  days,  having 
invited  my  sister,  Mr.  Churchill,  and  their  daughter  Sophia  and 
Mr.  Walpole,  to  come  to  me  precisely  for  these  two  days ;  nay, 
and  on  Friday  I  am  to  dine  with  the  Bishop  of  London, 

[Of  French  news  I  can  give  you  no  fresher  or  more  authentic 
account  than  you  can  collect  in  general  from  the  newspapers ; 
but  my  present  visitants  and  everybody  else  confirm  the  vera- 
city of  Paris  being  in  that  anarchy  that  speaks  the  populace 
domineering  in  the  most  cruel  and  savage  manner,  and  which  a 
servile  multitude  broken  loose  calls  liberty,  and  which  in  all  pro- 
bability will  end,  when  their  Massaniello-like  reign  is  over,  in 
their  being  more  abject  slaves  than  ever,  and  chiefly  by  the 
crime  of  their  Etats,  who,  had  they  acted  with  temper  and  pru- 
dence, might  have  obtained  from  their  poor  undesigning  King 
a  good  and  permanent  constitution.  Who  may  prove  their 
tyrant,  if  reviving  loyalty  does  not  in  a  new  phrenzy  force  him 
to  be  so,  it  is  impossible  to  foresee,  but  much  may  happen  first.] 
You  asked  me  in  one  of  y''  letters  who  La  Chalotais  was.  I 
answer.  Premier  President  or  Avocat-Greneral,  I  forg'et  which,  of 
the  Parliament  of  Bretagne,  a  great,  able,  honest,  and  most  vir- 
tuous man,  who  opposed  the  Jesuits  and  the  tyranny  of  the  Due 
d'Aiguillon — but  he  was  as  indiscreet  as  he  was  good.  Calonne 
was  his  friend  and  confident,  to  whom  the  imprudent  patriot 
trusted  by  letter  his  further  plan  of  opposition  and  designs.  The 
wretch  pretended  to  have  business  with,  or  to  be  sent  for  by,  the 
Due  de  la  Vrilli^re,  Secretary  of  State,  a  courtier-wretch,  whose 
mistress  used  to  sell  lettres  de  cachet  for  a  louis.  Calonne  was 
left  to  wait  in  the  antiohamber,  but  being,  as  he  said,  suddenly 
called  in  to  the  minister,  as  he  was  reading  (a  most  natural  soil 
for  such  a  lecture)  the  letter  of  his  friend,  he   by  a  second 


1789]  THE   FEEIfCH   EBVOLUTION.  177 

natural  inadvertence  left  the  fatal  letter  on  the  chimneypiece. 
The  consequence,  much  more  natural,  was  that  La  Chalotais 
was  committed  to  the  Chateau  du  Taureau,  a  horrible  dungeon 
on  a  rock  in  the  sea,  with  his  son,  whose  legs  mortified  there 
and  the  father  was  doomed  to  the  scaffold  ;    but  the  Due  de 
Choiseul  sent  a  counter-reprieve  by  an  express  and  a  crossroad 
and  saved  him.    At  the  beginning  of  this  reign  he  was  restored. 
Paris,  however,  was  so  indignant  at  the  treachery,  that  this 
Calonne  was  hissed  out  of  the  theatre,  when  I  was  in  that  capi- 
tal.    When  I  heard  some  years  after  that  a  Calonne  was  made 
controleur-general,  I  concluded  it  must  be  a  son,  not  conceiving 
that  so  reprobated  a  character  could  emerge  to  such  a  height ; 
but  asking  my  sister,*  who  has  been  in  France  since  I  was,  she 
assured  me  it  was  not  only  the  identic  being,  but  that  when  she 
was  at  Metz,  where  I  think  he  was  intendant,  the  officers  in 
garrison  would  not  dine  with  him.     When  he  fled  hither  for  an 
asylum,  I  did  not  talk  of  his  story,  till  I  saw  it  in  one  of  the 
pamphlets  that  were  written  against  him  in  France  and  that 
came  over  hither, 

Friday  night,  31st. 
Mrs.  Boscawen  saw  a  letter  from  Paris  to  Miss  Sayer  this 
morning,  which  says  Necker's  son-in-law  was  arrived,  and  had 
announced  his  father-in-law's  promise  of  return  from  Basle.  I 
do  not  know  whether  his  honour  or  ambition  prompts  this  com- 
pliance—  surely  not  his  discretion.  I  am  much  acquainted 
with  him,  and  do  not  hold  him  great  and  profound  enough  to 
quell  the  present  anarchy.  If  he  attempts  to  moderate  for  the 
King,  I  shall  not  be  surprised  if  he  falls  another  victim  to 
tumultuary  jealousy  and  outrage.  All  accounts  agree  in  the 
violences  of  the  mob  against  the  inoffensive  as  well  as  against 
the  objects  of  their  resentment,  and  in  the  provinces,  where  even 
women  are  not  safe  in  their  houses.  The  hotel  of  the  Due  du 
Chatelet,  lately  built  and  superb,  has  been  assaulted  and  the  fur- 
niture sold  by  auction;  but  a  most  shocking  act  of  a  royalist  in 
Burgundy,  who  is  said  to  have  blown  up  a  committee  of  40  per- 
sons, will  probably  spread  the  flames  of  outrage  much  wider. 
When  I  redde  the  account,  I  did  not  believe  it ;  but  the  Bishop 
says  he  hears  the  Etats  have  required  the  King  to  write  to 

*  Lady  Mary  ChurcMU. 
VOL.  I.  N 


178  LETTERS.  [1789 

every  foreign  power  not  to  harbour  the  execrable  author,  who  is 
fled.  I  fear  this  conflagration  will  not  end  as  rapidly  as  that  in 
Holland.] 

I  have  left  myself  no  room  but  for  a  codocil  of  scraps.  Mrs. 
Darner  will  be  with  me  to-morrow.  With  the  Pepys's  I  have 
had  small  dealings  yet,  from  his  Chancery  and  the  House  of 
Lords.  Lady  Jul.  Penn  had  a  very  bad  fall  downstairs  about  a 
week  ago  at  Windsor,  and  was  much  bruised,  but  with  no  other 
bad  consequences.  The  wife  Agnes's  pen  lies  fallow,  I  hope  her 
pencil  does  not.  I  will  write  but  to  one  if  but  one  will  write  to 
me,  and  I  will  not  keep  a  new  name  I  have  just  assumed,  that 
of  Horace  Fondlewives. 

Strawb.,  Thursday  night,  Aug.  6, 1789. 

By  your  letter  of  1st  and  3rd,  which  I  received  this  morning, 
you  surprise  me  by  complaining  of  my  silence,  when  I  thought 
I  had  talked  y''  eyes  to  death.  If  I  did  pause,  it  was  to  give 
you  time  to  answer.  Here  is  a  list  of  talks  since  you  left  Lon- 
don :— June  27,  30,  July  3,  4  (to  Miss  A.),  9,  16,  19,  31.  If 
eight  letters,*  and  those  no  scraps,  in  less  than  40  days,  are  not 
the  deeds  of  something  more  than  a  correspondent,  I  wish  I 
may  never  be  in  love  again.  If  you  have  not  received  all  these, 
the  devil  take  the  post-house  at  York ! 

I  am  not  going  to  complain  again,  but  to  lament.  I  now 
find  I  shall  not  see  you  before  the  end  of  September — a  month 
later  than  I  expected  would  be  nothing  to  an  old  husband,  but 
it  is  a  century  to  a  husband  that  is  old.  Mrs,  Damer  (who 
passed  Saturday  and  Sunday  here,  with  her  parents),  and  I, 
settled  it  with  them  that  Mr.  Berry  and  you  two  should  meet 
us  at  Park-place  the  beginning  of  September.  Now  you  will 
make  me  hate  that  month  more  than  ever.  Long  evenings 
without  a  fire  are  tiresome,  and  without  two  wives  insupport- 
able ! 

Major  Dixon  was  here  too,  and  on  Sunday  the  Johnstones 
and  Mrs.  Grenville  dined  and  passed  the  whole  day  with  us. 
On  Monday  the  Conways  went  to  Ealing :  the  Dukef  is  gone  to 
Inverary,  but  returns  the  beginning  of  ugly  September  to  carry 

*  Only  six  letters  out  of  the  eight  remain. 

t  John,  fifth  Duke  of  Argyll,  bom  1720,  died  1806. 


1789]  GENERAL   FITZWILLIAM'S   WILL.  179 

the  Duchess*  to  Italy;  and  she,  who,  poor  -woman,  loves  a  train, 
carries  Lady  Augusta  and  Mrs.  Clavering  with  them.  She  is 
very  ill  indeed. 

I  have  not  a  penfuU  of  news  for  you ; — no,  tho'  Mr.  Cam- 
bridge was  here  this  morning.  The  arrival  of  Necker,  I  sup- 
pose, has  suspended  the  horrors  of  Paris  for  a  moment,  till  the 
mob  find  that  he  does  not  propose  to  crown  them  all  in  the 
room  of  their  late  King.  I  shall  go  to  London  to-morrow  for 
one  night,  yet  I  am  not  likely  to  see  anybody  that  knows  much 
authentic. 

General  Fitzwilliam  is  dead,  at  Eichmond ;  extremely  rich. 
He  has  not,  I  believe,  extremely  disappointed  his  nephew  the 
Viscount,  who  did  not  depend  upon  hopes  that  had  been  thrown 
out  to  him,nor  is  much  surprised  that  the  Greneral's  upper  ser- 
vant and  his  late  wife's  woman  are  the  principal  heirs,  as  the 
Abbe  Nichols  and  others  long  foresaw.  Lord  Fitzwilliam  has 
only  an  estate  of  550L  a-year.  The  man-servant,  whom  he 
originally  took  a  shoeless  boy  in  "Wales  playing  on  the  harp, 
will  have  above  forty  thousand  pds. :  the  woman  300Z.  a  yr.  in 
long  annuities.  A  will,  however^  pleases  one,  you  know,  if  it 
pleases  one  any  how.  To  General  Conway  (an  old  fellow- 
servant  in  the  late  Duke  of  Cumberland's  family,  as  were  Lord 
Dover  and  Lord  Frederic  Cavendish,  similar  legatees)  he  has 
given  5001.  This  is  so  much  to  my  mind,  that  I  shall  not 
haggle  about  the  rest  of  the  will. 

I  am  rejoiced  that  you  do  not  go  to  York  races.  Whatever  I 
do  myself,  I  should  not  like  to  haye  the  P.  of  Wales  have  two 
or  three  wives.  Believe  me,  who  have  some  cause  for  knowing, 
there  is  nothing  so  transitory  as  the  happiness  of  red  liveries  1 

It  is  not  to  fill  up  the  page  that  I  now  advert  to  the  weather, 
which  at  last  is  become  fine,  and  tolerably  warm ;  but  I  enjoy 
it,  as  it  will  favour  your  riding,  and  both,  I  trust,  will  give  you 
full  health  and  spirits  by  the  ugly  month's  end  Your  old 
rapacious  landlord,  I  flatter  myself,  will  be  reasonable  when  it 
is  in  vain  to  be  otherwise.  I  should  not  like  the  house  by 
Bushy  Park  for  you,  tho'  better  than  none.  The  personage 
that  will  gain  most  by  your  delay  will  be  Tonton,  whose  long 
nose  begins  to  recover  its  curled  rotundity.  -    It  is  the  best- 

*  Elizateth  Gunning,  relict  of  the  Duke  of  Hamilton,  married  the  Duke 
of  ArgyU  1759. 

N  2 


ISO  LETTERS.  [1789 

tempered  quiet  animal  alive,  which  is  candid  in  me  to  own,  as 
he,  as  long  as  it  is  light,  prefers  my  footboy,  or  a  bone  on  the 
lawn,  to  my  company.  In  the  evening,  as  I  allow  him  to  lay  on 
every  couch  and  chair,  he  thinks  me  agreeable  enough.  I  must 
celebrate  the  sense  of  Fidelle,  Mrs.  Darner's  terrier.  Without 
making  the  slightest  gesture,  her  mistress  only  said  to  her, — 
'  Now,  Fidelle,  you  may  here  jump  on  any  chair  you  please.' 
She  instantly  jumped  on  the  sette ;  and  so  she  did  in  every 
room  for  the  whole  two  days  she  staid.  This  is  another  demon- 
stration to  me  that  dogs  understand  even  language,  as  far  as  it 
relates  to  their  own  affairs. 

Now  I  have  cleared  my  character,  and  that  harmony  is  quite 
re-established,  I  will  not  attempt  to  eke  out  my  letter,  only  to 
say  that  I  am  sorry  there  is  but  one  pen  in  y"^  family.  I 
hinted  in  my  last  that  I  would  compound  for  a  pencil.  Of  all 
y''  visits,  that  cost  me  a  month,  I  grudge  the  least  that  to  your 
grandmother  and  aunt,  as  I  can  judge  how  happy  you  make 
them.  It  is  a  good  symptom,  too,  for  y"'  husband.  Duty  and 
gratitude  to  parents  are  seldom,  I  believe>  ingredients  in  bad 
wives.     Adieu ! 

Yrs,  most  cordially  and  constantly, 

'  H.  W. 

Strawberry  HiU,  Aug.  13.  1789. 

I  have  received  at  once  most  kind  letters  from  you  both ;  too 
kind,  for  you  both  talk  of  gratitude.  Mercy  on  me !  Which  is 
the  obliged,  and  which  is  the  gainer  ?  Two  chamjing  beings, 
whom  everybody  likes  and  approves,  and  who  jet  can  be  pleased 
with  the  company  and  conversation  and  old  stories  of  a  Methu- 
salem  ?  or  I,  who  at  the  end  of  my  days  have  fallen  into  more 
agreeable  society  than  ever  I  knew  at  any  period  of  my  life  ? 
I  will  say  nothing  of  y'  persons,  sense,  or  accomplishments ; 
but  where,  vmited  with  all  those,  could  I  find  so  much  sim- 
plicity, void  of  pretensions  and  affectation  ?  This  from  any 
other  man  would  sound  like  compliment  and  flattery ;  but  in 
me,  who  have  appointed  myself  your  guardian,  it  is  a  duty  to 
tell  you  of  y'  merits,  that  you  may  preserve  and  persevere  in 
them.  If  I  ever  descry  any  faults,  I  will  tell  you  as  freely  of 
them.     Be  just  what  you  are,  and  you  may  dare  my  reproofs. 

I  will  restrain  even  reproaches,  tho'  in  jest,  if  it  puts  my 
eweet  Agnes  to  the  trouble  of  writing  when  she  does  not  care 
for  it.     It  is  the  extreme  equality  of  my  affection  for  both  that 


1789]  LOED    CAMELFORD.  181 

makes  me  jealous  if  I  do  not  receive  equal  tokens  of  friendship 
from  both  ;  and  though  nothing  is  more  just  than  the  observa- 
tion of  two  sisters  repeating  the  same  ideas,  yet  never  was  that 
remark  so  ill  applied.  Tho'  y''  minds  are  so  congenial,  I  have 
long  observed  how  originally  each  of  you  expresses  her  thoughts. 
I  could  repeat  to  you  expressions  of  both,  which  I  remember  as 
distinctly  as  if  I  had  only  known  either  of  you.  For  the  future 
there  shall  be  perfect  liberty  amongst  us.  Either  of  you  shall 
write  when  she  pleases ;  while  my  letters  are  inseparably  meant 
to  both,  tho'  the  direction  may  contain  but  one  name,  lest  the 
postman  should  not  comprehead  a  double  address. 

I  can  tell  you  nothing  new  from  France,  that  is  authentic, 
only  that  the  explosion  at  Besanfon,  I  am  assured,  was  a  fable, 
grounded  on  an  accident  that  happened  to  a  man  who,  going  to 
see  a  train  laid  for  blowing  up  a  hill,  and  having  a  pipe  in  his 
mouth,  some  sparks  fell,  and,  setting  fire,  blew  up  him^  his  wife, 
and  child. 

The  death  of  the  Abbess  of  Montmartre  was  false,  too,  tho' 
written  by  Mrs.  Swinburn  to  her  husband  !  What,  then,  can 
one  believe  ?  Nothing.  Nay,  I  can  prove  that  there  is  a  man 
living  who  believes  his  ears  against  his  own  eyes;  Listen  !  The 
minister  of  our  parish  told  me  t'other  day  that  Lord  Camelford 
was  not  the  author  of  a  pamphlet  of  which  there  has  been  much 
talk  lately.  I  s*,  '  S"",  I  doubt  you  are  mistaken.'  He  replied, 
'  S"",  I  assm-e  you  Mr.  Cambridge  told  me  an  hour  ago  that  he 
had  just  seen  the  D.  of  Queensberry,  who  had  affirmed  to  him 
that  the  pamphlet  is  not  Ld.  C.'s.'  I  lifted  up  my  eye  to  the 
third  heaven  I  '  Mr.  C.  told  you  so?'  '  Yes,  S"",  Mr.  C  'Bless 
my  soul,  S"','  said  I,  '  why,  but  four  days  ago  Mr.  C<,  in  this 
room,  told  me  Mr.  Gr.  Hardinge  had  shown  him  the  pamphlet, 
and  told  him  he  had  received  it  from  Lord  C,  the  author.  Mr. 
C.  had  read  it,  and  gave  me  a  minute  account  of  the  six  letters 
it  contained.' 

Was  ever  so  strange  a  story  ?  Lo  !  what  a  thirst  of  news  can 
do  !  it  can  efface  one's  memory  in  four  days,  and  leave  no  more 
impression  than  if  one's  memory  could  not  contain  a  tittle  but 
what  it  has  received  last. 

I  do  not  vouch  for  my  next  story,  but,  true  or  coined,  the 
answer  was  good. 

The  King  of  Spain  consulted  his  minister  whether  he  should 
march  40,000  men  into  France   at  the  requisition  of  Louis 


182  LETTERS.  [1789 

Seize.  '  I  can  send  them  if  your  Majesty  commands  me,' 
replied  the  minister,  'but  if  I  do,  y''  Majesty  will  soon  want 
them  at  home.' 

The  flame  does  seem  spreading,  and  no  doubt  will  rage  in 
Austrian  Flanders,  where  a  more  real  tyrant  than  poor  Louis 
has  justly  provoked  them. 

I  have  not  seen  Mrs.  A.  very  lately,  but  sh^,  like  you,  much 
disapprove  jesting  on  such  dreadful  calamities.  I  am  shocked 
at  a  brutality  that  disgraces  us.  In  London  a  caricature  print 
has  been  published  against  M.  de  Luxembourg  and  some  of  the 
unhappy  fugitives,  and  the  Queen  of  France. 

I  approve  of  your  suspending  a  new  offer  to  y''  late  land- 
lord till  quite  necessary ;  nay,  I  have  heard  of  a  house  at  Ted- 
dington  likely  to  be  vacant  by  your  time,  and  have  ordered  an 
indirect  inquiry  to  be  made.  It  is  much  nearer  to  Twickenham 
than  t'other  side  of  Bushy  Park.  Of  the  Pepys's  I  have  seen 
very  little  yet.  I  called  on  them  t'other  day  to  ask  them  to 
dine  here;  but  one  of  their  little  boys  has  broken  his  arm,  and 
the  mother ^will  not  leave  him,  nor  the  husband  her. 

I  have  been  at  Lady  Cecilia's  this  evening  since  I  wrote  the 
first  part  of  my  letter.  Mr.  Wheler  is  there,  and  Mrs.  Ander- 
son, who  has  seen,  as  she  told  you,  swarms  of  refugees  at  the 
French  Embassador's,  especially  the  Lieutenant  de  Police, 
Monsr.  de  Crosne,  who  had  the  rope  round  his  neck,  but  made 
his  escape' while  a  new  tumult  arose.  They  are  savages,  who 
have  known  so  little  of  liberty  that  they  take  murder  for  it. 
Good  night ! 

The  two  following  letters,  addressed  to  Miss  Berry  from 
Mr.  Eichard  Owen  Cambridge,  allude  to  some  of  the 
incidents  which  at  this  time  interested  the  society  of 
Twickenham : — 

General  Fitzwilliam's  will  is  a  disgrace  to  misanthropy. 
Some  large  and  useless  legacies  to  people  who  neither  want  nor 
will  be  thankful,  consume  such  a  portion  of  his  large  wealth  as 
would  have  made  some  others  (L'^  Herbert,  for  instance)  com- 
fortable.    To  him  not  a  farthing.     To  L"*  Fitz 500L  a-year 

in   Northamp".      His   servant.   Harper  Tom  Jones,  residuary 

legatee,  above  40,000L     He  came  to  L'^  Fitz ;  said  he  was 

overpower'd ;  wish'd  he  had  had  only  a  suitable  provision ;  did 
not  know  what  to  do  with  his  fortune ;  had  no  friend ;  beg'd 


1789]  LETTER   FROM   MS.    R.    C.    CAMBRIDGE.  183 

his  LdP'^  protection;  offered  all  the  books  and  pictures,  and 

anything  else  his  Ld?  w'^  accept.     L'*  F said  to  me:  If  the 

Gen^  had  known  he  w'^  have  behaved  so,  he  w''  not  have 
left  it  him.  I  dare  say  if  he  looks  upon  Eichmond  from  his 
present  situation,  he  is  mortified  to  find  his  purpose  is  but  half 
executed  if  misbehaviour  is  not  added  to  privation. 

I  'hate  to  converse  with  you  so  abruptly,  but  I  have  wi'it  the 
main  substance,  and,  tho'  in  haste  to  go  out,  I  must  use  this 
day's  frank,  for  Selwyn  won't  return  till  Saturday.  He  lent  me 
a  book  explaining  proverbs,  which  I  caution  you  against  buying, 
for  it  is  not  satisfactory.  He  had  not  read,  but  just  bought  it 
for  the  design,  which  is  good,  but  the  execution  tiresome  and 
not  conclusive. 

Pepys  has  been  very  unfortunate.  His  sweet  patient  boy's 
arm  was  broke.  A  thief  in  his  house  (I  won't  say  of  which  sex) 
has  taken  more  linen.  It  shews,  however,  the  first  was  ap- 
proved, and  as  the  sample  was  good  the  customers  encrease. 
He  received  this  nonsense  with  great  good  humour  as  he  call'd 
on  me  yesterday, 

And  sat  like  Patience  on  a  spavin'd  poney 
Smiling  at  Theft. 

Saturday  night,  Aug.  15. 

This  morning  Lord  Dover  enquired  after  you  and  y'  sister, 
and  where  you  were,  with  so  much  interest  that  one  would  have 
thought  there  had  been  no  such  thing  as  beauty  or  parts  in 
Holland.  To  try  his  sincerity,  and  to  prove  to  you  that  it 
is  true  that  he  shew'd  this  interest,  I  told  him  he  must  give  it 
under  his  hand,  which  he  has  done  on  the  direction  of  this 
letter,  and  thereby  made  me  the  less  reluctant  to  force  upon  you 
whatever  nonsense  may  come  into  my  head  to  blot  this  fair 
paper  with.  But  first  let  me  copy  what  is  worth  your  seeing  if 
you  have  paid  any  attention  to  the  assertions,  and  then  to  the 
false  insinuations  of  the  '  Morning  Post ' : — 

Extract  of  a  letter  dated  Binussels,  Aug.  7th. 

'  I  certainly  never  wrote,  much  less  published,  any  pamphlet 
in  France,  or  about  French  politics.  You  will,  therefore,  on 
this  authority,  have  the  goodness  to  contradict  the  report,  &c. 

'  Camelfoed.' 


184  LETTERS.  [1789 

Pray  tell  your  father  I  send  him  no  politics,  because  there 
are  more  than  enough  from  France  in  all  the  papers.  I  wish  I 
c"*  distinguish  what  is  true.  You  may,  however,  credit  much 
of  robbery  and  plunder  by  these  words,  w'^  the  D.  of  Dorset 
spoke  to  a  friend  of  mine  last  Friday.  There  are  at  this  time 
twelve  million  of  men  arm^d  in  France.  You'll  say,  how  can 
they  be  kept  in  order  till  disarm'd,  and  may  they  not  do  all 
they  are  said  to  be  doing  ? 

Monday,  17tli. 
I  beg  my  best  comp'  to  Mr.  Berry,  which  is  all  I  can  write 
this  morn.,  being  interrupted. 

I  am,  d''  Madam,  most  sincerely  y", 

E.  0.  Cambridge. 

Mr.  Walpole's  search  for  a  house  was  at  length  suc- 
cessful. 

Strawberry  Hill,  Thursday  night,  Aug.  20,  1789. 

If  the  worst  comes  to  the  worst,  I  think  I  can  secure  you  a 
house  at  Teddington,  a  very  comfortable  one,  very  reasonably, 
and  a  more  agreeable  one  than  the  Cecilian  destination  at  Bushy- 
gate  ;  *  at  least,  more  agreeable  to  my  Lord  Castlecomer,  for  it  is 
nearer  to  me  by  half.  That  Strawberry  proverb  I  must  explain 
to  you  for  your  future  use.  There  was  an  old  Lady  Castlecomer, 
who  had  an  only  son,  and  he  had  a  tutor  called  Eoberts,  who 
happened  to  break  his  leg.  A  visitant  lamented  the  accident  to 
her  ladyship.  The  old  Eock  replied,  'Yes,  indeed,  it  is  very 
inconvenient  to  my  Lord  Castlecomer  ! '  This  saying  was  adopted 
40  years  ago  into  the  phraseology  of  Strawberry,  and  is  very 
expressive  of  the  selfish  apathy  towards  others,  which  refers 
everything  to  its  own  centre,  and  never  feels  any  shock  that  does 
not  vibrate  to  its  own  interest. 

The  house  in  question  is  at  the  entrance  of  Teddington.  You 
may  shake  hands  with  Mr.  Pepys  out  of  the  window.  A  Mrs. 
Armstrong  took  it  for  one  year  at  fourscore  pounds,  but  is  tired 
of  making  hay,  and  minded  to  leave  it  at  Michaelmas ;  but  says 
that  her  landlord  has  behaved  so  well  towards  her,  that  tho'  she 
will  pay  the  whole,  she  will  give  it  up  to  him  at  quitting  it.  I 
sent  to  him  to  inquire  what  he  would  ask  for  October  and 
November.     He  replied  I  should  name  my  own  price,  and  I  am 

'  Lady  Cecilia  liad  informed  Miss  Berry  that  a  house  was  to  he  let  on 
reasonable  terms  at  Bushy,  at  the  end  of  September. 


1789]  HOUSE   AT   TEDDINGTON.  185 

to  have  the  refusal.  I  think  he  cannot  expect  above  20l.  at 
most.  All  I  now  dread  is  Mad.  Armstrong's  loitering  into  Octo- 
ber. Tell  me  your  pleasure  on  this.  Let  the  Duke  of  Nor- 
thumberland's steward  rust  with  his  avarice  ! 

I  know  nothing,  nothing  at  all.  Indeed,  I  am  too  much 
engrossed  by  a  sad  misfortune  too  likely  to  fall  on  my  f9,mily 
and  me !  Dear  Lady  Dysart  is  in  the  utmost  danger.  Her  case 
is  pronounced  to  be  water  on  her  breast,  and  every  day  may  be 
her  last!  She  suffers  considerably,  but  with  her  unalterable 
patience  !  But  I  will  not  afflict  your  tender  hearts  with  dwelling 
on  so  melancholy  a  subject. 

Lady  Juliana  Penn  is  still  lying  on  a  couch.  What  she 
thought  a  bruise  on  her  leg  has  by  neglect  become  a  wound. 
Her  sister.  Lady  Harriet,  was  here  the  other  morning  with  her 
daughters,  and  I  showed  them  the  whole  house  myself,  as  they 
are  excellent  people,  and  the  daughters  have  taste.  The  young- 
est especially  struck  me  by  her  knowledge  of  pictures,  which  she 
immediately  showed  she  understood.  This  of  my  house  being 
shown  is  a  dangerous  subject  for  me  to  tap,  such  a  grievance  is 
it  become ;  I  have  actually  tickets  given  out  till  the  middle 
of  the  week  after  next.  I  write  two  or  three  every  day,  or 
as  many  excuses.  Pray  come,  and  make  my  evenings  at  least 
pleasant. 

Summer  is  arrived  at  last,  tho'  as  much  after  due  time  as  if 
it  was  one  of  the  Ton.  It  is  more  bounteous,  however,  and  will 
bless  the  poor  by  lowering  bread.  The  whole  face  of  the  coun- 
try is  spread  with  luxurious  harvests  and  gilt  with  shining  suns. 

The  Johnstones  are  gone  to  Park-place,  where  Lady  Dysart's 
situation  prevented  my  meeting  them.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Anderson 
are  cooing  tete-a-tete  at  Hampton,  as  if  they  were  Venus's  own 
turtles  left  at  home  in  her  stable.  They  told  me  that  on  Tues- 
day night  the  Duchess  of  Argyle  walked  into  old  Bushy's  as- 
sembly at  Hampton  Court,  but  did  look  too  like  an  apparition ! 

I  have  exhausted  all  my  nothings,  and  if  I  have  no  letter 
from  you,  shall  send  this  away,  meager  as  it  is,  because  I  want 
to  know  your  will  about  the  Teddingtonian  Villa. 

Friday  afternoon. 

Monsieur  de  Teddington  has  been  with  me,  and  is  all  accom- 
modating—if Mrs.  Armstrong  will  not  stay  till  after  the  first  week 
in  October.  I  asked  the  price ;  he  said,  should  you  think  ten 
guineas  a  month  too  much,  if  I  did,  he  would  lower.   Therefore, 


186  LETTERS.  [1789 

no  doubt  you  may  have  it  for  eighteen  for  the  two  months,  and 
you  may  tell  me  to  offer  sixteen.  Pray  let  me  have  an  answer 
soon,  for  I  will  convey  to  Mrs.  A.  that  she  will  hurt  her  landlord 
if  she  lingers  beyond  St.  Michaelmas. 

I  think,  if  my  account  should  suit  you,  the  best  way  will  be, 
as  soon  as  you  arrive  in  town,  for  Mr.  Berry  and  you  two  to 
come  and  lodge  with  me  for  a  day  or  two,  and  then  you  can  go 
and  view  your  future  nest  at  your  leisure,  and  that  you  may 
insert,  with  a  little  cavil  at  the  price,  in  your  answer  to  me, 
which  will  make  your  assent  conditional. 

Saturday. 

I  have  no  letter,  so  this  departs ;  but  pray  answer  it  directly. 

Mr.  Walpole  thus  expresses  his  delight  at  the  approval 
of  his  negotiations  for  a  house  : — 

[Strawberry  Hill,  Thursday  evening,  Aug.  27,  1789. 

I  jumped  for  joy ;  that  is,  my  heart  did,  which  is  all  the 
remain  of  me  that  is  in  statu  jumpante,  at  the  receipt  of  your 
letter  this  morning,  which  tells  me  you  approve  of  the  house  at 
Teddington.  How  kind  you  was  to  answer  so  incontinently  !  I 
believe  you  borrowed  the  best  steed  from  the  races.  I  have  sent 
to  the  landlord  to  come  to  me  to-morrow. 

You  ask  how  you  have  deserved  such  attentions— why,  by 
deserving  them  ;  by  every  kind  of  merit,  and  by  that  superlative 
one  to  me,  your  submitting  to  throw  away  so  much  time  on  a 
forlorn  antique ;  you  two,  who  without  specifying  particulars 
(and  you  must  at  least  be  conscious  that  you  are  not  two  frights) 
might  expect  any  fortune  and  distinctions,  and  do  delight  all 
companies.  On  which  side  lies  the  wonder  ?  Ask  me  no  more 
such  questions,  or  I  will  cram  you  with  reasons. 

I  had  promised  Mr.  Barrett  to  make  a  visit  to  my  gothic  child 
his  house  on  Sunday,  but  I  have  written  to-day  to  excuse  myself; 
so  I  have  to  the  Duchess  of  Eichmond,*  who  wanted  me  to  meet 
her  mother,  sister,f  and  General  Conway,  at  Goodwood  next 
week, 

*  Lady  Mary  Bruce,  daughter  of  the  Earl  of  Aileshury,  by  Caroline 
Campbell,  daughter  of  General  John  Campbell,  afterwards  Duke  of  Argyle. 

t  Anne  Seymour  Conway,  only  child  of  the  Dowager  Countess  of  Ailes- 
bury,  by  Marshal  Plenry  Seymour  Conway,  her  second  husband ;  she  was 
thus  half-sister  to  the  Duchess  of  Eichmond. 


1789]  THE   HOUSE   SECUEED.  187 

I  wish  Lady  Fitzwilliam  *  may  not  hear  the  same  bad  news 
as  I  expect,  in  the  midst  of  her  royal  visitors.  Her  sister,  the 
Duchess  of  St.  Albans,  is  dying  in  the  same  way  as  Lady  Dysart, 
and  for  some  days  has  not  been  in  her  senses. 

How  charming  you  are  to  leave  those  festivities  for  your  good 
parents,  who  I  do  not  wonder  are  impatient  for  you  !  I,  who  am 
old  enough  to  be  your  great  grandmother,  know  one  needs  not 
be  your  near  relation  to  long  for  your  return.  Of  all  your  tour, 
next  to  your  duteous  visits,  I  must  approve  the  jaunt  to  the  sea ; 
I  believe  in  its  salutary  air  more  than  in  the  whole  College  and 
all  its  works.] 

Mrs.  Armstrong's  secession  is  doubly  fortunate.  Your  last 
year's  mansion  is  actually  taken  by  Lord  Cathcart,  and  what  is 
incredible,  his  wife  is  to  lie  in  there.  It  must  be  in  the  round 
summer-house. 

[Friday. 

Well,  I  have  seen  him,  and  nobody  was  ever  so  accommoda- 
ting !  He  is  as  courteous  as  a  candidate  for  a  county.  You  may 
stay  in  his  house  till  Christmas  if  you  please,  and  shall  pay  but 
twenty  pounds :  and  if  more  furniture  is  wanting,  it  shall  be 
supplied.] 

Mrs.  Armstrong  talks  of  not  quitting  but  the  first  week  in 

October;  but  as  she  is  prodigiously  timorous  about  her  health, 

he  thinks  the  first  round  shower  will  send  her  to  London.     In 

any  case  you  know  you  may  come  and  stay  in  your  conjugal 

castle  till  the  house  of  y'  separate  maintenance  is  vacant  for 

you.     I  was  curious  to  learn  whence  Mr.  Wickes  contracted  all 

this  honneteU.    I  do  not  believe  I  have  discovered,  for  all  I  can 

trace  of  his  history  is,  that  he  married  a  dowager  mistress  of 

Greneral  Harvey,  whom  the  General  called  Monimia,  though  not 

the  meekest  of  her  calling,  and  with  whom  (Wickes)  she  did 

not  at  all  agree.     I  am  sure  she  was  the  aggressor,  as  he  has 

captivated  Mrs.  Aj-mstrong  and  me  by  his  flowing  benignity. 

Besides,  I  have  no  notion  how  one  can  use  one's  wife  ill,  even  if 

one  has  two. 

Berkley  Square,  August  29. 

You  will  laugh  at  me,  for  I  am  just  come  to  town,  though  it 

*  Charlotte  Ponsonby,  daughter  of  tlie  Earl  of  Beasborough,  wife  of  Earl 
FitzwiUiam.  George  IV.,  when  Prince  of  Wales,  and  his  brother  the 
Duke  of  York,  who  this  day  attended  York  races,  were  going  to  receive  a 
gi-eat  entertainment  at  Wentworth  House,  the  seat  of  Earl  Fitzwilliam,  in 
Yorkshire. 


188  LETTERS.  [1789 

is  the  first  real  summer  day  we  have  had ;  but  I  had  a  little 
business,  and  return  to-morrow.  As  this  very  fine  weather  is 
arrived  so  late,  I  suppose  it  is  some  fugitive  heat  that  has 
escaped  from  the  troubles  on  the  Continent,  which  are  spreading 
along  the  Rhine.  I  hope  it  has  left  its  sting  behind  it,  and  will 
not  affect  us  who  have  every  reason  to  be  happy. — Adieu. 

Strawberry  Hill,  Sept.  4,  1789. 
I  am  charmed  that  Mr.  Berry  ratifies  my  negotiation  for  the 
house  at  Teddington;  and  I  do 'not  doubt  now  but  Mrs.  Arm- 
strong will  quit  it  even  before  Michaelmas  :  for,  though  Satur- 
day last  was  so  glorious,  it  was  the  setting  not  the  rising  sun  of 
summer.  It  rained  a  torrent  all  Sunday  evening;  so  it  has 
done  almost  every  day  since,  and  did  last  night,  and  does  at  this 
instant.  I  grieve  for  the  incomplete  harvest ;  but,  as  it  is  an 
ill-rain  that  brings  nobody  good,  I  must  rejoice  if  it  washes 
away  Dame  Armstrong-  Mr.  Wickes  I  am  sure  will  give  me 
the  earliest  notice  of  her  departure,— for,  as  Spenser  says, 

A  semely  man  our  iioste  is  withal 
To  ben  a  marsbal  in  a  lordis  hall. 

[You  ask  whether  I  will  call  you  wise  or  stupid  for  leaving 
York  races  in  the  middle — neither :  had  you  chosen  to  stay,  you 
would  have  done  rightly.  The  more  young  persons  see,  where 
there  is  nothing  blameable,  the  better,  as  increasing  the  stock 
of  ideas  early  will  be  a  resource  for  age.  To  resign  pleasure  to 
please  tender  relations  is  amiable,  and  superior  to  wisdom :  for 
wisdom,  however  laudable,  is  but  a  selfish  virtue.  But  I  do 
decide  peremptorily  that  it  was  very  prudent  to  decline  the  in- 
vitation to  Wentworth  House,  which  was  obligingly  given ;  but 
as  I  am  very  proud  for  you,  I  should  have  disliked  your  being 
included  in  a  mobbish  kind  of  cohue.  You  two  are  not  to  go 
where  any  other  two  Misses  would  have  been  equally  priees ; 
and  where  people  would  have  been  thinking  of  the  Princes  more 
than  of  the  Berries.  Besides,  Princes  are  so  rife  now,  that  be-- 
sides  my  sweet  nephew  *  in  the  Park,  we  have  another  at  Eich- 
mond.  The  Duke  of  Clarence  has  taken  Mr.  Henry  Hobart's 
house,  point-blank  over  against  Mr.  Cambridge's,  which  will 

*  William  Henry,  Duke  of  Gloucester,  brother  to  George  HI.  and  father 
to  the  last  Duke.  He  had  married  the  Dowager  Countess  of  Waldegrave, 
niece  to  Lord  Orford. 


1789]  WENTWOETH   CASTLE.  189 

make  the  good  woman  of  that  mansion  cross  herself  piteously, 
and  stretch  the  throats  of  the  Blatant  beast  at  Sudbrook,*  and 
of  all  the  other  pious  matrons  a  la  ronde :  for  his  E.  H.,  to  divert 
loneliness,  has  brought  with  him  [a  Miss  Polly  Finch],  who 
being  still  more  averse  to  solitude,  declares  that  any  tempter 
would  make  even  Paradise  more  agreeable  than  a  constant 
tete-a-tSte. 

Grra'mercy  for  your  intention  of  seeing  Wentworth  Castle ;  it 
is  my  favourite  of  all  great  seats :  such  a  variety  of  ground,  of 
wood  and  water ;  and  almost  all  executed  and  disposed  with  so 
much  taste  by  the  present  earl !  Mr.  Gilpin  sillily  could  see 
nothing  but  faxilts  there !  The  new  front  is  in  my  opinion  one 
of  the  lightest  and  most  beautiful  buildings  on  earth — and  pray 
like  the  little  gothic  edifice  and  its  position  in  the  menagerie ; 
I  recommended  it,  and  had  it  drawn  by  Mr.  Bentley  from  Chi- 
chester Cross,  Do  not  bring  me  a  pair  of  scissars  from  Sheffield ; 
I  am  determined  nothing  shall  cut  our  loves,  tho'  I  should  live 
out  the  rest  of  Methusalem's  term  as  you  kindly  wish,  and  as  I 
can  believe,  though  you  are  my  wives,— for  I  am  persuaded  my 
Agnes  wishes  so  too,  don't  you  ? 

At  night, 

I  am  just  come  from  Cambridge's,  where  I  have  not  been  in 
an  evening  time  out  of  mind.  Major  Dixon,  alias  the  '  charm- 
ing man,'f  is  there,  but  I  heard  nothing  of  the  emperor's 
rickets  ;$  a  great  deal  and  many  horrid  stories  of  the  violences 
in  France :  for  his  brother,  the  Chevalier  Jerningham,  is  just 
arrived  from  Paris.  You  have  heard  of  the  destruction  of 
32  chateaux  in  Burgundy,  at  the  instigation  of  a  demon,  who 
has  since  been  broken  on  the  rack.  There  is  now  assembled  near 
Paris  a  body  of  16,000  deserters,  daily  increasing,  who  they 
fear  will  encamp  and  dictate  to  the  capital,  in  spite  of  their 

*  Caroline  Campbell,  Baroness  Greenwich. 

f  Edward  Jerningham,  Esq.,  of  Cossey  in  Norfolk,  uncle  to  the  present 
Lord  Stafford.  He  was  distinguished  in  his  day  by  the  name  of  '  Jerning- 
ham the  poet;'  but  it  was  an  unpoetical  d^y;  the  stars  of  Byron,  of 
Baillie,  and  of  Scott  had  not  risen  on  the  horizon.  The  more  merited  dis- 
tinction of  Jerningham  was  the  friendship,  affection,  and  intimacy  which  his 
amiable  character  had  inspired  to  the  author  and  all  of  his  society  mentioned 
in  these  letters. — M.£. 

I  This  alluded  to  something  said  in  a  character  which  Jerningham  had 
assumed  for  the  amusement  of  a  society  some  time  before  at  Marshal 
Conway's. — M.B. 


190  LETTERS.  [1789 

militia  of  20,000  bourgeois.  It  will  soon,  I  suppose,  ripen  to 
several  armies  and  a  civil  war :  a  fine  acheminement  to  liberty. 
My  poor  niece  *  is  still  alive,  though  weaker  every  day,  and 
pronounced  irrecoverable.  Still  she  is  calm,  and  behaves  with 
the  patience  of  a  martyr.] 

Strawberry  Hill,  Sept.  13, 1789. 

I  don't  wonder  that  y''  grandmother  is  unwilling  to  part  with 
you,  when  you  sacrifice  the  amendment  of  y''  health  to  her,  and 
give  up  bathing  for  her  satisfaction ;  but,  between  ourselves,  I 
do  not  admire  her  for  accepting  the  sacrifice.  You  bid  me  be 
very  kind  to  make  up  for  your  parting  with  her  and  yorar 
friends.     I  am  like  poor  Cordelia  : — 

I  am  sure  my  love's 
More  pond'roua  than  my  tongue. 

She  reserved  half  her  affection  from  her  father  for  her  husband. 
I  will  keep  none  of  mine  from  my  wives  for  my  grandmother ; 
but  I  promise  nothing.     Come  and  try. 

I  will  see  Mr.  Wickes  and  know  more  particularly  about  Mrs. 
Armstrong's  motions.  I  shall  be  a  little  fearful  of  haggling  with 
him,  lest  I  should  sour  his  complaisance,  which  hitherto  has  been 
all  sugar.  Still  I  will  not  be  grandmaternal,  and  prefer  myself 
to  your  interest. 

I  have  had  a  most  melancholy  scene  with  the  loss  of  dear 
Lady  Dysart,  and  the  affliction  of  the  family,  tho'  her  release 
was  to  be  wished,  and  for  which  she  wished  earnestly  herself.  "We 
have  the  comfort  of  finding  that  she  is  full  as  much  regretted  as 
she  was  known ;  indeed,  a  more  faultless  being  exists  not  within 
my  knowledge.     I  will  transcribe  some  lines  that  I  have  written 
on  her,  which  have  not  the  merit  of  poetry,  but  a  much  more 
uncommon  one, — that  of  being  an  epitaph  in  which  there  is  no 
exaggeration;  however,  I  beg  you  will  not  give  a  copy  of  it  :— 
Adieu  !  sweet  shade  !  complete  was  thy  career, 
Tho'  lost  too  soon,  and  premature  thy  bier ; 
For  each  fair  character  adorned  thy  life 
Of  daughter,  sister,  friend,  relation,  wife. 
Yet,  lest  unaltered  fortune  should  have  seem'd 
The  source  whence  virtues  so  benignly  beam'd. 
Long-mining  illness  prov'd  thy  equal  soul, 
And  patience,  like  a  martyr's,  crown'd  the  whole. 

*  Charlotte    Walpole,   Countess   of    Dysart,   daughter   of    Sir  Edward 
Walpole. 


1789]  EPITAPH   ON   LADY   DTSAET.  191 

Pain  could  not  sour,  whom  blessings  had  not  spoil'd; 
Nor  death  affright,  whom  not  a  vice  had  soil'd. 

You  shall  hear  no  more  on  this  sad  subject,  tho'  I  have 
nothing  else  that  will  much  amuse  you :  for,  besides  confinement 
with  my  relations,  I  have  been  a  prisoner  in  my  own  house  for 
some  days,  in  consequence  of  a  violent  fall  I  had  last  week,  in 
which  it  is  wonderful  that  I  lost  nor  life,  nor  limb,  nor  even  a  bone. 
I  went  to  sit  with  my  cousins,  the  three  Philips's,  on  Hampton 
Court  Green ;  it  was  dusk ;  there  was  a  very  low  step  at  the  door, 
I  did  not  see  it;  it  tripped  me  up.  I  fell  headlong  on  the 
stones,  and  against  the  frame  of  a  table  at  the  door,  and  bat- 
tered myself  so  much,  that  my  whole  hip  is  as  black  as  my  shoe 
for  above  half  a  yard  long  and  a  quarter  wide,  besides  bruising 
one  hand,  both  knees,  and  my  left  elbow,  into  which  it  brought 
the  gout  next  day.  Now,  pray  admire  my  lightness :  if  I  had 
weighed  a  straw,  what  mischief  might  not  have  happened  to 
me  ?  nay,  I  have  had  very  little  pain ;  and  the  gout,  not  to  be 
out  of  the  fashion,  is  gone  too :  and  I  should  have  been  abroad 
this  morning,  if  I  had  not  preferred  writing  to  you. 

I  shall  go  to  Park-place  on  Monday  next  for  two  or  three  days, 
and  then  come  back  to  be  ready  to  receive  you  ;  but  you  have  not 
been  very  gracious,  nor  said  a  word  of  accepting  my  invitation 
till  the  house  at  Teddington  is  ready  for  you.  Pray  let  me  know 
when  I  may  expect  you,  that  I  may  not  enter  into  any  engage- 
ment, even  for  the  evening. 

As  the  hour  of  my  seeing  you  again  approaches,  and  as  I  have 
nothing  of  the  least  import  to  tell,  I  shall  not  try  to  lengthen  this 
to  its  usual  complement,  though  the  verses  have  saved  some  of 
my  paper.  Essays,  that  act  the  part  of  letters,  are  mighty  in- 
sipid things,  and  when  one  has  nothing  occasional  to  say,  it  is 
better  to  say  nothing. 

The  weather  has  been  so  cold  since  Monday,  that  for  these 
two  days  I  have  had  the  carpenter  stopping  chinks  in  window 
■  frames,  and  listing  the  door  of  the  blue  room,  which  I  destine 
to  wife  Agnes.  Winds  will  get  into  these  old  castles.  Sultana 
Maria  is  to  sleep  in  the  red  room,  where  the  Sultan  himself 
resides  when  he  has  the  gout,  and  which  his  haughtiness  always 
keeps  very  comfortable.     Adieu ! 

The  following  letter,  addressed  to  Somerset  Street,  to 
greet  Miss  Berry  on  her  return  from  the  country,  is  the 


192  LETTERS.  [1789 

last  written  to  her  and  her  sister  before  their  taking 
possession  of  the  house  Mr.  Walpole  had  secured  for  their 
occupation  at  Teddington  : — 

Strawberry  Hill,  Wednesday  night,  Sept.  30,  1789. 

When  an  ancient  gentleman  marries,  it  is  his  hest  excuse  that 
he  wants  a  nurse,  which  I  suppose  was  the  motive  of  Solo- 
mon, who  was  the  wisest  of  mortals,  and  a  most  puissant  and 
opulent  monarch,  for  marrying  a  thousand  wives  in  his  old  age 
when,  I  conclude,  he  was  very  gouty.  I,  in  humble  imitation  of 
that  sapient  king,  and  no  mines  of  Ophir  flowing  into  my  exche- 
quer, espoused  a  couple  of  helpmates,  but  being  less  provident 
than  the  son  of  David,  suffered  both  to  ramble  into  the  land  of 
Groshen  when  I  most  wanted  their  attendance. — I  tell  a  great 
story  :  I  did  not  want  you :  on  the  contrary,  I  am  delighted  that 
you  did  not  accept  my  invitation.  I  should  have  been  mortified 
to  the  death  to  have  had  you  in  my  house  when  I  am  lying  help- 
lessly on  my  couch,  or  going  to  bed  early  from  pain.  In  short,  I 
came  from  Park-place  last  Thursday,  suffered  a  good  deal  yes- 
terday evening,  and  blessed  myself  you  were  not  here.  Did  you 
ever  think  it  would  come  to  that  ?  I  am  a  great  deal  better  to- 
day ;  but  I  fear  it  will  scarce  be  possible  for  me  to  be  in  town 
by  Saturday.  In  the  mean  time  here  is  the  state  of  affairs: — 
Mr.  Wickes  goes  into  Norfolk  to-morrow  for  three  weeks  to 
shoot.  I  told  him  you  was  much  displeased  at  his  asking  new 
terms,  and  that  till  you  should  come  to  town  I  could  say  nothing 
positive  to  him,  and  he  must  not  depend  on  anything  till  then. 
He  was  all  penitence  and  complaisance.  I  told  him  I  must  have 
a  lease  signed ;  he  said  there  was  no  necessity  for  it.  '  Oh,  yes,' 
I  said,  '  but  there  is.'  He  answered,  if  I  would  send  one  down 
to  him,  signed  by  Mr.  Berry,  he  would  sign  it  too  ;  but  what  I 
shall  do  when  I  know  y""  determination  is  to  send  to  Mr.  Wickes 
a  copy  of  the  few  lines  which  Mr.  Pepys,  whom  I  have  consulted 
twice,  had  from  Lady  Dudley,  and  which  shall  specify  that  you 
are  to  pay  but  20^.,  in  full  of  all  demands,  from  the  time  you 
shall  take  possession  of  the  house  to  December  25th,  and  when 
Wickes  returns  that  agreement  signed,  Mr.  Berry  will  sign  it 
too.  Thus,  you  see,  I  have  acted  with  the  utmost  caution,  nor 
have  been  to  the  house,  nor  sent  anybody  to  see  it,  that  Wickes 
might  not  say  we  had  taken  possession. 

Now,  hold  a  council  incontinently,  and  let  me  know  its  decree ; 


1789]  LINES   INSCRIBED   TO   THE   MISS   BEEEYS.  193 

or  why  should  not  Mr.  Berry  come  to  me  immediately,  if  I  can- 
not come,  as  I  fear  ?  You  know  here  is  a  dinner  and  a  hed 
always  at  his  service,  which  will  save  you  a  great  deal  of  time. 

I  am  not  qmte  for  having  your  house  in  town  new  painted  at 
this  time  of  year  when  it  cannot  dry  fast.  There  is  nothing  so. 
very  unwholesome  as  the  smell  of  wet  paint.  Cannot  you  make 
shift  as  it  is  for  another  year  ?  I  never  perceived  its  wanting  it: 
you  do  not  propose  to  give  assemblies  and  concerts. 

If  I  hear  nothing  on  Sunday  morning,  I  shall  conclude  you 
arrived  too  late.  Thus  I  think  I  have  foreseen  and  said  all  that 
can  be  necessary,  and  perhaps  more  like  a  nurse  than  a  person 
that  wants  one. 

Be  sure  that  I  find  you  both  looking  remarkably  well ; — not 
that  I  have  any  reason  for  desiring  it,  but  as  I  am  not  able  to 
nurse  you.     Adieu ! 

It  was  at  the  close  of  this  year  that  Mr.  Walpole  thus 
inscribed  his  Catalogue  of  Strawberry  Hill  to  the  Miss 
Berrys : — 

[lO 
THE   BEAU  SISTERS 

MARY  AUB  AGNES  BERRY 

THIS  DBSCKIPTIOir 

OP 

HIS   VILLA   AT   SIRAWBEEET  HILL, 

WHICH   THET   0ETE2f     MADE    DELIGHTFULL 

BY   THEIE   COMPANY,    CONVERSATION,    AND   TALENTS, 

IS    OFPEEED 

BT 

HORACE  WALPOLE, 

FKOM  A.  HEART   OVERIXOWINa  WITH 

ADMIRATION,    ESTEEM,   AND   FRIENDSHIP, 

HOPING 

THAT  LONG   AFTER  HE    SHALL  BE  NO   MORE, 

II     MAY,   WHILE    AMtrSING   THEM, 

RECALL  SOME  KDTD  THOTTGHTS 

OF  A   MOST   DEVOTED 

AND   AFFECTIONATE   HUMBLE   SERVANT. 

December  1789.] 

Lines  inscribed  by  Mr.  Walpole  in  a  copy  of  his  Catalogue  of  Strawbeny 
EQU  given  to  M.  and  A.  Berry  long  before  it  was  publisbed. — M.  B. 
VOL.  I.  O 


194  LETTERS.  [1790 


LETTEES. 

1790. 

Miss  Beret's  entry  for  the  year  1790  is — '  Summer  for 
three  weeks  in  Montpeher  Eow.  Go  abroad  in  October  ; 
winter  between  Florence  and  Pisa.' 

How  long  Mr.  Berry  and  his  daughters  remained  at 
Teddington  does  not  transpire,  but  letters  from  their 
friend  Mrs.  Cholmley"*  were  addressed  to  Miss  Berry 
in  Somerset  Street  as  early  in  the  year  as  the  month  of 
February  1790. 

Mrs.  Cholmley  was  one  of  Miss  Berry's  early  and 
intimate  friends,  and  seems  to  have  been  well  aware  of 
the  melancholy  which  pervaded  her  character,  though 
little  perceived  by  those  who  saw  only  the  genial  warmth 
and  intelhgent  vivacity  which  distinguished  her  manner  in 
society.   In  a  letter  dated  Brandsby,  May  25,  she  says : — 

Your  letter  has  grieved  my  heart  and  yet  relieved  part  of 
its  anxiety,  which  had  been  directed  to  some  more  embodied 
giief  than  you  have  to  complain  of.  .  .  .  The  dear  Agnes' 
better  health  and  looks  will  revive  you,  and  when  your  mind 
has  had  its  own  melancholy  swing,  I  trust  it  will  settle  again  to 
its  usual  balance.  You  are  naturally  deeply  thoughtful ;  such 
a  mind  as  yours  can,  indeed,  scarce  be  otherwise. 

The  following  letters  from  Mr.  Walpole  were  addressed 
to  Miss  Berry  at  Lymington,  where  they  passed  a  short 
time  during  the  summer : — 

*  Mrs.  Cholmley,  sister  to  Sir  Harry  Englefield,  married  to  Mr.  Cholmley 
of  Brandshy,  Yorkshire. 


1790]  FRENCH   NEWS.  195 

Strawberry  Hill,  July  25,  1790. 

I  wrote  a  bit  of  a  letter  to  you  t'other  day  in  such  a  hurry, 
that  I  don't  know  what  I  said — tho'  I  fear  more  than  I  intended 
— but  no  more  of  that. 

JNIy  neighbourhood,  tho'  Richmond  is  brimfull  both  of  French 
and  English,  furnishes  no  more  entertainment  than  usual,  for 
which  I  am  much  more  sorry  on  your  account  than  on  my  own, 
for  my  letters  will  not  be  amusing.  My  personal  history  is 
short  and  duU.  I  have  made  my  chief  visits ;  my  offices  advance, 
and  I  have  got  in  most  of  my  hay,  and  such  a  quantity;  that  I 
believe,  it  will  pay  for  half  a  yard  of  my  building.  All  news 
have  centered  in  elections ;  I  care  about  none,  nor  have  listened 
to  any.  They  and  the  pressgangs  have  swept  the  roads  of  foot- 
pads and  highwaymen,  who  hide  themselves,  or  are  gone  to 
vote.  Whether  they  who  used  to  come  to  see  my  house  are  of 
either  complexion,  I  don't  know,  but  I  have  had  less  demand 
for  tickets  than  usual — what  else  can  I  tell  you  ? 

I  am  glad  you  staid  long  enough  at  Park- place  to  see  all  its 
beauties.  The  cottage  and  all  its  purlieus  are  delicious,  so  is 
the  bridge  and  Isis,  and  the  Druids'  Temple  seems  to  have  been 
born  and  bred  on  the  spot  where  it  stands.  I  wish  you  had 
seen  Nuneham  too,  which  is  another  of  my  first  favourites. 

Mr.  Berry  will  want  news  of  the  Spanish  War,  but  I  can  send 
him  none,  nor  do  I  at  all  believe  that  it  will  come  to  a  head. 
France  seems  more  likely  to  ripen  to  confusion;  they  go  on 
levelling  so  madly,  that  I  shall  wonder  if  everybody  does  not 
think  himself  loosened  from  all  restraints  and  bound  to  conform 
to  none.  A  pretty  experiment  to  throw  society,  with  all  its 
improved  vices  and  desires,  into  a  state  of  nature,  which  in  its 
outset  had  many  of  them  to  discover,  and  no  worse  instrument 
than  the  jawbone  of  an  ass  to  execute  mischief  with.  That 
serene  Prince  the  Duke  of  Orleans  has  bowed  to  the  abolition 
of  titles,  and  calls  himself  MoTisr.  Capet,  from  whom  he  may 
be  descended,  if  he  is  not  from  the  Bourbons ;  but  as  he  has 
failed  in  being  such  another  usurper,  I  wonder  he  did  not  avoid 
the  allusion. 

Since  I  began  my  letter,  I  have  called  on  Madame  de 
Boufflers,  and  heard  but  too  much  news.  Monsr.  d'Olan,  a 
worthy  man,  and  nephew  of  my  dear  friend  Mad.  du  Deffand, 
has  been  taken  out  of  his  bed,  to  which  he  was  confined  by  the 

o2 


196  LETTERS.  '  [1790 

gout,  at  Avignon,  and  hanged  by  the  mob !  I  have  said  for 
this  year  that  I  am  happy  she  is  dead ;  and  now  how  much  that 
reflection  is  fortified !  The  Prime  Minister  of  Spain  has  been, 
stabbed  by  a  Frenchman,  but  is  not  dead — the  wretch  is  taken. 
I  hope  Mr.  Berry  will  cease  to  reckon  me  a  Royalist,  because  I 
do  not  think  that  liberty  is  cheaply  purchased  by  murders  and 
every  kind  of  violence  and  injustice. 

You  must  tack  this  half  letter  to  that  of  t'other  day,  and  call 
it  a  whole  one.  You  are  sure  I  must  want  matter,  not  inchna- 
tion,  when  I  don't  send  you  what  pedants  call  a  just  volume. 
Pray  return  from  Lymington  with  blooming  countenances ;  you 
must  sit  for  your  pictures  before  your  long  journey.  I  have 
not  mentioned  that  article  lately,  because  you  have  both  looked 
so  pale,  nor  indeed  has  the  subject  been  so  agreeable  as  when  I 
first  proposed  it ;  portraits  are  but  melancholy  pleasures  in  long 
absence.  With  what  different  emphasis  does  one  say  adieu !  for 
a  month,  and  for  a  year.  I  scarce  guess  how  one  can  say  the 
latter — alas  !  I  must  learn. 

Mr.  Berry  and  his  daughters  had  made  their  arrange- 
ments for  a  tour  on  the  Continent,  and  Mr.  "Walpole's 
sadness  at  the  thoughts  of  parting  with  his  friends  for  a 
twelvemonth  is  very  apparent  in  the  following  letter ;  but 
his  regret  was  much  increased  by  the  most  unbounded 
alarm  at  the  prospect  of  their  going  abroad,  and  he  used 
every  argument  founded  on  the  state  of  the  Continent  to 
dissuade  them  from  undertaking  so  hazardous  a  journey. 

[Strawberry  Hill,  Saturday  mght,  July  3,  1790. 
How  kind  to  write  the  very  moment  you  arrived !  but  pray 
do  not  think  that,  welcome  as  your  letters  are,  I  would  purchase 
them  at  the  price  of  any  fatigue  to  you — a  proviso  I  put  in 
already  against  moments  when  you  may  be  more  weary  than 
by  a  journey  to  Lymington.  You  make  me  happy  by  the  good 
accounts  of  Miss  Agnes ;  and  I  should  be  completely  so,  if  the 
air  of  the  sea  could  be  so  beneficial  for  you  both,  as  to  make 
your  farther  journey  unnecessary  to  your  healths,  at  least  for 
some  time;  for — and  I  protest  solemnly  that  not  a  personal 
thought  enters  into  the  consideration — I  shall  be  excessively 


<17S0]  FRENCH   JUBILEE   BANQUET.  197 

alarmed  at  your  going  to  the  Continent,  when  such  a  frenzy  has 
seized  it.  You  see  by  the  papers  that  the  flame  has  burst  out 
at  Florence — can  Pisa  then  be  secure  ?  Flanders  can  be  no  safe 
road,  and  is  any  part  of  France  so  ?  I  told  you  in  my  last  of  the 
horrors  at  Avignon.  At  Madrid  the  people  are  riotous  against 
the  war  with  us,  and  prosecuted  I  am  persuaded  it  will  not  be ; 
but  the  demon  of  Gaul  is  busy  everywhere — nay,  its  imps  are 
here.] 

Home  Tooke  declared  on  the  hustings  t'other  day,  that  he 
would  exterminate  those  locusts  the  nobility.  Lord  Lansdowne, 
whose  family-name  I  suspect  to  have  been  Petit  (a  French  one), 
not  Petty,  is  suspected  to  have  set  Tooke  at  work,  and,  like 
Monsr.  Capet,  would  waive  his  Marquisate  to  compass  a  revo- 
lution. Capet  is  gone  to  the  new  St.  Barthelemi  or  Jubilee  on 
the  14th.  The  banquet-tables,  it  is  said,  are  to  extend  a  ligue, 
for  league  is  not  French  enough ;  the  King  is  to  be  declared 
Emperor  of  the  Franks,  but  the  dignity  not  to  be  hereditary, 
that  Polish  massacres  may  be  so. 

[The  Etats,  who  are  as  foolish  as  atrocious,  have  printed  lists 
of  the  surnames  which  the  late  noblesse  are  to  assume  or  resume, 
as  if  people  did  not  know  their  own  names. 

Mrs.  Damer  tells  me  in  a  letter  to-day,  that  Lady  Ailesbury 
was  charmed  with  you  both  (which  did  not  surprise  either  of 
us),  and  says,  she  never  saw  two  persons  have  so  much  taste  for 
the  country,  who  have  no  place  of  their  own.  It  may  be  so,  but 
begging  her  ladyship's  pardon  and  yours,  I  think  that  people 
who  have  a  place  of  their  own  are  mighty  apt  not  to  like  any 
other. 

I  feel  all  the  kindness  of  your  determination  of  coming  to 
Twickenham  in  August,  and  shall  certainly  say  no  more  against 
it,  tho'  I  am  certain  that  I  shall  count  every  day  that  passes, 
and  when  they  are  passed,  they  will  leave  a  melancholy  im- 
pression on  Strawberry,  that  I  had  rather  have  affixed  to  London. 
The  two  last  summers  were  infinitely  the  pleasantest  I  ever 
passed  here,  for  I  never  before  had  an  agreeable  neighbourhood. 
Still  I  loved  the  place,  and  had  no  comparisons  to  draw.  Now, 
the  neighbourhood  will  remain,  and  will  appear  ten  times  worse, 
with  the  aggravation  of  remembering  two  months  that  may  have 
some  transient  roses,  but  I  am  sure,  lasting  thorns.  You  tell 
me  I  do  not  write  with  my  usual  spirits — at  least  I  will  suppress 


198  LETTERS.  [1790 

as  much  as  I  can,  the  -want  of  them,  tho'  I  am  a  bad  dis- 
sembler.] 

Miss  Cambridge  told  me  you  had  charged  her  to  search  for 
a  house  for  you.  I  did  bid  Philip,  but  I  believe  not  with  the 
eagerness  of  last  year,  and  I  am  persuaded  she  Avill  execute 
your  commission  punctually. 

The  home-chapter  will  be  dull  as  usual.  The  Boydels  and 
Nichols's  breakfasted  here  yesterday,  in  return  for  their  civilities 
at  the  Shakespeare  Gallery.  On  Tuesday  is  to  come  Lady 
Herries  and  her  clan. 

It  has  rained  all  day,  and  I  have  not  been  out  of  my  house. 
In  the  morning  I  had  three  or  four  visitors,  particularly  my 
nephew,  George  Cholmondeley,  with  an  account  of  his  marriage 
settlements  and  the  toothache.  To-night  I  am  writing  to  you 
comfortably  by  the  fireside,  for  we  are  forced  to  raise  an  English 
July  in  a  hot-house,  like  grapes.  Pray  tell  me  much  of  your 
personal  history,  and  what  company  you  have.  I  care  much 
more  about  Lymington  than  all  the  elections  in  the  kingdom, 
and  I  seem  to  think  that  you  interest  yourself  as  much  about 
les  amusemens  des  eaux  de  Strawberri.     Good  night. 

Strawberry  Hill,  Friday  night,  July  10,  1790. 

I  begin  my  letter  to-night,  but  shall  not  send  it  away  till  I 
hear  again  from  you,  that  our  letters  may  not  jostle  without 
answering  one  another ;  but  how  can  I  pass  my  solitary  evenings 
so  well  as  by  talking  to  you?  I  laid  on  my  couch  for  three 
days,  but  as  never  was  so  tractable  a  gout  as  mine,  I  have 
walked  all  over  the  house  to-day  without  assistance.  I  did  long 
to  peep  at  my  building,  but  as  it  has  been  a  cold  dog-day,  I 
would  not  risk  a  relapse,  and  about  dinner  we  had  a  smart 
shower.  Well,  you  cry,  and  was  it  worth  while  to  write  only  to 
tell  me  it  is  cold  ?  We  know  that  at  Lymington.  Oh  yes !  it 
was  to  tell  you  other  guess-news  than  of  heat  or  cold  overhead. 
In  short,  as  whatever  may  directly  or  indirectly  affect  you 
and  your  sister,  is  my  principal  occupation  at  present,  I  must 
transcribe  two  passages  from  The  Times  of  the  day  before 
yesterday. 

'  The  subjects  of  Leopold  have  assumed  the  cockade  in  Leg- 
horn, and  delivered  to  the  Eegency  a  Bill  of  Rights.'' 

'On  the  31st  of  May,  the  people  in  a  tumultuous  manner 
broke  open  two  churches  at  Leghorn.     They  then  advanced  to 


1790]  STATE   OF   THE    CONTINEXT.  199 

the  quarter  of  the  Jews,  threatening  entirely  to  extirpate  them. 
Some  soldiers  were  hastily  assembled  and  ordered  to  fire  on 
the  mutineers.  Sis  were  killed  and  a  great  number  wounded. 
Still  however  the  disturbances  continued.  They  have  opened 
other  churches,  and  converted  them  into  magazines,  and  have 
assumed  the  red  and  white  cockade.  The  senate  and  governor 
have  endeavoured  to  persuade  them  to  adopt  peaceable  measures. 
They  have  answered  by  a  memorial,  stating  their  civil  and 
religious  grievances  and  demanding  redress.' 

Thus  Pisa,  you  see,  is  no  sojourning  place  for  you.  Indeed, 
as  I  told  Miss  Agnes  in  my  last,  till  some  of  the  ferment  in 
Europe  subsides,  it  would  be  very  unadvised  to  change  this 
country  for  any  other.  Mrs.  Boscawen,  who  came  to  visit  my 
gout  this  morning,  told  me  that  Mr.  Prescot,  coming  from 
Avignon,  where  poor  Monsr.  Dolan  and  four  other  persons  have 
been  hanged  for  refusing  to  disavow  the  Pope,  was  thrown  into 
prison  in  France,  and  detained  there  all  night,  before  suffered  to 
prosecute  his  journey  through  France.  The  Duchess  of  Glou- 
cester, who  called  on  me  afterwards,  says,  the  like  troubles  are 
broken  out  in  Switzerland.  Surely  this  is  not  a  season  for 
expeditions  to  the  Continent. 

Monsr.  Capet  has  been  twice  at  Brighthelmstone,  and  had 
sent  Madame  Buffon  before  to  feel  his  way.  She  and  others 
have  warned  him  not  to  embark ;  he  has  given  it  up,  has  sent 
for  his  pictures  for  sale,  and  perhaps  with  them  may  buy  an 
Irish  Peerage.  Lord  Carlisle  and  Lord  William  Gordon  were 
going  to  Paris  for  the  14th,  but  hear  it  would  be  too  perilous 
a  service- — il  n'y  feroit  pas  bon  pour  tout  aristocrat ! 

General  Conway  in  his  last  letter  asked  me  if  it  was  not  a 
theme  to  moralize  on,  this  earthquake  that  has  swallowed  up  all 
Montmorencis,  Guises,  Birons,  and  great  names  ?  I  reply,  it 
makes  me  immoralize ;  I  am  outrageous  at  the  destruction  of 
all  the  visions  that  make  history  delectable  :  without  some 
romance  it  is  but  a  register  of  crimes  and  calamities,  and  the 
French  seem  preparing  to  make  their  country  one  universal  St. 
Bartelemi  :  they  are  instructing  the  populace  to  lay  everything 
waste  !  What  is  to  restrain  them?  Will  they  obey  those  masters 
who  tell  them,  preach  to  them,  that  all  are  equal ;  but  who, 
good  men !  pay  themselves  twelve  livres  a-day  for  propagating 
that  doctrine  ?     I  shall  wonder  if  their  equals  do  not  recollect 


200  LETTEES.  [1790 

having  an  equal  right  to  twelve  livres  a-day !  Oh  !  go  not  into 
that  conflagration,  nor  whither  its  sparks  extend !  come  to  the 
banks  of  the  gentle  placid  Thames,  nor  strew  its  shores  with 
alarm  and  anxiety  by  leaving  them.  How  I  wished  for  you 
to-day — yes,  don't  you  believe  me  ? — and  particularly  at  three 
o'clock.  Mrs.  Boscawen  was  sitting  with  me  here  in  the  blue 
bow-window  ;  in  a  moment  the  river  was  covered  with  little 
yachts  and  boats,  the  road  and  the  opposite  meadow  with 
coaches,  chaises,  horsemen,  women,  and  children.  Mr.  Greorge 
Hardinge  had  given  three  guineas  to  be  rowed  for  by  four  two- 
oared  boats  from  his  Eagman's  castle  to  Lady  Dudley's  and 
back,  so  we  saw  the  conflux  go  and  return.  I  had  not  heard  of 
it,  but  all  Richmond  had,  and  was  descended  from  its  heights. 
Mrs.  Boscawen  says  you  have  at  Weymouth  the  Dowager 
Duchess  Plantagenet,  or,  as  I  translate  her.  Broomstick ;  beau- 
coup  d'honneur,  but  I  don't  believe  she  enlivens  you  like  a 
boat-race.     Adieu,  jusqu^au  rSsurnS. 

12th. 

It  is  but  Monday  evening,  and  I  expect  no  letter  till  to- 
morrow, but  I  must  go  on ;  I  have  new  horrors  and  dangers  to 
relate.  Monsr.  Cordon,  who  was  Sardinian  Minister  here,  and 
now  at  Paris,  fell  under  the  displeasure  of  the  new  despots,  the 
mob ;  they  met  a  man  whom  they  took  for  Cordon,  and  sans 
dire  gave !  hanged  him.  Madame  de  St.  Alban,  who  you  know 
is  a  pinchbeck-piece  of  mine,  was  returning  to  Ld.  Cholmondeley 
from  Paris,  but  was  arrested  at  the  gate,  and  had  all  her  papers 
seized  and  examined.  While  I  was  writing  this  paragraph,  Mrs. 
Grrenville  called  to  see  me,  and  had  just  seen  a  Mrs.  Hamlyn, 
lately  returned  from  Italy  with  her  husband  ;  between  Boulogne 
and  Calais  they  were  stopped  seven  times  by  vagabonds  liberty- 
drunk,  and  obliged  to  drink  with  them  ;  and  yesterday,  I 
heard  of  a  Mr.  Prescot  being  stopped  in  France  and  imprisoned 
for  a  night ;  but  'tis  for  Wednesday  that  everybody  trembles. 
The  son  of  Mad.  de  Boufilers  has  written  to  his  mother  in  a 
style  of  taking  leave  of  her  and  his  wife  and  child,  as  not 
knowing  if  he  shall  ever  see  them  again.  I  do  not  coin  these 
tragedies  to  frighten  you,  but  they  will  terrify  me  if  you  still 
think  of  setting  your  foot  on  French  ground.  • 

^Vhat  say  you  to  that  mischievous  lunatic  Lord  Stanhope,* 

*  Charlea,  third  Earl  of  Stanhope,  died  1816. 


1790]  CORRECTION   OF   AN   OLD   PROVERB.  201 

who  is  to  celebrate  the  French  jubilee  at  the  Crown  and  Anchor  ? 
I  was  told  to-day,  but  have  not  seen  it,  of  an  excellent  advertise- 
ment against  him  from  the  oysterwomen  of  Billingsgate,  pro- 
fessing their  disloyalty,  and  desiring  to  be  associated  to  his 
banquet. 

I  am  still  confined,  but,  like  others  who  are  well,  sitting  by 
the  fire — in  short,  one  must  have  fire-summer,  if  sun-summer 
is  not  at  hand.  Mrs.  Anderson  and  Mr.  Wheeler  called  on 
me  this  morning  from  Hampton ;  she  looks  lean  and  ill,  and 
goes  to  Eamsgate ;  her  parents  next  week  to  Tunbridge  for  a 
month.  One  would  think  all  the  English  were  ducks,  they  are 
for  ever  waddUng  to  the  water.  But  I  must  stop,  I  shall  not 
have  an  inch  of  paper  for  to-morrow. 

Tuesday. 

It  is  past  twelve  and  no  post  yet,  and  ours  go  away  at  one. 
Lady  Valetort  was  brought  to  bed  of  a  dead  daughter  yesterday, 
but  Lady  Mt.  Edgcumbe  is  more  likely  to  die  of  the  mis- 
carriage than  she.  Here  is  y""  letter,  I  do  not  like  y'  resolution 
not  being  shaken.  I  will  say  no  more,  but  that  I  have  not 
invented  one  of  the  circumstances  I  have  stated  in  this  or  my 
last.  I  am  grieved  that  Miss  Agnes  does  not  advance.  About 
me  you  may  be  quite  easy ;  my  lameness  is  no  bigger  than  a 
limp.  I  only  do  not  go  out  because  I  dread  a  relapse ;  and  as 
I  have  company  quantum  sufiicit  in  a  morning,  and  can  write 
to  you  all  the  evening,  I  do  not  mind  voluntary  confinement. 
It  rains  again  this  minute — cold  rain.  I  am  sorry  your  coast  is 
as  bad. 

I  have  nothing  to  add  to  my  letter  but  a  new  edition  or 
correction  of  an  old  proverb,  that  I  made  this  morning  on  Lady 
Cecilia's  and  everybody's  jaunts  to  watering-places ;  Home  is 
never  Home,tho'  ever  so  comely.  Mrs.  Udney  is  just  come  in, 
the  post  is  just  going  out ;  I  must  finish  abruptly — if  my  letters 
ever  do  finish. 

Strawberry  HLU,  Satm-day,  July  17,  1720. 

I  have  received  yours  of  the  14th,  and  since  you  seem  so 
determined  on  y'  journey,  I  shall  say  little  more  on  the  sub- 
ject; tho'  if  my  arguments  have  had  no  weight,  yours,  I  assure 
you,  are  as  far  from  convincing  me.  That  Miss  Crawford  or 
31rs.  Lockart  may  have  met  with  no  disturbances  on  their 
routes  is  probably  true,  but  proves  nothing  as  to  safety ;  nor. 


202  LETTERS.  [1790 

when  there  is  so  much  danger,  does  it  become  a  jot  wiser  to 
run  the  contrary  risk.  That  our  papers  are  very  untrue,  is 
certain  ;  but  nothing  on  earth  is  less  true  than  that  they  have 
exaggerated  the  barbarities  in  France — they  have  not  specified 
an  hundredth  part  of  them  !  They  have  not  mentioned  a  third 
part  of  the  chateaux  that  have  been  burnt.  Have  they  said  a 
syllable  of  the  murder  of  poor  Monsr.  Dolan,  or  of  five  nuns 
massacred  there,  or  of  a  young  man  just  going  to  be  married  to 
a  pretty  young  woman  with  whom  he  was  in  love,  and  whom 
they  hanged  before  her  window?  Will  Miss  Crawford  deny 
these  facts,  or  Miss  Lockart  deny  the  disturbances  in  Tuscany, 
of  which  I  do  know  the  Government  received  an  account  ?  I 
have  heard  that  they  are  pacified — so  were  the  disturbances  in 
Hungary  said  to  be — but  they  have  broken  out  again. 

You  need  not  have  the  most  trifling  apprehension  of  what  I 
said  I  could  not  write.  It  is  merely  a  project  for  suspending 
y''  journey  till  you  see  a  little  farther,  and  that  you  shall  know 
when  I  see  you. 

It  is  said  that  an  account  has  come  in  48  hours  that  every- 
thing of  St.  Bartelemi's  Jubilee  passed  tranquilly  the  first  day, 
and  I  did  suppose  that  the  fears  of  the  Etats  would  make  them 
take  all  manner  of  precautions;  but  my  notion  all  along  has 
been  that  the  great  danger  of  confusion  will  be  when  the 
deputies,  double-poisoned  by  the  levellers,  shall  return  into 
their  several  provinces.  The  Duke  of  Orleans,  after  much 
fluctuation,  did  go  to  Paris,  and  made  a  speech  to  the  Etats, 
as  you  will  see  in  our  papers ;  but  it  is  said  to  have  been  ill 
received.  This  is  all  I  know  des  parties  d^outremer.  We  seem 
to  be  very  preparatory  for  war  with  Spain,  but  still  I  have  no 
faith  in  its  taking  place.  Lord  Camelford  has  at  last  heard 
of  his  son's  safety — and  there  ends  all  my  knowledge. 

My  gout  did  not  last  so  long  as  a  common  cold.  I  was  at 
Hampton  on  Friday,  and  at  Eichmond  last  night,  making  visits, 
but  found  nobody  at  home ;  it  was  the  first  tolerable  evening, 
and  every  body  had  flown  out.  To-day  it  has  been  warmer,  but 
as  moist  as  if  a  sirocco. 

Thus,  you  see,  Lymington  is  not  more  eventless.  The  two 
male  Edgcumbes  and  Mr.  Williams  were  with  me  this  morning, 
and  the  two  Lysons's  dined  with  me,  and  Gren.  Conway  break- 
fasted with  me  on  Thursday  morning  on  his  way  from  to's^n,  so 


1790]  THE    'QUIKT   PEACEABLE   FRENCH.'  20 


Q 


if  there  were  a  wherewitlial  of  news,  I  might  have  learnt  some. 
To-morrow  I  go  to  London ;  on  Tuesday,  to  Mr.  Barrett's  in 
Kent ;  and  on  Friday,  I  shall  be  here  again. 

My  week  of  confined  evenings  has  been  employed  in  writing 
notes  to  Mr.  Pennant's  London.  Ever  since  the  appearance  of 
Les  Rues  de  Pa-i'is  I  had  been  collecting  notices  for  such  a  work, 
tho'  probably  now  should  not  have  executed  it.  When  Mr. 
Pennant  had  something  of  such  an  idea  the  winter  before  last, 
I  told  him  such  hints  as  I  recollected ;  but  as  he  is  more  im- 
petuous than  digestive,  I  bad  not  looked  out  my  memorandums, 
and  he  has  made  such  a  bungling  use  of  those  I  gave  him.  (for 
instance,  in  calling  the  Dss.  of  Tirconnel  the  white  milliner 
instead  of  the  ivhite  widow),  that  I  am  glad  I  furnished  him 
with  no  more. 

What  can  I  say  more?  Nothing  to-night,  but  that  both 
Philip  and  I  have  looked  and  inquired,  and  can  find  nothing 
here  that  even  calls  itself  a  ready-furnished  house.  I  am  per- 
suaded, tho'  Miss  Cambridge  did  not  tell  you  so,  that  she  had 
inquired,  and  knows  there  is  not  one. 

This  being  such  a  chip  in  paper,  I  will  carry  it  with  me  to 
town  to-morrow,  and  even  keep  it  back  till  after  Monday 
evening,  when  I  may  possibly  be  able  to  satisfy  y""  curiosity 
about  the  quiet  peaceable  French,  and  their  modest  jubilee,  in 
honour  of  their  destroying  tyranny  and  restoring  liberty  to 
everybody  of  hanging  whom  they  please  without  trial. 

Monday,  19tli. 

I  came  to  town  yesterday,  and  at  the  door  my  maid  told  me 
that  two  persons  had  called  to  inquire,  who  had  heard  that  I 
was  dangerously  ill,  and  even  reported  dead.  To  be  sure  at 
my  age  that  would  be  no  miracle ;  but  as  upon  my  honour,  I 
have  seen  myself  every  day,  and  know  nothing  of  any  illness  I 
have  had  but  a  fillip  of  gout,  I  cannot  believe  there  is  any  truth 
in  those  reports. 

I  supped  at  my  sister's  last  night,  with  several  Churchills, 
Miss  Carter,  and  Mr.  Fawkener,  Clerk  of  the  Council,  and  even 
he  had  only  heard  that  the  Wednesday  you  wot  of  passed  at 
Paris  without  disturbance.  If  I  hear  more  of  it  this  evening, 
you  shall  know.  I  did  hear  a  deal  about  Lord  Barrymore  and 
theatres   he  is   building ;   and   of  Ld.    Salisbury's   licence   to 


204  LETTERS.  [1790 

O'Reilly  for  operas  at  the  Pantheon,  but  caring  nothing  about 
those  matters,  I  did  not  listen. 

To-night. — I  have  seen  Madame  de  Villegagnon-Walpole*  and 
Madame  de  la  Villebaque  this  evening,  and  all  they  have  heard 
yet  is,  that  the  Wednesday  passed  quietly,  ejtcept  that  one 
cannon  burst  and  killed  five  or  six  persons — but  lives  go  for 
nothing  upon  good  occasions.  The  King  tramped  on  foot  on  the 
left  hand  of  his  superior  the  President  of  the  Assembly ;  the 
Queen  was  so  lucky  as  to  be  worse  treated,  and  was  not  forced 
to  be  present !  There,  I  think  Miss  Crawford  cannot  send  you  a 
more  peaceable  or  a  more  inviting  account.  Oh  yes  !  had  you 
been  at  Lyons  lately,  you  might  have  been  obliged  to  receive 
most  condescending  civilities  from  two  of  the  greatest  personages 
in  France.  Lady  Elvers  has  written  to  my  sister  that  she  was 
at  Lyons  when  two  Amazons  arrived  there,  deputed  by  their 
legislative  body,  Mesdames  les  Poissardes,  to  invite  the  late 
Comtesse  d'Artois  to  return  to  Paris ;  and  these  two  embassa- 
dresses  lodged  in  the  same  hotel.  Lady  E.  was  told  she  ought 
to  wait  on  them — not  she  indeed.  Oh !  yes,  you  had  much 
better — and  so  she  found  she  had.  They  received  her  very 
graciously,  and  said,  'Nous  nous  reverrons.^  How  could  I  ima- 
gine that  it  is  not  charming  travelling  thro'  France  !  I  go  into 
Kent  to-morrow ;  how  you  will  envy  me  if  I  meet  a  detach- 
ment of  Poissardes  on  the  road  to  Chevening  to  create  Earl 
Stanhope  no  peer  !     Grood  night. 

StrawlDerry  Hill,  Friday  night,  July  23,  1790. 
I  arrived  at  Lee  on  the  day  and  hour  I  had  promised  to  Mr. 
Barrett ;  returned  to  town  on  the  day  and  hour  I  had  promised 
myself,  and  was  back  here  as  punctually  in  my  promise  to  Straw- 
berry. Nothing  in  this  was  extraordinary,  as  I  have  always  had 
the  felicity  of  knowing  my  own  mind ;  but  the  marvel  was,  that 
I,  who  have  not  been  farther  than  Park-place  these  four  years, 
and  am  moreover  four  years  older  and  have  had  half  a  dozen  more 
fits  of  gout,  was  not  at  all  fatigued  by  an  hundred  and  twenty 
miles  in  three  days,  was  new  dressed  by  seven  yesterday  evening, 
went  to  Madame  Walpole's,  and  then  supped  at  Lady  M. 
Churchiirs.t     In  short,  I  am  so  proud  of  all  these  feats  of  acti- 

*  Madame   de  Villegagnon-Walpole,   a  French  lady,  married  to  Mr. 
Thomas  Walpole,  yomiger  son  of  the  first  Lord  Walpole,  of  Woolterton. 
t  A  daughter  of  Sir  Kohert  Walpole  by  Miss  Sherret,  the  lady  he  after- 


1790]  THE   FRENCH   JUBILEE.  205 

vity,  that  if  you  two  should  elope,  I  will  say  like  portly  Hal  the 
moment  he  had  beheaded  Anne  Boleyn, 

Cock's  bones  !  now  again  I  stand 
The  jolliest  batchelor  i'  th'  land, 

and  I  will  marry  two  more  wives  the  next  day — so  at  y'  peril 
belt! 

I  found  Mr.  Barrett's  house  complete,  and  the  most  perfect 
thing  ever  formed  !  Such  taste,  every  inch  so  well  finished,  and 
the  drawing-room  and  eating-room  so  magnificent !  I  think  if 
Strawberry  were  not  its  parent,  it  would  be  jealous.  My  jour- 
ney, too,  delighted  me  :  such  a  face  of  plenty  and  beauty;  the 
corn,  the  hay  harvest,  the  cherry  orchards,  the  hop  grounds, 
all  in  their  different  ages  so  promising  or  so  fullfilling !  All  the 
farms  and  hedges  so  tight  and  neat,  and  such  rows  of  houses 
tacking  themselves  on  to  every  town,  that  every  five  miles  were 
an  answer  to  Dr.  Price*  and  Lord  Stanhope ;  and  on  t'other  side 
what  an  answer  is  coming  from  France  !  But  I  must  keep  to  a 
little  regularity. 

The  day  of  the  Jubilee  was  a  deluge,  and,  like  Noah's  flood 
and  the  Etats,  almost  swept  away  everything ;  it  rained  fourteen 
hours,  and  not  a  dry  thread  but  on  the  Queen  (who  was  there), 
and  had  an  awning  for  her  and  a  few  ladies,  behind  the  King.  The 
rest  you  know — but  now  list !  When  Philippe  d'Orleans  waited 
on  the  still  King,  M.  Gouvion  (second  under  La  Fayette)  jostled 
him,  and  said,  '  If  you  do  not  resent  this,  you  are  a  scoundrel ' 
— ce  n'est  past  tout — five  and  twenty  of  the  Garde  Nationale 
have  bound  themselves  to  fight  the  aforesaid  Philippe,  provided 
that  like  a  bowl  he  can  tip  down  Gouvion  and  the  first  four  and 
twenty.  I  left  London  on  tiptoe  for  the  event,  and  Mr.  Lenox, 
I  suppose,  is  not  one  of  the  least  impatient. 

The  27th  is  to  be  the  octave  to  the  14th,  and  is  expected  to 
produce  fearful  events.  On  that  day  La  Fayette's  commission  is 
to  be  renewed,  or  a  successor  appointed.  But  all  this  is  nothing 
to  an  event  that  has  happened,  and  the  detail  of  which  /  saw 

wards  married.  When  SirKobert  was  created  Earl  of  Orford,  this  daughter 
had  the  king's  letter  to  rank  as  an  earl's  daughter.  She  married  Charles 
Churchill,  Esq.,  himself  a  natural  son  of  the  General  Chuichil]  of  Marl- 
horough's  wars,  by  Mrs.  Oldfield,  the  celebrated  actress. 

*  Eichard  Price,  an  eminent  dissenting  minister  and  political  writer, 
bom  1723,  died  1791. 


206  LETTERS.  [1790 

last  night  in  a  letter  to  Mad.  Walpole  from  her  sister  at  Paris, 
and  which  Mr.  Fawkener  had  heard,  tho'  not  quite  so  circum- 
stantially. 

On  the  13th  arrived  at  Paris  fifteen  hundred  Bretons  on  foot, 
the  commander  alone  mounted.  They  marched  to  the  Pont- 
tournant  of  the  Tuileries.  The  Garde  Nationale  would  have 
stopped  them,  and  have  obliged  the  commander  to  dismount — 
point  du  tout.  They  advanced  into  the  garden  under  the  win- 
dows of  the  King,  who  appeared  in  the  balcony,  and  gracieused 
them.  They  demanded  admission  to  him,  and  were  admitted, 
when  the  commandant,  bending  one  knee,  laid  his  sword  at  the 
King's  feet,  and  said,  '  Sire,  je  suis  charge  par  la  nation  Bretonne 
de  venir  jurer  amour  et  fidelite  a  votre  Majeste,  et  je  verserai  la 
deirniere  goutte  de  mon  sang  pour  vous,  pour  la  Eeine  et  pourMon- 
seigneur  le  Dauphin.'  The  King  embraced  him.  The  whole  troop 
then  went  to  a  little  garden  parted  off  for  the  Dauphin  on  the 
terrace  of  the  Tuileries,  where  he  was  gathering  flowers.  The 
pretty  boy  gave  a  flower  as  long  as  they  lasted  to  every  Breton,  and 
then  gathered  lilac  leaves,  and  for  fear  they  should  not  last,  tore 
them  in  two,  and  gave  half  a  leaf  a  piece  to  the  rest.  And  what, 
you  will  cry,  were  their  majesties  the  Etats  doing  all  this  time.- 
Oh  !  I  suppose  they  had  more  important  business  on  their  hands, 
and  were  consulting  metaphysically  where  they  should  deposit 
that  old  rag  the  Oriflamme,  for  they  are  exceedingly  attentive 
to  making  laws  for  types  and  symbols,  and  probably  are  as  much 
afraid  of  the  Bretons  as  they  are  of  Myladies  the  Poissardes  ;  but 
I  do  not  add  a  tittle  to  my  text,  and  thus  leave  these  chapters 
in  the  middle.  Our  papers  say  the  Margrave  of  Anspach  is  dead 
suddenly — so  Lady  Craven  is  widow,  tho'  still  wife. 

I  went  to  carry  my  niece,  Sophia  Walpole,  home  last  night 
from  her  mother's,  and  found  Little  Burlington-street  blocked  up 
by  coaches.  Lord  Barrymore,  his  sister  Lady  Caroline,  and  Mrs. 
Groodall  the  actress,  were  performing  the  Beaux  Stratagem  in 
Squib's  auction-room,  which  his  lordship  has  converted  into  a 
theatre.  I  do  not  know  the  rest  of  the  company,  nor  are  you 
probably  curious.  Having  now  emptied  my  pouch  of  news,  I 
will  come  to  y'  letter  of  the  20th,  which  I  have  received. 

I  thank  you  for  saying  at  least  that  you  will  take  time  to  con- 
sider before  you  finally  determine  on  y""  journey,  I  do  not  pro- 
mise myself  much  from  that  consideration,  for  if  you  can  still 


1790]  PROPOSED   CONTINENTAL   TOUR.  207 

hesitate,  it  must  be  by  the  coup  de  baguette  of  some  guardian 
angel  that  the  face  of  Europe  can  be  tranquillized  in  two  months. 
The  position  of  France,  indeed,  may  be  much  worse ;  but  the 
talisman  which  I  conclude  you  possess,  and  that  is  to  convey  you 
invulnerable  or  invisible  thro'  that  nation  of  barbarians,  must 
have  as  much  virtue  as  it  had  a  fortnight  ago,  and  as  I  have  no 
amulet  that  can  lull  asleep  my  fears  for  you,  I  am  not  at  all 
comforted  nor  quieted  by  the  composing  draught  you  have  sent 
me.  Those  alarms  have  set  me  on  considering  too,  and  unless 
you  have  reasons  that  are  unknown  to  me,  those  you  did  give 
me  appear  by  no  means  adequate  to  so  strange  a  fancy  as  that 
of  leaving  your  country  again,  when  it  is,  and  appears  to  every- 
body else,  the  only  country  in  Europe  at  present  that  one  would 
wish  to  be  in.  I  fear  my  dread  of  letting  my  self-love  prepon- 
derate over  my  attachment  to  dear  you  and  dear  Agnes  made 
me  too  rashly  forbear  to  contend  against  your  scheme.  I  heartily 
repent  of  my  acquiescence,  which  was  as  full  of  self-love  as 
opposition  would  have  been.  In  the  cooler  moments  I  have 
had  since,  it  appears  to  me  a  wild  uncomfortable  plan,  that  will 
not  produce  one  of  the  purposes  you  seem  to  propose  by  it,  and 
I  therefore  ascribe  it  to  a  volatile  roving  humour,  or  to  some 
motive  of  which  I  am  ignorant,  and  into  which  I  have  no  right 
to  inquire. 

Any  amendment  in  y''  sister  that  you  announce  is  always  the 
most  gi'ateful  part  of  your  letters,  agreeable  as  they  are  to  me. 
Dull  they  cannot  be  when  one  is  so  interested  as  I  am.  It  is  for 
y'  sake,  not  my  own,  that  I  wish  you  better  amused.  Of  whom, 
were  all  the  world  at  Lymington,  could  you  talk,  that  woiild 
engage  my  attention  so  much,  as  what  you  tell  me  about  your- 
selves ?  Good  night.  Don't  forget  to  tell  me  when  I  am  to 
change  my  direction. 

Strawberry  Hill,  Thursday,  July  29,  1790. 
If  you  give  yourself  an  air  and  pretend  to  write  dull  letters, 
which  I  defy  you  to  do  when  they  are  to  pass  thro'  the  medium 
of  my  eyes,  I  will  lay  you  a  wager  that  this  shall  beat  you 
hollow,  and  even  please  Mr.  Cumberland,  who  told  me  it  was 
pity  Mr.  Gray's  letters  had  been  printed ;  and  consequently,  I 
suppose,  poor  gentleman !  he  thinks  private  letters  ought  to  be 
as  insipid  as  his  own  comedies.  One  comfort  is,  that  if  I  have 
nothing  to  say,  I  trust  it  will  be  the  last  that  you  will  receive 


208  LETTEES.  [1790 

till  I  see  you,  and  therefore  if  it  is  as  dull  as  the  last  scene  in 
any  comedy,  no  matter. 

Yours  of  the  26th,  that  I  have  just  received,  tells  me  you  will 
be  in  town  by  Thursday  at  farthest — so  will  I,  certainly,  and 
call  on  you  in  the  evening.  I  have  most  seriously  been  house- 
hunting for  you.  I  saw  bills  on  two  doors  in  Montpellier- 
row,  but  neither  are  furnished.  Yesterday  to  a  larger  at  Ted- 
flington,  but  it  was  not  only  stark  naked,  but  tumbling  down. 
You  shall  come  to  me,  and  then  we  will  see  what  can  be  done. 

I  do  hope  you  will  be  staggered  about  a  longer  journey  for 
some  time.  But  two  days  ago  I  saw  a  new  paragraph  of  Tuscan 
disturbances.  Every  paper  talks  of  horrid  ones  at  Lyons ;  but 
I  will  say  no  more  now,  as  you  promise  to  be  guided  by  farther 
accounts. 

I  have  learnt  nothing  fresher  from  Paris,  only  that  all  the 
letters  talk  of  repeated  insults  to  the  Duke  of  Orleans,  and  it  is 
thought  he  will  return  hither.     Nor  of  the  Bretons,  non  plus. 

The  Duchesse  de  Biron  and  the  BoufHers's  are  to  dine  here 
on  Saturday,  and  the  Edgcumbes.  The  Duchess  returns  to  Paris 
next  week,  but  as  she  must  leave  her  duchy  behind,  why  should 
not  Lord  Abercorn  desire  the  King  to  seize  it  as  a  wreck,  and 
give  it  to  Lady  Cecil  Hamilton  ? 

The  Argyles  are  returned,  the  Duchess,  I  hear,  looking  very 
ill.  They  have  got  a  foolish  notion  at  Eichmond  that  Lord 
Blandford  is  to  marry  Miss  Gunning;  an  idea  so  improbable 
that  even  the  luck  of  the  Gunnings  cannot  make  one  believe  it. 
You  are  in  the  right  to  look  better,  and  I  would  advise  Agnes 
to  do  so  too  as  fast  as  possible,  for,  to  tell  you  the  truth,  I  feel 
myself  growing  inconstant.  I  have  seen  Mrs.  Udney.  Oh  !  she  is 
charming,  looks  so  sensible  and,  unluckily,  so  modest;  but  then, 
as  Mr.  Udney  looks  as  old  and  decrepit  as  I  do,  there  may  be 
some  hopes. 

At  night. 
Mr.  Lysons  the  divine  and  I  have  been  this  evening  to  see 
the  late  Duke  of  Montagu's  at  Eichmond,  where  I  had  not  been 
for  many  years.  Formerly  I  was  much  there,  but  her  grace 
broke  with  me  on  what  I  had  said  in  my  '  Noble  Authors '  of  her 
grandfather  Marlborough,  as  if  I  had  been  the  first  to  propagate 
his  avarice !  I  softened  it  in  the  second  edition  to  please  her, 
but  not  being  the  most  placable  of  her  soft  sex,  she  never  for- 


1790]    "WALPOLE'S  fears  FOR  THE  MISS  BERRTS'  SAFETY.    209 

gave  it.  The  new  garden  that  clambers  up  the  hill  is  delightful, 
and  disposed  with  admirable  taste  and  variety.  It  is  perfectly 
screened  from  human  eyes,  tho'  in  the  bosom  of  so  populous 
a  village ;  and  you  climb  till  at  last,  treading  the  houses  under 
foot,  you  recover  the  Thames  and  all  the  world  at  a  little  dis- 
tance. I  am  amazed  that  it  is  not  more  talked  of,  and  I  am 
glad  Mrs.  Udney  did  not  see  me  in  my  ascent  or  descent.  I 
was  no  very  graceful  figure  as  Mr.  Lysons  was  dragging  me  up 
and  down.  I  will  take  care  to  make  love  on  plain  ground ;  and 
things  do  go  on  well,  for  at  my  return  I  found  a  note  from  Mrs. 
Udney  to  invite  me  to  a  concert  on  Sunday,  so  I  must  have 
made  some  impression,  for  I  never  saw  her  till  yesterday 
morning. 

While  I  write,  Mr.  Lysons  has  been  turning  over  Le  Neve's  * 
'  Monumenta  Anglicana,'  and  has  found  that  nine  aldermen  of 
London  died  in  one  year.  I  concluded  it  must  have  been  in  one 
of  the  years  of  the  Plague.  No,  it  was  in  1711.  Then  it  cer- 
tainly was  in  1711  that  turtles  were  first  imported. 

Adieu  !  How  glad  I  am  to  have  no  more  of  these  empty 
letters  to  write !  Don't  you  think  it  tii-esome  to  write  letters  at 
all  ?     Pray  let  us  have  no  more  occasion  to  write  any. 

P.S. — ]Mr.  Lysons  was  last  Monday  at  Mrs.  Piozzi's  fete  at 
Streatham.  Five  and  forty  persons  sat  down  to  dinner.  In 
the  evening  was  a  concert,  and  a  little  hopping,  and  a  supper. 

Strawberry  Hill,  Monday  nigtt,  Aug.  2,  1790. 

By  yours  of  Friday,  which  I  received  yesterday,  I  find  you 
got  one  from  me  on  Wednesday,  and  I  hope  one  on  Friday  too. 

I  shall  certainly  see  you  in  Somerset- street  on  Thursday 
evening.  I  have  changed  my  language,  not  my  wishes  ;  and 
scarce  a  morsel  of  my  opinion  about  your  going  abroad,  tho',  as 
I  have  told  you,  I  did  at  first  acquiesce,  because  I  knew  how 
much  my  own  happiness  was  at  stake,  and  I  would  not  suffer  that 
to  preponderate  with  me.  But  oh  !  my  beloved  friend,  can  I  be 
so  interested  about  you  and  not  be  alarmed  ?  Every  day  I  hear 
new  causes  of  terror.  Lyons  is  all  tumult  and  violence.  The 
Duke  of  Argyle,  who  is  just  arrived,  had  his  chaise  pelted,  and 
the  coronet  over  his  arms  rubbed  out.     Miss  Cheap,  whom  I 

*  Inscriptions  on  the  Monnments  of  Eminent  Persons  deceased  from  1700 
to  1715,  by  John  le  Neve. 

VOL.  I.  P 


210  LETTERS.  [1790 

met  last  night  at  a  concert  at  Mrs.  Udney's,  is  frightened  for  you, 
like  me,  and  very  sorry  for  your  project.  She  told  me  she  has 
just  received  a  letter  from  an  English  family  abroad,  whom  pro- 
bably you  know,  who  are  longing  to  come  home,  but  dare  not 
venture.  Are  these  vain  terrors  in  me  ?  And  tho'  I  did  not 
remonstrate  at  first,  can  I  love  you  and  be  silent  now  ? 

Tho'  I  cannot  yet  believe  it  will  be,  there  is  certainly  much 
more  probability  than  I  thought  of  another  Gunning  becoming 
a  duchess.  Gen,  Conway  wrote  to  me  that  it  is  all  settled,  and  that 
she  is  to  have  the  same  jointure  as  the  Duchess  of  Marlborough ; 
but  Lady  Clackmannan,  who  has  questioned  (you  may  be  sure) 
both  the  Duke  and  Lord  Lome,  says  the  former  answered  coolly, 
'  They  tell  me  it  is  to  be,'  but  the  other  told  her  he  knew  no- 
thing of  the  matter,  and  that  he  had  even  not  seen  Lord  Bland- 
ford.  The  Dss.  of  Gloucester  says  that  Mrs.  Howe,  who  is  apt  to 
be  well  informed,  does  not  believe  it.  My  incredulity  is  still 
better  founded,  and  hangs  on  the  Duchess  of  Marlborough's 
wavering  weathercockhood,  which  always  rests  at  forbidding 
the  banns. 

My  dinner  for. the  Biron  and  Boufflers  went  off  agreeably. 
Yesterday  I  had  Mr.  Thomas  Walpole,  his  French  wife,  who  is 
most  amiable,  and  his  sister  and  daughters,  and  that  too  passed 
well.  The  Bretons,  who  are  party  per  pale,  loyal  and  levellers, 
have  promised  the  Seigneur  de  Chilly  to  burn  his  chateau  at 
their  return,  if  they  find  a  souppon  of  any  seigneurial  marks 
remaining.  They  joined  in  the  Jubilee  with  alacrity,  and  yet 
since  have  quelled  a  mob  who  were  proceeding  to  great  lengths 
against  Le  Capet  for  not  taking  the  oath  on  the  altar.  The 
Queen  they  call  nothing  but  la  Dame  Capet,  as  in  the  Fronde 
Anne  of  Austria  was  Dame  Anne. 

It  has  rained  all  day.  I  had  ordered  my  coach  to  go  to  Eich- 
mond  in  the  evening,  but  had  it  set  up  again,  and  preferred 
having  the  fires  lighted,  and  writing  to  you  comfortably. 

Miss  Cheap  is  certainly  your  true  friend,  for  she  told  me  that 
Mrs.  Udney,  whom  I  took  for  two  and  twenty,  is  eight  and 
thirty.  There  I  found  the  Abbe  singing  glees  with  the  Abra- 
hams. He  came  to  Mr.  Barrett's  a  day  later  than  he  had  pro- 
mised. I  insisted  that  he  had  been  warbling  at  the  Worcester 
and  Gloucester  music  meeting. 

My  nephew,  George  Cholmondeley,   is   to  be   married  on 


1790]  LETTERS   FKOM   MISS   BERRY   TO   WALPOLE.  211 

Saturday.*     Grood  night!   I  am  glad  I  shall  say  so  in  person 
on  Thursday. 

Mr.  Berry  and  his  daughters  had  promised  Mr.  Walpole 
to  pass  some  time  in  August  at  Twickenham  ;  and  to  his 
exertions  in  obtaining  a  house  for  them  the  following  note 
from  Miss  Berry  appears  to  refer,  though  no  date  of 
month  is  affixed :  — 

Sunday  evening. 

A  thousand  thanks,  my  good  Sir,  for  your  earnestness  last 
night,  and  your  kind  attention  this  morning  about  a  house  for 
us.  My  father  goes  to  Twickenham  to-morrow  or  next  day, 
and  carries  with  him  our  best  wishes  to  find  a  place  in  that 
neighbourhood ;  he  will  enquire  after  the  house  you  mention, 
the  situation  of  which  I  do  not  immediately  recollect,  but  be 
assured  a  short  distance  from  Strawberry  Hill  will  be  one  of  the 
first  recommendations  to  us.  To  our  many  obligations  to  you 
we  must  add  that  of  the  very  agreeable  evening  we  spent  last 
night.  I  fear  we  shall  not  meet  often  this  week,  except  you 
are  to  be  at  Lady  J.  Penn's  on  Wednesday ;  perhaps  not  at  all, 
for  we  go  on  Thursday  to  the  Duke  of  Argyll's,  and  shall 
probably  stay  till  Saturday.  Allow  us,  therefore,  to  lay  a  plan 
already  for  next  week,  and  to  beg  the  favour  of  seeing  you  to- 
morrow se'nnight,  which  will  be  the  2Ist.  Without  a  little 
arrangement  and  consideration  beforehand,  I  find  one's  time 
passes  away  in  London  '  nee  recte,  nee  suaviter,'  while  we  ensure 
both  when  we  are  lucky  enough  to  spend  the  evening  with  you. 

M.  Beert. 

P.S. — Do  tell  me  where  Mrs.  Darner  lives ;  though  we  are 
not  to  have  the  pleasure  of  being  admitted  till  next  week  we 
wish  no  longer  to  delay  leaving  our  name  at  her  door. 

The  note  subjoined  is  also  without  date  of  month : 

Saturday  afternoon. 

Was  I  to  begin  thanking  you,  when  should  I  have  done  ? 

and  what  is  three  tickets,  or  three  dozen  tickets  for  any  show 

upon  earth  in  comparison  of  my  other  obligations  to  you,  in 

comparison  of  that  flattering  regard,  that  lively  interest,  that  real 

*  To  Miss  Pitt. 
p  2 


212-  LETTERS.  [1790 

friendship,  with  which  upon  every  occasion  you  act  towards  us  ? 
Believe  me,  and  it  is  all  I  feel  able  to  say,  it  is  not  lost  upon 
us ;  we  feel  it  all,  and  the  impossibility  of  ever  thanking  you 
for  such  obligations.  For  tickets  to  the  trial,*  to  anybody  else  I 
could  write  a  fine  note,  to  you  it  is  impossible.  M.  B. 

On  the  10th  of  October  Mr.  Berry  and  his  daughters 
left  England,  and  the  letter  of  that  day  is  too  touchingly 
descriptive  of  the  writer's  feelings  not  to  be  here  inserted, 
though  it  is  amongst  the  few  that  are  already  printed 
without  omissions. 

[Sunday,  Oct.  10,  1790 ;   tlie  day  of  yr  departure. 

Is  it  possible  to  write  to  my  beloved  friends  and  refrain  from 
speaking  of  my  grief  for  losing  you,  though  it  is  but  the  con- 
tinuation of  what  I  have  felt  ever  since  I  was  stunned  by  your 
intention  of  going  abroad  this  autumn.  Still  I  will  not  tire 
you  with  it  often.  In  happy  days  I  smiled  and  called  you 
my  dear  wives — now,  I  can  only  think  on  you  as  darling 
children,  of  whom  I  am  bereaved !  As  such  I  have  loved  and  do 
love  you ;  and  charming  as  you  both  are,  I  have  had  no  occasion 
to  remind  myself  that  I  am  past  73.  Your  hearts,  your  under- 
standings, your  virtues,  and  the  cruel  injustice  of  your  fate,  have 
interested  me  in  everything  that  concerns  you ;  and  so  far  from 
having  occasion  to  blush  for  any  unbecoming  weakness,  I  am 
proud  of  my  affection  for  you,  and  very  proud  of  your  con- 
descending to  pass  so  many  hours  with  a  very  old  man,  when 
everybody  admires  you,  and  the  most  insensible  allow  that  your 
good  sense  and  information  (I  speak  of  both)  have  formed  you  to 
converse  with  the  most  intelligent  of  our  sex  as  well  as  your  own ; 
and  neither  can  tax  you  with  airs  of  pretension  or  affectation. 
Your  simplicity  and  natural  ease  set  off  all  your  other  merits — 
all  these  graces  are  lost  to  me,  alas  !  when  I  have  no  time  to  lose ! 

"Sensible  as  I  am  to  my  loss,  it  will  occupy  but  part  of  my 
thoughts  till  I  know  you  safely  landed,  and  arrived  safely  at 
Turin.  Not  till  you  are  there,  and  I  learn  so,  will  my  anxiety 
subside  and  settle  into  steady  selfish  sorrow.  I  looked  at  every 
weathercock  as  I  came  along  the  road  to-day,  and  was  happy  to 
see  every  one  point  north-east — may  they  do  so  to-morrow  ! 

*  Trial,  proloaMy,  of  Warren  Hastings. 


1790]  "walpole's  eegret  at  the  beeeys'  depaetdee.  213 

I  found  here  the  frame  for  Wolsey,*  and  to-morrow  morning 
Kirgate  will  place  him  in  it,  and  then  I  shall  begin  pulling  the 
little  parlour  to  pieces  that  it  may  be  hung  anew  to  receive 
him.  I  have  also  obeyed  Miss  Agnes,  tho'  with  regret,  for  on 
trying  it  I  found  her  Arcadia  would  fit  the  place  of  the  picture 
she  condemned,  which  shall,  therefore,  be  hung  in  its  room, 
tho'  the  latter  should  give  way  to  nothing  else,  nor  shall  be 
laid  aside,  but  shall  haog  where  I  shall  see  it  almost  as  often. 
I  long  to  hear  that  its  dear  paintress  is  well ;  I  thought  her  not 
at  all  so  last  night.  You  will  tell  me  the  truth,  though  she  in 
her  own  case,  and  in  that  alone,  allows  herself  mental  reser- 
vation. 

Forgive  me  for  writing  nothing  to-night  but  about  you  two 
and  myself.  Of  what  can  I  have  thought  else  ?  I  have  not 
spoken  to  a  single  person  but  my  own  servants  since  we  parted 
last  night.  I  found  a  message  here  from  Miss  Howe  f  to  invite 
me  for  this  evening.  Do  you  think  I  have  not  preferred  staying 
at  home  to  write  to  you,  as  this  must  go  to  London  to-morrow 
morning  by  the  coach  to  be  ready  for  Tuesday's  post?  My 
future  letters  shall  talk  of  other  things,  whenever  I  know  any- 
thingworth  repeating — or  perhaps  any  trifle,  for  I  am  determined 
to  forbid  myself  lamentations  that  would  weary  you ;  and  the 
frequency  of  my  letters  will  prove  there  is  no  forgetfulness.  If 
I  live  to  see  you  again,  you  will  then  judge  whether  I  am  changed 
— ^but  a  friendship  so  rational  and  so  pure  as  mine  is,  and  so 
equal  for  both,  is  not  likely  to  have  any  of  the  fickleness  of 
youth,  when  it  has  none  of  its  other  ingredients.  It  was  a  sweet 
consolation  to  the  short  time  that  I  may  have  left,  to  fall  into  such 
a  society — no  wonder  then  that  I  am  unhappy  at  that  consolation 
being  abridged.  I  pique  myself  on  no  philosophy  but  what  a 
long  use  and  knowledge  of  the  world  had  given  me,  the  philo- 
sophy of  indifference  to  most  persons  and  events.  I  do  pique 
myself  on  not  being  ridiculous  at  this  very  late  period  of  my 
life  ;  but  when  there  is  not  a  grain  of  passion  in  my  affection  for 
you  two,  and  when  you  both  have  the  good  sense  not  to  be  dis- 
pleased at  my  telling  you  so  (though  I  hope  you  would  have 
despised  me  for  the  contrary),  I  am  not  ashamed  to  say  that 

*  Drawing  by  Miss  Agnes  Berry. 

t  An  vmmajried  sister  of  the  first  Eail  Howe,  then  living  at  Eich- 
Biond, 


214  MISS  beeey's  JOUENAL.  [1?90 

yoiir  loss  is  heavy  to  me  ;  and  that  I  am  only  reconciled  to  it 
by  hoping  that  a  winter  in  Italy,  and  the  journies  and  sea  air 
will  be  very  beneficial  to  two  constitutions  so  delicate  as  yours. 
Adieu  !  my  dearest  friends.  It  would  be  tautology  to  subscribe 
a  name  to  a  letter,  every  line  of  which  would  suit  no  other  man 
in  the  world  but  the  writer.] 


JOURNAL, 

London:  1790. 

Sunday,  October  \^ih. — ^Left  JSTorth  Audley  Street  at 
half-past  11  A.M. ;  arrived  at  the  Old  Ship  at  Brighthelm- 
stone  at  half- past  eight.* 

Monday,  Wth. — Sailed  at  6  p.m.  onboard  the  Speedwell 
sloop  of  forty  tons,  Captain  Lyn,  which  we  hired,  paying 
eight  guineas  and  a  half ;  the  captain  put  our  carriage  and 
baggage  aboard.  The  wind  fair,  and  we  got  over  to  the 
coast  of  France  in  little  more  than  twelve  hours,  but  were 
twenty-four  before  we  made  Dieppe. 

Tuesday,  12th. — Arrived  at  the  H6tel  du  Grand  Cerf 
k  Dieppe,  having  been  exactly  twenty-four  hours  on  board 
our  vessel.  I  went  to  bed  the  instant  we  got  aboard,  and 
never  moved  hand  or  foot  tUl  I  got  into  the  boat  to  be 
landed  at  Dieppe.  The  inn  much  better  than  I  expected. 
We  got  tea  and  supper,  and  to  bed  as  fast  as  we  could. 

I  had  heard  Dieppe  spoken  of  as  much  the  dirtiest  town 
in  Prance :  it  certainly  by  no  means  deserves  that  descrip- 
tion; the  streets  are  straight  and  tolerably  wide,  the  houses 
for  the  most  part  ill-built,  and  immediately  after  leaving 
English  neatness,  give  one  the  idea  of  being  half  in  ruins. 
There  is  a  fine  sea  view  from  an  old  castle  f  guarded  by 
some  invalids,  to  which  my  father  and  I  walked. 

*  A  journey  of  nine  lioiira,  now  performed  in  one  hour  and  a  half. 

f  This  castle  afforded  a  refuge  to  Henri  IV.  when  retreating  before  the 
army  of  the  League.  In  1650  the  Duchess  de  Longueville  took  refuge  here 
when  pursued  by  the  yengeanoe  of  Mazarin  and  Anne  of  Austria.  The 
castle  has  been  repaired,  and  is  used  as  a  barrack. — Murray's  Handbook. 


1790]  AEEIVAIi  AT  PARIS.  215 

Wednesday,  loth ^Arrived  at  I'H&tel  Vatel  at  Eouen. 

The  road  excellent,  and  we  went  nearly  as  fast  as  we  should 
have  posted  in  England.  Eouen  is  a  large  populous  town, 
the  streets  remarkably  narrow  even  for  this  country.  The 
Quay  to  the  Seine,  which  is  here  as  broad  as  the  Thames 
at  Kew  Bridge  and  crowded  with  vessels,  must  be  above 
a  mile  long,  fuU  of  people  and  business,  and  very  broad, 
gay,  and  bustling.  The  cathedral  a  noble  Gotliic  building, 
highly  ornamented  on  the  outside,  and  within  inferior  to 
nothing  I  have  ever  seen  except  York  Minster.  The 
choir  enclosed  with  a  polished  brass  open  screen,  the 
great  west  door  of  the  church  has  the  same  impropriety 
(but  without  any  of  the  same  beauty  to  apologise  for  it), 
as  our  cathedral  at  Winchester,  viz.,  a  front  of  Grecian 
architecture.  The  shops  in  Eouen  are  aU  open  to  the 
street,  without  vdndows  or  any  sort  of  defence  from  the 
weather,  and  the  women  by  whom  they  are  universally 
served  sit  there  from  morning  to  night,  at  all  seasons 
with  a  Httle  chaufiette  under  their  feet.  Here  we  found 
ourselves  obliged  to  alter  our  intended  course;  for  our 
bankers,  Garvie  &  Co.,  could  not  give  us  51.  in  money  in- 
stead of  60^.  which  we  wanted — as  much  as  we  pleased  in 
assignats  of  800  florins  each,  but  money  of  any  sort  was 
not  to  be  had  at  Eouen ;  so  that  instead  of  going  from 
St.  Germains  to  Versailles,  and  avoiding  Paris,  we  were 
obliged  to  go  there  in  search  of  money — that  one  thing 
needful,  above  aU  on  a  journey. 

Thursday,  lith. — Left  Eouen;  the  road  along  the  banks 
of  the  Seine  beautifiil.  At  Gaillon  is  a  magnificent  old 
chateau,  in  the  real  castle  style,  with  turrets,  &c.,  &c.,  be- 
longing to  the  Archbishop  of  Eouen,  the  Cardinal  de  la 
Eochefoucauld,  who  from  20,000Z.  a  year,  half  of  which 
they  own  he  gave  in  charity,  is  reduced  to  1,500Z.  Lay  at 
Mantes. 

Friday,  15th. — Arrived  at  Paris;  drove  to  the  Hotel 
d'Orleans,  Eue  des  Petits  Augustins;  took  the  apartment  au 


216  MISS  beret's  journal.  [1796 

second  at  123.  per  day.  Found  a  laquais  de  place,  known 
to  the  house,  ready  for  us  on  the  staircase ;  got  a  very 
good  dinner  from  a  traiteur  in  less  than  an  hour,  and  found 
ourselves  as  weU  arranged  and  as  much  at  home  as  if  we 
had  been  here  a  month.  1  know  no  other  place  where 
one  can  have  so  many  comforts  in  so  short  a  time.  The 
approach  to  Paris  from  St.  Germain-en-Laye,  and  more  par- 
ticularly from  the  beautiful  Pont  de  Feuilly,  is  worthy  to 
lead  to  what  the  people  of  this  country  delight  to  call  the 
first  city  in  the  world.  The  first  city  in  the  world  is  at 
present  much  in  deshabille  ;  for  what  with  the  number  of 
emigrants  caused  by  the  violence  and  prejudices  of  the 
people,  the  number  of  others  who,  without  being  actually 
in  danger,  choose  to  stand  aloof,  and  see  how  matters  wiU 
go,  together  with  another  description  of  people,  perhaps 
not  less  numerous,  who  from  motives  of  economy  and 
quiet  have  retired  to  their  own  country-houses,  or  to  those 
of  their  relations,  or  to  the  provincial  towns — the  streets  of 
Paris,  the  Palais  Eoyal,  the  Tuileries — ^in  short,  all  places 
of  public  resort,  exhibit  a  very  difierent  appearance,  and 
seem  filled  with  very  different  people,  from  what  I  re- 
member them  five  years  ago.  The  streets  are  fuU  of  fiacres 
and  carts,  hardly  a  gentleman's  carriage  or  a  voiture  de 
remise  to  be  seen,  at  least  not  one  for  twenty,  and  the  Pa- 
lais Eoyal  and  Tuileries  fiUed  with  people  of  the  lowest 
class,  with  a  very  small  proportion  of  those  one  can  sup- 
pose above  it. 

Saturday^  l&th. — Monsieur  de  Levis,*  to  whom  we 

*  Le  Due  Pierre  Marc-Gastin  de  Levis,  son  of  Marshal  Levis,  was  chosen 
D^put6  de  la  Noblesse  of  Dijon  at  the  age  of  tvfenty-five.  He  adopted  the 
principles  of  the  Revolution,  but  always  with  great  moderation.  After  the 
events  of  the  10th  of  August  1792,  he  quitted  Paris  and  joined  the  army  of 
the  Princes,  where  he  served  as  a  private  soldier.  He  was  wounded  in  the 
Quiberon  expedition,  and  came  over  to  England,  where  he  published  a 
funeral  oration  on  Louis  XVI.  and  on  Marie  Antoinette.  He  returned  to 
Prance  after  the  18th  Brumaire,  1808,  but  occupied  himself  only  with  litera- 
ture. In  1814  he  was  included  in  the  first  promotion  of  Peers,  and  again 
took  part  in  public  affairs,  as  well  as  in  literary  pursuits :  died  Feb.  1830* — * 
Biog.  NouveUe  des  Contemporaim, 


1790]  PAEIS — THE   NATIONAL  ASSEMBLY.  217 

had  sent,  called  upon  us  in  the  morning.  Agreed  to  meet 
him  upon  the  terrace  of  the  Tuileries  at  half-past  two 
o'clock,  to  go,  if  possible,  into  the  National  Assembly. 
In  the  meantime  drove  to  the  Porte  St.  Antoine.  Saw 
the  remams  of  the  Bastile  ;  it  is  now  levelled  with  the 
bottom  of  the  fosse,  and  the  stones  piled  up  upon  every 
side.  There  are  still  a  number  of  people  at  work  digging 
up  the  foundations.  It  is,  they  say,  to  be  levelled  to  the 
surface  of  the  ground,  and  a  Place  built,  to  be  called  that 
of  Louis  Seize. 

From  the  Porte  St.  Antoine,  drove  round  the  Boule- 
vards, which,  in  spite  of  their  natural  gaiety,  have  the  same 
neglected  look  with  the  rest  of  the  town.  The  Ambigu 
Comique,  the  Theatre  Lyrique,  and  all  the  little  Spectacles 
of  the. Boulevards,  have  got  new  fronts  to  their  theatres  — 
all  of  them  architectural,  all  of  them  after  the  antique,  and 
by  no  means  in  bad  taste  ;  indeed,  I  cannot  help  thinking 
the  taste  for  architecture  at  present  in  Paris  much  better 
than  ours  in  London.  All  their  late  buildings  are  divided 
into  few  and  large  parts,  and  have  an  air  of  grandeur  that 
we  have  never  yet  been  able  to  attain  in  London.  Wit- 
ness that  enormous  mass  of  httlenesses  aA,  Somerset  House. 
The  colonnade  of  the  gay  and  beautiful  faQade  of  the  Place 
de  Louis  Quinze  struck  me,  however,  upon  this  second 
view  of  it,  as  somewhat  meagre,  and  hable  to  the  very 
objection  I  have  just  been  making  to  our  buildings — 
that  of  being  divided  into  too  small  parts. 

At  half-past  two  found  M.  de  Levis  waiting  for  us  in 
the  Terrace  des  Peuillans  in  the  Tuileries.  The  SaUe  of 
the  National  Assembly  joins  it,  and  is  what  was  formerly 
a  Manege.  We  entered  it  under  the  auspices  of  our  friend 
M.  de  Levis,  who  is  Depute  de  la  Noblesse  de  Dijon. 

The  members  have  aU  in  their  turn,  alphabetically,  so 
many  tickets  to  give  away.  It  was  not  his  turn,  but  as 
the  debate  was  a  dry  one- — upon  the  equal  taxation  of 
different  sorts  of  hiens  fonder s — many  people  had  left 


218  MISS  berry's  journal.  [1790 

the  gallery,  and  we  got  very  good  places.  The  room  is 
long,  very  commodiously  fitted  up  for  the  purpose,  with 
six  or  seven  rows  of  benches,  one  above  another,  all  round, 
and  covered  with  green  cloth,  and  a  door,  such  as  is  in  our 
Westminster  Hall  fitted  up  for  a  court  of  justice.  In  the 
middle  of  one  side  sits  the  President  at  a  small  table, 
elevated  as  high  as  the  last  row  of  benches ;  and  under 
him  is  another  larger  table,  at  which  sit  the  clerks  and 
short-hand  writers.  Opposite  the  President  is  a  sort  of 
pulpit,  in  which  those  who  wish  to  make  a  speech  place 
themselves  ;  those  who  have  only  an  amendment  to  move, 
an  objection  to  make,  or  only  wish  to  say  a  few  words, 
speak  in  their  place.  While  we  were  present,  there  were 
seldom  fewer  than  three  or  four  speaking  at  once — often 
many  more — ^with  such  a  noise  that  it  was  impossible 
anything  could  be  heard  ;  the  President  in  vain  ringing  a 
great  bell,  which  stands  by  him  on  the  table,  by  way  of 
enforcing  silence  or  drowning  other  noises,  and  the  criers 
in  vain  demanding  it ;  and  when  at  last  some  one  with 
strong  lungs  and  much  perseverance  overcame  the  rest, 
he  never  got  a  hearing  for  more  than  three  or  four  sen- 
tences, ia  the  course  of  which  something  was  sure  to 
occur  which  met  with  the  approbation,  or  blame,  of  the 
major  part  of  the  Assembly,  and  was  expressed  in  an 
equally  vociferous  manner  by  every  individual  according 
to  his  own  particular  sentiments.  Their  appearance  is 
not  more  gentlemanhke  than  their  manner  of  debating  > — 
such  a  set  of  shabby,  ill-dressed,  strange-looking  people  I 
hardly  ever  saw  together.  Our  House  of  Commons  is  not 
half  so  bad.  The  aristocratical  party — for  such  a  party 
there  is  even  in  the  National  Assembly,  and  a  party  which, 
after  the  present  rage  for  reformation  is  over,  and  the 
people  have  found  that  their  representatives  have  destroyed 
much  without  having  estabhshed  anything  in  its  place — 
will  then  come  forward,  and  perhaps  have  it  in  their 
power  (if  really  good  patriots)  to  settle  a  good  constitution, 


1790]  VISIT   TO   THE   CHAMP   DE   MAES.  219 

and  to  restore  the  degraded  monarch  to  that  degree  of 
power  which,  in  a  great  country  like  this,  it  is  perhaps 
necessary  he  should  have,  to  secure  the  hberties  of  the 
people.*  When  the  Assemblee  broke  up  at  four  o'clock, 
we  returned  to  our  hotel. 

After  dinner,  went  to  the  Champ  de  Mars,  now  called 
Le  Champ  de  la  Confederation.  M.  de  Levis,  who  had 
much  recommended  our  seeing  it,  called  upon  us  just  as 
we  were  stepping  into  the  carriage,  and  accompanied  us, 
which  was  pleasant,  as  he  explained  where  everybody  sat, 
how  they  came  in,  &c.,  &c.  I  should  indeed  have  been 
sorry  not  to  have  seen  what  I  think  more  truly  in  good 
taste  and  in  great  style  of  anything  I  ever  saw  in  France. 
The  sort  of  covered  pavilion,  under  which  sat  the  king, 
the  Etats,  &c.,  &c.,  groups  so  well  with  the  higher  edifice 
of  the  Ecole  Militaire,  which  it  joins  by  a  covered  passage ; 
the  enclosure  is  so  large  and  so  well  encadre  by  the 
trees  round  it,  and  the  altar  in  the  middle,  though  only 
composed  of  canvass  and  boards,  is  in  such  perfect  good 
taste,  that  it  puts  one  in  mind  of  N.  Poussin's  fine  ideal 
landscapes  of  Greece.  "We  saw  it  aU  by  the  finest  moon- 
light that  ever  was,  which  perhaps  was  not  without  its 
effect  upon  the  whole  scene. 

*  The  following  extraordinary  performance,  that  took  place  in  the 
National  Assemhly  a  few  months  earlier,  presents  even  a  stronger  pictui'e  of 
the  ■wild  absurdities  into  ■which  men  in  a  deliberative  assembly  could  be  led 
by  the  excitement  ■which  then  prevailed  over  reason  and  sense  : — 

'  L' Assemblee  NATioifAi^. 

*  Le  President  annonce  qu'une  deputation  va  paroitre,  et  qu'elle  est  com- 
posge  d'Anglois,  de  Prusses,  d'Hollandois,  de  Russes,  de  Polonois,  d'vUle- 
mands,  de  Su^dois,  d'ltaliens,  d'Espagnols,  de  Brabanpons,  de  Li^gois, 
d'A-yignonais,  de  Suisses,  de  G^nevois,  d'Indiens,  d'Arabes,  et  de  Chald^es.' 
They  ■were  headed  by  a  Baron  de  Cloots  du  Val  de  Gr^ce,  ■who  acted  as 
'leur  orateur.'  They  demanded  to  have  a  place  allotted  for  them  on  the 
day  of  the  Confederation  in  the  Champs  de  Mars,  ■which  ■was  granted  by 
acclamation,  and  their  speaker  from  that  day  received  the  title  of  '  I'Orateur 
du  Genre  Humain.' 

N.B. — ^His  name  -was  Baptiste  Cloots,  but  he  called  himself  afterwards 
Anacharsis,  to  avoid  a  Scriptural  name. 


220  MISS  BEEET'S  JOUENAL.  [1790 

Sunday,  17th. — Left  Paris,  very  much  satisfied  with 
the  few  hours  we  spent  there,  and  glad  to  have  seen  Paris 
in  the  very  particular  situation  to  which  the  present  state 
of  Prance  has  reduced  it.  At  Ponthierry,  on  the  opposite 
bank  of  the  river  Yonne,  stands  the  fine  gay-looking 
chateau  of  the  Duke  of  Orleans  at  St.  Assis.  There  are 
fine  woods  about  it,  and  the  country  and  banks  of  the 
river  very  beautiful.  At  Chailly,  a  post  and  a  half  from 
Fontainebleau,  we  observed  that  the  bed  of  the  carriage 
was  broken.  After  some  delay,  continued  our  route,  and 
arrived  at  Fontainebleau ;  the  roads  perfectly  good,  and 
they  drive  faster  than  in  England.  The  ForSt  de  Fontaine- 
bleau is  one  of  the  most  romantic  and  beautiful  parks 
imaginable,  and  singular  from  the  large  abrupt  masses  of 
rocks  scattered  everywhere  in  the  midst  of  a  flat  country. 
It  always  puts  me  in  mind  of  Plumpton,  in  Yorkshire ; 
but  the  rocks  here  are  more  considerable,  and  all  covered 
with  common  and  weeping  birches,  which  add  much  to 
their  beauty.  The  Hotel  du  Grand  Cerf  inconceivably 
bad  in  a  town  where,  from  being  the  occasional  residence 
of  the  court,  a  number  of  strangers' of  distinction  must 
sometimes  lodge.  Walked  in  the  gardens  of  the  chateau : 
these  were  fuU  of  aU  sorts  of  people,  in  their  hohday 
clothes,  which  the  moment  a  French  man  or  woman  put 
on,  they  are  anxious  to  show  themselves.  In  the  park, 
just  without  the  garden,  there  was  a  large  sort  of  tem- 
porary building,  where  not  less  than  three  or  four  hundred 
of  the  common  people  were  dancing  away  most  merrily, 
both  French  and  Enghsh  country  dances ;  and  though 
without  much  grace,  better  than  any  other  common  people 
in  the  world  dance.  We  did  not  go  into  the  apartments 
of  the  chateau,  which  we  had  formerly  visited ;  it  is 
an  enormous  building,  and  is  computed  to  have  8,600 
chimneys. 

Monday,  \%th.  —  The  Charon  at  Fontainebleau,  as 
usual,  not  getting  his  work,  done  as  soon  as  he  promised, 


1790]  NEVEES.  221 

"we  could  not  leave  Fontainebleau  tiU  twelve  o'clock;  the 
first  two  posts  to  JSTemours,  through  the  forest,  and  beau- 
tiful.    Slept  at  Nogent,  a  poor  little  village. 

Tuesday,  19^A. — At  Briare,  we  came  upon  the  banks  of 
the  Loire,  which  runs  through  a  large  and  highly  culti- 
vated vaUey.      At  Cosne  and  Pouilly,  two  wretched  httle 
towns  or  bourgs,  they  plague  you  to  buy  knives  and 
gloves  they  manufacture — their  importunity  is  excessive  at 
the  door  of  the  carriage.      The  people  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  La  Charite  were  in  the  middle  of  their  vendange, 
and  the  postilions  we  got  from  thence  to  Pougues  were 
drunk  (an  uncommon  case  in  France),  and  nearly  over- 
turned and  broke  our  carriage  to  pieces  in  galloping  out 
of  the  town.  Lay  at  Pougues ;  tolerable  inn,  civil  people. 
Wednesday,  20iA. — The  road  from  Pougues  to  Nevers 
through  a  rich  enclosed  country,  very  hke  the  best  part 
of  England.    Nevers  is  a  considerable  town.     We  were 
obhged  to  stop  for  nearly  an  hour,  to  get  the  sabot  of  our 
carriage  mended.    The  streets  through  which  we  passed 
were  all  up  hiU  and  down,  and,  after  a  long  course  of  fine 
dry  weather,  were  as  wet  as  if  the  middle  of  winter.  There 
is  a  great  manufacture  of  the  very  coarsest  sort  of  fai- 
ence and  earthenware  at  Nevers,  which  is  sent  down  the 
river.     The  women  make  and  bring  to  the  inn  beadwork, 
baskets,  and  little  toys,  which  they  call  de  Vouvrage  a 
petits  grains.     The  town  in  general  has  the  appearance 
of  much  poverty.     One  passes  a  long  stone  bridge  over 
the  Loire,  but  the  country  hereabouts  all  corn-fields  and 
pasturage,  enclosed  with  hedges  ;  no  vines  from  the  south 
of  Pougues  till  near  Eoanne.    Moulins  is  a  wretched-look- 
ing town.     The  tomb  of  the  Duke  of  Montmorency,  be- 
headed in  the  time  of  Louis  Treize,*  and  which  his  wife, 
Marie  Orsini,  erected  to  his  memory  twenty  years  after 
his  death,  in  the  church  of  the  Visitandines,  to  which 
she  retired,  is  grand.    The  sarcophagus  of  black  marble 

*  Executed  at  Toulouse  in  1632.  ' 


222  MISS  BEEET'S  JOUEIiTAL.  [1790 

upon  whicli  the  figure  of  the  Duke  reposes  is  noble  from 
its  size  and  colour ;  but  that  of  his  wife,  who  is  in  a  weep- 
ing attitude  behind  him,  does  not  group  with  it :  still  less 
do  the  figures  of  Strength  and  LiberaKty,  which  are  sitting 
in  niches  far  below  the  sarcophagus,  and  do  not  seem  to 
have  anything  to  do  with  the  principal  figure,  but  the 
sculpture  of  the  Hercules,  representing  Strength,  is  very 
good.  Seeing  this  tomb,  and  some  delay  about  horses, 
detained  us  at  Moulins  for  above  an  hour,  and  we  did  not 
arrive  at  La  Varenne  till  near  nine  o'clock. 

Thursday,  21st. — The  country  about  La  Palisse  and  Droi- 
turier  finely  waved  and  covered  with  low  woods.  At  La 
Palisse,  a  romantic  old  chateau  belonging  to  and  inhabited 
by  an  old  Marquis  de  la  Palisse.  The  Loire  is  first  navi- 
gable at  Eoanne,  and  covered  with  large  roughly  con- 
structed boats,  which  are  all  sold  and  broken  up  down 
the  river. 

Friday,  22nd. — Prom  St.  Symphorien  to  La  Fontaine, 
from  La  Fontaine  to  Tarare,  cross  the  mountain  of  Tarare, 
one  of  the  longest  hills  I  ever  saw  ;  bullocks,  as  well  as 
horses,  are  obliged  to  be  put  to  the  carriage.  The  country 
hereabouts,  and  indeed  from  Eoanne,  like  the  lowest  re- 
gion of  the  Alps  ;  flat-topped  houses  and  villages  perched 
upon  hills,  more  like  the  paysage  of  Italy  than  any  other 
part  of  France  that  I  have  seen.  The  environs  to  Lyons, 
by  whichever  way  it  is  approached,  are  beautiful.  Ar- 
rived at  the  H6tel  de  Provence,  and  were  much  disap- 
pointed at  finding  our  old  acquaintance,  Mme.  Giraud, 
had  left  that  house  and  kept  another  h6tel  of  the  same 
name ;  we  agreed  for  a  saUe  and  three  bedrooms,  at 
twelve  livres  a  day. 

Saturday,  22,rd. — Sent  for  M.  Pels,  the  civil  Kttle  banker 
from  whom  we  had  formerly  got  money,  and  went  to 
several  shops,  and  in  the  evening  to  the  play,  where 
Mdlle.  St.  Val  happens  to  be  acting  for  a  few  nights.  She 
pleased  me  much,  though  in  an  uninteresting  character 


1790]  BOUEGOIN.  223 

in  Crebillon's  '  Ehadamiste  et  Zenobie.'  She  has  a  charm- 
ing tone  of  voice,  speaks  well,  without  either  ranting  or 
affectation ;  her  figure  and  face  not  remarkable — ni  en 
Men,  ni  en  mal. 

Sunday,  2ith. — It  raiaed  all  day.  Spoke  to  two  or  three 
different  voituriers,  all  so  unreasonable  in  their  demands, 
asking  us  nearly  the  double  of  what  we  had  formerly  paid. 
Monday,  2bth. — The  voituriers  refusing  to  go  for  less 
than  thirty-six  louis,  setting  us  down  at  Turin,  we  deter- 
mined to  take  the  post  to  Chamberri.  Slept  at  Bourgoin, 
a  poor  little  town, 

Tuesday,  26th.  —  The  postilion,  in  leaving  Bourgoin, 
stopped  us  at  a  corps  de  garde  nationale,  where  our  passe- 
port  was  demanded,  which  was  one  from  the  French  Am- 
bassador in  London,  which  had  been  signed  by  the 
Mayor  at  Lyons.  Our  carriage  was  immediately  sur- 
rounded by  a  number  of  people  without  uniforms  or  any- 
thing else  to  distinguish  them,  who,  whilst  they  were 
examining  our  passeport  and  asking  eagerly  if  we  were 
French  people,  told  us  they  must  search  our  trunks  '  pas 
pour  la  contrebande,  mais  pour  des  papiers.'  This  wise 
demand,  an  officer  of  the  regular  troops  told  us,  there  was 
no  avoiding  ;  when  he  went  into  the  guard-room  with  us 
he  told  us  he  saw  all  the  folly,  and  wished  he  could  pre- 
vent what  they  were  doing,  but  did  not  dare,  for  fear  they 
should  fall  upon  him,  or  complain  he  did  not  do  his  duty. 
Two  or  three  of  them  immediately  mounted  upon  the  back 
of  the  carriage  and  began  rummaging  over  everything  in 
the  large  trunk  behind^  where,  certainly,  if  we  had  been 
conspirators,  it  would  have  been  mighty  likely  we  should 
put  our  papers !  One  of  them — a  saucy  lad  who  called 
himself  a  corporal,  and  was  foremost  in  turning  everythiag 
dessus  dessous — when  I  asked  him  if  he  was  content,  re- 
plied in  the  most  impertinent  manner,  '  Non,  je  ne  suis  pas 
content,  et  ne  parlez  pas  tant  vous,  cela  ne  vous  fera  aucun 
bien.'     Another  of  them,  observing  something  sticking 


224  MISS  beret's  journal.  [1790 

out  of  our  courier's  pocket,  came  behind  him  and  took 
them  out;  they  happened  to  be  bills  of  the  h6tel  at  Lyons, 
which,  I  hope,  reheved  the  fears  of  the  patriot.  Upon  the 
officers  coming  out  again,  and  telling  them  that  our  passe- 
port  was  a  perfectly  good  one,  that  they  saw,  or  rather 
heard,  we  were  English,  and  that  having  searched  our 
trunk  they  need  not  look  farther,  we  were  allowed  to  pro- 
ceed; the  officer  having  put  upon  our  passeport  '■vu  et 
fouilU,'  which  he  said  would  prevent  our  being  searched 
again  at  the  Pont  de  Beauvoisin.  I  really  began  to  dread 
being  searched  at  every  village.  No  such  thing,  however, 
happened  ;  and  at  the  Pont,  our  passeport  was  only  shown 
to  the  commandant,  a^d  no  further  trouble  given  us  about 
papers  ;  our  trunks  and  imperial  were  just  opened  at  the 
douane.  At  the  Pont  of  Beauvoisin,  one  passes  the  Guiers, 
which  separates  France  from  Savoy.  From  thence  one  soon 
gets  into  Alpine  scenery,  mounting  up  the  side  of  the  hiU 
with  the  stream  running  in  some  places  at  an  immense 
depth  below.  Between  Les  Echelles  and  St.  Jean  des  Coups 
one  passes  by  Le  Chemin  de  la  Grotte,a  curious  passage  cut 
through  the  solid  rock  by  Emanuel,  Duke  of  Savoy,*  in  I 
forget  what  year.  There  is  an  inscription  at  the  entrance, 
saying  when  and  by  whom  done,  and  mentioning  it  as  a 
workf  Romanis  intentatum  ceteris  desperatum.  It  is  ex- 
cessively steep  and  narrow,  paved  with  stones,  and  winds 
through  the  steep  bare  rock  which  rises  hke  a  wall  on  each 
side,  and  seems  to  shut  up  both  ends;  our  six  wretched 
post-horses  absolutely  refused  drawing  the  carriage,  and  we 
were  indebted  to  the  assistance  of  a  number  of  peasants 
pushing  behind,  who  I  fancy  attend  all  carriages  they  see 
going  up  the  mountain.     Arrived  at  Chamberri. 

Wednesday,  11th. — After  much  talking  and  trouble,  we 
settled  with  a  voiturier  to  carry  us  to  Turin,  with  four 
horses  for  our  carriage  and  a  bidet  for  one  of  the  servants, 

*  Duke  Charles  Emanuel  of  Savoy,  in  1670. 

t  Written  by  tlie  Abbg  St.  Real,  bom  at  Chamberri,  1639. 


1790]  CHAMBfiET.  225 

for  twenty-six  louis  d'or,  as  much  as  we  paid  five  years 
ago  from  Tm-in  to  Geneva,  a  two  days'  longer  journey ;  but, 
before  our  agreement  was  drawn  up,  the  man  said  that  we 
could  only  make  half  a  day's  journey,  which  would  bring 
us  to  bad  inns  every  night.  Having  once  before  expe- 
rienced the  inconveniences  of  this,  we  did  not  set  out  till 
the  next  morning.  I  walked  all  over  the  town  of  Cham- 
bery  with  my  father,  over  the  shoes  in  mud.  Saw  the 
Palace,*  a  large  castle  sort  of  building,  round  an  irregular 
court.  The  king's  apartment  is  demeuhU  every  winter, 
and  in  this  condition  we  saw  it.  In  the  evening,  walked 
through  the  mud  to  the  theatre ;  it  would  have  held 
Drury  Lane  within  it.  There  was  a  large  box  in  the 
middle  for  the  court,  but  so  empty  a  theatre  I  think  I 
never  saw  :  there  might  be  about  thirty  people  in  the  pit, 
not  near  a  dozen  in  the  boxes,  including  ourselves,  and 
yet  we  had  'Les  Deux  Meces'  and  '  L'Amant  Bourru,'  very 
tolerably  acted ;  and  a  very  tolerable  orchestra,  com- 
posed, I  fancy,  of  the  band  of  the  regiment.  In  the  next 
box  to  us  sat  a  French  cordon-hleu,  and  another  gentle- 
man, with  whom  I  had  some  conversation.  I  found  he 
was  an  officer  in  the  French  Garde  du  Corps,  and  had 
escaped  from  Paris  after  the  memorable  days  of  October 
last.  He  said  he  had  been  at  Chambery  ever  since,  and 
that  it  was  wonderful  the  number  of  French  scattered  all 
over  Savoy  and  Piedmont. 

Thursday,  2^th. — Left  Chambery.  The  day  was  very 
fine,  and  we  walked,  I  dare  say,  four  or  five  miles.  It  is 
impossible  to  describe  the  subhme  beauties  of  every  inch 
of  the  road,  which  made  a  hardly  less  strong  impression 
upon  me  at  this  third  view  than  they  did  the  first  time. 

Friday,  29th. — Left  Aiguebelle  at  6  a.m.;  arrived  at  La 
Chambre  about  ten.    Finding  we  made  our  first  stage 

*  Several  towers  and  other  fragments  exist  of  the  ancient  castle  of  the 
Dukes  of  Savoy.  The  Gothic  chapel  built  within  its  enclosure,  1415,  sur-- 
vjved  the  conflagration  of  1798. — Murray's  Handbook.. 

VOL.  I.  Q. 


226  MISS  beekt's  journal.  [1790 

so  easily,  we  begged  our  voiturier  to  change  the  dinner 
into  a  breakfast — giving  bread,  butter,  and  milk,  instead 
of  roasts  and  bouiUies.  It  rained  violently  all  the  early 
part  of  the  morning ;  turned  out  a  fine  afternoon,  which 
we  enjoyed  by  taking  a  long  walk.  We  were  joined 
by  a  young  peasant  coming  from  the  fair  at  St.  Jean 
Maurienne.  He  gave  us  a  great  deal  of  information,  in 
his  way,  about  the  country  :  he  said  that  the  French 
people,  who  used  to  come  and  buy  great  quantities  of  cattle 
at  their  fair,  now  brought  it  to  sell ;  so  that  there  was 
more  cattle  to  sell,  and  less  sold,  than  ever  had  been  re- 
membered. We  were  much  amused  at  St.  Jean  Maurienne 
at  driving  through  the  fair,  which  is  held  on  the  outside 
of  the  town  ;  it  was  entirely  for  cattle  and  for  selhng 
ready-made  clothes  to  the  people.  The  road,  for  two 
leagues  on  each  side  of  the  town,  was  enUvened  by  strings 
of  peasants  bringing  their  cattle  from  the  market — mostly 
goats  and  sheep — which  they  buy  at  this  season,  to  kill 
and  salt  for  the  winter ;  and  some,  but  few,  pigs.  The 
pigs  cost  40  livres  of  this  country  {21.  Enghsh),  and  the 
goats  about  55, :  the  prices  seem  to  me  to  bear  no  pro- 
portion to  each  other.  Arrived  at  St.  Michel.  The  au- 
berge  bad  ;  but  I  must  observe  that  they  are  all  greatly 
improved  since  we  were  here  six  years  ago. 

Saturday,  30^7t.  —  Eoad  from  St.  Michel  often  upon 
the  edge  of  precipices,  which,  in  any  other  place,  might 
make  one  tremble  ;  but  here  one  is  never  afraid :  the  road 
in  general  well  made.  All  the  httle  villages,  without 
exception,  through  which  we  passed,  are  so  miserably 
paved,  and  the  streets  so  narrow  and  often  so  steep,  that  it 
is  wonderful  how  any  carriage,  however  strong,  holds  to- 
gether passing  over  them.  I  thought  them  worse  now  than 
they  even  were  formerly  ;  and  the  voiturier  said  that,  the 
princes  of  Piedmont  not  having  come  this  way  for  these 
two  years  past,  they  had  been  shamefully  neglected.  In 
coming  through  St.  Andre,  one  of  the  worst  and  steepest 


1790]  LANSLEBOUKG.  227 

of  these  miserable  places,  the  street  was  so  narrow,  and  the 
jolts  so  violent,  that  our  imperial  hit  against  the  project- 
ing roof  of  a  house,  and  brought  down  one  of  the  great 
stones  with  which  they  are  covered ;  this  stone  tore  off 
two  of  the  staples  which  fastened  the  imperials,  broke  one 
of  the  check-braces,  and  took  off  the  top  of  one  of  the 
lanterns.     Arrived  at  Lanslebourg. 

Sunday,  31sf. — ^Left  Lanslebourg  at  half-f)ast  7  a.m. 
Our  carriage  had  been  all  taken  to  pieces  the  night 
before,  and  ought  to  have  started  long  before  us  ;  but  it 
was  Sunday,  and  though  we  paid  forty  shillings  to  have  a 
mass  said  at  five' o'clock  for  the  carriers,  they  did  not  set 
out  above  an  hour  before  our  chairs,  and  we  soon  passed 
them  upon  the  road.  We  were  lucky  in  having  exceed- 
ingly fine  wearther,  and  found  this  crossing  the  mountain, 
as  we  always  have  done,  a  most  agreeable  day's  journey. 
We  got  to  the  Hospital,  about  the  middle  of  the  plain  at 
the  summit,  in  an  hour  and  a  half,  and  found  our  old 
friend  the  prStre,  with  whom  we  had  formerly  dined, 
recollecting  us  perfectly,  and  very  glad  to  see  us  again. 
His  house  is  much  improved  ;  he  has  now  a  very  comfort- 
able, clean,  whitewashed  room,  hung  with  maps,  by  way 
of  salon,  and  two  or  three  very  decent  beds  in  other  rooms, 
and  a  good  kitchen.  I  found  that,  since  we  saw  him,  Mr. 
Trevor  and  several  other  people  had  at  different  times 
stayed  several  days  with  him,  and  indeed  I  should  think,  in 
the  middle  of  summer,  nothing  could  be  pleasanter,  or 
more  conducive  to  health.  We  were  served  by  a  very 
clean  woman,  who  brought  us  excellent  cream,  bread  and 
butter,  eggs,  a  couple  of  boiled  trout  from  the  lake,  which 
are  famous,  apples  and  grapes  (which  are  foreign  luxuries), 
and,  in  short,  everything  that  is  necessary  to  make  an  ex- 
cellent meal  in  that  keen  mountain  air.  We  found  no 
snow  upon  Mont  Cenis,  but  a  very  considerable  degree  of 
frost  and  snow  upon  all  the  mountains  above  the  plain  ; 
and  the  north  wind,  to  which  we  luckily  had  turned  our 


228  MISS  BEEEy'S  JOURNAL.  [1790 

backs,  was  piercing.  We  left  the  top  of  tlie  mountain  about 
eleven,  and  got  to  La  Novalese  at  one  o'clock ;  arrived  at 
Susa  soon  after  four.  Walked  to  the  remains  of  the  Arch  of 
Triumph  erected  to  Augustus.*  From  the  description  of 
it,  I  expected  to  see  a  mere  skeleton,  but  was  agreeably 
surprised  to  find  a  very  beautiful  shaped  arch,  supported 
by  two  Corinthian  pillars,  and  an  enriched  fi-ieze  in  quite 
as  good  preservation  as  any  of  those  at  Eome  ;  it  stands 
in  the  garden  of  the  Governor's  house,  and  is  joined  to 
another  more  modern,  though  hardly  less  curious,  ruin  of 
a  castle  of  the  middle  ages.  Susa  appeared  to  us,  after  the 
towns  of  Savoy,  magnijicent;  the  streets  are  tolerably  wide, 
some  of  them  with  arcades,  and  (for  Italy)  rather  clean. 

Monday,  1st  November. — ^Left  Susa.  We  have  found 
aU  the  road  upon  this  route  much  worse  than  formerly, 
owing,  the  people  say,  to  none  of  the  princes  having  been 
in  Savoy  for  these  two  years  past ;  we  went  a  snail's  pace, 
and  were  jumbled  to  pieces.  When  we  got  to  Turin,  we 
went  first  to  the  Auberge  Eoyale,  which  was  quite  full ; 
then  to  the  Armes  d'Angleterre,  the  next  best  hotel.  Here 
they  showed  us  two  rooms  only,  very  bad  accommodation, 
for  which  they  asked  ten  hvres  a  day.  Thought  we  should 
do  better  at  La  Bonne  Temme,  and  found  aU  full  there, 
and  returned  to  the  Armes  d'Angleterre,  but  were  stopped 
from  driving  into  the  court:  a  gentleman  had  in  the 
meantime  taken  the  rooms.  We  were  now  at  a  loss  what 
to  do.  I  knew  of  no  other  hotels  in  Turin ;  the  people 
mentioned  an  Hotel  de  Provence,  a  vile  place  which  my 
father  went  to  look  at,  and  which  luckily  was  quite  full.  In 
the  meantime  the  voiturier  and  a  civil  cofiee-house  man 

*  Erected  by  Julius  Ootius,  son  of  King  Donnus,  about  8  B.C.,  in  honour 
of  Augustus.  This  chieftain  of  the  Alpine  tribes,  having  submitted  to  the 
Eoman  authority,  records  his  dignity  under  the  humbler  character  of  Pre- 
fect ;  the  inscription,  now  nearly  defaced,  states  the  names  of  his  fifteen 
mountain  clans,  whUst  the  basso-relievos  represent  the  sacrifices  (suove- 
taurilia)  and  other  ceremonies  by  which  the  treaty  was  ratified  and  con- 
eluded. — Murray's  Handbook. 


1790]  LETTERS   FKOM   ME.  WALPOLB.  229 

proposed  our  going  to  the  Dogana  Vecchia,  an  auberge 
I  had  never  even  heard  of ;  thither  we  went,  and  found 
room  enough,  but  not  a  bit  better  accommodated  than 
we  should  have  been  in  one  of  the  smallest  towns  in 
Italy  —  common  brick  floors,  doors  and  windows  that 
would  not  shut,  dishes  full  of  oil  and  garlick,  &c.  After  all 
this  trouble  in  lodging  ourselves,  we  had  the  much  greater 
annoyance  of  being  disappoiated  of  the  letters  we  ex- 
pected, and  for  which  we  sent  in  vain  to  the  post  and  to 
the  banker's.  I  cannot  describe,  and  I  am  sure  I  do  not 
wish  anybody  to  experience,  the  regret  and  discomfort  we 
felt.  We  had  desired  everybody  to  direct  to  us  at  Turin, 
and  expected  a  large  bundle  of  letters,  but  having  foolishly 
forgotten  to  desire  our  friends  to  put  '  par  Paris '  on  the 
address,  they  had  all  gone  round  by  Germany,  and  we  had 
arrived  before  them.  This  the  banker  told  us  the  next 
morning,  and  comforted  us  as  to  the  safety  of  our  letters, 
but  stiU  we  must  wait  for  them  a  cruel  time. 

Amongst  the  letters  expected  in  'the  large  bundle,' 
and  soon  after  recovered,  were  certainly  those  from  Mr. 
Walpole.  The  three  following,  directed  to  Miss  Berry 
at  Turin,  have  happily  been  preserved : — 

Tuesday,  Oct.  12, 1790. 

Yesterday  was  so  serene,  and  the  wind  so  favorable,  that  I 
hoped  the  pacquet  was  ready  and  that  you  sailed.  To-day  is 
blowing,  and  more  to  the  south.  I  wish  for  a  brisk  wind  to 
carry  you  swiftly;  yet,  if  I  could  hold  the  bag,  I  should  open  it 
so  timorously,  that  Boreas  would  not  be  able  to  squeeze  his 
puffed  cheeks  thro'  the  vent,  tho'  I  might  hear  of  you  sooner. 
Then  I  shall  long  for  a  line  from  Eouen,  and  then  from  Lyons, 
and  most  of  all  from  Turin.  Oh  !  how  you  have  made  me  long 
to  dip  deep  into  the  almanac,  and  even  into  that  of  next  year, 
tho'  it  is  most  prodigal  in  me  to  be  willing  to  hurry  away  a  day, 
who  may  have  so  few  in  hank. 

Yesterday  morning  I  had  just  framed  Wolsey,  and  hung 
him  over  the  chimney  of  the  little  parlour,  when  the  D^'  of 


230  LETTERS.  [1730 

Grloucester  came,  and  could  scarce  be  persuaded  it  was  the  work 
of  Agnes ;  but  who  else  could  have  painted  it  ?  Milbourne,  who  is 
here  drawing  from  some  of  my  pictures  for  his  prints  to  Shake- 
speare, cried  out  at  it  as  the  finest  piece  of  water-colours  he  ever 
beheld,  before  he  knew  whose  work  it  is.  This  was  my  employ- 
ment yesterday,  but  not  the  only  one ;  for  I  had  my  lawyer  with 
me  to  prepare  for  securing  Cliveden,  if  I  should  not  have  ano- 
ther almanac;  and  he's  to  bring  me  a  proper  clause  on  Monday 
next. 

At  night. 

The  wind  has  been  so  high  since  noon  that  I  should  have 
been  very  uneasy  if  it  were  not  full  south-west,  with  which  I 
think  you  could  not  sail.  I  have  been  fully  apprehensive  about 
the  whole  of  your  journey,  but  had  not  foreseen  that  I  should 
be  alarmed  about  your  voyage.  Now  I  am  impatient  for  a 
letter  from  Dieppe ! 

I  have  dined  to-day  at  Bushy  with  the  Gruilfords,  where  were 
only  the  two  daughters,  Mr.  Storer,  and  Sir  Harry  Englefield, 
who  performed  en  professeur  at  the  game  I  thought  Turkish, 
but  which  sounds  Moorish ;  he  calls  it,  Bandalore.  I  had  written 
a  note  to  Mrs.  Grrenville  to  inquire  its  name,  but  I  think  this 
will  serve,  as  you  only  wanted  to  be  told  some  name,  no  matter 
what,  as  one  does  about  a  new  face :  '  Who  is  that  ? '  One  cares 
not  whether  the  reply  is  Thompson  or  Johnson. 

This  will  be  only  a  journal  of  scraps  till  you  are  settled  some- 
where, and  I  can  write  regularly.  Moreover,  it  is  the  only  way 
of  filliag  random  letters — unless  I  were  to  indulge  myself  on  the 
theme  that  for  your  sakes  I  will  avoid.  I  am  little  likely  here 
to  learn  or  do  anything  worth  repeating ;  yet,  if  you  will  be 
content  with  trifles,  my  wanting  better  subjects  shall  not  be  an 
excuse  for  not  writing.  It  is  a  common  plea  with  the  unwilling ; 
and  persons  abroad,  I  know,  are  often  told  by  their  correspondents, 
who  have  not  the  grace  of  friendship  before  their  eyes,  that 
they  did  not  send  them  news,  concluding  they  had  better  infor- 
mation. I  may  apologize  for  writing  too  often,  but  have  too 
much  pleasure  in  conversing  with  you  in  any  manner,  to  lose 
the  opportunity,  provided  I  can  hope  to  give  you  the  least  enter- 
tainment. Eemember,  however,  that  I  ask  no  punctuality  of 
replies — nay,  beg  you  to  restrain  them.  You  are  young,  have 
much  to  revisit,  many  pleasures,  I  fervently  hope,  to  enjoy ; 


1790]  walpole's  kind  considekation,  231 

many  friends  besides  to  write  to,  and  your  healths  to  re-establish. 
I  certainly  have  nothing  to  do  that  I  like  half  so  well  as  writing 
to  you  two.  Do  but  tell  me  in  short  notes  y"^  stations,  y"^  motions 
and  intentions,  and  particularly  how  you  both  do,  and  I  shall  be 
content :  I  do  give  you  my  word  I  shall.  Writing  is  bad  for 
delicate  constitutions:  in  the  day  you  must  sacrifice  some 
sight  or  amusement ;  at  night  you  may  be  writing  too  late,  or 
fatiguing  y'^self  when  you  should  repose.  Never,  I  beseech  you, 
let  the  person  who  studies  y'  well-being  the  most  be  accessory 
to  causing  you  the  least  trouble,  disquiet  or  disorder.  This  is  a 
positive  injunction.     Grood  night. 

Wednesday  night,  13tli. 

I  received  y'  kind  letter  from  Brighth.  this  morning,  and  give 
you  a  million  of  thanks  for  it.  It  gives  me  some  hopes  that  you 
might  be  landed  on  Tuesday  morning  before  the  wind  changed 
and  rose  ;  but  it  revived  a  thousand  more  anxieties.  I  do  not 
like  a  vessel  smaller  than  the  pacquet ;  and  the  tempestuous 
wind  of  yesterday  shocks  me,  lest  it  should  have  overtaken  you 
at  sea.  That  good  soul  Miss  Seton  walked  over  from  Eichmond 
to  communicate  her  letter  to  me — ^how  I  love  her  for  it !  And  she 
had  previously  called  at  Cambridge's  to  consult  him,  when  his 
son  George,  who  has  often  crossed  to  Dieppe,  assured  her  the 
vessel  would  put  back  to  England,  or  put  into  Boulogne  on 
change  of  the  wind.  It  may  be  so,  but  I  cannot  get  out  of  my 
head  the  storm  of  yesterday,  every  blast  of  which  made  me 
quake  and  tremble  more  now  lest  you  should  have  been  in  its 
power !  Oh  !  when  shall  I  hear  you  are  safe?  I  have  written 
to  Mrs.  D.,  and  told  her  y""  being  summoned  on  board  suddenly 
prevented  y'  writing  to  her. 

As  you  desire  my  second  letter  might  be  directed  to  Turin,  I 
have  settled  with  good  Miss  S.  that  she  shall  write  this  next  Fri- 
day to  Lyons,  and  that  I  will  Aefer  this  till  Tuesday  for  Turin; 
that  you  may  be  sure  of  a  letter  either  at  the  one  or  the  other, 
and  know  why  you  do  not  hear  from  us  both  at  once.  I  hope 
in  Grod  you  are  safe,  and  that  my  fears  are  groundless !  All  my 
letters  and  fears  are  for  both,  which  I  will  not  repeat  any  more. 
As  I  shall  always  I  find  be  writing,  you  will  order  any  letters  to 
be  sent  after  you  from  Turin,  till  I  know  how  to  direct  farther 
on.  When  you  are  settled  anywhere,  I  shall  be  more  composed, 
and  will  think  of  the  more  insignificant  things  of  the  world. 


232  LETTERS.  [1790 

Friday,  15th.   . 

Worda  cannot  tell  what  I  have  felt,  and  do  now  feel !  The 
storm  on  Tuesday  terrified  me  beyond  measure,  and  so  I  have 
remained  till  this  minute,  that  Mrs.  D.  has  most  humanely  sent 
me  an  express  to  tell  me  you  are  landed.  I  must  send  him 
back  with  this,  and  will  instantly  send  to  Miss  Seton  to  tell  her 
the  happy  news,  and  to  Cambridge.  I  am  not  composed  enough 
to  say  anjrthing  else;  but  I  will  write  again  on  Tuesday. 
Heaven  preserve  you  all ! 

I  have  not  got  my  letter  yet,  but  am  easy  for  the  present. 

Saturday  night,  Oct.  16, 1790. 

The  hurry  and  confusion  in  which  I  finished  my  letter  this 
morning  which  I  had  prepared  for  the  post,  will  have  told  you 
better  than  I  can  describe  the  terror  I  have  been  under  from 
the  storm  of  Tuesday,  and  ever  since,  and  the  transport  of  a 
line  from  Mrs.  D.  to  tell  me  you  are  landed.  I  will  not  dwell  but 
on  one  circumstance,  but  a  dreadfuU  one !  I  saw  in  yesterday's 
newspaper  that  two  hoys  had  been  lost  off  Plymouth  on  Tues- 
day night.  You,  I  believe,  know  how  affection's  imagination 
travels  on  such  an  occasion !  My  letter  from  you  I  have  not  yet 
received,  but  expect  to-morrow  morning,  and  then  will  resume 
the  subject  of  y''  voyage.     Now  my  fears  are  returning  to  land. 

This  will  not  depart  till  Tuesday ;  yet  I  have  chosen  to  stay 
at  home  and  write  to  you,  for  my  thoughts  are  not  resettled 
enough  for  anything  else.  I  met  Gr.  H.  on  Wednesday,  who 
was  beginning  to  condole  with  me  on  losing  you,  but  the  storm 
was  in  my  head  and  I  cut  him  short  crossly,  for  as  you  are  no 
longer  my  wives  but  my  children,  I  can  talk  of  you  to  nobody 
but  those  who  love  you  almost  as  much  as  I  do. 

Not  having  been  out  of  my  house  these  three  days,  nor  scarce 
seen  a  soul  in  it,  I  am  not  yet  come  to  my  worldly  talk,  but  hope 
to  be  able  to  entertain  you  a  little  soon — arrive  but  at  Turin. 
I  know  nothing  but  two  events,  not  likely  to  please  you. 

Poor  Mr.  Ogilvie  *  has  been  near  killed  at  Goodwood  by  an 
astonishing  indiscretion  of  his  own.  He  went,  yes,  and  with 
one  of  his  daughters,  and  without  even  a  stick,  into  an  inclosure 
where  the  duke  keeps  an  elk.     The  animal  attacked  him,  threw 

*  Ogilvie,   Esq.,  who  was  married  to  the  Duchess  Dowager  of 

Leinater,  sister  to  the  Duke  of  Richmond. 


1790]        walpole's  anxiety  about  the  beerys.        233 

him  down,  gored  him,  bruised  him — in  short,  he  is  not  yet  out 
of  danger. 

Boyd  is  made  governor  of  Gibraltar,  and  somebody,  I  know  not 
whom,  is  appointed  lieutenant-governor  in  the  place  of  y''  friend 
O'Hara — I  know  not  how  or  why,  but  shall  be  sorry  if  he  is 
mortified,  and  you  consequently. 

I  believe  I  have  one  or  two  nephews  in  war  going  with  the 
guards  to  the  West  Indies,  and  therefore  one  or  two  nieces  that 
are  mourning  brides — but  I  do  not  inquire,  for  I  should  be  a 
poor  comforter  just  now.  The  proclamation  is  out  for  the  Pari, 
meeting  the  25th  of  next  month;  but  the  definitive  Porter  from 
Spain,  that  is  to  open  or  shut  Janus's  gates,  is  not  expected 
back  till  the  27th  of  this.     That  is  all  I  can  tell  Mr.  Berry. 

Sunday,  noon. 

Here  is  y'  letter  from  Dieppe  as  I  expected,  and  strange  it 
is,  that  as  much  as  I  abhor  sea-sickness  myself,  I  am  very  hard- 
hearted about  yours- — to  have  been  only  less  sick  than  usual, 
when  I  would  have  compounded  for  y'  both  rivalling  the  cascades 
of  St.  Cloud,  if  I  could  have  been  certain  that  you  would  soon 
be  as  dusty  as  those  of  Versailles.  Oh!  don't  talk  of  it — but 
what  harlequin  of  a  Triton  whisked  y''  vessel  about  so  as  to  escape 
the  tempest,  tho'  you  were  27  hours  at  sea? — nay,  are  not  you 
silent  about  it,  lest  you  should  give  me  a  posthumous  panic  ? 
Thank  God  you  are  all  safe  !  I  will  say  no  more  of  the  storm, 
tho'  I  shall  not  forget  it,  nor  recover  soon  of  that  sea-sickness. 

I  think  it  probable  that  good  Miss  Seton  *  may  take  a  walk 
hither  after  church,  as  October  is  dressed  out  in  all  its  diamonds ; 
I  have  my  coach  ready  to  convey  her  back  if  she  does — if  not, 
I  will  call  on  her  this  evening  ;  we  must  drink  the  health  of  y' 
sea-sickness. 

I  have  seen  nothing  of  the  Hamptonians ;  I  could  not  bear 
to  go  to  them,  while  my  mind  was  so  agitated — consequently  I 
know  nothing  of  the  person  who  was  to  come  to  town  yesterday, 
to  be  married  on  the  20th ;  but  I  do  know  that  his  aunt  at  the 
foot  of  yonder  hill  had  heard  nothing  of  it  four  days  ago,  nor 
believes  a  word  of  it — nor  has  her  brother  been  near  town  these 
two  months. 

*  A  cousin  of  Miss  Berry's,  then  on  a  visit  ia  the  neighbourhood  of 
Strawberry  Hill.— ikf.A 


234  LETTERS.  [1790 

Mrs,  D.  dines  here  to-morrow,  and  will  probably  carry  this  to 
town  with  her  for  Tuesday's  post — but  I  may  add  a  few  words. 

Sunday  night. 

If  I  could  continue  to  predict  as  well  as  I  have  done  to-day, 
I  would  turn  prophet,  and  I  know  what  I  would  foretell.  Miss  S. 
did  come  to  me,  and  we  had  an  hour  and  half  of  comfort- 
able conversation,  and  nobody  interrupted  us,  nor  would  any 
mortal  have  been  welcome.  You  may  guess  the  topics — the  storm 
was  not  forgot.  She  saw  Wolsey  over  his  chimney  in  a  comely 
frame  of  black  and  gold,  and  to-morrow  the  paper-man  comes 
to  new  hang  the  room  in  sober  brown  suiting  the  occasion.  As 
she  was  going  she  desired  me  to  read  to  her  Prior's  '  Turtle  and 
Sparrow,'  and  his  '  Apollo  and  Daphne,'  with  which  you  were  so 
delighted,  and  which,  tho'  scarce  known,  are  two  of  his  wittiest 
and  genteelest  poems.  There  should  be  new  way-posts  on  our 
common  roads  to  some  of  our  best  poets,  since  Dr.  Johnson, 
from  want  of  taste  and  ear,  and  from  mean  party-malice,  defaced 
the  old  indexes  as  the  mob  do  milestones. 

I  have  heard  at  Kichmond  this  evening  that  at  Ealing  the 
match  is  talked  of  as  indubitable ;  yet  yesterday  morning  the 
old  grandam  in  Pallmall  disavowed  it,  and  laid  the  invention 
on  L.  M.  C.  From  all  this  you  will  not  much  expect  to  hear 
the  ceremony  is  performed.  L*  Stopford  marries  the  D.  of 
Buccleugh's  eldest  daughter ;  the  D^=  gives  her  20,000?.,  the 
Duke  10,000?.,  and  they  settle  15  more. 

Oct.  22, 1790. 

Though  Mrs.  D.  and  Mrs.  B.  recommended  y""  going  thro' 
Paris,  I  should  have  had  a  new  alarm  could  I  have  known  you 
would  be  reduced  to  take  that  route — but  you  had  left  it  before 
I  had  any  apprehension  of  it,  and  I  hope  are  actually  at  Lyons, 
or  beyond  it.  Still  I  shall  not  feel  comfortably  till  I  hear  from 
Turin — and  what  an  age  that  will  be  ! 

I  was  in  town  yesterday ;  passed  the  evening  with  Mrs.  D., 
where  were  Mrs.  B.  and  the  Charming  Man ;  I  did  not  see 
another  creature,  and  returned  hither  to-day,  but  I  shall  go 
again  on  Thursday  to  take  leave  of  Mrs.  D.,  who  sets  out  on 
Saturday.  She  writes  to  you  to-night,  for  which  reason  I 
agreed  I  would  not  till  Tuesday — and  indeed  I  have  already 
said  all  I  have  to  say,  or  at  least  all  I  will  say.  Three  days  may 
furnish  something.  The  Johnstones  have  been  at  Nuneham,  and 


1790]  THE   PEIfNS — LADY  GOODEEE.  235 

are  actually  at  Park  Place,  or  I  might  have  heard  more  of 
Marchioness  to  be  or  not  to  be,  for  those  I  saw  in  town  knew 
not  a  tittle  more  of  the  matter,  yet  the  Ides  of  March,  i.  e.  the 
20th  of  October,  are  come  and  gone  ! — consequently  Faith 
minifies,  instead  of  increasing ;  and  unless  Lord  Abercorn  insists 
upon  the  King's  declaring  that  she  was  born  a  marchioness,  I 
doubt  whether  she  ever  will  be  one. 

My  dates  hitherto  have  been,  of  the  12th,  to  Lyons;  of  16th, 
19th,  and  this,  to  Turin.  Whither  I  am  to  direct  next  I  shall 
not  know  till  you  tell  me. 

Sunday,  24th,  after  dinner, 

I  should  be  tired  of  talking  of  the  silly  Miss  and  her  match, 
and  of  inquiring  about  them,  if  you  had  not  charged  me  to  send 
you  the  progress  of  a  history  that  at  the  eve  of  y^  departure 
revived  so  strangely,  without  having  had  a  beginning.  In  its 
present  stage  it  is  a  war  of  duchesses.  The  bride's  aunt  firmly 
asserts  it  is  to  be ;  the  bridegroom's  grandmother  positively 
denies  it — and  she  ought  to  know  as  first  inventress.  In  the 
mean  time  no  sposo  appears,  nor  his  parents,  M —  house 
wanting  repainting — in  short,  everybody  but  the  ducal  aunt 
suspects  the  letter  was  fictitious  somewhence  or  other. 

I  have  called  twice  on  Miss  Seton  at  Eichmond,  and  made 
her  very  happy  by  your  safe  arrival  at  Paris.  I  went  afterwards 
to  Lady  Betty  Mackinsey,  where  the  Comtesse  EmiUe  played 
■admirably  on  the  harp.  The  Penns  were  there,  and  delighted 
to  hear  of  you.  Lady  Dillon  told  me  she  heard  Lady  Groodere 
say  that  I  have  been  mighty  obliging,  and  offered  to  buy  the 
furniture  if  she  and  her  knight  would  stay  in  my  house.  I  am 
rejoiced  at  having  been  so  civil,  without  having  said  or  intended 
any  such  thing.  I  have  agreed  to  buy  the  furniture,  but  I  do  not 
believe  it  is  for  the  Gooderes,  tho'  it  may  be  for  the  good  year. 
I  wish  I  was  as  sure  that  the  one  is  true,  as  I  am  certain  that  the 
other  is  false ! 

I  can  tell  Mr.  B.  nothing  about  War  or  Peace.  We  have  a 
fleet  mighty  enough  to  take,  aye,  and  bring  home,  Peru  and 
Mexico,  and  deposit  them  in  a  West  India  warehouse — vis  a  vis 
that  in  Leadenhall  Street.  Tho'  we  should  come  by  them  a 
little  more  honestly  than  we  did  by  the  diamonds  of  Bengal,  I 
shall  not  be  sorry  if  we  make  peace  and  condescend  to  leave  the 
new  world  where  it  was. 


236  MISS  beret's  jouenal^  [1790 

Mr.  Burke's  pamphlet  is  at  last  literally  advertised  for  the  first 
of  November. 

Monday,  25tli. 
The  little  parlour  is  new  hung,  and  Wolsey  has  been  installed 
this  morning,  and  proclaimed  president  of  all  the  waterworks 
in  the  world,  with  shouts  of  Viva  Samta  Agnese!  With  these 
festivities  I  must  conclude  for  this  post.  Disposed  as  I  am  to 
be  always  writing  to  you  two,  be  sure  matter,  outward  matter, 
only  is  wanting.  I  send  you  heaps  of  trifles,  lest  I  should  omit 
anything  you  might  like  to  know,  especially  as  I  know  not 
when  you  will  see  an  English  newspaper.  You  are  not  to  answer 
any  of  these  trumpery  articles — let  me  write,  it  amuses  me;  but 
remember  you  are  gone  for  your  healths,  and  are  not  to  be 
sitting  against  the  edge  of  a  table.     Adieu  I  Adieu  ! 

P.S. — I  have  just  permitted  four  foreigners  to  see  my  house, 
tho'  past  the  season,  because  all  their  names  end  in  i's,  and  I 
must  propitiate  Italians,  when  you  are,  as  I  hope,  on  Hesperian 
ground. 


J  0  U  E  N  A  L. 

Tuesday,  2nd. — "We  sent  a  civil  note  to  Mrs.  Trevor, 
asking  her  commands  for  Florence.  She  answered  us 
that  she  was  at  home  till  the  hour  of  the  opera,  and 
hoped  to  see  us,  and  sent  us  the  key  of  a  box,  which  w^ 
declined,  but  went  to  her  soon  after  five  in  our  riding 
habits.  Several  people  came  in,  all  French,  of  whom  her 
society  at  present  chiefly  consists.  She  said  so  much 
about  our  going  to  the  opera,  and  that  there  was  no  im- 
propriety in  our  dress,  that  we  stayed  till  between  eight 
and  nine,  when  her  whist  party  was  finished,  and  then 
accompanied  her  to  the  Carignano  Theatre.  It  has  been 
burnt  down  and  rebuilt  since  we  saw  it  last,  and  is  much 
neater  and  prettier — no  gilding,  but  the  boxes  painted 
Hke  stucco  ornaments,  upon  a  pale  green  ground,  in  very 
good  taste.  The  opera, '  La  Zingara  in  Fiera,'  very  pretty ; 
the  prima  donna  an  admirable  singer.  I  asked  in  vaia  for 


1790]  FEOM   TURIN   TO   FLOEENCB.  237 

her  name  ;  she  was  La  Prima  Donna,  and  nobody  knew 
more  of  her.  The  theatre  crowded  with  French  people. 
Our  box  was  fiill  of  them  the  whole  night ;  among  others 
the  Due  de  Bourbon,*  who  seems  a  cIyiI,  good-humoured, 
gentlemanlike,  stupid  man.  The  Trevors  pressed  us  much 
to  stay  and  see  the  hunt  at  Stupinigi  the  next  day,  offer- 
ing to  carry  us  first  there,  and  then  to  Moncalieri  (the 
first  post  on  our  journey  onwards),  and  where  (they  said) 
our  carriage  might  meet  us.  We  therefore  agreed,  if  my 
father  permitted  us,  to  accept  the  proposal. 

Wednesday,  Srd. — We  had  intended  leaving  Turin  by 
the  post,  but  the  voiturier  who  brought  us  from  Cham- 
bery  persuaded  my  father  that  he  would  carry  us  as  well. 
I  confess,  after  having  had  the  experience  of  a  long  jour- 
ney, with  one  very  stupid  servant  and  another  very  use- 
less one,  I  was  not  sorry  to  be  saved  the  trouble  of  all 
the  bargains,  &c.,  necessary  at  Itahan  inns  and  Italian 
rivers,  &c.,  &c.  He  was  to  carry  us  from  Turin  to  Flo- 
rence in  ten  days,  stopping  half  a  day  at  Parma  and  a 
whole  day  at  Bologna,  we  paying  all  expenses  of  crossing 
rivers,  &c.,  for  thirty-two  louis  d'or.     At  eleven  o'clock 

*  Louis  Henri  Joseph  de  Bourbon,  Duke  of  Bourbon  and  Prince  de 
CondS,  bom  April  1766,  married,  April  1770,  Marie-Th^rese  d'Orl^ans,  who 
died  in  January  1822.  He  was  the  son  of  Louis  Joseph,  Prince  of  Cond^, 
who  died  1818,  and  was  the  father  of  the  unfortunate  Due  d'Enghien.  In 
1776  he  fought  a  duel  with  the  Comte  d'Artois,  on  account  of  a  quarrel 
which  had  taken  place  at  a  masquerade.  In  1789  the  Duke  quitted  France 
with  the  rest  of  the  family  of  the  Prince  de  Condfi,  and  retired  to  Brussels. 
In  1793  he,  with  the  Due  d'Enghien,  joined  the  Prince  de  Cond^  in  the 
Black  Forest,  where  three  generations  were  seen  combating  together.  After 
the  campaign  of  1800  he  accompanied  his  father  to  England,  and  was 
residing  at  Wanstead  House,  in  Essex,  at  the  time  of  the  murder  of  his 
son  in  1804.  In  1814  he  returned  to  France.  In  August,  1880,  at  his 
Chateau  de  St.  Leu,  he  was  found  suspended  by  his  own  neckerchief  to  the 
iron  central  fastening  of  the  window.  The  body  was  quite  cold  when  the 
attendants  forced  their  way  into  the  room.  His  fortune  passed  to  the  Due 
d'Aumale,  with  enormous  legacies  to  Dame  Sophia  Dawes,  Baroness  of 
Feucheres,  with  whom  he  lived,  and  who  was  in  the  house  at  the  time  of 
his  death.  Thus  perished  the  last  member  of  the  House  of  Cond6. — Ann, 
Heyister. 


238  MISS  beert's  journal.  [1790 

we  went  from  Mr.  Trevor's  in  his  coach-and-four  to  Stu- 
pinigi,  where  we  found  relays,  and  dogs,  and  horses,  and 
people  wandering,  but  heard  nothing  of  the  chase.  Here 
Mr.  Trevor  mounted  his  horse  and  joined  the  hunt,  we 
continuing  in  the  carriage  and.driving  about  till  we  heard 
the  stag  was  killed ;  then  our  carriage  drew  up  in  an  allee, 
through  which  all  the  princes  and  their  suites  on  horse- 
back, and  all  the  ladies  in  carriages,  passed  us.  The 
king*  rode  up  and  spoke  to  Mrs.  Trevor ;  he  is  a  very- 
gentlemanlike  old  man,  easy  and  dignified  in  his  manner. 
The  Prince  de  Piedmont  is  the  oddest,  ugliest-looking 
being  I  ever  beheld,  il  abuse  du  privilege  non  seulement 
qu'ont  les  hommes,  mais  les princes,  d'etre  laids.  They  say 
he  has  a  great  deal  of  natural  wit,  penetration,  and  clever- 
ness. "  The  Prince  de  Carignan  seems  grown  a  great  awk- 
ward ill-looking  young  man ;  his  mother  was  iU,  and  not 
there.  The  Comte  d'Artois,  a  great  deal  fatter  and  better- 
looking  than  when  we  saw  him  at  Paris  ;  his  two  sons,t 
charming,  pretty  boys,  on  horseback.  They  were  all  in 
uniforme  de  chasse,  red,  faced  with  blue,  and  a  broad 
silver  lace,  ugly  in  itself,  but  gay  and  pretty  in  the  field. 
After  passing  us,  they  went  to  the  Cur^e,  where  all  the 
carriages  were  drawn  up.  We  avoided  as  much  as  we 
could  so  disgusting  a  sight.  Afterwards,  all  the  court, 
princes,  &c.,  &c.,  went  to  Stupinigi  in  their  carriages ; 
we  followed,  and  then  went  in  for  a  moment  with  Mr. 
Trevor  to  the  Great  Hall,  where  the  guards,  ofiicers,  ladies, 
&c.,  were  waiting.  Without  being  in  good  and  true  taste, 
the  Palace  of  Stupinigi  is  gay-looking  and  magnificent, 
the  hall  particularly  so — exactly  like  a  fine  opera  scene. 
We  returned  to  our  carriage,  and  there  sat  till  all  the  court 

*  Vittorio  Amedeo  HE. 

t  Duo  d'Angouleme  (afterwards  Dauphin)  and  the  Due  de  Berri,  sons  of 
the  Oomte  d'Artois  and  of  Marie-Th&ese  of  Savoy.  The  Due  d'Angouleme 
aoeompanied  his  father  to  Turin  in  1789,  and  spent  there  more  than  a  year 
with  his  grandfather,  the  King  of  Sardinia.  The  Due  de  Berri,  bom  1778, 
was  sent  to  Turin  for  his  education. — Chalmers's  BiographicalBictionary. 


1790]  FEOM   TUEIN  TO  PLORBNCE.  239 

passed  to  go  to  the  Palace  at  Montcaillier,  whitlier  we 
followed  them.  I  neglected  to  count  the  carriages,  but  I 
think  there  were  certainly  above  a  dozen  all  atteles  de 
six  chevaux,  and  near  a  hundred  people  on  horseback — 
ecuyers,  pages,  &c.,  &c. — accompanying  them.  At  Mont- 
caillier there  was  a  fair  through  which  the  court  passed, 
and  the  number  of  people  which  this  had  brought  together 
was  uncommonly  gay  and  pretty.  We  were  told  that 
almost  every  horse  in  Turin  was  there,  and  that  for  saddle- 
horses  people  had  given  as  much  as  forty  hvres.  We 
left  Mrs.  Trevor  at  the  Minister's  house,  much  pleased  with 
our  morning  entertainment,  and  with  her  and  Mr.  Trevor's 
politeness  to  us.  We  left  Montcaillier  in  our  own  carriage 
about  three  o'clock,  and  reached  Villa  Nuova  at  seven ; 
the  night  was  very  fine,  so  we  were  not  discomposed 
at  being  above  an  hour  in  the  dark. 

Thursday,  Ath. — Left  Villa  Nuova.  Asti,  a  comfortable, 
bustling-like  town.  Between  Asti  and  Fehzano  they  are 
now  making  a  fine  new  road,  at  a  great  expense  in  le- 
veUing  the  ground ;  it  will  save  a  considerable  detour. 
Arrived  at  Fehzano  ;  a  wretched  inn,  where  I  was  eaten 
up  with  fleas. 

Friday,  bth. — Arrived  at  Alessandria.  Walked  about 
with  my  father.  It  is  a  considerable  town.  The  place 
in  which  the  fair  is  held  (which  lasts  for  eighteen  days 
twice  a  year,  in  May  and  October)  is  a  large  square, 
covered  in,  and  divided  into  streets  of  shops,  like  the 
Palais  Eoyal.  When  full  of  people,  and  hghted  up,  it 
must  look  very  gay  and  pretty.  It  belongs  to  the  town. 
The  shops  are  let,  many  of  them,  for  400  or  500  florins 
a  year — that  is  to  say,  20^.  or  261.  a  year.  There  are 
about  thirteen  or  fourteen  Palazzi  Cavaheri  in  Alessan- 
dria— two  in  particular,  belonging  to  a  Marchese  Gillini 
and  a  Marchese  Cassini,  are  in  a  style  of  magnificence 
with  respect  to  outward  appearance,  to  size,  entry,  and 
staircase,  of  which  London,  and  I  had  almost  said  Paris, 


240  MISS   BEEET'S   journal.  [1790 

has  no  idea.  On  the  other  side  of  Tortona  we  crossed 
the  Scrivia,  of  which  I  have  always  retained  a  disagree- 
able impression,  from  the  danger  and  plague  we  once 
had  upon  its  banks.  It  was  now  very  quiet,  and  we 
got  over  without  difficulty  in  the  carriage,  though  the 
boat  seems  neither  larger  nor  more  convenient  than  when 
we  first  passed.  Between  Tortona  and  Voghera  we  also 
passed  another  httle  river — the  Corion — the  channel  much 
narrower,  but,  from  the  appearance  of  the  banks  and  a 
strange  aWkward-looking  boat  lying  upon  them,  I  should 
suppose  it  might  sometimes  be  troublesome.  Getting  in 
and  out  of  the  broad  stony  channels  of  these  rivers,  even 
where  the  waters  themselves  are  passed  without  difficulty, 
is  always  a  disagreeable  job,  and  should  be  avoided  in  the 
dark.  Voghera  is  a  neat  httle  town,  enclosed  with  an 
old  wall. 

Saturday,  %th. — Arrived  at  Castel  S.  Giovanni.  It  had 
frozen,  and  been  excessively  cold,  in  the  early  part  of  the 
morning.  The  sun  was  so  powerful  by  the  time  we 
arrived  that,  after  breakfast,  we  sat  and  wrote  and  drew 
in  the  loggia  or  open  gallery  of  the  inn. 

Arrived  at  Piacenza  at  5  p.m.  AU  about  Piacenza  great 
flat  grass-fields,  at  this  time  of  the  year  beautifully  green, 
and  in  which  are  pasturing  those  fine  white-and-dun- 
coloured  cattle  peculiar  to  this  country,  and  which  I  think 
the  handsomest  in  the  world.  Before  Piacenza,  crossed 
the  Trebia :  the  channel,  I  am  sure,  cannot  be  less  than 
three-quarters  of  a  mile  wide ;  the  stream  itself  is  consi- 
derable, though  we  passed  it  now  with  ease  a  gue. 

Walked  out  to  the  Piazza  to  look  at  the  two  equestrian 
statues ;  that  of  Eanuzio  [Farneze]  is  the  best,  but  they 
are  both  too  much  in  the  French  flattering  manner,  and 
neither  of  them  very  good,  though  their  efiect  is  fine 
from  size  and  situation.  The  bronze  basso-relievos  upon 
the  pedestals,  which  I  do  iiot  recoUect  remarking  for- 
merly,  are    good ;    they   are   executed  in   a   singular 


1790]  FKOM   TURIN   TO    FLOEENCE,  241 

manner.  There  is  a  new  fa9ade  of  buildings,  built  by 
the  town,  for  shops  and  private  houses ;  the  Duke  of 
Parma  gave  400  sequins  towards  it.  In  the  middle  is  a 
corps  de  garde.  Walked  to  the  Corso,  which  is  really  a 
noble  street,  to  see  Vignola's  fine  church,  to  which  they 
are  putting  a  new  front,  or  rather  finishing  it  ;  it  is 
doing  at  the  expense  of  the  chapter  it  belongs  to,  the 
architect  a  Cav''  Morigi.  It  has  been  five  years  in  pro- 
gress, is  to  be  finished  in  two  more,  and  to  cost  14,000 
sequins.*  The  Palazzo  Scotti,  one  of  the  largest  and 
finest  in  Piacenza,  has  been  aU  painted  and  repaired 
since  we  were  last  here ;  and,  indeed,  Piacenza  in  gene- 
ral, and  all  the  towns  we  have  passed  through  in  Italy, 
strike  me  as  much  improved — less  dirty  and  more  com- 
fortable— than  they  appeared  formerly.  Whether  this  is 
really  so,  or  is  only  the  efiect  of  coming  direct  from  France 
to  Italy,  which  we  did  not  before,  I  know  not ;  certain  it 
is  that  every  little  Itahan  town  is  a  paradise  in  com- 
parison to  places  of  the  same  size  in  France.  Here  the 
streets  are  always  straight,  weU  paved,  and  clean,  and 
there  is  always  much  space  both  within  and  without, 
which  is  seldom  the  case  in  France.  In  Piacenza,  one  of 
the  most  wretched  large  towns  I  know  in  Italy,  there  are 
a  nuniber  of  magnificent-looking  palaces,  and  a  hundred 
private  carriages  are  kept.  The  common  people  in  the 
town  certainly  have  the  appearance  of  great  poverty,  and 
probably  are  poor,  having  no  manufactures)  little  foreign 
commerce,  and  living  one  upon  another  ;  but  the  country 
people  are  all  well  clothed,  and  look  fat  and  fair  and  com- 
fortable, even  to  Enghsh  eyes. 

Sunday,  7th. — Left  Piacenza ;  arrived  at  Borgo  S.  Do- 
nino.  It  has  rained  every  day,  more  or  less,  for  this 
month  past.     At  Fierenzuola  we  passed  the  Lara,  a  great 

*  Churcli  of  San  Agostino,  desecrated  and  closed,  and  in  danger  of  demo- 
lition.    This  cliurcli,  by  Vignola,  is  a  very  noble  fabric.     Tbe  nave  is  sup- 
ported by  thirty-foiir  Doric  columns. — Murray's  Sandbook. 
VOL.  I.  K 


242  MISS  BERKY'S   JOUENAL.  [1790 

channel,  with,  hardly  any  water  in  it ;  there  is  a  brick 
bridge,  to  cross  where  there  is  too  much  water.  The 
country  the  same  uninterrupted  rich  grass  and  corn-fields, 
with  rows  of  vines  down  them  and  along  every  hedge. 

Monday,  8th. — Left  Borgo  S.  Donino  for  Parma.  After 
breakfast,  went  to  the  Accademia,  the  Teatro  Grande, 
and  the  Campanile  Eeale,  which  are  all  under  one  roof 
Correggio  does  not  delight  me  more  than  formerly;  his 
boasted  grace  is  to  me  affectation — has  no  simphcity,  no 
dignity  about  it,  and  never  touches  me.  I  thought  more 
than  ever  of  the  great  theatre.  If  one  can  fancy  such  a  ruin 
new  and  clean,  it  must  have  been  magnificent,  but,  hke 
many  of  the  great  works  of  little  man,  much  too  big  for  him. 
Prom  the  boxes  the  figures  of  persons  upon  the  stage  are 
lost,  but  their  voices,  from  its  admirable  construction,  are 
heard,without  the  least  elevation,  from  one  end  to  the  other. 
At  the  printing-office  they  go  on  very  slowly,  but  their 
work  is  excellent :  they  had  just  finished  an  impression  of 
three  hundred  copies  of  the '  Castle  of  Otranto,'  for  Edwards 
the  bookseller  in  London,  and  five  copies  upon  vellum. 
With  the  director  (Bodoni),  w;ho  seems  to  be  a  clever  man 
and  fond  of  his  art,  I  had  a  good  deal  of  conversation  in  a 
bookseller's  shop.  Few  books,  I  fancy,  are  sold  at  Parma ; 
the  shop  we  were  in,  though  the  principal  one,  poorly 
supphed.  They  are  furnishing  another  long  gallery  with 
books  at  the  Eoyal  Library,  which  is  open  to  everybody. 
The  church* of  S.  Antonio,  which  I  remember  pleased 
me  much  formerly,  had  not  the  same  effect  ;  it  is  gay, 
but  gewgaw  and  trumpery. 

Tuesday,  9th. — It  had  rained  all  night,  and  continued 
pouring ;  heard  it  would  be  impossible  to  cross  the  Secchia 
and  get  to  Modena  at  night.  "We  resolved,  however,  to  get 
to  Eeggio.  The  rain  still  pouring,  crossed  upon  a  brick 
bridge  a  river  which  divides  the  state  of  Parma  from 
Modena  ;  it  entirely  filled  its  wide  channel,  and  was  rush- 
ing like  a  torrent,  every  ditch  was  a  considerable  stream. 


1790]  FEOM   TUEm  TO   FLOEENCE.  243 

and  many  of  the  fields  overflowed.  In  the  midst  of  all 
this  rain,  there  were  three  or  four  lively  flashes  of  light- 
ning, and  loud  thunder  at  a  distance.  Arrived  at  Eeggio 
at  4  P.M. 

Wednesday,  lOth. — ^We  were  destined  to  stay  here  the 
whole  day.  After  breakfast  walked  all  over  the  town  of 
Eeggio ;  it  is  not  well  built  (for  Italy),  though  there  are 
some  handsome  palaces.  In  the  Duomo  there  is  a  monu- 
ment to  a  bishop* — a  single  figure  sitting  upon  a  sarco- 
phagus of  no  contemptible  sculpture.  The  shops  poor,  and 
many  beggars.  The  Duchess  of  Modena,  separated  from 
her  husband,  the  duke,f  for  these  twenty-five  or  twenty-six 
years,  has  lived  here  constantly.  Her  palace  by  no  means 
a  fine  one,  just  under  the  ramparts.  She  is  dying  of  a 
complication  of  disorders. 

Thursday,  11th. — Left  Eeggio  for  Modena.  We  passed 
the  Secchia  in  a  good  boat ;  the  river  had  got  back  into  its 
usual  course,  but  had  completely  filled  its  channel,  which 
was  now  mud  and  pools  of  water  ;  the  boatman  said  no 
creature  had  passed  it  the  day  before.  There  is  a  new 
brick  bridge  built  over  the  river  here;  it  has  been  finished 
these  three  years,  but  nobody  is  yet  allowed  to  pass  over 
it,  nor  wiU  not,  they  say,  till  the  spring :  the  road  is 
raised  up  to  the  bridge  at  each  end,  so  that  it.  is  impos- 
sible in  future  that  the  river  should  ever  stop  the  road. 
There  is  a  wooden  bridge,  a  post  and  a  half  up  the  river, 
which  can  be  crossed  when  the  boat  cannot  pass.  The 
courier  from  Bologna  came  that  way  yesterday  ;  a  Swiss 
family  did  the  same,  from  Eeggio,  last  night.  The  road  to 
it  very  bad,  they  say.  I  always  remembered  Modena  as 
a  remarkably  pretty,  neat  town,  and  was  not  disappointed 

*  The  tomb  of  Ugo  Eangoni,  Bishop  of  Eeggio. 

t  Hercule  HI.,  Kenaud,  born  in  1727,  Duke  of  Modena  in  1780,  lost  his 
duchy  by  the  peace  of  Luneville  in  1801,  died  in  1803  ;  married,  in  1741, 
Marie-Th^rese-Cibo-Malespina,  heiress  to  Massa  and  Carrara^  who  died  in 
1790. — Koch's  Tableau  des  S^volutions  de  V Europe. 

B  2 


244  MISS  beeey's  jouenal.  [irso 

in  it.  Went  to  see  the  duke's  palace,  -whicli,  when  here 
before,  was  not  to  be  seen.  The  outside  front  by  Dulens, 
famous  for  its  four  orders  of  architecture,  is  magnificent. 
In  the  apartments  are  some  very  fine  pictures,  which  the 
duke  has  collected  from  all  the  churches  in  his  dominions, 
giving  them  copies.  The  recesses  of  all  the  windows  are 
hung  with  drawings,  some  very  fine.  The  ball-room  is 
monstrously  heavy.  The  duke  never  inhabits  this  apart- 
ment ;  it  is  kept,  the  custode  told  us,  for  foreign  princes 
visiting  him,  which  I  fancy  never  happens,  except  the 
Duke  of  Milan  and  his  daughter,  who  come  to  see  him 
every  year  for  a  day  or  two. 

Friday,  12th. — Left  Modena.  Before  Samoggia  we 
passed  the  Panaro  in  a  boat ;  it  is  a  deep,  narrow,  rapid 
river,  the  banks  steep,  and  consequently  there  is  a  great 
difficulty  in  getting  in  and  out  of  the  boat.  Close  by  the 
ferry  there  was  a  bridge,  which  the  stream  had  carried 
away,  and  is  now  rebuilding ;  it  has  four  sorts  of  square 
towers,  one  at  each  corner,  which  looks  handsome ;  when 
finished,  the  access  to  Modena  on  both  sides  can  never  again 
be  interrupted  by  weather.  At  entering  the  Pope's  domi- 
nions, they  ask  for  contrehande  only  to  get  two  or  three 
paoli ;  there  is  no  examination  bulletin  or  other  trouble. 

Arrived  at  Bologna  before  3  p.m.  Bologna  struck  me 
as  looking  dirty  and  dark  after  the  neat  regularity  of 
Modena,  but  it  is  a  bustling  place,  with  more  appearance 
of  business  and  population  than  almost  any  other  town  in 
Italy  that  I  know.  We  found  the  Pellegrino  stiU  an  ex- 
cellent inn;  our  bill  there  for  dinner,  beds,  &c.,  fifty- three 
paoli.  We  walked  to  the  Sampieri  Palace,  or  GaUeria  as 
it  is  called,  for  the  pictures  are  in  an  unfurnished  terreno 
apartment  of  a  palace  which  the  family  do  not  inhabit. 
Albani's  '  Children'  did  not  delight  me  quite  so  much  as 
formerly — Guercino's  'Abraham  and  Hagar,'  if  possible 
more  than  ever.  The  'St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul'  is  a  won- 
derful painting ;  it  is  Guido  with  the  colouring  of  Titian, 


1790]  FROM   TURIN   TO   FLORENCE.  245 

but  it  is  a  picture  that  never  gave  me  great  pleasure. 
This  fine  collection  is  so  settled  by  the  family  to  whom 
it  belongs,  that  it  never  can  be  sold.  Failing  male 
heirs,  it  goes  to  the  Institute,  or  Public  Academy. 

Saturday,  \2>th. — ^Left  Bologna.  The  Apennines  I  think 
less  disagreeable  upon  this  second  view  of  them  than  I 
did  formerly ;  they  are  mostly  covered  with  chesnut  woods, 
which,  though  generally  small  and  stunted,  are  here  and 
there  fine  picturesque  trees.  The  inhabitants  seem  pecu- 
Harly  wretched  and  poor.  Arrived  at  Cavagliajo  before 
six.  At  the  Dogana  di  Pietra  Mala,  our  trunks,  &c.,  were 
sealed  and  a  bulletin  given,  which  carries  us  into  Florence. 
Paid  only  six  baiocchi  from  hence  to  Cavaghajo.  The 
roads  well  kept.  An  almost  contmual  descent.  The  vol- 
cano we  did  not  see  ;  either  from  the  great  fog,  or  from 
the  quantities  of  rain  lately  fallen,  it  may  be  extinguished 
for  a  time,  which  they  say  often  happens. 

Sunday,  \A.th. — Left  Cavagliajo.  The  views  beautiful. 
Arrived  at  Maget's,  at  Florence  ;  took  possesion  of  the 
same  apartment  we  had  occupied  there  six  years  before. 
Found  ourselves  again  disappointed  in  our  hopes  of  re- 
ceiving letters,  and  were  very  melancholy. 

The  following  letter  from  Mr.  Berry  to  his  friend  Mr. 
Bertie  Greathead*  explains  the  motives  that  determined 
his  leaving  Florence.  It  was  at  Florence,  upon  a  former 
occasion,  that  Miss  Berry  says,  in  her  autobiography,  that 
she  first  felt  how  entirely  dependent  she  was  on  her  own 
resources  for  her  conduct,  respectability,  and  success.  It 
would  seem  by  the  following  letter  that  the  change  from 
Florence  to  Pisa  was  the  result  of  his  daughter's  prudence 

*  Bertie  Greathead,  Esq.,  son  of  Samuel  Greathead  of  Guy's  Cliff,  near 
Warwick,  by  Mary,  daughter  of  the  second  Duke  of  Ancaster.  When  in 
Italy,  in  1785,  he  -was  one  of  the  contributors  to  the  *  Florence  Miscellany.' 
He  was  also  the  author  of  a  tragedy  called  '  The  Regent.'  The  '  Florence 
Miscellany '  was  unsparingly  attacked  by  Gifford  in  his  '  Bseriad  and 
Mieviad.' — Ann.  Register. 


246  LETTERS.  •  [1790 

on  the  subject  of  the  society  collected  together  at  the 
former : — 

Florence,  7tli  December,  1790. 

DeAK  Sir, — I  have  delayed  thanking  you  for  your  kind  com- 
munications to  us  before  we  set  out,  and  for  your  letter  to  Prince 
Corsini,  till  I  could  give  you  some  satisfactory  account  of  our- 
selves, and  of  our  motions  past  and  intended.  Here  we  have 
been  above  three  weeks,  after  an  agreeable  enough  journey 
through  France  and  Savoy,  without  meeting  with  any  mishap 
worth  mentioning.  Since  our  arrival  our  time  has  been  spent, 
as  you  may  suppose,  in  reviewing  with  fresh  pleasure  the  many 
productions  of  the  fine  arts  here  that  since  our  first  visit  had 
left  on  us  an  impression  of  their  beauty.  Here,  at  first,  we 
thought  of  establishing  ourselves  for  good,  but  the  mildness  of 
the  climate  of  Pisa,  and  my  daughters  not  choosing  to  form  any 
liaison  with  some  of  our  countrywomen  who  happen  to  be  here 
at  present,  nor  to  give  offence  by  shunning  their  company, 
made  us  resolve  to  spend  the  three  winter  months  there,  and  to 
return  to  Florence  in  March. 

Your  letter  has  procured  us  every  kind  civility  and  attention 
from  the  Cor^ni  family.  Not  many  hours  after  I  left  my  card 
at  le  Palais  Corsini,  the  Grand  Priore  called  and  sat  an  hour 
with  us.  Many  enquiries  were  made  after  you  and  your  family. 
He  then  invited  us  two  days  after  to  a  ballet  champetre,  which 
every  Sunday  evening  he  gives  to  the  peasants  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Fiesoli,  where  he  has  a  country  house  and  sleeps 
every  night.  To  his  ball  the  girls  and  I  went,  and  much  enter- 
tained we  were  with  the  perfect  ease,  and  at  the  same  time  good 
behaviour,  of  the  contadini,  and  of  the  kind  affability  of  U 
Gra7id  Priore  towards  them.  My  daughter  Mary  danced  'the 
whole  evening  with  these  happy  and  seemingly  innocent  country 
lads  and  lasses,  with  one  of  whom  R  Principe  himself,  though 
as  you  know  a  little  stricken  in  years,  danced  down  a  country 
dance.  We  have  since  dined  with  them  in  a  family  way  most 
agreeably.  The  Prince  and  Princesse  Corsini,  his  brother,  with 
Don  Tommaso,  the  son  and  heir  of  the  family,  with  two  friends 
of  the  family,  were  the  whole  company.  Madame  la  Princesse 
has  since  called  on  my  daughters,  and  introduced  us  to  the 
Cassine,  where  you  know  the  noblesse  here  meet  every  evening 
to  walk  about,  play  at  cards,  &c.,  which,  though  tiresome  enough 


1790]  THE   COESINI   FAMILY.  247 

to  us,  is  no  less  obliging  in  the  kind  Corsinis  for  -wishing  and 
taking  pains  to  contribute  to  our  amusement.  I  mention  these 
circumstances  to  show  the  attention  that  has  been  paid  to  your 
letter,  and  to  let  you  know  how  much  we  think  ourselves  obliged 
to  you  for  it. 

Mrs.  Grreathead  and  you  will  be  pleased  to  hear  that  my 
daughters  have  already  reaped  benefit  from  the  change  of  air 
and  exercise  since  they  left  England.  Agnes  has  recovered  her 
complexion,  and  I  trust  in  God  they  will  both  return  to  England 
in  better  health  than  when  they  left  it.  They  desire  me  to  tell 
you  that  Italy  charms  them  on  a  second  visit  as  much  as  it  did 
on  the  first.  Quieter,  as  you  observe,  it  certainly  is,  but  not 
less  attractive,  and  we  are  now  more  at  leisure  to  observe  its 
beauties  of  art  and  nature. 

But,  as  even  the  charms  of  Arno's  Vale  cannot  for  any  length 
of  time  compensate  the  loss  of  social  joys,  with  much  pleasure 
we  look  forward  to  the  winter  following,  when  we  hope  to 
return  home,  and  flatter  ourselves  that  you  and  Mrs.  Grreathead 
will  often  find  leisure  to  cheer  our  fireside  in  North  Audley 
Street,  where  I  hope  you  will  sometimes  find  a  small  circle  of 
friends  with  souls  congenial  to  your  own.     .     .     . 

I  ever  am,  my  dear  Sir,  your  faithful,  humble  servant, 

E.  Beket. 

Amongst  the  letters  addressed  to  the  Miss  Berrys  at 
Florence,  and  of  which  they  were  disappointed  on  first 
arriving,  were  those  from  Mr.  Walpole  and  from  Mrs. 
Damer.  Notwithstanding  Mr.  Walpole's  fears  for  the  safety 
of  his  friends,  their  journey  through  Prance  was  ac- 
complished without  danger;  but  of  his  grief  at  losing 
those  loved  companions,  and  his  constant  anxiety  about 
them  during  their  absence,  there  can  be  no  doubt,  and  is 
thus  feelingly  described  by  Mrs.  Damer,  who  was  herself 
on  the  point  of  leaving  England  for  Lisbon,  on  account  of 
her  health : — 

Thursday,  Oct.  30, 1790. 
.     .     .      Mr.  W.  comes   to-day,      I  know  how  melancholy 
he  will  be,  for  we  have  no  letters  from  you  yet>  and  I  fear  that 
I  shall  leave  London  without  heariug  again.     ,     ,     Jerningham 


248  LBTTEES.  [1790 

told  me  that  the  night  Mr.  W.  was  here  (he  set  Mrs.  B.  and 
him  down),  when  he  got  into  the  coach  he  could  not  contain 
himself.  There  was  nothing  melancholy  he  did  not  say.  He 
was  quite  in  an  agony.  I  have  not  written  to  him  for  fear  that, 
seeing  a  letter  come  from  me,  he  should  be  disappointed  in  find- 
ing that  I  had  no  news  from  France. 

Hertford  Bridge,  Oct.  80,  1790. 
.  .  .  I  left  Mr.  W.,  I  really  think,  in  health  well ;  but  he 
receives  no  degree  of  comfort  as  to  his  fears,  nor  will,  till  he 
hears  and  receives  letters  from  another  country.  The  interest 
and  tenderness  he  shows  makes  me  feel  infinitely  more  sensibly 
giving  him  any  additional  pain,  and  depriving  him  of  the  satis- 
faction he  may,  heaven  knows  !  indulge  with  me  of  saying  all 
he  thinks. 

The  three  following  letters  from  Mr.  Walpole  were 
addressed  to  the  Miss  Berrys  at  Florence  :■ — 

[Str.,  Sunday,  Oct.  81,  1790. 

Perhaps  I  am  unreasonably  impatient,  and  expect  letters 
before  they  can  come.  ...  I  have  got  one  to-day,  but 
alas  !  from  Pougues  only,  llj  posts  short  of  Lyons  !  Well ! 
I  must  be  happy  for  the  past,  and  that  you  had  such  delight- 
full  weather,  and  but  one  little  accident  to  y''  carriage.  We 
have  had  equal  summer  till  Wednesday  last,  when  it  blew  a 
hurricane.  I  said  to  it,  '  Blow,  blow,  thou  winter  wind,  I  don't 
mind  you  now.'  But  I  have  not  forgotten  Tuesday,  12th.  And 
now  I  hope  it  will  be  as  calm  as  it  is  to-day  on  Wednesday 
next,  when  Mrs.  Darner  is  to  sail.  I  was  in  town  on  Thursday 
and  Friday,  and  so  were  her  parents,  to  take  our  leaves,  as  we 
did  on  Friday  night,  supping  all  at  Eichmond  House.  She  set 
out  yesterday  morning,  and  I  returned  hither. 

I  am  glad  you  had  the  amusement  of  seeing  the  National 
Assembly.  Did  Mr.  B.  find  it  quite  so  august  as  he  intended 
it  should  be?  Burke's  pamphlet  is  to  appear  to-morrow,  and 
Calonne  has  published  a  thumping  one  of  440  pages.*  I  have 
but  begun  it,  for  there  is  such  a  quantity  of  calculations,  and 
one  is  forced  to  bate  so  often  to  boil  milliards  of  livres  down  to 

*  Lettre  sur  I'Etat  de  la  France,  present  et  a  venir. 


1790]  WALPOLE   TO   THE   MISS   BEREYS.  249 

a  rob  of  p^^  sterling,  that  my  head  is  only  filled  with  figures 
instead  of  arguments,  and  I  understand  arithmetic'  less  than 
logic. 

Our  war  still  hangs  by  a  hair,  they  say,  and  that  this  ap- 
proaching week  must  terminate  its  fiuctuations.  Brabant,  I  am 
told,  is  to  be  pacified  by  negotiations  at  the  Hague.  Tho'  I 
talk  like  a  newspaper,  I  do  not  assume  their  airs,  nor  give  my 
intelligence  of  any  sort  for  authentic,  unless  when  the  '  Gazette ' 
endorses  the  articles.  Thus  Lord  Louvain  is  made  Earl  of 
Beverley,  and  Lord,  Earl  of,  Digby;  but  in  no  Gazette,  tho' 
still  in  the  Songs  of  Sion,  do  I  find  that  Miss  G.*  is  a  marchion- 
ess. It  is  not  that  I  suppose  you  care  who  gains  a  step  in  the 
aristocracy,  but  I  tell  you  those  trifles  to  keep  you  au  courant, 
and  that  at  y"^  return  you  may  not  make  only  a  baronial  curtsy, 
when  it  should  be  lower  by  two  rows  of  ermine  to  some  new- 
hatched  countess.     This  is  all  the  news-market  furnishes. 

Your  description  of  the  National  Assembly  and  of  the  Champ 
de  Mars  were  both  admirable ;  but  the  altar  of  boards  and  can- 
vass seems  a  type  of  their  perishable  constitution,  as  their 
air-balloons  were  before.  French  visions  are  generally  full  of 
vapour,  and  terminate  accordingly.     .     .     .] 

You  licence  me  to  direct  this  to  Bologna,  but  I  prefer  Flo- 
rence, and  always  think  that  the  less  complicated  the  ma- 
noeuvres of  the  post,  the  safer. 

You  say  nothing  of  y''  healths  —  how  are  Miss  Agnes's 
teeth?  Don't  omit  such  essential  articles.  Miss  Seton  has 
called  here  again  to-day,  and  was  delighted  to  see  y""  letter 
which  I  had  just  received.  She  does  not  leave  Eichmond  till 
Tuesday,  and  is  to  write  to  me  for  news  of  you,  if  she  is  long 
without  hearing  from  one  or  other  of  you.  I  proposed  this 
to  her,  not  only  for  her  satisfaction,  but  that  you  may  not 
be  worn  out  by  writing.  For  this  reason  I  make  my  letters 
shorter,  to  set  you  the  example,  tho'  I  promise  not  to  omit  a 
tittle  that  I  can  think  you  would  like  to  know ;  and  in  that 
light  nothing  will  seem  too  insignificant  to  tell  you.  Even  arti- 
cles that  would  scarce  do  for  home  consumption  acquire  a  value, 
I  know,  by  coming  from  home.  Besides,  Lord  Hervey,  I  think, 
is  not  at  present  at  Florence,  and  you  may  not  see  a  newspaper. 

•  Meaning  tke  reported  maxriage   of  Miss  Gunning  to  tlie  Marquis  of 
Blandford. 


250  LETTEES.  [1-90 

Those  wretched  Tatlers,  that  one  so  justly  despises  on  their 
own  dunghill,  are  welcome  abroad  in  hopes  of  finding  a  barley- 
corn or  two  that  are  eatable. 

I  shall  go  to  Park  Place  next  Saturday,  6th.  You  know  why 
I  postponed  my  visit  so  long.  I  announce  it  to  you  now,  because 
I  shall  probably  not  write  on  the  following  Tuesday,  but  wait  till 
Friday,  12th,  when  I  shall  be  returned  hither,  for  I  do  not  love 
letters  taking  so  many  hops  before  they  get  into  the  high  post 
road. 

P.S. — Monday.  No  letter  from  Lyons.  It  may  be  in  B.  Sq., 
and  I  may  get  it  to-morrow ;  but  it  will  be  after  this  is  gone  by 
the  coach  to  my  servant  in  town.  If  I  do  get  it,  it  will  not  damp 
my  impatience  for  one  from  Turin,  nor  that  extinguish  the  same 
eagerness  for  one  from  Florence — in  short,  I  shall  not  be  'per- 
fectly indifferent  till  I  know  you  settled  somewhere. 

[Park  Place,  Nov.  8, 1790. 

No  letter  since  Pougues  1  I  think  you  can  guess  how  uneasy 
I  am  !  It  is  not  the  fault  of  the  wind,  which  has  blown  from 
every  quarter.  To-day  I  cannot  hear,  for  no  post  comes  in  on 
Mondays.  What  can  have  occasioned  my  receiving  no  letter 
from  Lyons,  when  on  the  18th  of  last  month  you  were  within 
twelve  posts  of  it  ?  I  am  now  sorry  I  came  hither,  lest  by  my 
change  of  place  a  letter  may  have  shuttlecocked  about,  and  not 
have  known  where  to  find  me. 

The  first  and  great  piece  of  news  is  the  pacification  with 
Spain.  The  courier  arrived  on  Thursday  morning  with  a  most 
acquiescent  answer  to  our  ultimatum — what  that  was  I  don't 
know,  nor  much  care ;  peace  contents  me,  and  for  my  part  I 
shall  not  haggle  about  the  terms. 

The  pacification  of  Brabant  is  likely  to  be  Volume  the  Second. 
The  Emperor  and  their  Majesties  oi  Great  Britain  a.nd  Prussia, 
and  his  Serene  Highness  the  Eepublic  of  Holland  have  sent  a 
card  to  his  turbulent  Lowness  of  Brabant  that  they  allow  him 
but  three  weeks  to  submit  to  his  old  Sovereign,  on  promise  of 
a  general  pardon,  or  the  choice  of  threescore  thousand  men 
ready  to  march  without  a  pardon. 

The  Third  Volume — expected,  but  not  yet  in  the  press — is  a 
counter-revolution  in  France.  ...  In  this  country  the  stock 
of  the  National  Assembly  is  fallen  down  to  bankruptcy.    Their 


1790]  CONTINENTAL   IMPOSITIONS.  251 

only  renegade  aristocrat  Earl  Stanhope  has  (with  Lord  W. 
Eussell)  scratched  his  name  out  of  the  Eevolution  Club,  but 
the  fatal  blow  has  been  at  last  given  by  Mr.  Burke.  His 
pamphlet  came  out  this  day  se'nnight,  and  is  far  superior  to 
what  was  expected  even  by  his  warmest  admirers.  I  have  redde 
it  twice,  and  tho'  of  350  pages,  I  wish  I  could  repeat  every 
page  by  heart.  It  is  sublime,  profound,  and  gay.  The  wit  and 
satire  are  equally  brilliant,  and  the  whole  is  wise,  tho'  in  some 
points  he  goes  too  far ;  yet  in  general  there  is  far  less  want 
of  judgment  than  could  be  expected  from  him.  If  it  could  be 
translated,  which  from  the  wit  and  metaphors  and  allusions  is 
almost  impossible,  I  should  think  it  would  be  a  classic  book  in 
all  countries,  except  in  present  France.  To  their  Tribunes  it 
speaks  daggers,  tho',  unlike  them,  it  uses  none.  Seven  thou- 
sand copies  have  been  taken  off  by  the  booksellers  already,  and 
a  new  edition  is  preparing.  I  hope  you  will  see  it  soon.  There 
ends  my  gazette.] 

To-day  is  very  fine,  and  the  wind  has  been  favorable  these  two 
days  for  Mrs.  Damer.  I  am  out  of  humour  with  Miss  Foldson.* 
Tho'  paid  for,  she  has  not  yet  sent  y''  pictures,  and  has  twice 
broken  her  promise  of  finishing  them. 

I  have  taken  a  great  liberty,  which  I  hope  Mr.  B.  will  for- 
give, tho'  a  breach  of  trust.  Having  only  a  coach  myself,  and 
Saturday  being  very  wet,  and  being  afraid  of  a  bad  hired  chaise, 
I  did  allow  myself  to  use  his  hither.     I  will  do  so  no  more. 

I  reserve  the  rest  of  my  paper  for,  I  hope,  an  answer.  0  !  I 
do  hope  so. 

[Str.,  Qth,  at  niglit. 

This  morning,  before  I  left  Park-place,  I  had  the  relief  and  joy 
of  receiving  your  letter  of  Oct.  29  from  Lyons.  It  would  have 
been  still  more  welcome  if  dated  from  Turin ;  but  as  you  have 
met  with  no  impediments  so  far,  I  trust  you  got  out  of  France 
as  well  as  through  it.  I  do  hope  too  that  Miss  Agnes  is  better, 
as  you  say ;  but  when  one  is  very  anxious  about  a  person,  cre- 
dulity does  not  take  long  strides  in  proportion.  I  am  not  sur- 
prised at  your  finding  voiturins  or  anybody  or  anything  dearer. 
^Miere  all  credit  and  all  controul  are  swept  away,  every  man 
will  be  a  tyrant  in  proportion  to  his  necessities  and  his  strength. 
Societies  were  invented  to  temperate  force ;  but  it  seems  force 

*  Afterwards  Mrs.  Mee, 


252  LETTBES.  [1790 

was  liberty;  and  mucli  good  may  it  do  the  French  with  being 
delivered  from  everything  but  violence  !  which,  I  believe,  they 
will  soon  taste  pro  and  con.]  For  the  impositions  on  you  there 
is  a  remedy  at  Charing-cross. 

I  have  received  all  your  five  letters.  I  have  sent  three  to 
Turin  of  16,  19,  25  of  Oct.,  and  one  of  Nov.  2  to  Florence. 

To-day's  paper  says  the  ratification  of  the  peace  with  Spain  is 
arrived.     The  Stocks  are  extremely  pleased  with  it. 

I  thought  in  one  of  my  last  that  Lord  Hervey  was  in  England, 
but  it  is  only  my  Lady,  as  his  cousins  told  me  yesterday  at  P.  P. 

[You  make  me  smile  by  desiring  me  to  continue  my  affec- 
tion. Have  I  so  much  time  left  for  inconstancy  ?  For  three 
score  years  and  ten  I  have  not  been  very  fickle  in  my  friendships 
— ^in  all  those  years  I  never  found  such  a  pair  as  you  and  y'' 
sister.  Should  I  meet  with  a  superior  pair — but  then  they  must 
not  be  deficient  in  any  one  of  the  qualities  which  I  found  in  you 
two — why  perhaps  I  may  change  ;  but  with  that  double  mort- 
gage on  my  affections,  I  do  not  think  you  are  in  much  danger  of 
losing  them.  You  shall  have  timely  notice  if  a  second  couple 
drops  out  of  the  clouds  and  falls  in  my  way. 

Nov.  nth. 

I  had  a  letter  from  Mrs.  Damer  at  Falmouth.  She  suffered 
much  by  cold  and  fatigue,  and  probably  sailed  on  Saturday 
evening  last,  and  may  be  at  Lisbon  by  this  time,  as  you,  I  trust, 
are  in  Italy. 

Mr.  Burke's  pamphlet  has  quite  turned  Dr.  Price's  head.  He 
got  upon  a  table  at  their  club,  toasted  to  our  Pari,  becoming  a 
National  Assembly,  and  to  admitting  no  more  peers  of  their 
assembly — having  lost  the  only  one  they  had.  They  themselves 
are  very  like  the  French  Etats.  Two  more  members  got  on 
the  table  (their  pulpit)  and  broke  it  down.     So  be  it ! 

The  Marquisate*  is  just  where  it  was.  To  be  and  not  to  be. 
Dss.  Argyll  is  ^id  to  be  worse.  Delia  Cruscaf  has  published  a 
poem  called  the  Laurel  of  Liberty,  which,  like  the  Enrages, 
has  confounded  and  overturned  all  ideas.  There  are  gossamery 
tears  and  silky  oceans.     The  first  time  to  be  sure  that  anybody 

•  The  reported  marriage  of  Miss  Gunning  to  the  Marquis  of  Blandford, 
t  Robert  Merry,  Esq.,  the  object  of  the  caustic  satire  of  Mr.  GifFord  in  the 
BsBviad  and  Mseviad. 


1790]  ANIMOSITY   OF   THE   FRENCH.  253 

ever  cried  cobtvebs,  or  that  the  sea  was  made  of  Padua  soy. 
There  is  besides  a  violent  tirade  against  a  considerable  person- 
age, who,  it  is  supposed,  the  author  was  jealous  of  as  too  much 
favoured  a  few  years  ago  by  a  certain  countess.  You  may  guess 
why  I  am  not  more  explicit :  for  the  same  reason  I  beg  you  not 
to  mention  it  at  all ;  it  would  be  exceedingly  improper.] 

Strawberry  HiU,  Nov.  13,  1790. 
Oh !  yes,  yes,  Chamberry  is  more  welcome  than  Turin,  tho'  I 
thought  nothing  could  make  me  so  happy  as  a  letter  from  the 
latter  ;  but  Chamberry  is  nearer,  and  has  made  me  easy  sooner. 
What  a  melancholy  forlorn  object  did  I  think  that  antique  capi- 
tal of  a  dismal  dutchy  formerly  !  It  looked  like  a  wife  who  had 
been  deserted  by  her  husband  for  many  years,  and  kept  at  his 
old  mansion  in  Westmorland,  while  he  was  living  with  an 
actress  in  London.  Now  I  am  surprised  the  King  of  Sardinia 
does  not  return  to  that  delightful  spot,  which  appears  to  me 
like  the  palace  of  the  sun,  diffusing  light  and  warmth  even  to 
the  northern  islands.  With  what  anxiety  did  I  read  your  letter 
while  you  were  in  the  hands  of  the  savages  at  Burgoin!  I 
figured  them  with  scalping  knives  and  setting  up  a  war-whoop  ! 
But  you  are  all  safe,  and  I  shall  not  have  another  panic  till  you 
are  returning,  which  I  hope  will  not  be  thro'  European  Abys- 
sinia, that  land  of  hyaenas  !  Pray  burn  all  my  letters  ;  I  trem- 
bled when  they  were  ransacking  y""  trunks,  lest  they  should  meet 
with  any  of  them ;  for  tho'  I  was  very  cautious  while  you  were 
in  France,  I  was  afraid  that  my  eagerness  to  learn  y""  arrival  at 
Turin  might  be  misinterpreted,  tho'  meaning  nothing  but  impa- 
tience to  know  you  out  of  France,into  which  I  hope  you  will  never 
set  y"^  feet  more,  but  return  home  thro'  Switzerland  and  Flanders, 
which  I  conclude  will  be  resettled  shortly.  At  any  rate,  I  insist 
on  y"^  burning  this,  that  you  may  not  forget  it  and  have  it  in  y"^ 
trunk.  I  was  the  more  alarmed,  as  I  have  lately  heard  that 
Lord  Bruce*  and  Mr.  Locke,f  whom  Miss  Agnes  has  rivalled, 
riding  out  in  Languedoc,  escorted  by  two  national  guards,  and 
the  former  spitting,  the  wind  carried  the  spittle  on  one  of  those 
heroes,  on  which  they  seized  our  countrymen  and  imprisoned 
them  all  night  in  a  sentry-box,  for  imprisonment  is  the  charac- 
teristic of  liberty,  and  when  all  men  are  equal,  accidents  are 

*  Tlie  late  Marquis  of  Ailesbury. 

•j-  William  Locke,  Esq.,  of  Norbuiy,  ia  Surrey. 


254  LETTERS.  [1790 

punished  as  only  crimes  used  to  be ;  which  makes  it  delicious 
to  live  in  a  state  of  nature !  I  am  so  relieved  by  y'  letter  that  I 
do  not  believe  I  shall  be  uneasy  about  you  again  this  month. 
About  Miss  Agnes,  yes,  unless  1  hear  she  is  as  well  as  if  every  day 
was  a  Chamberry-day.  By  tjhe  way,  you  affront  my  dear  city 
by  calling  it  a  dirty  'place.  So  far  from  that,  it  is  snug,  beau- 
tiful, sublimibus  alta  columnis,  and  deserves  to  be  the  metro- 
polis of  Europe. 

You  must  have  been  charmed  at  the  comedie.  I  was, 
tho'  not  there,  and  prefer  Mdlle.  (what  is  her  name?)  to  the 
Sainval.  In  short,  I  am  so  content  that  I  shall  not  inquire 
any  more  about  the  foreign  post,  nor  care  whether  you  write  to 
me  or  not ;  at  least,  pray  don't  plague  me  with  long  letters  the 
moment  you  arrive  anywhere  fatigued  and  cold.  Seriously,  I  do 
beg  you  not  to  write  long  letters ;  let  me  chatter  to  you  as 
much  as  I  will.  My  mind  is  at  peace,  which  it  has  not  been 
at  all  since  the  first  moment  you  talked  of  passing  thro' 
France,  and  I  was  not  the  happiest  man  in  the  world  from  the 
day  Mr.  Batt  told  me  of  y""  intention  of  going  abroad.  After 
both  came  the  storm  the  day  you  sailed.  Chamberry  has  made 
amends  for  a  good  deal,  and  I  will  pass  a  few — oh  !  I  fear  more 
than  a  few  months  contentedly ;  but  then  there  is  to  come  a 
journey  back — not  through  France,  I  hope:  the  sea  to  cross, 
which  I  shall  not  leave  out  of  my  reckoning  a  second  time !  All 
may  be  forgotten,  if  I  see  you  next  autumn  at  Cliveden,  at  2/*" 
own  Cliveden,  alias  little  Chamberry. 

I  know  nothing,  nothing  at  all ;  but  I  go  to  town  to-morrow 
for  two  days,  and  may  pick  up  something ;  but  I  could  not  help 
indulging  my  joy  by  writing  this  against  Tuesday's  post,  tho'  I 
wrote  but  yesterday.  For  the  future  I  will  not  be  so  intempe- 
rate. I  have  sent  a  line  from  Chamberry  to  Miss  Seton,  and 
shall  dispatch  another  by  the  first  packet  to  Lisbon,  for  I  am 
not  so  very  particular.  Others  can  be  anxious  about  you  as  well 
as  I. 

[Berkeley  Square — for  now  you  are  clear  of  the  Abyssinians, 
no  place  is  afraid  of  signing  its  own  name — Tuesday,  15tli. 

I  might  as  well  be  in  a  country  village.  You  will  not  be  a 
tittle  the  wiser  for  my  being  in  London,  which  is  still  a  solitude. 
I  have  not  heard  a  syllable  of  news.   I  supped  at  Miss  Farren's* 

*  Afterwards  Countess  of  Derby. 


1790]  DELAYS   OF  THE   POST.  255 

last  night.  There  were  only  Lord  Derby  and  Lady  Milner  ;* 
the  latter  produced  a  letter  from  her  sister-in-law,  Mrs.  Sturt, 
where  Lord  Blandford  is  and  has  been  these  three  months.  She 
says  he  has  heard  of  his  pretended  letter,f  laughs  at  it,  and  pro- 
tests it  is  not  his,  nor  is  there  the  least  foundation  for  it. 

Mrs.  Damer  did  not  sail  so  soon  as  she  expected ;  at  least, 
the  wind  was  contrary  both  on  the  Saturday  and  Sunday;  but  it 
has  been  favourable  since,  and  I  hope  she  is  at  Chamberry— pho ! 
I  mean  Lisbon. 

.  If  I  learn  nothing  before  to-morrow,  when  I  shall  return  to 
Strawberry,  I  shall  let  this  amble  to  Florence  without  a  word 
more.    Adieu  I] 

Saturday,  Wth  December.  (Journal.) — ^Left  Florence  as 
soon  as  the  gates  opened,  whicli  was  only  at  seven  o'clock. 
The  road  to  Pisa  excellent,  mostly  along  the  banks  of  the 
Axno. 

Miss  Berry's  correspondence  with  Mr.  Walpole  in  Eng- 
land, and  with  Mrs.  Damer  in  Portugal,  was  subject  to 
many  disappointments,  and  the  letters  as  well  as  jour- 
nals contain  often-repeated  lamentations  on  the  vexatious 
delays  of  the  post.  The  extracts  here  given  from  Mrs. 
Darner's  letters,  together  with  Mr.  Walpole's  letters,  were 
received  by  Miss  Beriy  during  their  residence  at  Pisa. 

Frovn  Mr.  Walpole. 

[Str.,  Thursday,  Nov.  18,  1790. 
On  Tuesday  morning,  after  my  letter  was  gone  to  the  post,  I 
received  y"  of  the  2nd  (as  I  have  all  the  rest)  from  Turin. 
You  will  find  my  Tuesday's  letter,  if  ever  you  receive  it,  in- 
toxicated with  Chamberry,  for  which  and  all  your  kind  per- 
sonality I  give  you  a  million  of  thanks.  But  how  cruel  to  find 
that  you  found  none  of  my  letters  at  Turin  !  There  ought  to 
have  been  two  at  least,  of  Oct.  16th  and  19th ;  but  alas !  from 
ignorance,  there  was  par  Paris  on  none  of  them,  and  the  Lord 

*  Diana  Sturt ;  married  to  Sir  William  MUner,  of  Nunappleton,  in 
Yorkshire. 

■j-  Relative  to  the  pretended  marriage  with  Miss  Gunning. 


256  LETTERS.  [1790 

knows  at  how  many  little  German  courts  they  may  have  been 
baiting  !  Eepose  you  will  have  at  Florence,  but  I  shall  fear  the 
winter  for  you  there.  I  suffered  more  by  cold  there  than  by 
any  place  in  my  life,  and  never  came  home  at  night  without  a 
pain  in  my  breast,  which  I  never  felt  elsewhere ;  yet  then  I  was 
very  young  and  in  perfect  health.  If  either  of  you  suffer  there 
in  any  shape  I  hope  you  will  retire  to  Pisa. 

My  inquietude,  that  presented  so  many  alarms  to  me  before 
you  set  out,  has,  I  find,  and  am  grieved  for  it,  not  been  quite 
in  the  wrong.  Some  inconveniences,  I  am  persuaded,  you  have 
sunk ;  yet  the  difficulty  of  landing  at  Dieppe,  and  the  ransack 
of  y""  poor  harmless  trunks  at  Burgoin,  and  the  wretched 
lodgings  with  which  you  were  forced  to  take  up  at  Turin,  count 
deeply  with  me,  and  I  had  much  rather  have  lost  all  credit  as  a 
prophet,  since  I  could  not  prevent  y''  journey.  May  it  answer 
for  y""  healths  !  I  doubt  it  will  not  in  any  other  respect,  as  you 
have  already  found  by  the  voiturins.  In  point  of  pleasure,  is 
it  possible  to  divest  myself  so  radically  of  all  self-love  as  to  wish 
you  may  find  Italy  as  agreeable  as  you  did  formerly  ?  In  all 
other  lights  I  do  most  fervently  hope  there  will  be  no  draw- 
backs on  your  plan.  Should  you  be  disappointed  any  way,  you 
know  what  a  warm  heart  is  open  to  receive  you  back,  and  so 
will  your  own  Cliveden  be  too. 

I  am  glad  you  met  the  Bishop  of  Arras,*  and  am  much  pleased 
that  he  remembers  me.  I  saw  him  very  frequently  at  my  dear 
old  friend's,  and  liked  him  the  best  of  all  the  Frenchmen  I 
ever  knew.  He  is  extremely  sensible,  easy,  lively,  and  void  of 
prejudices.  Should  he  fall  in  y''  way  again,  I  beg  you  will  tell 
him  how  sincere  a  regard  I  have  for  him.  He  lived  in  the 
strictest  union  with  his  brother,  the  Archbishop  of  Tours,  whom 
I  was  much  less  acquainted  with,  nor  know  if  he  be  living. 

Miss  Foldson  has  not  yet  sent  me  y""  pictures.  I  was  in 
town  on  Monday,  and  sent  to  reproach  her  with  having  twice 
broken  her  promise.  Her  mother  told  my  servant  that  Miss 
was  at  Windsor,  drawing  the  Queen  and  Princesses.  That  is 
not  the  work  of  a  moment.  I  am  glad  all  the  Princes  are  not 
on  the  spot.]     The  Charming  Man  passed  Tuesday  here,  and 

»  M.  cle  Couzies.  In  1801  he  declined  the  Arohbislioprio  of  Paris,  offered 
him  by  Bonaparte,  and  died  in  London  in  the  year  1804,  in  the  arms  of  the 
Comte  d'Artois. —  Wright. 


1790]  LATE   HOUKS.  257 

part  of  yesterday,  and  I  carried  him  back  to  Lady  Mount  Edg- 
cumbe  ;  to-day  he  goes  to  Park-place,  and  thence  to  Nuneham. 
Old  Brutus  was  at  the  point  of  death  the  night  before  last ;  I 
have  not  heard  of  her  since. 

[I  think  of  continuing  here  till  the  weather  grows  very  bad, 
which  it  has  not  been  at  all  yet,  tho'  not  equal  to  what  I  am 
rejoiced  you  have  found.  I  have  no  Somerset  or  Audley  Street 
to  receive  me.  Mrs.  Darner  is  gone,  too  ;  the  Conways  remain 
at  Park-place  till  after  Christmas.  It  is  entirely  out  of  fashion 
for  women  to  grow  old  and  stay  at  home  in  an  evening.  They 
invite  you,  indeed,  now  and  then,  but  do  not  expect  to  see  you 
till  midnight,  which  is  rather  too  late  to  begin  the  day,  unless 
one  was  born  but  20  years  ago.  I  do  not  condemn  any  fashions 
which  the  young  ought  to  set,  for  the  old  certainly  ought  not ; 
but  an  oak  that  has  been  going  on  in  its  old  way  for  an  hundred 
years  cannot  shoot  into  a  Maypole  in  three  years,  because  it  is 
the  mode  to  plant  Lombardy  poplars.  What  I  should  have 
suffered  if  your  letters,  like  mine,  had  wandered  thro'  Grer- 
many !  I,  you  was  sure,  had  written,  and  was  in  no  danger. 
Dr.  Price,  who  had  whetted  his  ancient  talons  last  year  to  no 
purpose,  has  had  them  all  drawn  by  Burke ;  and  the  Eevolution 
Club  is  as  much  exploded  as  the  Cock  Lane  Ghost ;  but  you,  in 
order  to  pass  a  quiet  winter  in  Italy,  would  pass  through  a  fiery 
furnace.  Fortunately  you  have  not  been  singed,  and  the  letter 
from  Chamberry  has  composed  all  my  panics,  but  has  b}'  no 
means  convinced  me  that  I  was  not  perfectly  in  the  right  to 
endeavour  to  keep  you  at  home.  One  does  not  put  one's  hand 
in  the  fire  to  burn  off  a  hangnail ;  and,  tho'  health  is  delightful, 
neither  of  you  were  out  of  order  enough  to  make  a  rash  experi- 
ment. I  w*  not  be  so  absurd  as  to  revert  to  old  arguments, 
that  happily  proved  no  prophecies,  if  my  great  anxiety  about 
you  did  not  wish  in  time  to  persuade  you  to  return  thro'  Swis- 
serland  and  Flanders,  if  the  latter  is  pacified  and  France  is  not, 
of  which  I  see  no  likelihood.  Pray  forgive  me,  if  parts  of  my 
letters  are  sometimes  tiresome ;  but  can  I  appear  only  and 
always  cheerful  when  you  two  are  absent,  and  have  another 
long  journey  to  make — aye,  and  the  sea  to  cross  again  ?  My 
fears  cannot  go  to  sleep,  like  a  paroli  at  faro,  till  there  is  a 
new  deal,  in  which  even  then  I  should  not  be  sure  of  winning. 
If  I  see  you  again,  I  will  think  I  have  gained  another  milleleva, 

TOL.  I.  S 


258  LETTERS.  [1790 

as  I  literally  once  did,  with  this  exception,  that  I  was  vehe- 
mently against  risking  a  doit  at  the  game  of  travelling.  Adieu  I] 

[Strawberry  Hill,  Friday  night,  Nov.  27, 1790. 

I  am  waiting  for  a  letter  from  Florence,  not  with  perfect 
patience,  tho'  I  could  barely  have  one,  even  if  you  did  arrive  as 
you  intended,  on  the  12th.  But  twenty  temptations  might  have 
occurred  to  detain  yoii  in  that  land  of  eye  and  ear-sight.  My 
chief  eagerness  is  to  learn  that  you  have  received  at  least  some 
of  my  letters.  I  wish  too  to  know,  tho'  I  cannot  yet,  whether 
you  would  have  me  direct  par  Paris,  or  as  I  did  before.  In  this 
state  of  uncertainty,  I  did  not  prepare  this  to  depart  this  morn- 
ing ;  nor,  tho'  the  Parliament  met  yesterday,  have  I  a  syllable  of 
news  for  you,  as  there  will  be  no  debate  till  all  the  members 
have  been  sworn,  which  takes  two  or  three  days.  Moreover,  I 
am  still  here ;  the  weather,  tho'  very  rainy,  is  quite  warm,  and 
I  have  much  more  agreeable  society  at  Eichmond,  with  small 
companies  and  better  hours  than  in  town,  and  shall  have  till 
after  Christmas,  unless  great  cold  drives  me  thither.  Lady 
Di,  Selwyn,  the  Penns,  the  Onslows,  Douglas's,  Mackinsy^, 
Keenes,  Lady  Mt.  Edgcumbe,  all  stay,  and  some  of  them  meet 
every  evening.  The  BoufHers's,  too,  are  constantly  invited, 
and  the  Comtesse  Emilie  sometimes  carries  her  harp,  on  which 
they  say  she  plays  better  than  Orpheus ;  but  as  I  never  heard 
him  on  earth,  nor  chez  Proserpine,  I  do  not  pretend  to  decide. 

Lord  Fitzwilliam*  has  been  here  too,  but  was  in  the  utmost 
danger  of  being  lost  on  Saturday  night,  in  a  violent  storm  be- 
tween Calais  and  Dover,  as  the  captain  confessed  to  him  when 
they  were  landed.  Do  you  think  I  did  not  ache  at  the  recollec- 
tion of  a  certain  Tuesday,  when  you  were  sailing  to  Dieppe  ?] 

Mr.  Cambridge  sent  me  notice  yesterday  that  he  and  his 
daughter  have  let  y''  house  very  favorably  for  Jive  months, — 
will  you  forgive  me  when  I  own  I  was  glad  it  was  for  no  longer? 
His  Parnassian  vein  is  opened  again ;  it  is  full  moon. 

Particularly  to  Miss  Agnes. 

[Sunday,  28th. 

Tho'  I  write  to  both  at  once,  and  reckon  your  letters  to  com6 

*  Richard,  seventh  and  last  Viscount  Fitzwilliam,  the  munificent  bene- 
factor to  the  University  of  Cambridge,  died  1816. 


1790]        WALPOLE'S   opinion   OF  CORBEGGIO'S   WORKS.        259 

equally  from  both,  yet  I  delight  in  seeing  y''  hand  with  a  pen 
as  well  as  with  a  pencil,  and  you  express  yourself  as  well  with 
the  one  as  with  the  other.  Your  part  in  that  which  I  have  been 
so  happy  as  to  receive  this  moment  has  singularly  obliged  me, 
by  your  having  saved  me  the  terror  of  knowing  you  had  a  tor- 
rent to  cross  after  heavy  rain.  No  cat  is  so  afraid  of  water  for 
herself  as  I  am  grown  to  be  for  you.  That  panic,  which  will 
last  for  many  months,  adds  to  my  fervent  desire  of  your  return- 
ing early  in  the  autumn,  that  you  may  have  neither  fresh  water 
nor  the  silky  ocean  to  cross  in  winter.  Precious  as  our  insular 
situation  is,  I  am  ready  to  wish,  with  the  Frenchman,  that  you 
could  somehow  or  other  get  to  it  by  land — '  Oui,  c'est  une  isle 
toujours,  je  le  spais  bien;  mais,  par  exemple,  enallant  d'alentour, 
n'y  auroit-il  pas  moyen  d'y  arriver  par  terre  ? '] 

I  was  delighted,  too,  to  hear  yesterday  from  Mr.  C,  from  y' 
sister's  letter,  that  you  had  recovered  your  healthy  looks ;  pray 
bring  them  back  with  you.  Y'^  house  is  let  for  six  months,  and 
at  seven  guineas  a  week.  This  and  the  rest  is  to  both,  and  in 
answer. 

[Correggio  never  pleased  me  in  proportion  to  his  fame.  His 
Grace  touches  upon  grimace ;  the  mouth  of  the  beautiful  angel 
at  Parma  curls  up  almost  into  a  half  moon.  Still  I  prefer 
Correggio  to  the  lourd  want  of  grace  in  Guercino,  who  is  to  me 
a,  German  edition  of  Guido.  I  am  sorry  the  bookseller  would 
not  let  you  have  an  '  Otranto.'  Edwards  told  me  above  two 
months  ago  that  he  every  day  expected  the  whole  impression, 
and  he  has  never  mentioned  it  waiting  for  my  corrections.  I 
will  make  Kirgate  write  to  him,  for  I  have  told  you  that  I  am 
still  here.  We  have  had  much  rain  but  no  flood,  and  yesterday 
and  to-day  have  exhibited  Florentine  skies. 

From  town  I  know  nothing  but  that  on  Friday,  after  the 
King's  speech.  Earl  Stanhope  made  a  most  frantic  speech  on  the 
National  Assembly,  and  against  Calonne's  book,  which  he 
wanted  to  have  taken  up  for  high  treason.  He  was  every 
minute  interrupted  by  loud  bursts  of  laughter,  which  was  all 
the  answer  he  received  or  deserved.  His  suffragan.  Price,  has 
published  a  short,  sneaking,  equivocal  answer  to  Burke,  in  which 
he  pretends  his  triumph  over  the  King  of  France  alluded  to 
July,  not  to  October,  tho'  his  sermon  was  preached  in  November. 
Credat — ^but  not  Judseus  Apella — as  Mr.  Burke  so  wittily  says 

8  2 


260  LETTEES.  [1790 

of  the  assignats.  Mr.  Grenville,  the  Secretary  of  State,  is 
made  a  peer ;  they  say  to  assist  the  Chancellor*  in  the  House  of 
Lords.  Yet  the  papers  pretend  the  Chancellor  is  out  of  humour 
and  will  resign ;  the  first  may  be  true,  the  latter  probably  not. 

Eichmond,  my  metropolis,  flourishes  exceedingly.  The  D.  of 
Clarence  arrived  at  his  palace  there  last  night,  between  eleven 
and  twelve,  as  I  came  from  Lady  Douglas.  His  eldest  brother 
and  Mrs.  Fitzherbert  dine  there  to-day,  with  the  D.  of  Queens- 
bury,  as  his  Grace,  who  called  here  this  morning,  told  me,  on 
the  very  spot  where  lived  Charles  I.,  and  where  are  the  portraits 
of  his  principal  courtiers,  from  Cornbury.  Q.  has  taken  to  that 
palace  at  last,  and  has  frequently  company  and  music  there  in 
an  evening.     I  intend  to  go.] 

The  very  old  uncle  of  the  Abbe  Nichols  is  dead,  and,  as  he 
tells  me,  has  left  well  to  his  mother  and  him,  and  he  is  come  to 
live  there  with  her,  and  I  shall  hear  him  sing,  I  conclude,  at  the 
Duke's  concerts.  The  Gunning  match  remains,  I  believe,  in  statu 
quo  non.  My  coachman  does  air  y"^  chaise :  have  joxi  received 
my  letter  which  tells  you  how  much  liberty  I  took  in  airing  it  ? 

Two  mails  have  arrived  at  Falmouth  this  week  from  Lisbon, 
and  yet  I  have  not  yet  heard  of  Mrs.  D.''  arrival  there,  but 
I  conclude  her  father  has. 

Monday,  29th. 

I  am  going  to  dine  at  Hampton  with  Lady  Cecilia  John- 
stone, and  am  to  attend  her  in  the  evening  to  Lady  Mary  Dun- 
can's, Monday,  whom  I  never  happened  to  visit  before,  tho' 
we  have  been  so  long  inhabitants  of  the  same  planet.  I  hope 
not  to  pass  so  many  evenings  out  of  my  own  parish  this  time 
twelvemonth !     Old  Brutus  is  still  alive,  but  almost  insensible. 

[I  suppose  none  of  my  Florentine  acquaintance  are  still  upon 
earth.  The  handsomest  woman  there  of  my  days  was  a  Madame 
Grifoni,  my  fair  Geraldine.  She  would  now  be  a  Methusalem- 
mess,  and  much  more  like  a  frightful  picture  I  have  of  her  by 
a  one-eyed  German  painter.  I  lived  there  with  Sir  Horace 
Mann,  in  Casa  Mannetti,  in  Via  de'  Santi  Apostoli,  by  the  Ponte 
di  Trinita.  Pray  wojship  the  works  of  Masaccio,  if  any  remain, 
tho'  I  think  the  best  have  been  burnt  in  a  church.  Eaphael 
himself  borrowed  from  him.  Fra  Bartolommeo,  too,  is  one  of  my 
standards  for  great  ideas  ;  and  Benvenuto  Cellini's  '  Perseus '  a 

*  Lord  Thurlow. 


1790]  DELAYS   OF   THE   POST.  261 

rival  of  the  antique,  tho'  Mrs.  D.  will  not  allow  it.  Over  against 
the  Perseus  is  a  beautifull  small  front  of  a  house,  with  only 
three  windows,  designed  by  Raphael;  and  another,  I  think, 
near  the  Porta  San  Grallo,  and  I  believe  called  Casa  Panciatici, 
or  Pandolfini.] 

I  hope  to-morrow  or  next  day  to  receive  y""  letter  from 
Florence,  but  am  forced  to  send  this  to  town  to-night.  If  you 
have  not  received  all  my  letters,  you  will  not  understand  some 
passages  in  this.  You  have,  I  trust,  recovered  the  fatigues  of 
y""  journey.     Adieu ! 

Strawberry  Hill,  Thursday  at  midniglit,  Dec.  10,  1700. 

After  receiving  yours  from  Bologna  ten  daj'S  ago,  I  expected 
another  from  Florence  in  three  days,  as  you  promised  to  write 
thence  on  y''  arrival,  but  I  have  none  till  this  minute,  that  on 
returning  from  Eichmond,  I  find  one  on  my  table  dated  as  long 
ago  as  the  16th  of  last  month,  and  what,  alas !  has  it  told  me 
but  y'  utter  disappointment  and  most  natural  vexation  at  the 
loss,  at  least  at  the  want,  of  any  one  letter,  but  Mrs.  D.'s,  from 
England.  Oh!  how  shall  I  expect  you  to  receive  any,  if  all 
have  miscarried ;  how  shall  I  direct  mine  ?  Till  you  told  me  to 
put  par  Paris,  I  did  direct  like  Mrs.  D.,  yet  you  have  not 
received  them.  I  know  but  one  consolation  to  oiFer  to  you,  and 
that  .is,  all  failing,  you  have  no  reason  to  be  alarmed  particularly 
for  any  of  y''  friends ;  and  for  a  succedaneum  to  y'  loss  of  the 
thread  of  domestic  occurrences,  I  will  keep  a  minute  journal  of 
all  I  know  and  hear,  and  keep  it  till  I  can  send  it  by  some 
secure  hand  or  method.  In  my  present  distress  f6r  you  and 
myself  on  this  cruel  disappointment  and  uncertainty,  I  caimot 
recollect  anything  I  have  said,  and  I  must  send  this  away  to 
town  to-morrow  in  time,  or  it  will  not  set  out  before  Tuesday,  by 
which  time  I  will  try  to  remember  what  events  have  happened, 
tho'  at  this  moment  I  cannot  recall  a  single  one  of  any  conse- 
quence. How  happy  I  shall  be  if  by  that  day  I  can  learn  that 
your  letters  have  at  last  reached  you  ! 

This  being  but  a  momentary  essay  to  see  if  you  can  get  a  line 
from  me,  and  half  in  despair  at  the  sad  cruel  prospect  of  our 
correspondence  being  cut  off,  I  will  say  but  few  words  more, 
to  assure  you  I  am  perfectly  well,  and  will  search  every  method 
upon   earth  of  conveying  letters  to  you.     I  have  not  heard 


262  LETTERS.  [1790 

from  Mrs.  D.  yet,  but  conclude  her  parents  have,  as  I  see  by 
the  papers  two  packets  have  arrived  from  Lisbon,  and  the  last 
I  conclude  since  she  must  have  landed  there.  That  letters  to 
you,  two  private  young  Englishwomen,  going  to  Italy  for 
health,  and  connected  with  nobody  ministerial  here,  and  cor- 
responding with  nobody  but  persons  involved  in  no  party,  and 
writing  about  nothing  political,  should  be  opened  in  France, 
and  still  more  wonderful,  should  continue  to  be  opened  there 
and  not  forwarded,  is  quite  astonishing !  I  should  rather  suspect 
they  have  gone  by  Flanders  and  been  lost  in  the  confusions 
there ;  but  as  the  Emperor  is  now  in  possession  again  of  that 
country,  I  hope  our  terrible  interruption  will  cease. 

If  you  receive  this,  you  may  be  satisfied  that  y''  grandmother 
has  heard  of  you,  as  I  have  received  every  one  of  yours.  Why 
yours  should  come,  and  ours  be  stopped  or  retarded,  is  incon- 
ceivable. 

I  could  write  on  this  subject  all  night,  but  as  it  is  so  late,  and 
Philip  must  carry  this  to  town  by  eight  to-morrow,  I  will  con- 
clude for  the  present,  after  telling  you  that  I  wrote  to  you, 
directed  to  Turin,  Oct.  16,  19,  25,  and  to  Florence,  Nov.  2,  11, 
16th,  and  thither  par  Paris,  19th  and  29th.  How  I  do  hope 
you  have  got  some  at  least !     Adieu,  adieu  ! 

Berkeley  Square,  Deo.  16, 1790. 

I  am  still  infinitely  distressed  about  your  receiving  no  letters 
from  England,  and  still  ignorant  whether  you  have  yet  received 
any.  Your  last  was  from  Florence  of  the  16th  of  last  month, 
and  you  promised  to  write  again  immediately;  but  the  strong 
westerly  winds  (which  on  Sunday  night  blew  a  tempest,  and 
broke  off  a  considerable  branch  of  my  beautifuU  ivied  walnut- 
tree  at  Strawberry)  have  prevented  (and  I  hope  nothing  else 
has)  our  receiving  any  letters  from  the  Continent.  My  best 
consolation  has  been  from  Miss  Penn,  who  tells  me  her  brother, 
now  at  Florence,  was  some  time  without  letters,  but  then  did 
receive  them.  May  this  have  been  your  case — you  may  ask  him. 
I  desired  her  to  write  to  him  to  acquaint  you  that  Miss  Seton 
and  I  have  received  all  your  letters  regularly,  consequently 
y"^  grandmother  has  not  been  alarmed. 

In  this  suspense  I  only  write,  that  if  our  letters  do  find 
passage  to  you,  you  may  have  no  interval ;  tho'  till  I  hear  they 


1790]  CLIVEDEN  SECURED.  263 

do,  I  cannot  write  comfortably.  Should  any  French  have 
stopped  them,  surely  they  must  have  discovered  by  this  time 
that  they  might  as  well  have  a  curiosity  about  letters  to 
Abyssinia!  But  how  unpleasant  that  you  cannot,  not  only 
hear  the  common  chit-chat  of  y'  own  country,  but  receive  no 
account  of  y'  own  private  affairs.  You  perhaps  do  not  yet 
know  that  y"^  house  is  let  for  six  months  at  seven  guineas  a- 
week.  I  called  on  Mr.  Cambridge  on  Sunday  evenmg ;  his  son 
G-eorge,  as  well  as  I,  have  sent  you  notice  of  it,  and  the  latter 
too  of  what  I  did  not  know,  that  he  has  sold  Mr.  Berry's  horse. 
If  you  have  received  our  letters,  these  will  be  unnecessary 
repetitions ;  but  I  want  so  much  to  give  sucb  satisfactory  in- 
formation, that  I  shall  not  spare  redits  till  I  am  sure  you  are 
informed. 

In  mine  of  last  week  I  was  so  confounded  at  y'  disappoint- 
ment, that  I  forgot  to  give  you,  as  you  desired,  the  direction  to 
Mrs.  D.  It  is  '  Aux  Soins  de  Messieurs  Mellish  et  de  Visme,  a 
Lisbon.'  I  have  heard  from  her  thence ;  she  had  a  passage  but 
of  seven  days. 

I  came  to  town  yesterday  purely  on  y'  account,  and  return 
to-morrow.  Cliveden  was  this  morning  secured  to  you  and  y' 
sister  in  form. 

Poor  Lady  Herries  has  lost  the  use  of  her  limbs,  and  is  at 
Bath  in  a  melancholy  way.  I  called  on  Mrs.  Buller  last  night, 
and  unluckily  found  seven  persons  who  had  dined  with  her :  so 
you  may  imagine  my  visit  was  short.  Lord  Bute  has  had  a  fall 
from  his  own  cliff  of  28  feet,  sprained  his  ankle,  and  broke 
the  little  bone  of  it,  but,  tho'  77,  is  recovering. 

The  Opposition  seem  very  temperate  and  tame,  and  the 
Court's  majorities  are  great.  The  three  Garters  were  given  away 
yesterday  to  the  Duke  of  Saxe  Grotha,  the  Duke  of  Leeds,  and 
Lord  Chatham.  All  this  perhaps  you  will  learn  earlier  from 
our  newspapers.  Of  private  news  I  do  not  know  a  tittle,  but  I 
would  try  once  more  to  acquaint  you  with  y'  own 'affairs  by  the 
common  post.  If  none  of  these  succeed,  I  will  try  some  other 
channel,  for  I  cannot  bear  your  living  ignorant  of  all  that  con- 
cerns you.  I  will  write  round  by  Eussia,  and  beg  the  Empress 
to  make  it  a  condition  of  peace,  that  the  Grrand  Signor  shall 
send  a  zebecque  to  Leghorn  with  my  letters.  Adieu !  for  the 
present. 


264  LETTBES.  [1790 

P.S. — I  am  sorry  I  was  so  much  ia  the  right,  when  I  endea- 
voured to  dissuade  y'' journey,  from  the  various  inconveniencies 
I  foresaw,  tho'  I  own  los§  of  letters  was  not  one  of  the  number. 

Strawb.,  Friday  night,  Dec.  17, 1790. 

My  letters  set  out  on  the  back  of  one  another.  I  wish  I 
could  know  that  any  one  of  them,  but  that  at  Lyons,  had 
reached  you  !  I  sent  off  the  11th  from  London  this  morning, 
but  here  is  a  new  and  great  distress  !  Last  week  I  received  y"^ 
first  from  Florence,  with  an  account  of  y'  shocking  disappoint- 
ment in  finding  no  letters  from  England  there  or  at  Turin,  tho' 
all  yours  have  come  regularly  to  me  and  Miss  Seton,  and  I 
conclude  to  others,  so  you  may  be  satisfied  that  y'  grandmother 
has  been  under  no  alarm  about  you.  Y""  Florentine  letter  pro- 
mised another,  in  which  I  trusted  I  should  learn  that  your 
letters  had  followed  you,  as  Mr.  Penn's  have  done  him;  but 
alas !  if  you  have  sent  such  a  letter,  I  shall  probably  never 
receive  it,  fur  a  French  pacquet  from  Calais  to  Dover  sank  in 
the  great  storm  on  Tuesday  with  all  the  crew,  30  persons,  and 
I  suppose  the  mails  too,  for  the  English  pacquet  escaped  at  the 
same  time,  and  yet  I  have  no  letter,  which  I  must  have  had 
to-night,  for  Kirgate  followed  me  by  the  evening  coach.  One 
great  consolation  he  has  brought  me,  a  permission  to  send  this 
in  Lord  Hervey's  packet,  which  sets  me  to  writing  with  confi- 
dence.    .     .     . 

The  Parliament  has  been  moderate,  and  the  Court's  majorities 
considerable.  The  chief  difficulty  is,  whether  Hastings's  trial  is 
to  proceed,  and  that  point  is  not  yet  settled.  The  Duke  of  Mont- 
rose is  master  of  the  horse ;  Mr.  W.  Grrenville  a  peer.  .  .  .  The 
famous  letter,  and  another  to  the  same  purport,  of  which  we 
were  told  the  night  before  you  set  out,  is  discovered  to  be  a 
forgery,  but  the  writer  not  found  out,  yet  supposed  to  be  the 
very  person  who  repeated  it  to  us ;  but  do  not  write  this  back 
to  England,  nor  mention  it  where  you  are,  I  beg. 

Mrs.  Siddons  is  playing  again  to  crowded  houses. 

For  my  own  history,  I  am  still  resident  here.  We  have  had 
several  beautiful  days,  a  vast  deal  of  rain  and  high  winds,  but 
scarce  any  cold.  Eichmond  is  still  full,  and  will  be  so  till  after 
Christmas.  The  Duke  of  Clarence  is  there,  and  every  night  at 
Mrs.  Bouverie's,  Lady  Di's,  at  .home,  or  at  the  Duke  of  Queens- 


1790]  WALPOLE'S  Aj!fXIETY   ABOUT   HIS   FEIENDS.  265 

bury's,  with  suppers  that  finish  at  twelve.  I  have  been  at  three, 
but  I  do  not  think  seventy-three  just  suited  to  twenty-five,  and 
therefore  have  excused  myself  from  as  many,  and  believe  I 
shall  settle  in  town  before  New  Year's  Day,  tho'  the  hours  in 
London,  even  of  old  folks,  are  not  half  so  reasonable  as  those  of 
this  young  Prince,  who  never  drinks  or  games,  and  is  extremely 
good  humoured  and  well  bred. 

If  I  have  anything  more  to  tell  you  before  Sunday  morning, 
when  this  must  go  to  town  for  Tuesday's  post,  I  will  add  it ; 
but  still  trusting  that  you  may  at  last  have  received  my  former 
letters,  I  have  been  very  brief  on  what  I  have  mentioned  in 
them.  One  thing  I  must  repeat  with  emphasis  :  I  implore  you 
not  to  return  thro'  France,  especially  as  Flanders  is  now  re- 
settled. I  as  earnestly  beseech  you  to  be  in  England  by  the 
end  of  September.  I, never  shall  forget  the  storm  in  which 
you  so  narrowly  escaped  going  to  Dieppe,  and  this  last  Tuesday 
has  been  still  more  tremendous.  Torrents  in  Italy  too  !  For 
France,  the  horrors  increase.  The  son  of  a  friend  of  mine 
called  on  me  yesterday ;  he  is  of  Cambridge,  and  told  me  that 
two  lords  of  his  acquaintance  had  the  curiosity  to  go  to  France 
this  summer,  and  he  was  on  the  point  of  going  with  them,  but 
was  prevented.  At  Lyons  they  were  seized  for  spies,  and  had 
the  rope  about  their  necks ;  but  a  man  of  letters  coming  by, 
they  explained  themselves  to  him  in  Latin,  which  they  had  not 
been  able  to  do  sufficiently  in  French,  and  he  saved  them.  I 
know  how  well  you  speak  Latin  and  French  too,  but  as  the 
benefit  of  clergy  is  so  lately  taken  away  in  that  country,  I  beg 
you  will  never  set  y'  foot  in  it,  but,  seriously  and  most  seriously, 
spare  me  more  alarms  !  I  shall  have  no  tranquillity  till  you  are 
safe  in  England  again.  I  know  I  have  no  right  to  ask  you  to 
sacrifice  your  own  satisfactions  to  mine ;  but  mine  are  not  the 
sole ;  yourselves  have  been  suffering  for  what  you  thought  y'' 
grandmother  must  have  felt  on  y""  accounts.  The  present  state 
of  France,  and  surely  it  is  not  mending,  has  already  caused 
you  many  inconveniencies.  At  Eouen  you  could  get  nothing 
but  paper — it  is  ten  times  worse  now.  What  if  you  should  not 
be  able  to  proceed  from  want  of  assistance  from  bankers,  who 
could  come  to  relieve  you  I — nay,  should  we  be  sure  of  getting  y'' 
letters  ?  Oh !  ponder  these  things,  and  listen  to  me  at  least  for 
y''  return !    I  will  not  look  back,  but  I  must  look  forward,  while 


266  LETTERS.  [1790 

I  am  on  earth  to  study  y"^  happiness  and  security.  That  cannot 
be  long — but  should  I  fail  before  y""  return,  who  will  be  equally 
active  for  y''  service  ?  You  have  been  so  kind  as  to  tell  me  I 
am  y""  true  friend ;  should  I  be  so  if  I  did  not  labour  to  prevent 
dangers  for  you,  and  did  not  warn  you  of  them  ?  I  write  so 
freely  and  warmly,  as  sure  of  y"^  receiving  this,  tho'  not  certain 
I  shall  have  leave  to  make  use  of  the  same  conveyance  often. 
Cultivate  L''  Hervey ;  he  may  perhaps  allow  you  to  receive  Miss 
Seton's  and  my  letters  in  his  packets — but  keep  that  a  secret. 
I  could  write  all  night,  but  surely  you  must  see  that  my  fears 
are  neither  ill-founded  nor  selfish.  Good  night !  may  Heaven 
preserve  you ! 

Saturday  night. 

I  have  nothing  to  add,  but  that  I  am  persuaded  the  mail  is 
lost,  for  I  have  no  letter,  and  have  written  to  Miss  Seton  to 
acquaint  her  with  my  suspicion  that  she  may  tranquillize  y'' 
grandniother.  This  is  a  vile  sheet  of  paper  and  sucks  up  the 
ink,  and  I  have  not  time  to  transcribe  it. 

Poor  Lady  Douglas  (Lady  Frances  Scott)  was  brought  to  bed 
ten  days  ago ;  is  most  dangerously  ill,  and  this  morning's  mes- 
sage said  the  fever  no  better. 

I  fear  a  particular  passage  to  Miss  Agnes  in  answer  to  her 
kind  scrap  must  have  been  amongst  the  letters  whose  fate  is 
still  iinknown  to  me — but  all  mine  are  equally  to  both,  as 
Cliveden  is ;  and  for  fear  of  mistakes  or  y"^  removal,  I  make  the 
address  of  this  double. 

Strawberry  Hill,  Dec.  20,  1790,  very  late  at  night. 

This  being  a  duplicate  or  rather  a  codicil  to  one  that  goes 
away  to-morrow  from  the  Secretary's  Office  in  Lord  Hervey's 
packet,  I  do  not  put  any  numero  to  it,  and  as  it  must  go 
hence  to-morow  very  early  by  the  coach,  I  write  a  few  lines 
just  to  contradict  what  I  have  said  about  lost  letters  in  the  letter 
you  will  receive  from  our  Minister. 

[The  French  pacquet  that  was  said  to  be  lost  on  Tuesday  last, 
and  which  did  hang  out  signals  of  distress,  was  saved,  but  did 
not  bring  any  letters ;  but  three  Flemish  mails  that  were  due, 
are  arrived,  and  did  bring  letters,  and,  to  my  inexpressible  joy, 
tivo  from  you  of  the  22nd  and  29th  of  last  month,  telling  me 
that  you  have  received  as  far  as  N°  4  and  5  of  mine.     I  am 


1790]  SATISFACTORY   COKEESPONDENCE.  267 

ashamed  to  say  that  with  this  there  are  eight  more  arrived  or  on 
the  road.  Y"  received  to-night  are  10  and  11.  I  conclude 
Miss  Seton  will  receive  one  or  two  from  one  of  you  to-morrow  at 
farthest,  as  I  am  sorry  to  say  she  has  one  from  me  this  morning, 
I  suppose,  lamenting  the  loss  of  the  French  pacquet.  Thank  all 
the  stars  in  Herschell's  telescope  or  beyond  its  reach,  that  our 
correspondence  is  out  of  the  reach  of  France  and  all  its  ravages !] 

I  truly  have  been  in  such  distress  and  confusion  about  y'' 
finding  no  letters  at  Florence,  that  I  have  scarce  thought  oi- 
talked  of  anything  else  but  contrivances  to  remedy  that  disaster. 
Y"  two  letters  have  made  me  quite  easy,  and  I  shall  fall  into  our 
natural  commerce  again. 

Y''  letters,  tho'  I  still  maintain  longer  than  I  wish  you  to 
write,  contain  everything  I  like  to  know  except  the  last  article, 
but  the  uppermost  in  my  thoughts,  y""  drinking  whey  from 
having  been  overheated  by  y'  journey.  I  hope  y"^  next  will 
be  as  minute,  on  that  article,  and  as  satisfactory  as  y"^  account 
of  Miss  Agnes,  which  doubles  the  pleasure  the  arrival  of 
these  letters  has  given  me.  I  rejoice  that  Mr.  Berry  continues 
so  well. 

After  a  deluge  of  letters  for  some  days,  I  have  not  left  myself 
a  tittle  to  tell  you.  Nay,  doubting  whether  any  w"*  reach  you, 
I  have  repeated  three  or  four  times  every  tittle  I  wanted  you  to 
know. 

[Thank  you  a  million  of  times  for  all  y''  details  about  your- 
selves. Whenever  the  apprehension  of  any  danger  disquiets  me 
so  much,  judge  whether  I  do  not  interest  myself  in  every  parti- 
cular of  y''  pleasures  and  amusements.  Florence  was  my  delight 
as  it  is  yours ;  but — I  don't  know  how — I  wish  you  did  not  like  it 
quite  so  much  !  And  after  the  Gallery — how  will  any  silver- 
penny  of  a  gallery  book  ?  Indeed  for  y''  Boboli,  which  I  thought 
horrible  even  fifty  years  ago,  before  Shepherds  had  seen  the  star 
of  taste  in  the  West,  and  glad  tidings  were  proclaimed  to  their 
flocks,  I  do  think  there  is  not  an  acre  on  the  banks  of  the 
Thames  that  should  vail  the  bonnet  to  it. 

Of  Mr.  Burke's  book,  if  I  have  not  yet  told  you  my  opinion, 
I  do  now — that  it  is  one  of  the  finest  compositions  in  print. 
There  is  reason,  logic,  wit,  truth,  eloquence,  and  enthusiasm  in 
the  brightest  colours.  That  it  has  given  a  mortal  stab  to  sedi- 
tion I  believe  and  hope,  because  the  fury  of  the  Brabanters, 


268  LETTERS.  Cl790 

■whom,  however,  as  haviDg  been  aggrieved,  I  pity  and  distinguish 
totally  from  the  savage  Grauls,  and  the  unmitigated  and  exe- 
crable injustices  of  the  latter,  have  made  almost  any  state  pre- 
ferable to  such  anarchy  and  desolation  that  increases  every  day. 

Admiring  thus  as  I  do,  I  am  very  far  from  subscribing  to  the 
extent  of  almost  all  Mr.  Burke's  principles.  The  work  I  have  no 
doubt  will  hereafter  be  applied  to  support  very  high  doctrines,  and 
to  you  I  will  say,  that  I  think  it  an  Apocrypha,  that  in  many  a 
council  of  bishops  will  be  added  to  the  Old  Testament.  Still 
such  an  Almanzor  was  wanting  at  this  crisis,  and  his  foes  show 
how  deeply  they  are  wounded  by  their  abusive  pamphlets.  Their 
Amazonian  allies,  headed  by  Kate  Macaulay*  and  the  virago 
Barbauld,t  whom  Mr.  Burke  calls  our  Poissardes,  spit  their  rage 
at  eighteen  pence  a  head,  and  will  return  to  P'leet  Ditch,  more 
fortunate  in  being  forgotten  than  their  predecessors  immortal- 
ized in  the  'Dunciad.' 

I  must  now  bid  you  good  night,  and  night  it  is  to  the  tune  of 
morning.     Adieu  all  three  !] 

P.S. — I  am  glad  you  did  not  get  a  Parmesan  Otranto.  A  copy 
is  come  so  full  of  faults,  that  it  is  not  fit  to  behold  here. 

To  Mr.  Berry. 

Strawberry  HiU,  Dec.  23, 1790. 
Dear  Sir, — If  your  letter  did  not  give  me  so  much  plea- 
sure from  many  particulars  I  should  be  vexed  at  y'  thinking  it 
necessary  to  thank  me  for  an  affection,  by  which  I  am  cer- 
tainly by  far  the  greatest  gainer.  At  my  great  age,  and 
decrepit  as  I  am,  what  could  happen  so  fortunate  to  me  in  the 
dregs  of  life  as  to  meet  with  you  and  your  daughters,  those  very 
pretty  young  women,  universally  admired,  and  all  the  more 
for  their  virtues,  sweet  tempers,  knowledge,  and  such  funds  of 
good  sense,  as  makes  them  company  for  the  most  sensible  of 
both  sexes,  as  you  constantly  have  seen.  Was  not  this  an 
acquisition  to  value  as  I  do,  when  you  allowed  me  to  enjoy  so 
much  of  y''  society  ?     Indeed,  I  sometimes  reproach  myself,  and 

*  A  pampHet  entitled  'Observations  on  the  Rigbt  Honourable  Edmund 
Burke  on  the  Revolution  in  France/  in  a  letter  to  Earl  Stanhope,  was 
attributed  to  Mrs.  Macaulay. 

f  Anna  Lastitia  Barbauld  wrote  some  political  pamphlets. 


1790]  LETTER  TO   ME.    BEERY.  269 

s&,y,  Did  not  I  engross  too  much  of  their  time,  and  may  not  my 
blind  self-love  have  contributed  to  deprive  me  of  that  blessing  ? 
Yes,  I  know  it  was  unreasonable,  and  may  never  be  so  happy 
again !  Can  I  at  past  73  depend  on  a  year's  life  ?  I  am  not  so 
vainly  sanguine.  Nay,  can  I  be  so  unjust  as  to  wish  to  shorten 
their  stay  in  a  country  to  which  they  are  so  partial  ?  Yet 
human  nature,  tho'  worn  out,  cannot  with  all  its  reason,  philoso- 
phy, and  what  is  much  stronger  in  me,  friendship,  put  itself  so 
entirely  out  of  the  question,  as  to  eradicate  every  hope,  that 
they  may  have  a  wish  to  return  home  ;  tho'  you  alarm  me,  S"", 
when  you  speak  hypothetically  of  being  in  England  by  the 
annual  period  of  y"^  setting  out — should  there  be  an  If  in  the  case, 
I  doubt  there  will  be  no  If  for  me.  Forgive  my  returning  y'' 
favour  by  this  melancholy  strain.'  I  am  too  weak  to  command 
myself,  and  the  best  advice  I  can  give  to  y"^  daughters  is  to 
gratify  their  own,  and  so  reasonable,  inclinations,  and  ascribe 
my  grief  to  what  I  should  think  myself  and  would  allow  to 
be  dotage,  if  there  were  one  spark  of  ridiculous  love  in  my 
affection  for  y''  daughters,  and  which  is  equal  for  both.  I  am 
most  happy  in  the  accounts  you  and  they  give  of  their  health 
and  looks. 

On  reading  what  I  have  been  writing,  I  perceive  I  had  omitted 
half  my  words.  In  fact  your  letter  arrived  at  nine  to-night, 
and  afiFected  me  so  much  that  I  began  to  answer  it  the  instant  I 
had  read  it,  and  have  written  in  great  precipitation.  I  will 
now  turn  to  subjects  less  interesting,  as  indeed  to  me  almost  all 
other  subjects  are.  I  will  only  first  say,  that  I  know  y''  daugh- 
ters have  friendships  in  Swisserland  that  may  detain  them  ;  but 
on  that  point  I  most  assuredly  prefer  your  safeties  to  the  whole 
mass  of  my  personalities,  and  implore  again  and  again  that  you 
will  cross  to  Flanders,  and  avoid  fatal  France. 

The  Duchess  of  Argyle  died  the  day  before  yesterday.  She 
had  kept  her  bed  for  some  days. 

Poor  Lady  Douglas  has  been  twice  thought  out  of  danger, 
but  is  relapsed  and  in  extreme  danger.  This  would  make  ano- 
ther gap  in  my  society:  she  is  very  sensible  and  amiable. 

Thursday,  2Srd. 
My  head  was  so  confused  last  night,  and  I  have  made  so 
many  interlineations,  that  I  can  scarce  read  it  myself — if  you 
cannot,  you  will  have  no  loss. 


270  LETTERS.  [1790 

When  I  went  to  bed,  the  wind  was  very  high,  yet  I  got  to 
sleep.  At  half  an  hour  after  four  I  was  waked  by  such  vollies 
of  thunder,  lightening,  hail,  and  then  a  torrent  of  rain,  as  I  be- 
lieve was  never  known  in  this  temperate  clime  two  days  before 
Christmas.  I  thought  my  little  castle  would  be  crushed  under 
the  bombardment.  The  lightening  darted  down  the  chimney, 
thro'  the  crevices  of  the  shutters  and  the  linen  curtains  of  my 
bed.  Some  of  my  servants  and  others  of  the  village  got  off 
their  beds — yet  I  find  no  mischief  done  here,  nor  yet  anywhere 
else ;  and  with  this  no  accident  I  must  supply  part  of  my  letter 
for  want  of  more  important  news.  The  debates  in  Parliament  on 
the  Spanish  Peace  and  the  new  taxes  have  produced  some  long 
days,  but  less  heat  than  ever,  and  hitherto  most  decided  ma-jori- 
ties.     About  Hastings's  trial  they  are  more  puzzled  than  angry. 

I  propose  settling  in  town  the  begiiming  of  next  week,  and 
after  the  holidays  shall  probably  be  less  sterile. 

Grive  me  leave  to  finish  with  an  observation,  that  for  three, 
not  new,  travellers,  you  seem  not  to  chuse  the  most  judicious 
months  for  your  journeys  :  the  coldest  and  the  hottest  can  not 
both  be  the  most  suitable.  You  went  to  Florence  in  November, 
and  propose  setting  out  for  Swisserland  towards  the  middle  of 
June — surely  May  would  be  preferable! 

Adieu  !  dear  S^  I  shall  always  be  happy  to  hear  from  you, 
if  without  thanks.  Y""  daughters  seem  .to  write  too  much  for 
their  delicate  breasts — why  not  take  it  by  turns  ? 

Y"  most  cordially, 

H.  W. 

Letters  from  Mrs.  Darner,  from  Lisbon. 

Nov.  21, 1790. 
.  .  .  You  cannot  form  to  yourself  any  idea  of  the  Portu- 
guese, their  indolence  or  indifference ;  neither  money  nor  en- 
treaty will  bring  them  ;  till  it  may  suit  their  own  particular  con- 
venience, there  is  no  getting  even  the  commonest  workman  near 
you.  When  I  came  I  found  two  panes  of  glass  broken,  and  for 
five  days,  tho'  the  master  of  the  house  and  my  own  servants 
went  twenty  times  a  day  after  the  people,  I  could  not  have 
them  put  in.  I  can  divest  myself  with  all  distresses  of  this  sort 
except  cold  ones.  ...  I  dined  at  our  Minister's  last  Thurs- 
day with  I  know  not  how  many  English,  of  that  sort  no  foreign 


1790]  LETTER  FROM   MRS.    DAMER.  271 

town  is  free  from,  fat  vulgar  women,  and  scowling  unknown 
men,  consuls,  and  some  of  the  Factory.  In  the  evening  we  had 
the  French  Ambassadress  (Madame  de  Chalons),  and  all  the 
Corps  DiploTnatique.  ...  I  should  like  to  see  something 
of  the  Portuguese,  which  is  not  easy  for  foreigners. 

Mr.  Walpole  *  is  to  carry  me  to  a  grand  fete  at  a  Portuguese 
house,  given  on  the  marriage  of  a  great  heiress,  who  has  mar- 
ried her  uncle,  as  she  could  find  no  one  great  enough  to  marry 
out  of  her  own  family. 

Lisbon,  Dec.  2,  1790. 

.  .  .  .  Nothing  can  be  more  civil  and  attentive  than  the 
people  in  general  are  to  me  here ;  Mr.  Walpole,  our  Minister, 
in  particular,  and  his  wife.  .  .  .  But  going  out  at  Lisbon  is 
really  an  operation.  .  .  .  There  are  in  general  only  two- 
wheeled  chaises,  open  before,  with  leathern  curtains  that  draw : 
you  set  out  as  if  you  went  on  a  journey,  and  go  nodding  along 
over  the  worst  pavement  commonly,  or  the  worst  road,  and  up 
and  down  the  very  steep  hills  on  which  this  town  stands ;  yet 
these  chaises  are  actually  the  vehicle  best  calculated  for  this 
town,  and  far  from  unpleasant  when  one  is  not  obliged  to  be 
much  dressed ;  but  you  may  guess  how  it  is  when  you  are  to 
scramble  up  into  such  a  carriage  in  rainy  weather  with  a  gauze 
petticoat  and  a  dressed  head.  A  four-wheeled  carriage  is  so  un- 
easy ;  it  is,  I  think,  scarcely  bearable.  These  are  used  (but  not 
without  four  mules)  by  ministers  and  great  persons,  and  here 
and  there  a  foreigner ;  but  there  is  no  such  thing  to  be  hired 
unless  by  chance.  My  own  coach,  were  it  here,  might  be  drawn 
up  the  hills  by  six  mules ;  but  could  never  be  kept  back  by 
two,  such  as  they  have  for  the  town.  You  will  imagine  that  all 
this  diverts  more  than  it  disturbs  me :   I  make,   however,  my 

necessary  visits.     On  Monday  in  the  evening  Mrs. ,  wife 

of  one  of  the  Factory,  sees  company ;  on  Wednesday,  a  Portu- 
guese house,  the  Marquis  D'Abrantes,  is  open ;  on  Thursday, 
Mrs.  Walpole's;  on  Friday,  the  long  room  (an  assembly  and 
ball);  on  Saturday,  the  French  Ambassadress ;  and  on  Sunday, 
the  opera  and  a  Portuguese  play,  if  one  chooses  to  go :  omnia 
habes,  except  some  dinners.  The  hours  are  early ;  sometimes 
they  begin  to  make  visits  at  five  o'clock,  and  everything  ends 
at  latest,  unless  it  be  some  fete,  by  eleven.     .     .     . 

*  English  Minister  at  Lisbon. 


272  LETTERS.  [1790 

The  weather  was  soft  this  morning,  and  I  went  in  my  chaise 
to  see  an  acqueduct  some  way  off,  yet  close  to  this  straggling 
town  on  one  side ;  but  here  you  have  a  corn-field,  an  orange- 
garden,  a  church,  and  then  a  house,  just  as  it  happens,  all  jum- 
bled in  the  oddest  queerest  manner  that  I  ever  yet  saw.  The 
acqueduct  may  be  called  magnificent ;  but  the  arches  are,  I 
think,  too  close,  the  height  in  one  part  immense,  it  looks  rather 
thin  and  poor  than  light  .  .  .  the  place  is  wild  and  rocky, 
with  some  gardens  of  orange  trees,  now  ripening,  and  some  olive 
trees.  I  do  not  love  comparisons ;  but  there  is  no  seeing  this 
place  without  thinking  of  the  Pont  du  Grard,  and  sadly  indeed 
it  loses  by  such  a  comparison,  though  the  one  is  in  all  its  glory, 
and  the  other  but  a  ruin. 

To  Miss  Berry,  Pisa. 

Lisbon,  Wednesday,  Dec.  8,  1790. 

I  went  yesterday  to  a  concert  and  ball  given  by  the  Due  de 
Cadaval  ...  I  am  glad  to  pass  this  evening  at  home  and 
in  my  cabinet,  of  which  I  wish  I  could  give  you  a  complete 
idea : — It  is  very  small,  whitewashed,  and  a  sort  of  farmhouse 
chimney  occupies  one-half  of  it,  high,  and  formed  with  large 
rough  stones,  some  shelves,  two  tables,  &c.,  many  chairs ;  here 
I  have  my  books  and  my  writing,  and  my  ideas  are  not  at  least 
outwardly  frozen.  .  .  .  Their  substitutes  for  fires  are  large 
cloaks,  of  the  form  you  see  at  Florence,  which  they  wear  very 
gracefully — men  and  women.  They  are  eternally  wrapped  up 
in  them,  riding,  walking,  hanging  over  a  balcony  when  the  sun 
shines,  or  sitting  at  home  in  a  state  of  idleness,  a  state  to  which 
they  seem  to  have  a  great  propensity,  by  what  I  hear  and 
by  the  little  I  have  seen.  .  .  .  It  is  very  lately  that  even 
the  nobility,  any  part  of  it,  have  quitted  these  and  other  good 
customs.  To  this  day  the  ladies  of  the  vieille  cour  plump  down 
on  the  floor  and  sit  with  their  legs  crossed  without  a  chair  in 
their  rooms.  I  do  assure  you  that  I  myself  at  one  of  their  as- 
semblies saw  a  woman  of  the  first  rank,  who  from  misfortune 
did  not  choose  to  appear  among  the  company,  sitting  in  deep 
mourning  on  the  floor,  just  within  the  door  of  the  next  room  with 
the  maids.  I  wish  they  had  not  begun  to  improve,  they  would  be 
much  more  entertaining,  tho'  indeed  no  stranger  would  be  likely 
to  be  much  the  better  for  it,  as  part  of  the  ceremony  is  to  live 


1791]  SOCIETY   AT   LISBON.  273 

quite  shut  up  with  their  own  families,  and  the  women  separately 
from  the  men,  even  near  relations  must  not  go  into  their  rooms, 
nor  speak  to  them,  in  strictness ;  particularly  a  fatur — a  young 
man  who  imagined  that  he  was  to  marry  a  cousin  of  his,  whom 
he  had  attended  and  followed  properly,  knew  that  the  match 
was  broken  off  because  one  evening  the  lady  asked  him  how  he 
did.  I  am  telling  literally  what  I  hear,  and  from  a  person  whom 
I  believe.  The  Due  de  Cadaval  is  the  first  nobleman  of  Por- 
tugal and  a  prince  of  the  blood,  and  yesterday  was  the  first  en- 
tertainment that  he  ever  gave ;  but  it  not  being  the  old  etftjuette 
even  for  married  women  to  go  to  the  house  of  an  unmarried 
man,  tho'  two  of  his  aunts  assisted  in  doing  the  honours  and 
were  there  to  receive  the  company,  many  of  the  starch  ones 
would  not  go,  or  were  not  suffered  to  go,  tho'  their  husbands 
were  there  dancing  away  and  enjoying  the  fete.  I  would  have 
nations  polish,  but  I  wish  the  polish  could  be  given  to  their 
own  national  customs  and  manners,  and  not  the  manners  of 
other  nations  always  attempted,  for  if  manque  nothing  can  be 
worse. 

Lisbon,  Dec.  25,  1790. 

On  Thursday  morning  I  took  a  second  view  of  the  aequeduct, 
walked  over  it  and  under  it,  and  one  must  stand  under  one  arch 
of  240  feet  to  have  an  idea  of  the  effect ;  that  is,  they  say,  the 
height  of  the  principal  arch,  and  I  fancy  there  is  not  such  ano- 
ther in  the  world.  The  building  consists  of  one  tier,  with  a 
gallery  on  each  side  of  where  the  water  flows  at  the  top.  The 
niches  are  in  proportion  extremely  narrow,  Gothic,  except  the 
end  ones,  which,  for  what  reason  I  know  not,  as  it  gives  an  ap- 
pearance of  patchwork,  the  architect  has  made  elliptic ;  but, 
whatever  faults  the  building  may  have,  there  is  no  seeing  it  in 
a  fine  day  with  a  bright  sun  without  being  much  struck  ;  or,  I 
doubt  not,  with  a  bright  moon,  as  you  saw  the  Champ  de  Mars. 
It  seemed  to  me  that  I  owed  it  this  reparation  cUhonneur,  as  I 
believe  my  first  account  to  you  was  not  favourable.  ...  I 
have  been  learning  Portuguese,  and  it  only  deserves  the  name  of 
a  dialect,  and  to  those  who  have  learned  other  languages  is  ridi- 
culously easy.  I  am  told,  too,  that  when  I  learn  Portuguese,  I 
shall  be  able  to  read  Spanish,  as  they  all  do,  without  learning 
it.  ...  I  cannot  help  thinking  of  poor  dear  Mr.  W.,  if  his 
mind  was  tolerably  at  ease  about  you,  and  that  he  could  turn  it 

VOL.  I.  T 


274  LETTERS.  [1790 

to  any  other  object.  What  a  fuss  he  must  have  been  in  about  his 
letters  !  he  has  always  a  horror  of  his  letters  being  seen  except 
by  those  they  are  intended  for ;  and  though  I  dare  say  he  took 
care  to  put  no  politics  in  them,  I  should  not  wonder  if  his  ima- 
gination presented  them  to  him  read  aloud  in  the  Assemblee 
Nationale. — Still  no  packets,  and  it  is  an  age  since  I  have  heard 
from  him,  and  my  last  letters  from  England  are  of  above  a 
month.     Farewell ! 


1791]  LETTERS.  275 


LETTEES. 

1791. 

Miss  Beret's  entry  in  her  memorandum-book  for  this 
year  is — 'After  winter  between  Florence  and  Pisa,  re- 
turn home  in  November,  take  possession  of  httle  Straw- 
berry Hill.' 

In  the  month  of  January  Mr.  Walpole  addressed  five 
letters  to  Miss  Berry  at  Pisa.  The  three  following  have 
not  been  pubhshed  before. 

Strawberry  Hill,  Jan.  2, 1791. 

I  doubt  the  letter  I  wrote  last  week  to  Mr.  B.  was  both  con- 
fused and  illegible — for  the  latter,  no  matter.  The  truth  is,  I 
had  got  the  gout  in  my  left  hand ;  and  whenever  a  fit  comes,  I 
suppose  it  may  be  my  last ;  and  the  consequence  of  that  idea 
was,  the  thought  that  I  might  never  see  you  more  !  I  had  just 
been  delighting  myself  with  having  settled  Cliveden — then  came 
Mr.  B.'s  letter,  which  after  relating  y""  plan,  and  mentioning  y'  in- 
tention of  being  at  home  by  the  period  of  y'  setting  out,  talked  of 
a  visit  to  Swisserland,  which  I  dreaded  w*  detain  you,  and  then 
said,  '  all  subject  to  correction  and  alteration.^  Those  words 
went  to  my  heart,  as  if  threatening  prolongation  of  y'  term, 
tho'  perhaps  meaning  only  the  intervening  time — in  short,  I 
quite  despaired ! 

I  have  had  the  gout  in  my  hand  for  above  a  fortnight  now  ; 
but  I  have  been  much  worse  with  the  rheumatism,  which  joined 
it,  and  still  possesses  that  whole  arm  and  shoulder.  1  have  been 
quite  immoveable,  but  by  two  servants ;  and  this  is  the  first 
day  I  have  been  able  to  attempt  writing  to  you.  I  have  no 
fever,  my  appetite  quite  perfect,  and  my  sleep  so  excellent,  that 
I  do  little  else  but  sleep.     The  exact  state  of  my  case  is,  that  I 

T  2 


276  LETTEKS.  [1791 

do  not  recover  so  fast  as  I  used  to  do,  which  is  not  at  all  sur- 
prising at  my  age  ;  nor  perhaps  so  soon  as  I  should  in  town  ; 
but  I  dread  a  relapse ;  and  besides,  as  my  greatest  danger 
always  lies  in  the  weakness  of  my  breast,  I  am  safer  here, 
where  I  see  nobody,  and  cannot  be  made  to  talk,  I  have  written 
all  this  in  my  lap  without  stopping,  so  you  may  be  sure  I  am 
not  very  bad — I  could  not  have  done  as  much  yesterday,  but  I 
certainly  am  better  to-day  than  I  have  been  at  all.  Now  I  will 
rest. 

Sunday  evening. 

Having  written  enough  with  my  own  hand  to  convince  you 
that  I  am  not  very  ill,  I  will,  for  ease,  let  Eargate  continue.  I 
received  yours.  No.  12,  of  December  the  6*'',  two  days  ago,  a 
long  time  coming !  However,  if  this  is  as  slow,  you  will  be 
pretty  sure  that  I  am  well  when  you  receive  it. 

I  am  glad  you  are  going  to  Pisa ;  Florence  is  too  cold  for  you. 
You  divert  me  with  the  account  of  the  Charming's  brother  being 
a  democrat:  upon  my  word,  the  transition  from  an  English 
Catholic  non-juror  to  a  French  leveller  is  Pindaric  enough. 
Still  it  does  not  look  well  for  the  National  Assembly  when  their 
proselytes  fly  the  country  as  well  as  those  they  persecute.  That 
Synod  has  lately  ordered  500,000L  sterling  to  be  issued  to  the 
famished  in  the  provinces.  They  ask  for  bread,  and  they  have 
given  them  paper.  They  might  as  well  have  sent  the  useless 
clergy, 

And  helpt  to  bury  those  they  helpt  to  starve. 

The  Duchess  of  Biron  is  returned  to  London,  where,  with  her 
spirit,  I  am  sure  she  is  better  than  at  Paris  :  she  was  at  the  play 
there,  and  a  song  applicable  to  the  Queen  being  encored  as  a 
compliment,  and  the  duchess  applauding  with  her  fan  on  the 
box,  a  shower  of  apples  flew  at  her,  and  with  them  a  penknife 
that  hardly  missed  her.  She  took  it  away  with  her,  and  the  next 
morning  sent  it  to  La  Fayette,  and  desired  he  would  lay  it  on 
the  altar  of  liberty,  and  then  came  away. 

I  have  little  or  no  English  news  for  you.  Lady  Douglas,  after 
so  many  struggles,  will  live.  It  is  declared  that  Mrs.  Child  is 
going  to  marry  Lord  Ducie ;  as  they  are  both  fifty,  nobody  can 
have  any  objection,  if  they  have  not  themselves.  She  gives  him 
ten  thousand  pounds ;  they  are  to  live  on  her  twenty  thousand 


1791]  WALPOLE's   growing   INFIRMITIES.  277 

pounds  a  year  from  the  shop,  and  she  reserves  in  her  own  power 
7O5OOOL  that  she  has  saved ;  my  lord  laying  up  his  own  estate 
for  his  two  sons. 

Monday,  3rd. 

I  chuse  to  finish  with  my  own  hand,  that  you  may  not  think 
me  worse:  indeed  I  am  better, but  the  amendment  is  very  slow; 
but  the  swelling  of  my  left  hand  remains,  and  the  elbow  and 
shoulder  are  still  lame.     This  is  the  whole  truth. 

Lady  Mt.  Edgcumbe  and  Mad.  de  la  Villebague  have  been 
here  from  Eichmond  this  morning,  and  says  Mrs.  Siddons  has 
suffered  so  much  by  her  late  exertions  that  she  has  relapsed, 
and  they  think  must  quit  the  stage.  They  told  me  nothing 
else,  and  so  I  will  conclude.  My  next  week's  letter  will  I  trust 
be  more  satisfactory.     Adieu  ! 

Strawberry  Hill,  Sunday,  Jan.  9,  1791. 

I  am  unfortunate,  for  when  I  want  most  to  satisfy  you  by 
writing  with  my  own  hand,  I  am  least  able  to  do  so  comfortably, 
for  the  rheumatism  is  got  into  my  right  elbow  too,  and  nothing 
can  be  more  awkward  than  my  writing  at  all.  You  may  be 
assured  now,  that  tho'  my  disorder  began  with  a  little  gout,  it  is 
a  decided  rheumatism,  which  I  think  much  worse,  as  it  is  not  so 
sure  of  quitting  its  hold.  My  best  prospect  is  being  carried  to 
tovm,  but  I  do  not  think  I  could  yet  bear  a  carriage.  All  I 
have  done  yet  is  to  walk  with  a  little  help  from  the  red  bed- 
chamber to  the  blue  room — that  is,  down  three  steps ;  and  that 
journey  contains  my  daily  and  whole  history. 

Now  I  have  satisfied  you  that  my  handwriting  is  alive,  it 
shall  act  by  proxy ;  but  it  will  not  be  like  a  King  that  says  a  few 
words,  and  then  tells  the  assembly  that  his  Chancellor  will 
deliver  the  rest ;  now  it  happens  that  Chancellor  Kirgate  has 
nothing  to  deliver,  for  he  nor  his  Majesty  know  a  word  of 
news. 

I  am  glad  you  are  pleased  with  your  lodgings  at  Pisa,  and 
think  you  shall  like  the  company.  It  is  a  novelty  to  me  that 
you  have  put  up  some  learned  men  there  ;  Mr.  Pinkerton,  who 
is  of  no  great  authority  with  you,  has  often  talked  to  me  of  the 
mighty  science  and  learning  of  the  Italians.  They  may  live  at 
Pisa  for  what  I  know ;  Mr.  Parsons  was  out  of  luck  to  live  so 


278  LETTEHS.  [1791 

long  at  Florence,  and  be  forced  to  go  to  search  for  the  wise  men 
in  Grermany.  I  shall  rest  at  present,  and  finish  this  to-morrow 
evening. 

Monday,  10th. 

I  try  to  write  a  little  myself,  and  you  see  I  can,  but  it  shall 
be  only  to  tell  you  my  exact  case,  in  which  I  have  not  deceived 
you.  It  is  most  clearly  rheumatism,  all  over  my  left  hand,  arm, 
and  shoulder,  which  I  do  not  find  mend  at  all,  and  for  the  last  two 
nights  the  right  elbow  has  been  bad  too.  I  rise  every  day  and 
sit  in  the  blue  room  till  eleven  at  night ;  but  the  weather  is 
most  unfortunate  for  me,  either  tempests  or  rains— the  meadows 
quite  overflowed.  I  will  undoubtedly  be  carried  to  town  the 
moment  it  is  possible. 

I  hope  I  shall  be  able  to  give  you  a  better  account  next 
week ;  and  that  shows  my  confidence  that  you  will  be  wishing 
for  a  better  account,  I  mean,  all  Three.     Adieu,  all  Three ! 

Berkeley  Square,  Jan.  15, 1791. 
If  I  had  not  promised  to  write  again  this  post,  I  should  have 
been  disinclined  to  it,  for  I  cannot  give  you  a  better  account  of 
myself.  The  first  amendment  I  perceived  was  on  Tuesday 
morning  last,  and  I  really  thought  the  worst  over,  but  after 
dinner  the  gout  came  into  my  right  hand,  and  has  taken  pos- 
session of  that  whole  arm  too,  while  the  left  hand  and  arm  are 
so  very  little  better  that  I  have  scarce  any  use  from  either.  In 
this  most  uncomfortable  state  I  did  determine  to  come  to  town, 
and  here  I  actually  arrived  yesterday:  I  bore  the  journey  very 
well,  and  had  a  better  night  after  it  than  I  had  had  for  some  time ; 
so  that  probably  the  warmth  of  London  has  contributed  a  little 
already,  and  may  in  time  do  more.  You  see  I  do  not  make  the 
case  better  than  it  is — danger  there  is  none — but  the  case  of  the 
sufferer  is  not  much  mitigated  by  that  consideration. 

Sunday,  16th. 
Tho'  I  have  had  a  good  night,  my  journal  does  not  yet 
improve ;  not  one  of  my  limbs  mends,  and  I  have  the  additional 
dread  of  the  gout  coming  into  one  of  my  knees.  In  this 
deplorable  state  you  may  imagine  I  scarce  see  anybody,  nor  can 
have  anything  almost  to  talk  of  but  my  suffering  helpless  self. 
It  is  vexatious  to  give  you  such  an  account,  but  I  am  sure  yoii 


1791]  walpole's  growing  inpiemities.  279 

had  rather  receive  this  true  than  a  fictitious  one ;  besides,  you 
may  reasonably  conclude  that  by  the  time  you  receive  this  letter 
there  may  be  some  considerable  amendment  in  me. 

Yesterday  I  received  your  No.  14,  of  the  22nd  of  last  month, 
with  an  account  of  your  Pisan  life  and  acquaintance;  just  what 
I  wanted  to  know,  yet  you  call  it  a  dull  detail :  think,  then, 
what  I  send  you  in  return,  the  journal  of  a  sick  room  !  Thank 
you  for  the  memoirs  of  the  Grrifonis,  and  for  Miss  Agnes's  horse. 
Now  I  will  bate  a  little. 

Sunday  evening. 

I  do  think  I  begin  to  use  a  finger  or  two  of  my  left  hand, 
which  is  a  great  event  in  this  room,  as  I  admit  no  others.  The 
Edgcumbes  and  Johnstones,  and  a  few  more  have  called  here 
this  morning,  but  I  could  not  see  them.  Lady  Mary  and  Mr. 
Churchill  are  almost  the  only  persons  I  do  receive,  and 
Jerningham  I  have  seen  once.  The  town,  they  say,  is  quite 
empty,  but  probably  will  be  fuller  by  Tuesday,  for  the  Queen's 
birthday.  I  shall  leave  a  little  of  my  paper  for  my  progress  to- 
morrow, if  I  make  any :  this  bulletin  is  long  enough  already. 

Monday,  17th. 
I  am  reduced  to  make  bonfires  for  negatives ;  the  gout  is  not 
come  into  my  knee,  and  I  must  rejoice  that  I  have  no  other 
matter  of  triumph,  as  I  have  not  recovered  one  joint  in  either 
arm  or  hand  ;  so  I  will  finish  this  letter,  as  I  shall  have  certainly 
nothing  better  to  tell  you  by  this  post.    Adieu  ! 

Tuesday  morning,  18tb. 
I  just  add  one  line  before  this  goes  to  the  post  to  say  that  I 
have  had  another  very  good  night,  and  yet,  alas  !  I  do  not  find 
any  amendment ;  what  time  may  do  I  do  not  know. 

[Berkeley  Square,  Sat.,  Jan.  22,  1791. 
I  have  been  mo-st  unwillingly  forced  to  send  you  such  bad  ac- 
counts of  myself  by  my  two  last  letters,  but  as  I  could  not  conceal 
all,  it  was  best  to  tell  you  the  whole  truth.  Tho'  I  did  not  know 
that  there  was  any  real  danger,  I  could  not  be  so  blind  to  my 
own  age  and  weakness,  as  not  to  think  that  with  so  much  gout 
and  fever  the  conclusion  might  very  probably  be  fatal,  and 
therefore  it  was  better  you  should  be  prepared  for  what  might 
happen.     The  danger  appears  to  be  entirely  over ;  there  seems 


280  LETTEES.  [1791 

no  more  gout  to  come;  I  have  no  fever,  have  a  very  good 
appetite,  and  sleep  well.  Mr.  Watson,*  who  is  all  tenderness 
and  attention,  is  persuaded  to-day  that  I  shall  recover  the  use 
of  my  left  hand,  of  which  I  despaired  much  more  than  of 
the  right,  as  having  been  seized  three  weeks  earlier.  Emaciated 
and  altered  I  am  incredibly,  as  you  would  find  were  you  ever 
to  see  me  again.  But  this  illness  has  dispelled  all  visions  ! 
And  as  I  have  so  little  prospect  of  passing  another  happy 
autumn,  I  must  wean  myself  from  whatever  would  embitter  my 
remaining  time  by  disappointments. 

Your  No.  15  came  two  days  ago,  and  gives  me  the  pleasure 
of  knowing  that  you  both  are  the  better  for  riding,  which  I  hope 
you  will  continue.  I  am  glad,  too,  that  you  are  pleased  with 
your  Duchess  of  Fleury  and  your  Latin  Professor ;  but  I  own, 
except  your  climate  and  the  600  camels,  you  seem  to  me 
to  have  met  with  no  treasure  which  you  might  not  have  found 
here  without  going  twenty  miles  ;  and  even  the  camels,  accord- 
ing to  Soame  Jenyns's  spelling,  were  to  be  had  from  Carrick 
and  other  places. 

I  doubt  you  apply  Tully  de  Amicitia  too  favourably— at  least, 
I  fear,  there  is  no  paragraph  that  countenances  73  and  27.] 

I  wonder  you  have  not  heard  oftener  from  Lisbon.  She 
(Mrs.  Damer)  seems  perfectly  well,  and  to  have  settled  her 
return,  which  is  to  be  thro'  Spain:  after  the  20th  of  February 
our  letters  are  to  be  directed  to  Madrid.  She  is  in  great  distress, 
and  I  heartily  pity  her,  about  Fidele,t  which  seems  dying, 

[Monday,  24tli. 

I  think  I  shall  give  you  pleasure  by  telling  you  that  I  am 
very  sure  now  of  recovering  from  the  present  fit.  It  has  almost 
always  happened  to  me,  in  my  considerable  fits  of  the  gout, 
to  have  one  critical  night  that  celebrates  its  departure :  at  the 
end  of  two  different  fits  I  each  time  slept  eleven  hours : 
Morpheus  is  not  quite  so  young  nor  so  generous  now,  but  with 
the  interruption  of  a  few  minutes,  he  presented  me  with  eight 
hours  last  night,  and  thence  I  shall  date  my  recovery. 

I  shall  now  begin  to  let  in  a  little  company,  and  as  the 

*  His  surgeon. 

t  Mrs.  Darner's  dog ;  it  died  at  Lisbon. 


1791]      WALPOLE'S  LOIfGING  FOR  THE  BEEETS'  EETUEN.      281 

Paxliament  will  meet  in  a  week,  my  letters  will  probably  not  be 
so  dull  as  they  have  been,  nor  shall  I  have  occasion,  nor  be 
obUged  to  talk  so  much  of  myself,  of  which  I  am  sure  others 
must  be  tired,  when  I  am  so  much  tired  myself. 

Tuesday,  25tli. 

I  have  had  another  good  night,  and  clearly  do  mend.  I  even 
hope  that  in  a  fortnight  I  shall  be  able  to  write  a  few  lines  with 
my  own  hand. 

[Old  Mrs.  French*  is  dead  at  last ;  and  I  am  on  the  point  of 
losing,  or  have  lost,  my  oldest  acquaintance  and  friend,  Greorge 
Selwyn,  who  was  yesterday  at  the  extremity.  These  misfortunes, 
tho'  they  can  be  so  but  for  a  short  time,  are  very  sensible  to  the 
old ;  but  him  I  really  loved,  not  only  for  his  infinite  wit,  but  for 
a  thousand  good  qualities. 

The  Gunnings  are  still  playing  the  fool,  and  perhaps  some- 
body with  them,  but  I  cannot  tell  you  the  particulars  now. 
Adieu !] 

Mr.  Walpole's  letter  of  January  22  is  in  his  secretary's 
(Kirgate's)  handwriting. 

In  his  letter  of  the  29th  to  the  Miss  Berrys,  he  writes, 
confirming  the  account  of  his  recovery,  and  in  tolerably 
cheerful  spirits  ;  but  far  other  was  the  tone  of  the  next 
letter,  dated  February  4,  and  which  begins  with  this 
melancholy  sentence  : — 

[Last  post  I  sent  you  as  cheerful  a  letter  as  I  could,  to  convince 
you  I  was  recovering.  This  will  be  less  gay,  because  I  have  much 
more  pain  in  my  mind  than  in  my  limbs.  I  see  and  thank  you 
for  all  the  kindness  of  your  intention  ;  but  as  it  has  the  contrary 
effect  from  what  you  expect,  I  am  forced  for  my  own  peace  to 
beseech  you  not  to  continue  a  manoeuvre  that  only  tantalises 
and  wounds  me.  In  your  last  you  put  together  many  friendly 
words  to  give  me  hopes  of  your  return ;  but  can  I  be  so  blind  as 
not  to  see  that  they  are  vague  words  ?  Did  you  mean  to  return 
in  autumn,  would   you  not  say  so?     Would  the  most  artful 

*  An  Irish  lady  wKo,  during  the  latter  part  of  her  life,  had  a  country 
house  at  Hampton  Court. — M.B. 


282  LETTERS.  [1791 

arrangement  of  words  be  so  kind  as  those  few  simple  ones  ?  In 
fact  I  have  for  some  time  seen  how  little  you  mean  it,  and  for 
your  sakes,  I  cease  to  desire  it.] 

This  sudden  burst  of  wounded  and  irritable  feeling 
was  in  consequence  of  Mrs.  Damer  having  written  him 
word  that  he  must  not  expect  the  Miss  Berrys'  return  till 
the  following  spring.  The  rest  of  the  letter  is  in  the  same 
strain,  and  must  have  been  at  once  painful  and  gratifying 
to  them  to  receive,  as,  even  in  the  bitter  and  somewhat 
unreasonable  expression  of  his  disappointment  at  their 
prolonged  absence,  they  could  not  fail  to  see  in  every 
line  of  his  reproachful  regret  how  necessary  their  presence 
was  to  his  comfort  and  happiness. 

In  his  letter  of  February  12,  he  thus  declines  their  offer 
of  shortening  their  tour  : — 

[Berkeley  Square,  Feb.  12,  1791. 

I  have  received  y'  two  letters  of  Jan.  17*  and  27*,  with  an 
account  of  your  objects  and  plans,  and  the  latter  are  very  much 
what  I  expected,  as  before  you  receive  this,  you  will  have  seen 
by  my  last,  No.  18.  Indeed,  you  most  kindly  offer  to  break  so 
far  into  y'  plan  as  to  return  at  the  beginning  of  next  winter ; 
but  as  that  would,  as  you  say,  not  only  be  a  sacrifice,  but  risk 
y'  healths,  can  anything  upon  earth  be  more  impossible  than  for 
me  to  accept  or  consent  to  such  a  sacrifice  ?  Were  I  even 
in  love  with  one  of  you,  could  I  agree  to  it  ?  and  being  only  a 
most  zealous  friend,  do  you  think  I  will  hear  of  it  ?  Should 
I  be  a  friend  at  all,  if  I  wished  you,  for  my  sake,  to  travel  in 
winter  over  mountains,  or  risk  the  storms  at  sea,  that  I  have  not 
forgotten  when  you  went  away  ?  Can  I  desire  you  to  derange  a 
reasonable  plan  of  economy,  that  would  put  you  quite  at  your 
ease  at  y""  return  ?  Have  I  any  pretensions  for  expecting,  stUl 
less  for  asking,  such  or  any  sacrifices  ?  Have  I  interested  my- 
self in  y''  affairs  only  to  embarrass  them  ?] 

The  only  point  on  which  I  can  make  a  shadow  of  complaint, 
is  y''  talking  of  what  I  did  to  assist  y''  going,  as  a  reason  for  y'" 
wishing  to  stay  longer  abroad;   that  would  be  hard  indeed 


1791]  WALPOLE's   growing   INFIRMITIES.  283 

on  me,  and  would  be  punishing  me  severely  for  doing  you 
a  trifling  service !  But  when  you  have  other  and  substantial 
reasons  for  not  returning  before  spring  twelvemonth,  it  is  useless 
to  talk  on  the  other. 

[I  do  in  the  most  positive  and  solemn  manner  refuse  to  accept 
the  smallest  sacrifice  of  any  part  of  y''  plan  (but  the  single  point 
that  would  be  so  hard  upon  me).  I  vn\l  say  not  a  word  more 
on  y'  return,  and  beg  y"^  pardon  for  having  been  so  selfish  as  to 
desire  it.  My  only  request  now  is  that  we  may  say  no  more 
about  it.  I  am  grieved  that  the  great  distance  we  are  at  must 
make  me  still  receive  letters  about  it  for  some  weeks.  I  shall 
not  forget  how  very  unreasonable  I  have  been  myself,  nor  shall 
I  try  to  forget  it,  lest  I  should  be  so  silly  again  ;  but  I  earnestly 
desire  to  be  totally  silent  on  a  subject  that  I  have  totally  aban- 
doned, and  which  it  is  not  at  all  improbable  I  may  never  have 
occasion  to  renew.] 

Y'  other  letter  talks  as  kindly  as  possible  on  my  illness,  on 
which  I  am  sure  I  have  not  deceived  you,  tho'  I  have  talked  too 
much  on  it ;  and  on  which,  to  satisfy  you,  I  will  still  be  particu- 
lar. A  fortnight  ago  I  had  every  reason  to  think  myself  quite 
recovering,  but  in  my  left  band ;  then  my  pains  returned  for  a 
week :  they  are  again  gone  but  in  my  left  wrist,  which  to-day  is 
uneasy  enough.  One  comfort,  however,  I  have,  which  is  the 
conviction  that  all  my  pains  have  been  and  are  gouty,  not 
rheumatic,  which  I  dread  much  more  as  less  likely  to  leave  me. 
The  moment  I  lie  down  in  bed,  I  go  to  sleep,  and  often  sleep 
five,  nay,  seven  hours  together  without  waking.  But  there  lies 
my  whole  strength.  A  lover,  especially  one  of  73,  would  not 
give  you  these  details.  But,  tho'  I  have  been  unreasonable, 
and  I  suspect  vain,  I  am  not  ridiculous.— Let  us  pass  to  better, 
that  is,  to  any  other  subjects. 

Miss  Foldson  is  a  prodigy  of  dishonest  impertinence.  I  sent 
her  word  a  week  ago,  by  Kirgate,  that  I  was  glad  she  had  so 
much  employment,  but  wished  she  w"*  recollect  that  y'  pictures 
had  been  paid  for  these  four  months.  She  was  such  a  fool  as  to 
take  the  compliment  seriously,  and  to  thank  me  for  it,  but  ver- 
bally, and  I  have  heard  no  more ;  so  I  suppose  she  thinks  me 
as  dirunk  with  her  honours  as  she  is.  I  shall  undeceive  her,  by 
sending  for  the  pictures  again,  and  telling  her  I  can  get  twenty 


284  LETTERS.  [1791 

persons  to  finish  them  as  well  as  she  can  ;  and  so  they  could  the 
likenesses,  and,  I  doubt,  better.  What  glories  have  befallen 
Mrs.  BuUer  I  know  not,  but  I  have  not  heard  a  word  more  of 
her! 

[The  flirts  towards  anarchy  here  have  no  effect  at  all.  Home 
Tooke  before  Christmas  presented  a  saucy  libel  to  the  House  of 
Commons  as  a  petition  on  his  election.  The  House  contemp- 
tuously voted  it  only  frivolous  and  vexatious,  and  disappointed 
him  of  a  ray  of  martyrdom ;  but  his  fees,  &c.,  will  cost  him 
three  or  four  hundred  p'^%  which  never  go  into  a  mob's  calcula- 
tion of  the  ingredients  of  martyrdom.] 

I  believe  I  am  rather  worse  than  I  know  (and  yet  you  need 
not  be  alarmed),  for  some  of  my  relations,  who  never  troubled 
themselves  much  about  me,  grow  very  attentive,  and  send  me 
game  and  sweetmeats,  which  rather  do  me  good,  for  they  make 
me  smile ;  and  tho'  this  fit  may  be  going,  they  are  sure  I  can- 
not grow  younger. 

[Monday  morning,  14tli. 

I  have  a  story  to  tell  you  much  too  long  to  add  to  this,  which 
I  will  send  next  post,  unless  I  have  leisure  enough  to-day  from 
people  that  call  on  me  to  finish  it  to-day  (having  begun  it  last 
night),  and  in  that  case  I  will  direct  it  to  Miss  Agnes.] 

Tuesday. 
I  have  finished  my  narrative,  and  it  goes  to-night  with  this. 
I  have  been  without  pain  these  two  days.     Adieu  ! 

In  his  letter  of  the  13th,  he  gives  the  Miss  Berrys  a 
playful  narrative  of  what  he  terms  the  '  Gunninghiad,'  a 
confused  and  mysterious  piece  of  gossip  in  which  Mr. 
Walpole  was  much  interested,  and  which  related  to  a  re- 
ported marriage  of  Miss  Gunning*  and  Lord  Blandford. 

He  also  adds  a  better  account  of  his  health. 

In  his  letter  to  the  two  sisters,  dated  February  20, 
he  teUs  Miss  Berry  that — 

[O'Hara  is  come  to  town,  and  you  will  love  him  better  than 

*  Daughter  of  General  Gunning,  son  of  John  Gunning,  Esq.,  of  Castle 
Combe,  Co.  Roscommon,  and  brother  of  the  beautiful  Miss  Gunning. 


1-Dl]  AN   ANECDOTE.  286 

ever ;  lie  persuaded  the  captain  of  the  ship,  whom  you  will  love 
for  being  persuaded,  to  stop  at  Lisbon  that  he  might  see  Mrs. 
Damer.     O'Hara  has  been  shockingly  treated.] 

In  his  letter  of  the  28th,  he  says — 

[I  wish  in  No.  20  you  had  not  again  named  October  or 
November.  I  have  quite  given  up  those  months,  and  am  vexed 
I  ever  pressed  for  them,  as  they  would  break  into  your  reason- 
able plans,  for  which  I  abandon  any  foolish  one's  of  my  own. 
But  I  am  a  poor  philosopher,  or  rather  am  like  all  philosophers, 
have  no  presence  of  mind,  and  must  study  my  part  before  I 
can  act  it.  I  have  now  settled  myself  not  to  expect  you  this 
year ;  do  not  unsettle  me ;  I  dread  a  disappointment  as  I  do  a 
relapse  of  the  gout,  and  therefore  cut  this  article  short,  that  I 
may  not  indulge  vain  hopes.] 

On  the  5th  of  March  he  writes  in  his  more  usual 
tone  : — 

[Berkeley  Square,  March  5, 1791. 

One  may  live  in  a  vast  capital,  and  know  no  more  of  three 
parts  of  it  than  of  Carthage.  When  I  was  at  Florence,  I  have 
surprised  some  Florentines  by  telling  them  that  London  Was 
built  like  their  city  (where  you  often  cross  the  bridges  several 
times  in  a  day)  on  each  side  of  the  river,  and  yet  that  I  had 
never  been  but  on  one  side,  for  then  I  had  never  been  in 
Southwark.  When  I  was  very  young,  and  in  the  height  of 
the  opposition  to  my  father,  my  mother  wanted  a  large  parcel 
of  bugles,  for  what  use  I  forget.  As  they  were  then  out  of 
fashion,  she  could  get  none.  At  last  she  was  told  of  a  quantity 
in  a  little  shop  in  an  obscure  alley  in  the  City :  we  drove 
thither,  found  a  great  stock ;  she  bought  it,  and  bad  the  pro- 
prietor send  it  home.  He  said,  'Whither?'  'To  S"^  Eobert 
Wal pole's.'     He  asked  coolly,  '  Who  is  S'  Eobert  Walpole  ?' 

This  is  very  like  Cambridge,  who  tells  you  three  stories  to 
make  you  understand  a  fourth.] 

Good  Hannah  More  is  labouring  to  amend  our  religion,  and 
has  just  published  a  book  called  '  An  Estimate  of  the  Religion  of 
the  Fashionable  World.'  It  is  prettily  written,  but  her  enthu- 
siasm increases ;  and  when  she  comes  to  town,  I  shall  tell  her 


286  '  LETTERS.  [1791 

that  if  she  preaches  to  people  of  fashion,  she  will  be  a  bishop 
in  partibus  infidelium. 

Lady  Cecilia's  disorder  has  literally  terminated  in  the  gout 
in  her  foot.  I  called  on  her  this  evening,  but  as  she  was  in  her 
bedchamber  up  two  pair  of  stairs,  my  gout  would  not  let  me  be 
so  clamberaceous ;  and  indeed,  she  sent  Miss  Johnstone  down 
to  the  coach  to  me  to  desire  I  would  not  attempt  it.  I  think, 
if  the  remedy  is  not  as  bad,  that  the  gout  may  relieve  her 
headachs. 

[Grood  night !  I  have  two  days  to  wait  for  a  letter  that  I  may 
answer.  Stay!  I  should  tell  you  that  I  have  been  at  S'  Joseph 
Banks's  literary  saturnalia,  where  was  a  Parisian  watchmaker, 
who  produced  the  smallest  automaton  that  I  suppose  was  ever 
created.  It  was  a  rich  snuffbox,  not  too  large  for  a  woman. 
On  opening  the  lid,  an  enamelled  bird  started  up,  sat  on  the 
rim,  turned  round,  fluttered  its  wings,  and  piped  in  a  delight- 
ful tone  the  notes  of  dilBFerent  birds,  particularly  the  jug,  jug 
of  the  nightingale.  It  is  the  prettiest  plaything  you  ever  saw — 
the  price  tempting — only  five  hundred  pd^  That  economist 
the  P.  of  W.  could  not  resist  it,  and  has  bought  one  of  those 
dickybirds.  If  the  maker  finds  such  customers,  he  will  not  end 
like  one  of  his  profession  here,  who  made  the  serpent  in 
'  Orj)heus  and  Eurydice,'*  and  who  fell  so  deeply  in  love  with  his 
own  works,  that  he  did  nothing  afterwards  but  make  serpents 
of  all  sorts  and  sizes,  till  he  was  ruined  and  broke.] 

It  is  six  o'clock  of  Monday  evening  the  7th,  and  no  letters 
from  Pisa ;  but  I  will  not  seal  this  till  to-morrow  noon,  in  hopes 
- — ^otherwise  I  have  not  a  tittle  to  add,  but  that  Lady  Mary 
Palk  is  dead  in  childbed :  I  think  I  have  heard  you  mention 
her,  or  I  should  not,  for  I  did  not  know  her. 

The  Mesdames  are  said  to  be  safely  out  of  France,  after  being 
stopped  3  times.  There  have  been  great  mobs  at  the  Luxem- 
bourg and  the  Tuileries,  and  La  Fayette  is  said  rather  to  have 
acted  the  royalist.  The  provinces  grow  turbulent,  but  you  must 
hear  French  news  sooner  and  more  authentically  than  I  do.  Of 
the  Gunning  not  a  word  since  my  last ;  nor  of  Mrs.  Buller,  tho' 
I  have  called  on  her ;  nor  of  the  righteous  Miss  Foldson. 

[The  Lord  Mayor  did  not  fetch  Mad.  du  Barry  in  the  city- 

*  A  celebrated  opera. 


1791]  RETURN   OF   THE   GOUT.  287 

royal  coach,  but  kept  her  to  dinner.     She  is  gone,  but  re- 
turns in  April.* 

Tuesday  morning. 

I  find  y'  No.  21  on  my  table,  but  as  it  only  talks  of  y""  life  at 
Pisa,  and  of  the  community  of  apartments,  which  appears  as 
bad  as  Buxton  or  Harrowgate,  I  have  nothing  to  add  but  to 
wonder  how  any  one  can  seek  such  an  uncomfortable  life  a 
second  time.     Adieu ! 

P.S. — I  should  not  wonder  if  Italians  flock  hither,  for  Car- 
navali  the  exhibitor  of  the  Fantoccini,  has  got  one  of  the 
20,000Z.  in  the  lottery — ^but  had,  unluckily  for  him,  sold  two- 
thirds  of  it. 

On  the  11th,  the  13th,  and  14th,  included  in  one  letter, 
Mr.  W.  writes  as  follows  : — 

Berkeley  Square,  March  11, 1791. 

I  usually  begin  my  letters  to  you  on  Fridays,  but  to-day  for 
a  different  reason,  not  because  I  have  anything  to  say,  but  like 
the  French  lady  to  her  husband,  because  I  have  ;aothing  to  do. 
In  short,  I  have  got  a  little  codicil  to  my  gout.  It  returned 
into  my  ankle  on  Monday  and  Tuesday,  left  it  on  Wednesday, 
and  yesterday  came  into  my  knee.  I  have  no  pain,  unless  I 
attempt  to  walk ;  so  have  been  forced  just  now  to  send  an 
excuse  to  Lady  Louisa  Macdonald,f  where  I  was  to  have  been 
to-night — and  so  must  amuse  myself  en  famille. 

The  Gunnings  continue  to  supply  me  with  matter.  As  it 
is  now  known  that  two  of  the  Minifry  have  been  mad,  I  should 
conclude  the  mother  and  daughter  were  so,  if  two  persons  could 
lose  their  senses  at  the  same  period,  and  on  the  same  subject. 
Well,  these  two  outpensioners  of  Bedlam  have  sent  a  new  narra- 
tive to  the  Duke  of  Marlborough,  wherein  the  infanta  maintains 
to  his  grace's  face,  that  she  passed  three  days  with  him  and  the 
D*'  this  summer  at  Sion,  tho'  it  was  but  three  hours ;  and  cites 
a  kind  speech  of  his  to  her,  for  the  truth  of  which  she  appeals 
to  S"'  John  Eiddel,  who  was  present  and  heard  it.  The  duke 
doubting  his  own  eyes  or  memory,  questions  S'  John,  who, 

*  She  never  returned,  but  perished  on  the  guillotine. 

t  Daughter  to  Earl  Gower,  and  sister  to  the  first  Duke  of  Sutherland. 


288  LETTERS.  [1791 

equally  amazed,  says,  '  Y"^  grace  knows  I  had  not  the  honour  of 
being  with  you  at  Sion  when  Miss  Gunning  was  there.'  All 
this  is  a  new  style  of  romancing,  and  tho'  I  repeat  it,  I  can 
scarce  believe  it  while  I  repeat  it. 

The  letter  to  the  Duke  of  Argyll  is  to  appear  next  week. 
Somebody  has  sent  a  proof  of  the  frontispiece  to  the  Duke,  who 
showed  it  to  Gen.  Conway,  as  Lord  Lorn  has  to  Mrs.  Anderson. 
There  is  a  medallion  of  Guanilda  supported  by  two — Cupids,  not 
marquisses,  her  name,  and  4  verses  beneath.  The  D^^  of  Bed- 
ford has  written  to  Lord  Lorn,  begging  him  to  intercede  for  his 
cousin,  for  the  sake  of  his  dear  mother  *  who  doated  on  her,  and 
which  dear  mother  she,  D'^  Gertrude,  introduced  into  the  world. 
If  Pisa  or  Florence  produce  more  diversion  than  London,  you 
have  but  to  say  so. 

The  Haymarket  Theatre  opened  last  night  with  an  opera 
gratis.  It  is  computed  that  four  thousand  persons  accepted 
the  favour,  and  the  theatre  is  allowed  to  be  the  most  splendid 
and  convenient,  let  Naples  say  what  it  will ;  the  singers  very 
indifferent ;  the  dancers  ( Vestris  and  Hilsberg)  and  the  dances 
charming.  Still  it  is  probable  there  will  be  no  more  represen- 
tations, for  people  cannot  get  much  by  giving  operas  for  nothing. 

I  have  got  a  solution  of  Miss  Foldson :  she  has  a  mother 
and  eight  brothers  and  sisters,  who  make  her  work  incessantly 
to  maintain  them,  and  who  reckon  it  loss  of  time  to  them  if  she 
finishes  any  pictures  that  are  paid  for  beforehand.  That,  how- 
ever, is  so  very  uncommon  that  I  should  not  think  the  family 
would  be  much  the  richer.  I  do  know  that  L'*  Carlisle  paid 
for  the  portraits  of  his  children  last  July,  and  cannot  get  them 
from  her ;  at  that  rate  I  may  see  you  before  your  pictures  ! 

I  have  not  so  clear  an  exposition  of  Mrs.  BuUer's  behaviour, 
yet  some  suspicion.  She  is  grown  extremely  Germanized — and 
of  whom  did  I  hear  extremely  intimate  in  a  private  party  at  her 
house  a  few  nights  ago,  but  one  who  lives  in  the  street  directly 
behind  hers,t  and  whom  I  should  be  as  sorry  to  meet  there 
or  anywhere,  as  he  could  be  to  meet  me.    These  Germans  remind 

*  Elizabeth  Gunning,  first  married  in  1752  to  the  Duke  of  Hamilton, 
and  then,  in  1759,  to  John,  Duke  of  Argyll. 

t  He  means  William  Henry,  Duke  of  Gloucester,  brother  to  George  IH., 
who  had  married  his  (Mr.  Walpole's)  niece,  the  Countess  Dowager  of 
Waldegrave. 


1791]  '  ok:   DITS  '   OF   THE   DAY.  289 

me  that  I  saw  in  to-day's  newspaper,  that  the  wife  of  the 
Margrave  of  Anspach  is  dead.  Courage,  Milady  Craven!  donnez- 
nons  une  nouvelle  edition  des  aventures  de  Madame  la  Duchesse 
de  Kingston !  et  depechez-vous ;  car  on  dit  que  Milord  Craven 
se  meurt.  II  seroit  indigne  de  vous  que  d'attendre  la  main 
gauche,  et  un  mariage  estime  legitime. 

Lady  Beaumont  *  called  on  me  two  days  ago,  and  inquired 
after  you  kindly.  The  rest  of  my  letter  must  depend  on  one 
from  you,  or  on  the  town  and  the  Grunnings.  There  is  published 
a  grub  print  not  void  of  humour,  called  the  New  Art  of  Gunning ; 
Miss,  astride  a  cannon,  is  firing  a  volley  of  forged  letters  at  the 
Castle  of  Blenheim,  and  old  Grertrude,  emaciated  and  withered, 
and  very  like,  lifting  up  her  hoop  to  shelter  injured  innocence, 
as  she  calls  her. 

Sunday,  IStli. 
Yesterday  I  had  the  misfortune  of  hearing  of  the  death  of 
my  oldest  remaining  friend.  Lord  Strafford,  f  whom  I  knew  from 
the  time  he  was  twelve  years  old,  and  who  was  invariably  kind 
and  obliging  to  me.  This  is  the  heavy  tax  one  pays  for  living 
long ! — but  as  it  is  not  a  language  necessary  to  be  talked  to  y'' 
time  of  life,  I  shall  keep  my  moralising  for  my  own  use,  and 
collect  for  yours  only  what  will  amuse  you ;  tho'  as  I  gather 
from  hearsay,  I  must  often  send  you  false  reports :  still  I  take 
care  they  should  only  be  on  trifles  of  no  consequence.  Thus  I 
told  you  old  French  had  funded  her  legacies  on  her  collection  ; 
but  luckily  for  her  legatees  she  had  money  enough  in  the  stocks 
to  discharge  the  6,000?. :  or  her  bequests  would  have  fallen 
wofully  short.  Three  or  four  years  ago,  she  had  wanted  to  sell 
her  pictures  to  the  Czarina  for  1,200?.  a  year,  estimating  her 
own  life,  she  said,  but  at  two  years'  purchase.  Well,  her  pictures, 
with  the  addition  of  her  bronzes,  china,  &c.,  were  sold  by  auction 
yesterday  and  Friday,  and  produced  but  978?.  j  and  yet  the 
pictures  went  for  more  than  they  were  worth. 

Monday,  14th. 
Your  No.  23*,  which  I  received  this  morning  at  breakfast, 
whets  no  reply,  being  merely  carnivalesque ;  but  you  are  going 

*  Mary  "Willes,  the  wife  of  the  late  Sir  George  Beaumont, 
t  The  last  Earl  of  Strafford  of  the  family  of  Wentworth. 
VOL.  I.  V 


290  LETTERS.  [1791 

to   more  royal   festivities  at  Florence  -with  their  Neapolitan 
aod  Tuscan  majesties  and  dukedoms. 

The  Great  Turk  at  Petersburg  has  sent  us  rather  a  de  haut  en 
has  answer  to  our  proposal  of  mediating  to  hinder  her  removing 
to  Constantinople ;  we  have  frowned  at  the  rate  of  eighteen  men 
of  war — still,  keeping  up  our  dignity  costs  us  so  dear,  that  I 
hope  we  shall  let  her  go  to  the  Black  Sea  and  be  d d  ! 

Mesdames  de  Biron  and  CJambis  have  taken  houses  on  Eich- 
mond  Green  as  well  as  Les  BoufHers  and  Mad.  de  PoncheroUes, 
so  it  will  be  petty  France.  Such  swarms  of  Franks  have  left 
the  country,  that  I  wonder  the  National  Assembly,  which 
delights  in  wasting  time  on  reviving  old  names,  do  not  call  their 
sovereign  king  of  Graul  instead  of  king  of  the  French.  On  the 
contrary,  Mesdames  Adelaide  and  Victoire,  formidable  as  the 
latter  name  is,  will  not  put  the  Eomans  much  in  mind  of  their 
precursor  Brennus. 

I  have  cancelled  my  codicil  of  gout,  and  shall  issue  forth  again 
this  evening,  and  perhaps  at  the  end  of  the  week  go  to  Straw- 
berry for  a  day  or  two,  as  the  weather  lately  has  been  uncom- 
monly fine.     Adieu ! 

On  the  19th  and  21st  of  March  he  writes  a  most 
touching  letter,  in  acknowledgment  of  that  he  had  re- 
ceived from  Miss  Berry  in  answer  to  his. 

[Strawberry  Hill,  Saturday,  March  19,  1791. 

The  town  lies  fallow — not  an  incident  worth  repeating  as  far 
as  I  know.  Parliament  manufactures  only  bills,  not  politics.  I 
never  understood  anything  usefull,  and  now  that  my  time  and 
connections  are  shrunk  to  so  narrow  a  compass,  what  business 
have  I  with  business  ?  As  I  have  mended  considerably  for  the 
last  four  days,  and  as  we  have  had  a  fortnight  of  soft  warm 
weather,  and  a  south-west  wind  to-day,  I  have  ventured  hither 
for  change  of  air,  and  to  give  orders  about  some  repairs  at 
Cliveden,  which,  by  the  way,  Mr.  H.  Bunbury  two  days  ago 
proposed  to  take  off  my  hands  for  his  life.  I  really  do  not 
think  I  accepted  his  offer.  I  shall  return  to  town  on  Monday, 
and  hope  to  find  a  letter  to  answer,  or  what  will  this  do  ?] 

Apropps,  as  the  town  stands  stock  still,  I  believe  I  shall 
change  my  post  days  from  Tuesdays  to  Fridays — at  least  when 


1791]  WALPOLE'S   IMPEOVED   STATE   OF   HEALTH.  291 

I  am  as  barren  as  at  this  moment.  However,  when  you  do 
not  hear  from  me  by  the  former,  be  assured  you  will  wait  but 
four  days  longer ;  besides  as  I  shall  now  be  frequently  coming 
hither,  I  may- have  more  to  say  at  the  end  of  the  week  than 
at  the  beginning. 

I  met  Mrs.  Buller  t'other  night  at  Lady  M'  Edgcumbe's,  and 
she  lays  all  her  omissions  on  the  'vharming  man,'  who  mentioned 
my  message  so  slightly  that  she  did  not.  comprehend  it.  I 
huffed  her  worse  for  her  bad  taste  in  sending  for  double  Gld'ster 
cheese  in  an  evening,  and  vowed  I  will  never  enter  her  doors,  if 
smelling  of  it.  I  have  a  notion  her  son  is  of  a  regiment  that 
eats  of  it.  The  Greatheds  are  in  Mrs.  Darner's  house.  I  hope 
they  will  not  be  there  six  weeks. 

[B.  Sq.,  Monday  evening. 

I  am  returned,  and  find  the  only  letter  I  dreaded,  and  the  only 
one  I  trust  that  I  shall  ever  not  be  impatient  to  receive  from 
you.  Tho'  ten  thousand  times  kinder  than  I  deserve,  it  wounds 
my  heart,  as  I  find  I  have  hurt  two  of  the  persons  I  love  the 
best  upon  earth,-  and  whom  I  am  most  constantly  studying  to 
please  and  serve.  That  I  soon  repented  of  my  murmurs  you 
have  seen  by  my  subsequent  letters.  The  truth,  as  you  may 
have  perceived,  tho'  no  excuse,  was,  that  I  had  thought  mj'self 
dying  and  should  never  see  you  more ;  that  I  was  extremely 
weak  and  low  when  Mrs.  D.'s  letter  arrived,  and  mentioned  her 
supposing  I  should  not  see  you  till  spring  twelvemonth.  That 
terrible  sentence  recalled  Mr.  Batt's  being  the  first  to  assure  me 
of  y''  going  abroad,  when  I  had  concluded  you  had  laid  aside  the 
design.  I  did  sincerely  allow  that  in  both  instances  you  had 
acted  from  tenderness  in  concealing  y""  intentions ;  but  as  I 
knew  I  could  better  bear  the  information  from  yourselves  than 
from  others,  I  thought  it  unfriendly  to  let  me  learn  from  others 
what  interested  me  so  deeply.  Yet  I  do  not  in  .the  least  excuse 
my  conduct.  No,  !■  condemn  it  in  every  light,  and  shall' never 
forgive  myself  if  youdo  not  promise  me  to  be  guided  entirely  by 
your  own  convenience  and  inclinations  about  your  return. 

I  am  perfectly  well  again,  and  just  as  likely  to  live  one  year 
as  half  an  one.  Indulge  y'  pleasure  in  being  abroad  while  you 
are  there.  I  am  now  reasonable  enough  to  enjoy  y""  happiness  as 
my  own ;    and  since  you  are  most  kind  when  I  least  deserve  it, 

u  2 


292  LETTERS.  [1791 

how  can  I  express  my  gratitude  for  giving  up  the  scruple  that 
was  so  distressing  to  me  !  Convince  me  you  are  in  earnest  by 
giving  me  notice  that  you  will  write  to  Charing-cross  while 
the  Neapolitans  are  at  Florence.*  I  will  look  on  that  as  a  clearer 
proof  of  y'^  forgiving  my  criminal  letter  than  your  return  before 
you  like  it.  It  is  most  sure  that  nothing  is  more  solid  or  less 
personal  than  my  friendship  for  you  two ;  and  even  my  com- 
plaining letter,  tho'  unjust  and  unreasonable,  proved  that  the 
nearer  I  thought  myself  to  quitting  the  world,  the  more  my 
heart  was  set  on  my  two  friends.  Nay,  they  had  occupied  the 
busiest  moments  of  my  illness  as  well  as  the  most  fretful  ones. 

Forgive  then,  my  dearest  friends,  what  could  proceed  from 
nothing  but  too  impatient  affection.  You  say  most  truly  you 
did  not  deserve  my  complaints.  Your  patience  and  temper 
under  them  make  me  but  the  more  in  the  wrong ;  and  to  have 
hurt  you,  who  have  known  but  too  much  grief,  is  such  a  contra- 
diction to  the  whole  turn  of  my  mind  ever  since  I  knew  you,  that 
I  believe  my  weakness  from  illness  was  beyond  even  what  I  sus- 
pected. It  is  sure  that  wTien  I  am  in  my  perfect  senses,  the 
whole  bent  of  my  thoughts  is  to  promote  your  and  y""  sister's 
felicity,  and  you  know  nothing  can  give  me  satisfaction  like 
your  allowing  me  to  be  of  use  to  you.  I  speak  honestly,  not- 
withstanding my  unjust  letter,  I  had  rather  serve  you  than 
see  you.  Here  Jet  me  finish  this  subject ;  I  do  not  think  I  shall 
be  faulty  with  you  again. 

That  ever  I  should  give  you  Two  an  uneasy  moment !  Oh ! 
forgive  me — yet  I  do  not  deserve  j)ardon  in  my  own  eyes,  and 
less  in  my  own  heart.^ 

The  next  letter  was  as  follows  :  — 

Berkeley  Square,  Thursday,  Marcli  31,  1791. 
I  postpone  my  further  answers  to  y'^  last  till  I  have  satisfied 
Mr.  Berry's  curiosity  about  the  war  with  Semiramis.  The  King's 
martial  message  was  adopted  on  Tuesday  by  both  Houses ;  but 

*  His  correspondents,  to  settle  his  mind  as  to  the  certainty  of  their 
return  at  the  time  they  had  promised,  had  assured  him  that  no  financial 
difficulties  should  stand  in  the  way :  which  is  what  he  means  by  sending  to 
Charing  Cross  (to  Drummond,  his  lianker).  No  such  diificulties  occurred. 
The  correspondence,  therefore,  with  Charing  Cross  never  took  place. — M.B. 
Vide  Horace  Walpole's  Letters. 


1791]  WALPOLE'S   SELF-SACEIFICE.  293 

the  measure  is  exceedingly  unpopular,  and  even  some  impres- 
sion was  made  on  the  court  troops.  The  ministerialists  affect  to 
give  out  that  matters  will  not  ripen  to  war,  as  if  our  blustering 
would  terrify  a  woman  in  whom  fear  of  no  sort  seems  to  pfedo- 
minate.     More  this  deponent  knows  not. 

Now,  my  dearest  friends,  I  turn  to  you,  and  do  most  cordially 
implore  you  both  not  to  bind  yourselves  nor  to  hold  yourselves 
bound  to^  me  by  any  promise  ab'  y""  return.  Let  it  depend  en- 
tirely on  y^  own  inclinations  and  convenience.  I  cannot  forgive 
my  sickly  impatience  in  writing  that  peevish  letter  which  vexed 
you :  it  has  vexed  me  more.  Are  you  to  be- pi  eased  only  by  what 
would  please  me  ?  What  claim  have  I  to  any  sacrifice?  and  why 
should  you  make  me  any  ?  or  think  you  that  I  cannot  sacrifice 
my  own  wishes  to  y""  content  ?  Oh  !  indeed  but  I  can,  and  wish 
to  do  so !  These  are  my  earnest  sentiments,  and  I  could  but 
repeat  them  in  various  words  were  I  to  continue  writing  all 
night. 

We  have  no  other  positive  news  since  my  Tuesday's  letter. 
There  is  no  peace  between  the  Opera  Theatres ;  the  Haymarket 
rather  triumphs.  They  have  opened  twice,  taking  money  in  an 
evasive  manner,  pretending  themselves  concerts ;  the  singers  are 
in  their  own  clothes,  the  dancers  drest,  and  no  recitative — a 
sort  of  opera  in  deshabille.  Threats  of  arrest  have  been  thrown 
out,  but  no'  coup  de  main.  Some  think  the  return  of  the  Judges 
from  the  circuit  is  awaited ;  but  perhaps  the  Court  is  sensible  of 
having  begun  by  being  in  the  wrong. 

I  never  mention  France,  concluding  you  more  a  port6e  to 
know.  The  hideous  barbarity  at  Douai,  where  they  have  frac- 
tured a  man's  skull,  and  then  taken  him  out  of  bed,  and  hanged 
him  after  he  had  been  trepanned;  while  the  prisons  are  over- 
stuffed, after  they  found  but  six  prisoners  in  the  Bastile,  does 
not  convince  me  yet  that  they  have  got  a  milder  government. 

How  sorry  I  am  that  you  have  lost  the  satisfaction  of  being 
with  your  friend  Mrs.  Cholmeley  in  town  this  season.  I  doubt 
the  two  courts  will  not  make  you  amends. 

I  feel  every  week  the  disagreeableness  of  the  distance  between 
us :  each  letter  is  generally  three  weeks  on  its  passage,  and  we 
receive  answers  to  what  one  must  often  forget  one  has  said ; 
and  cannot  under  six  weeks  learn  what  one  is  anxious  to  know. 
Balloons,  had  they  succeeded,  would  have  prodigiously  abridged 


294  LETTBKS.  [1791 

delays ;  but  French  discoveries  are  not,  I  believe,  endowed  with 
duration ;  when  they  have  broken  necks,  and  cut  throats,  they 
find  the  world  forced  to  content  itself  with  old  inventions. 
French  society  never  takes  disappointment  into  calculations. 

This  must  be  a  short  letter,  for  even  London,  you  see,  now 
the  Gunnings  are  gone,  cannot  furnish  a  whole  sheet  once  a 
week:  however,  I  had  rather  leave  half  my  paper  blank  than 
have  any  campaign-work  to  fill  it  with.  Europe  at  present  is 
in  a  strange  ferment,  distracted  between  the  daemons  of  repub- 
licanism and  universal  monarchy — at  least  Prussia  and  we  say 
that  Semiramis  aims  at  the  latter ;  if  she  does,  we  at  least 
might  wish  her  removed  to  Constantinople :  she  would  be  farther 
off.  Nay,  I  am  so  ignorant  to  imagine,  that,  if  there,  she 
would  cultivate  and  restore  Greece,  &c.,  and  be  a  better  custo- 
mer than  the  Turks.  Nor  am  I  disposed  to  think  Prussia  a  sub- 
stantial ally  :  it  is  a  fictitious  power  that  would  have  shrunk  to 
little  again  with  its  creator  had  the  successor  been  an  inactive 
prince.  Attention,  treasures,  and  a  most  formidable  army  he  has, 
but  if  war  dissipates  his  hoards,  and  diminishes  his  force,  which 
the  squander  of  his  wealth  will  weaken  too,  adieu  !  panier,  ven- 
danges  sont  faites.  These  are  my  speculations ; — I  don't  know 
whether  they  have  come  into  the  head  of  anybody  else,  nor  care 
whether  they  deserve  it.  I  write  to  amuse  you  and  myself,  and 
only  reason,  because  I  have  nothing  better  to  send  you.  I  am 
far  from  fond  of  dissertationary  letters,  which  present  themselves 
humbly,  but  hope  to  rank  as  essays.  I  must  be  in  sad  want  of 
nonsense  when  I  talk  seriously  on  general  topics,  and  I  hope 
that,  except  when  you  were  in  a  storm,  or  travelling  thro'  the  land 
of  anarchy,  or  when  I  was  in  terror  of  seeing  you  no  more,  or 
not  for  an  age,  you  will  not  charge  me  with  any  gravity.  I  have 
gossipped  to  anybody's  heart's  wish ;  and  the  deuce  is  in  it,  if 
any  letters  are  worth  receiving  that  have  the  fear  of  Wisdom 
before  their  eyes.     Adieu  to  Arno's  vale  till  next  Friday. 

It  was  in  the  month  of  March  that  Miss  Berry  met 
with  an  accident,  which  might  have  proved  serious,  and 
of  which  she  wrote  the  exact  truth  to  her  anxious  friend, 
that  his  imagination  might  not  exaggerate  the  danger. 
She  had  fallen  down  a  bank  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Pisa,  and  received  a  deep  cut  on  the  nose. 


1791]  MISS   BEREY,  HAS   AN   ACCIDENT.  295 

[Strawberry  Hill,  Sunday  niglit,  April  3,  1791. 

Oh !  what  a  shocking  accident  J  Oh !  how  I  detest  your  going 
abroad  more  than  I  have  done  yet  in  my  crossest  mood !  You 
escaped  the  storm  on  the  10th  of  October  that  gave  me  such  an 
alarm;  you  passed  unhurt  thro'  the  cannibals  of  France  and 
their  republic  of  Ladrones  and  Poissardes,  who  terrified  me 
sufficiently — ^but  I  never  expected  that  you  would  dash  y'self 
to  pieces  at  Pisa !  You  say  I  love  truth,  and  that  you  have  told 
me  the  exact  truth — but  how  can  fear  believe  ?]  You  say  you 
slept  fart  of  the  night  after  y'  fall — oh  !  but  the  other  part ! 
Was  not  you  feverish?  How  can  I  wait  above  a  month  for 
answers  to  an  hundred  questions  I  want  to  ask;  and  how  a 
week  for  another  letter  ?  A  little  comfort  I  have  had  even  since 
I  received  the  horrid  account;  I  have  met  Mrs.  Lockart  at 
Lady  Hesketh's,  and  she  has  assured  me  that  there  is  a  very 
good  surgeon  at  Pisa — if  he  is,  he  must  have  bloodied  you 
directly.  How  could  you  be  well  enough  to  write  the  next 
day  ?  Why  did  not  Miss  Agnes  for  you  ?  But  I  conclude  she 
was  not  recovered  enough  of  y"^  fall.  When  I  am  satisfied  that 
you  have  not  hurt  yourself  more  than  you  own,  I  will  indulge 
my  concern  about  the  outside  of  y'  nose,  about  which  I  shall 
not  have  your  indifference.  I  am  not  in  love  with  you,  yet 
fully  in  love  enough  not  to  bear  any  damage  done  to  that 
perfect  nose,  or  to  any  of  all  y'  beautiful  features ;  then,  too,  I 
shall  scold  at  y'  thoughtlessness. 

[How  I  hate  a  party  of  pleasure !  it  never  turns  out  well ; 
fools  fall  out,  and  sensible  people  fall  down  !  Still  I  thank 
you  a  million  of  times  for  writing  y'self ;  if  Miss  Agnes  had 
written  for  you,  I  confess  I  should  have  been  ten  times  more 
alarmed  than  I  am,  and  yet  I  am  alarmed  enough.]  My  sweet 
Agnes,  I  feel  for  you  too,  tho'  you  have  not  the  misery  of  being 
a  thousand  miles  from  y'  wounded  sister,  nor  are  waiting  for 
a  second  account.  The  quantity  of  blood  she  lost  has,  I  trust, 
prevented  any  fever.  I  would  ask  for  every  tiny  circumstance, 
but  alas !  I  must  wait  above  a  month  for  an  answer. 

.  .  .  .  I  received  the  account  two  days  sooner  than  the 
letters  generally  arrive,  and  the  day  after  my  last  was  gone, 
so  I  can  have  nothing  to  add,  nor  indeed,  do  I  think  of  any- 
thing but  the  fall  at  Pisa,  of  which  I  went  full  to  Lady 
Hesketh's  last  night,  and  there  were  so  many  of  y''  friends, 


296  LETTERS.  [1791 

that  my  sad  news  seemed  like  having  thrown  a  bomb  into  the 
room.  You  would  have  been  flattered  at  the  grief  it  occa- 
sioned ;  there  were  Mrs.  Lockart,  the  Pepys's,  Mrs.  Buller, 
Lady  Herries,  Geo.  Cambridge,  the  Abbe  Nichols,  Mrs.  Carter, 
and  some  who  scarce  know  you,  who  yet  found  they  w'^  be 
very  unfashionable  if  they  did  not  join  in  the  concern  for 
you  and  in  y''  panegyric.  Cambridge  had  received  a  letter  too, 
but  three  days  earlier  in  date.  Mr.  Pepys  desired  me  to  tell 
you  that  he  had  written  to  you  a  folio  of  news,  but  you  never 
received  it.  However,  I  am  sure  I  have  not  let  you  starve, 
unless  you  are  curious  about  suits  in  chancery. 

[Not  to  torment  you  more  with  my  fears  when  I  hope  you 
are  almost  recovered,  I  will  answer  the  rest  of  y"^  letter.  General 
O'Hara  I  have  unluckily  not  met  yet ;  he  is  so  dispersed,  and  I 
am  so  confined  in  my  resorts,  and  so  seldom  dine  from  home, 
that  I  have  not  seen  him  even  at  General  Conway's.  When  I 
do,  can  you  imagine  that  we  shall  not  talk  of  you  two  ?  Yes, 
and  y""  accident  I  am  sure  will  be  the  chief  topic.  As  our  fleets 
are  to  dethrone  Catherine  Petruchia,  O'Hara  will  probably  not 
be  sent  to  Siberia.*  Apropos  to  Catherine  and  Petruchio,  I 
supped  with  their  representatives,  Kemble  and  Mrs.  Siddons, 
t'other  night  at  Miss  Farren's ;  the  Hothams  f  were  there  too,  and 
Mrs.  Anderson,  J  who  treated  the  players  with  acting  as  many 
characters  as  ever  they  did,  particularly  Gunnilda  and  Lady 
Clackmannan. §   Mrs.  Siddons  is  leaner,  but  looks  well;  she  has 

*  In  Mr.  Walpole's  letter  of  the  27tli,  lie  says :  '  Mr.  Pitt  has  notified 
that  he  is  to  deliver  a  message  from  the  King,  to-morrow,  to  the  House  of 

Commons,  on  the  situation  of  Europe I  am  sorry  to  say  that 

I  fear  it  is  to  be  a  warlike  one.  The  Autocratrix  swears  she  mil  hack 
her  way  to  Constantinople  through  the  hlood  of  one  hundred  thousand 
more  Turks,  and  that  we  are  very  impertinent  for  sending  her  a  card  with  a 
sprig  of  Slive.  On-  the  other  hand,  Prussia  bounces  and  hufis,  and  claims 
our  promise  of  helping  him  to  make  peace  by  helping  him  to  make  war ; 
and  so,  in  the  most  charitable  and  pacific  way  in  the  world,  we  are,  they 
say,  to  send  twenty  ships  to  the  Baltic,  and  half  as  many  to  the  Black 
Sea.' — Vide  Horace  Walpole's  Letters. 

t  Sir  Charles  Hotham  Thompson,  married  to  Lady  Dorothy  Hobart, 
sister  of  John,  second  Earl  of  Buckinghamshire. —  Wright. 

J  Mrs.  Anderson,  daughter  of  Lady  Cecilia  Johnstone,  married  to  a 
brother  of  Lord  Yarborough. —  Wright. 

§  A  nickname  given  by  the  writer  to  a  lady  of  the  society. — Weight. 


1791]  MRS.  SIDDONS — DEATH   OF   MIEABEAU.  297 

played  Jane  Shore  and  Desdemona,  and  is  to  play  in  'The 
Gamester;'  all  the  parts  she  will  act  this  year.  Kemble,  they 
say,  shone  in  Othello. 

Mrs.  Darner  has  been  received  at  El-sas  with  all  military 
honours  and  a  banquet,  by  order  of  Mello,  formerly  embassador 
here.  It  was  handsome  in  him,  but  must  have  distressed  her 
who  is  so  void  of  ostentation  and  love  of  show. 

Miss  Boyle,*  who,  no  more  than  Miss  Pulteney,t  has  let  her- 
self be  snapped  up  by  lovers  of  her  fortune,  is  going  to  Italy 
for  a  year  with  Lord  and  Lady  Maiden.] 

I  return  to  town  to-morrow  morning,  with  a  faint  hope  of 
receiving  another  letter  about  your  fall,  and  will  reserve  the 
rest  of  my  paper  for  anything  I  may  hear  before  noon  on  Tues- 
day. I  will  not  peremptorily  fix  my  days  of  writing  to  Tuesdays 
and  Fridays,  but  write  as  you  mend,  or  as  I  find  matter ;  there- 
fore do  not  suspect  gout  if  I  am  not  punctual;  I  am  more 
likely,  I  think,  to  be  intercalary  than  remiss.  This  morning 
has  been  as  warm  as  if  the  day  had  been  born  at  Pisa ;  and 
Cliveden,  where  I  have  been  giving  some  orders,  did  not  look 

ugly- 

[B.  Square,  Monday,  after  dinner. 

Mirabeau  is  dead — aye,  miraculously,  for  it  was  of  a  putrid 
fever  (that  began  in  his  heart).  Dr.  Price  is  dying  also  | — fortu- 
nate omens  for  those  who  hope  to  die  in  their  beds  too.  I  think 
alike  of  such  incendiaries,  whose  lessons  tend  to  blood,  whether 
their  stillettoes  have  taken  place  or  not.  That  Mr.  Berry,  with 
so  much  good  nature  and  good  sense,  should  be  staggered,  I  do 
not  wonder.  Nobody  is  more  devoted  to  liberty  than  I  am.  It  is 
therefore  that  I  abhor  the  National  Assembly,  whose  outrageous 
violence  has  given,  I  fear,  a  lasting  wound  to  the  cause;  for 
anarchy  is  despotism  in  the  hands  of  thousands.  A  lion  attacks 
but  when  hungry  or  provoked ;  but  who  can  live  in  a  desart 
full  of  hyaenas  ?  Nobody  but  Mr.  Bruce — and  we  have  only  his 
word  for  it.  Here  is  started  up  another  corsair,  one  Paine  from 
America,  who  has  published  an  answer  to  Mr.  Burke,  that 

*  Miss  Boyle,  afterwards  Lady  H.  Fitzgerald. 
\  Miss  Pulteney,  married  to  Sir  James  Murray. 
\  Dr.  Price  died  soon  after. 


298  LETTERS.  [1791 

deserves  a  putrid  fever.*  His  doctrines  go  to  the  extremity  of 
levelling,  and  his  style  is  so  coarse,  that  you  would  think  he 
means  to  degrade  the  language  as  much  as  the  Government.] 

ft 

Monday  night. 

I  am  come  home  early  from  the  Bishop  of  London's  for  the 
chance  of  finding  another  letter  from  one  of  you.  But  ah  !  you 
did  not  know  my  anxiety! — March  16*^  will  be  a  blacker  day  in 
my  almanac  than  Oct.  10'^.  I  hope  after  nineteen  days,  without 
reckoning  the  time  this  will  be  travelling  to,  you,  you  w*  at 
this  moment  be  capable  of  laughing  at  my  alarm.  Alas  !  it  is 
no  jest  to  me! 

I  learnt  nothing  new  for  you,  but  that  Lord  Strathavenf  was 
married  this  morning  to  Miss  Cope!| — not  at  Gretna  Green,  for 
they  have  been  asked  in  church.  Adieu !  you  bid  me  have  no 
more  gout  this  year — pray  do  you  have  no  more  falls. 

The  next  letter  shows  that  his  mind  was  still  agitated 
on  the  subject  of  Miss  Berry's  fall : — 

Berkeley  S(3[uare,  April  10, 1791. 

It  is  Sunday,  but  no  letter !  I  did  hope  for  one  yesterday,  as 
the  preceding  Saturday  had  brought  me  the  miserable  news  of 
y"^  fall,  and  this  I  flattered  myself  would  make  me  amends  by  a 
favorable  account — but  Saturday  I  see  is  one  of  the  Dies  nefastos 
carbone  potandos,  and  a  pupil  of  March  16"^.  If  to-morrow 
brings  good  news,  I  will  prefer  Mondays,  tho'  two  days  later.  I 
have  little  news  for  you,  tho'  I  begin  writing  to-day."  If  any- 
body asks  me  for  news,  I  answer,  '  Yes,  and  very  bad ;  Miss 
Berry  has  had  a  terrible  fall,  and  cut  her  beautiful  nose  ! ' 

What  novelties  there  are  I  will  dispatch,  for  if  I  have  not  a 
most  prosperous  account  to-morrow,  I  shall  forget  anything  I 
have  heard — at  present  my  gazette  would  lie  in  a  nutshell ;  and 
were  it  not  for  the  oddity  of  what  happened  to  myself  for  two  days 
together,  my  intelligence  would  be  like  to  the  common  articles 
of  a  newspaper.     On  Wednesday  my  nephew,  L'^  Cholmondeley, 

»  The  first  part  of  the  '  Eights  of  Man.' 
t  Afterwards  Marquis  of  Huntley. 
X  Daughter  of  Sir  Charles  Cope,  Bart. 


1791]  HOME   NEWS.  299 

came  and  acquainted  me  that  he  is  going  to  be  married  to  Lady 
Charlotte  Bertie,  who  had  accepted  of  him — '  But,'  says  he, '  you 
will  be  so  good  as  not  to  mention  it  yet,  for  I  am  now  going  to 
the  Duchess  of  Ancaster  to  ask  her  consent ' — which  she  did 
not  refuse. 

The  next  day  Captain  Waldegrave  came,  and  almost  in  the 
same  words,  the  parties  excepted,  notified  a  match  between  his 
sister,  Lady  Elizabeth,  and  Lord  Cardigan,  '  But  you  must  not 
mention  it  yet,  for  the  Earl  is  only  now  gone  into  the  King  to 
ask  his  leave.'  I  did  not  know  I  was  so  proper  a  Cato  to  be 
trusted  with  love-tales.  I  doubt  George  Ch.  and  his  new  wife, 
and  the  mothers  of  both  are  not  delighted  with  the  former 
match;  and  Brudenel  and  his  mother  will  be  terribly  disappointed 
with  the  latter,  after  the  old  Earl  had  lain  fallow  so  long.  I 
remember  when  he  married  his  former  wife,  they  both  looked 
so  antique,  that  I  said,  they  may  have  grandchildren,  but  they 
certainly  will  have  no  children — now  it  seems  his  lordship  means 
to  have  a  great-grandson.  I  was  to  have  met  the  mother,  Mrs. 
Cholmondeley,  last  Friday  at  Mrs.  BuUer's,  but  the  latter  turned 
a  very  small  party  into  a  ball,  and  I  desired  to  be  excused,  for 
tho'  I  have  married  two  wives  at  once,  when  many  years  older 
than  L*  Cardigan,  I  did  not  chuse  to  jig  mth  Master  Buller's 
friends  the  officers  of  the  guards. 

I  can  tell  Mr.  Berry  nothing  more  of  our  Eussian  war,  but 
that  it  is  most  exceedingly  unpopular,  and  that  it  is  supposed 
Mr.  Pitt  will  avoid  it  if  he  possibly  can.  You  know  I  do  not 
love  Catherine  Petruchia  Slayczar,  yet  I  have  no  opinion  of  otir 
fleet  dethroning  her. 

An  odd  adventure  has  happened.  The  Primate  of  Poland  has 
been  here,  the  King's  brother.  He  bought  some  scientific  toys  at 
Merlin's,  paid  15  guineas  for  them  in  the  shop,  and  was  to  pay 
as  much  more.  Merlin  pretends  he  knew  him  only  for  a 
foreigner  who  was  going  away  in  two  days,  and  literally  had 
his  holy  highness  arrested  and  carried  to  a  spunging  house ;  for 
which  the  Chancellor  has  struck  the  attorney  off  the  list.  But 
hear  the  second  part.  The  King  of  Poland  had  desired  the  Pri- 
mate to  send  him  some  English  books,  who  for  one  sent  the  Law 
of  Arrests.  The  King  wrote,  '  This  is  not  so  useless  a  book  to 
me  as  some  might  think ;  for  when  I  was  in  England,  I  was 
arrested ' — before  the  letter  arrived,  the  Archbishop  himself  was 
in  limbo. 


300  LETTERS-  [1791 


Monday. 

Last  night  I  was  at  Mr.  Pep3's's,  where  was  Lady  Juliana 
Penn,  who  alarmed  roe  exceedingly,  for  she  had  received  a  letter 
from  her  son  in  Italy,  when  I  had  had  none — but  this  morning 
I  have  received  a  comfortable  one,  which  I  hope  is  perfectly 
true — for  you  must  forgive  me,  if  I  cannot  help  fearing  y"  kind- 
ness for  me  softens  y"^  accident  and  its  consequences.  You  did 
not  sleep  for  some  nights,  your  nerves  were  shaken.-  I  know  that 
from  the  25*'' of  March  to  the  11"' of  April  is  above  a  fortnight, 
and  yet  I  shall  think  it  above  a  fortnight  to  this  day  sevennight, 
when  I  hope  for  a  still  better  account;  for  tho'  a  little  easier,  I 
am  far  from  satisfied — and  not  yet  at  all  arrived  at  grieving  for 
a  m-ark  on  y"^  nose,  as  I  shall  do  till  I  actually  see  you,  when  the 
joy  of  y''  return  will  drown  less  considerations.  How  good  you 
are  to  reassure  me  on  that  subject !  The  Abbe  has  come  in  and 
distracted  me  with  news  for  which  I  do  not  care  a  straw,  nor 
w*  have  listened  to,  but  that  you  like  my  telling  you  all  I  hear 
— but  what  are  all  those  marriages  to  me  who  am  separated 
from  both  my  wives  ?  or  Miss  Bingham's  no-marriage  with 
Lord  Grrey,  for  which  L"*  Stamford  has  forbid  the  bans?  or 
the  Marquis  of  Worcester's  with  L*  Stafford's  daughter,  Lady 
M.  M.  or  N".  N.  Leveson,  which  is  declared  ?  or  the  D^'  of  Eut- 
land's  with  L*  Paget,  forbidden  by  his  father,  yet  to  be  or  not 
to  be— something.  Ma"*  du  Barry  is  again  come,  and  Lady  St. 
Asaph  died  yesterday  of  a  second  miscarriage,  leaving  four  young 
children,  a  most  fond  husband,  and  the  families  on  both  sides 
much  afHicted.  So  much  for  the  Abbe's  Morning  Herald,  and 
I  return  to  y"^  nose  and  your  nerves — how  could  you  write  so 
much,  when  they  are  not  well — and  to  be  thinking  of  my  gout, 
and  recommending  care  of  myself — I  am  perfectly  recovered  of 
everything  but  your  fall. 

I  had  a  letter  two  days  ago  from  Mrs.  Darner — then  at  Grenada; 
she  had  suffered  from  the  snow  on  the  mountains.  Her  parents 
have  been  in  town  these  two  months,  and  very  well.  I  supped 
there  last  night  with  the  Duchess  of  Eichmond  and  Mrs.  Pom- 
poustown  Hervey. 

Your  acquaintance  Mrs.  Horace  Churchill,  one  of  my  seventy 
and  I  don't  know  how  many  nephews  and  nieces,  has  just  pre- 
sented me  with  one  more  of  the  first  gender :  Ma"*  de  St.  Alban 


1791]     WALPOLE's   anxieties   RESPECTING  MISS   BERET,     301 

gave  me  two  of  the  other — but  perhaps  might  as  justly  have 
bestowed  them  on  somebody  not  so  rich  in  nepotism. 

I  must  have  an  attestation  under  the  hand  of  A^nes  aux  joues 
de  rose  that  yoxi  have  no  fever  left,  that  your  nerves  are  re- 
braced,  and  I  will  bear  an  oath  from  any  rival  that  your  nose  is 
as  perfect  as  ever. 

Your  letter  of  this  morning  is  an  answer  to  mine  of  Feb.  28, 
to  Florence — how  vexatious  such  a  distant  correspondence !  If 
I  to-day  flay  '  How  do  you  do  ?  '  it  will  be  one  or  two  and  forty 
days  before  you  answ«r,  '  Very  well  thank  you.' 

Monday  niglit. 

I  am  just  come  from  Laidy  Herries,  who  with  Mrs.  Hunter 
charged  me  to  tell  you  how  glad  they  are  to  bear  you  are  better 
of  y''  fall.  I  said  you  had  just  desired  me  to  thank  all  who  are 
so  kind  as  to  inquire  after  you :  I  wish  I  could  answer  their 
inquiries  oftener ! 

You  will,  I  trust,  be  at  Florence  when  you  receive  this,  but  it 
will  be  May  before  I  know  so,  which  is  sad,  as  it  will  be  a  better 
proof  than  all  you  can  say,  that  your  face  is  recovered.  I  shall 
apply  what  was  said  to  one  of  the  sable  Finches,  '  Sir,  if  you 
was  to  swear  till  you  are  white  in  the  face,'  &c. — that  is,  I  must 
have  collateral  proofs,  for  my  fears  are  stronger  than  my  faith. 
Adieu !  may  Heaven  preserve  you  both  !  and  may  I  have  no  more 
days  to  stigmatize  in  my  almanac ! 

In  his  letter  of  April  15tli  lie  says  :  — 

[I  cannot  help  having  that  nose  a  little  upon  my  spirits, 
though  if  it  were  flat  I  should  love  it  as  much  as  ever  for  the 
sake  of  the  head  and  heart  that  belong  to  it.] 

I  don't  know  what  business  you  had  to  carry  it  to  the  mouth 
of  the  Arno  aijd  throw  it  down  a  precipice.  I  go  to  Straw- 
berry to-morrow,  in  this  jubilee  spring  that  comes  but  once  in 
fifty  years,  and  shall  return  on  Monday,  trusting  to  be  met 
by  a  letter  from  Pisa,  with  a  prosperous  account  of  all  I  wot 
of. 

[T  have  seen  O'Hara  with  his  face  as  ruddy  and  black  and  his 
teeth  as  white  as  ever,  and  as  fond  of  you  two,  and  as  grieved 
for  your  fall  as  anybody — but  I.  He  has  got  a  better  regi- 
ment.] 


302  LETTEES.  •  [1791 

[Berkeley  Square,  Monday,  18. 

Oh !  what  a  dear  letter  have  I  found  !  and  from  both  at  once, 
and  with  such  a  delightful  bulletin.]  I  have  but  one  doubt,  and 
that  is  from  the  delay  of  going  to  Florence,  which  I  hope  is  to 
be  placed  only  to  the  article  of  the  becoming. 

[I  should  not  be  pleased  with  the  idleness  of  the  pencil,  were 
it  not  owing  to  the  chapter  of  health,  which  I  prefer  to  every- 
thing,] high  as  I  hold  the  Death  of  Wolsey.  The  moment  I 
enter  Strawberry  I  hasten  into  the  little  parlour,,  which  I  have 
new  hung  for  his  reception,  with  Lady  Di's  Gripsies  *  and  Mrs. 
Damer's  Dogs.f  I  defy  your  favourite  Italy  to.  produce  three 
such  monuments  of  female  genius.. 

The  rest  of  this  letter,  together  with  that  of  the  23rcl, 
is,  as  usual,  a  chronicle  of  all  the  floating  news,  both 
pohtical  and  social,  he  could  collect  to  send  them.  On 
the  25th  of  AprU  he  writes  from  Berkeley  Square  :  — 

Monday,  in  tlie  Square. 

I  have  found  a  letter  from  you;  as  I  expected,  but  there  were 
three  pages  before  I  found  a  word  of  y'  nose.  You  give  a  good 
account  of  it — yet,  as  you  have  again  deferred  your  journey  to 
Florence,  tho'  but  for  a  day  or  two,  I  do  not  quite  trust  to  your 
deposition.  Produce  your  nose  to  Kings  and  Emperors  or  I  shall 
not  be  satisfied.  I  know  you  are  not  eager  for  puppet  shows ; 
yet  your  being  at  a  fete  would  convince  me  more  than  the  attes- 
tation of  a  surgeon. 

You  kindly  desire  me  not  to  go  to  Strawberry  for  fear  of 
relapse^ — but  this  is  the  case  of  so  distaot  a  correspondence !  I 
have  been  there  four  or  five  times  without  the  smallest  incon- 
venience :  besides,  it  has  been  summer  all  winter.  You  desire 
me  too  to  continue  to  write  punctually.  I  do  not  seem  to  be  in 
danger  of  relaxing — at  least,  not  before  I  am  settled  in  the 
country ;  and  then  indeed  I  may  want  matter — but  the  town 
goes  so  late  out  of  itself,  that  I  dare  say  it  will  furnish  me  with 
something  or  other  for  these  two  months;  and  then  in  two 
months  more  I  trust  you  will  be  on  the  road — and  then — why 

*  Drawing  hj  Lady  Diana  Beauclerc. 
t  Dogs  sculptured  by  Mrs.  Darner. 


1791]  THE   COUNTESS   OF   ALBANY.  303 

then,  in  two  months  more  I  hope  I  shall  have  no  occasion  to 
write  to  you !  Six  months  of  y'  absence  are  nearly  gone,  and  I 
am  trying  as  much  as  I  can  to  anticipate  the  other  six ! 

Berkeley  Square,  May  4,  1791. 

Tho'  I  have  changed  my  post  days  to  Fridays,  as  better 
market  days  for  news,  the  first-fruits  do  not  answer — indeed,  on 
Tuesday  I  should  not  have  had  a  paragraph  to  send  you  ;  and 
now  my  articles  will  rather  be  talkables  than  events,  for  I  know 
not  one  that  has  happened,  except  the  change  of  weather, 
January  having  succeeded  to  April — but  what  signifies  how  the 
weather  was,  when  you  hear  it  three  weeks  afterwards  ? 

Nothing  more  is  known  of  the  Eussian  War,  or  the  new 
Secretary  of  State,  nor  why  the  last  resigned.  The  Duke  of 
York  is  gone  to  Berlin,  and  the  press  continues  alert.  That 
looks  all  martial — but  the  stocks  are  philosophic  and  keep  their 
temper.  The  Prince  of  Wales  is  much  out  of  order,  spits  blood, 
and  fainted  away  after  his  levee  on  Monday. 

General  Conway  has  had  a  great  escape ;  he  was  reviewing  his 
Blues  on  Friday,  previous  to  their  being  reviewed  yesterday  by 
the  King.  The  ground  was  so  slippery,  for  we  have  had  much 
rain,  that  his  horse  fell  down  and  rolled  over  him,  and  he  only 
had  his  arm  and  leg  much  bruised ;  yet  so  much  bruised,  that 
yesterday  he  was  forced  to  write  to  the  King  to  excuse  his 
appearance,  and  last  night  he  was  lamer  than  I  am. 

Mrs.  Damer  has  written  that  we  may  expect  her  by  the  10th. 
I  shall  allow  two  or  three  days  for  disappointments. 

Here  is  arrived  the  Pinchbeck  Queen  Dowager  of  England, 
alias  the  Countess  of  Albany.*  I  have  not  much  royal  curiosity 
left — ^yet  I  have  to  see  her,  and  it  will  be  satisfied — for  as  she 
is  great  niece  to  Lady  Ailesbury,  and  cousin  of  the  Duchess  of 
Eichmond,  they  must  visit  her,  and  they  will  make  some 
assembly  or  private  party  for  her.  At  present  they  say  she  is 
going  to  see  Mrs.  Swinburn  in  Yorkshire,  who  it  seems  is  the 
friend  of  all  sorts  of  queens. 

We  have  received  besides  a  pacquet  of  French  Dukes,  the  late 
Grentilhommes  de  la  Chambre,  Eichelieu,  Villequier,  and  Duras ; 
the  last  narrowly  escaped  with  his  life  at  the  late  violence  about 

*  Louisa  de  Stolberg,  married  to  Charles  Edward  Stuart,  tlie  grandson  of 
James  11.     Since  the  year  1745,  known  by  the  title  of  Comte  d' Albany. 


304  LETTERS.  [1791 

the  King's  journey  to  St.  Cloud ;  the  first  is  returned  to  Paris 
at  the  King's  own  request.  The  National  Assembly  have  added 
new  persecution  to  the  fugitives — or  to  their  embassadors,  for- 
bidding these  to  receive  those — but  .are  the  former  obliged  to 
remain  embassadors  ? 

You  will  have  heard  that  La  Fayette  has  resumed  his  com- 
mand; which  I  think  an  ambitious  weakness,  and  a  second 
tome  to  Necker's  return.  A  general,  who  has  lost  command 
and  authority  over  his  troops,  will  not  recover  it  for  long  by  im- 
posing an  oath  on  them.  The  Parisian  mob  are  mounted  to 
the  highest  note  of  the  gamut  of  riot,  and  whoever  plays  to 
them  in  that  key,  will  make  them  caper  away  from  their  com- 
mander, or  lead  them  against  him. 

I  am  sorry  to  say  that  we  have  discordant  people  amongst  us, 
who  are  trying  to  strike  up  the  same  tune  here.  One  Paine,  an 
American,  has  published  the  most  seditious  pamphlet  ever  seen 
but  in  open  rebellion  :  thousands  of  copies  of  it  have  been  dis- 
persed ;  and  the  Eevolution-Clubs  threaten  farther  hostilities. 
We  have  gained  the  happiest  constitution  upon  earth  by  many 
storms  ;  I  trust  we  shall  not  lose  it  by  one  !  nor  change  it  for 
anarchy,  which  always  ends  in  despotism,  which  I  am  persuaded 
will  be  the  consequence  of  the  intemperate  proceedings  in 
France,  and  in  the  end  will  be  fatal  to  liberty  in  general ;  as 
maakind  will  dread  buying  even  reformation  too  dear. 

Apropos  (an  odd  apropos,  but  you  will  see  it's  descent),  the 
Countess  Stanhope,*  to-night  inquired  in  the  kindest  and  most 
interested  manner  after  you  both;  so  did  Hannah  More  last 
night  at  White  Pussy's.] 

Friday,  noon,  Ctli. 

I  must  finish  my  letter,  tho'  my  cargo  is  so  small ;  regular 
stage-coaches,  you  know,  set  out,  whether  full  or  not.  I  have 
not  sent  you  so  short  a  gazette  yet. 

I  hope  to-morrow  or  Monday  to  hear  that  your  nose  has  exhi- 
bited itself  openly  at  Florence  ;  and  as  certain  cheeks  have  got 
natural  roses,  will  not  the  pencil  resume  its  practice  ?■  The 
Prince  of  Wales  is  better,  and  in  a  way  to  recover  by  an  erup- 
tion.    Adieu !  all  three ! 

*  Louisa  Grenville,  the  grandmotlier  of  the  present  Earl  Stanhope. 
+  Elizabeth  Gary,  wife  of  Lord  Amherst. 


1781]  BOSWELL'S   life   OF   JOHNSOIf.  305 

In  Mr.  Walpole's  letter  of  May  12th*  he  mentions 
-Mrs.  Darner's  return  to  England  and  her  arrival  at  her 
uncle's  (Lord  Frederick  Campbell)  house,  where  he  and 
her  parents  were  passuig  the  evening. 

In  his  letter,  dated  May  19th,*  he  gives  an  account 
of  the  arrival  of  the  Countess  of  Albany  in  England,  and 
of  her  presentation  at  court. 

[I  have  had  (says  he)  an  exact  account  of  the  interview  of 
the  two  Queens  from  one  who  stood  close  to  them.  The  Dow- 
ager was  announced  as  Princess  of  Stolberg.  She  was  well 
dressed,  and  not  at  all  embarrassed.  The  King  talked  to  her  a 
good  deal ;  but  about  her  passage,  the  sea,  and  general  topics. 
The  Queen  in  the  same  way  but  less.  Then  she  stood  between 
the  Dukes  of  Gloucester  and  Clarence,  and  had  a  good  deal  of 
conversation  with  the  former ;  who.  perhaps  may  have  met  her 
in  Italy.  Not  a  word  between  her  and  the  Princesses.  .  .  .  The 
Queen  looked  at  her  earnestly.] 

He  concludes  his  letter  with  the  announcement  that 
BosweU  had  just  published  his  long-promised  life  of 
Johnson,  in  two  volumes  quarto.  Mr.  Walpole  had  a 
great  repugnance  to  Dr.  Johnson,  and  says,  when  alludiag 
to  this  work,  in  his  letter  of  the  26th  of  May,*  that  he 
would  never  be  the  least  acquainted  with  him. 

[Johnson's  blind  Toryism  and  known  brutality  kept  me  aloof; 
nor  did  I  ever  exchange  a  syllable  with  him :  nay,  I  do  not 
think  I  was  in  a  room  with  him  six  times  in  my  days.] 

The  first  time,  I  think,  was  at  the  Eoyal  Academy.  Sir 
Joshua  said,  '  Let  me  present  D''  Goldsmith  to  you :'  he  did. 
'  Now  I  will  present  D""  Johnson  to  you.'  '  No,'  said  I,  '  Sir 
Joshua ;  for  D'  Goldsmith,  pass — but  you  shall  not  present  D"" 
Johnson  to  me.' 

In  Mr.  Walpole's  letter  of  June  2nd,  he  says  : — 

*  Published  in  1846. 
VOL.  I.  X 


306  LBTTEES.  [r;9i 

[Berkeley  Square,  June  2,  1791. 

Well !  I  have  seen  Madam  D'Albany,  who  has  not  a  ray  of 
royalty  about  her.  She  has  good  eyes  and  teeth  ;  but  I  think 
can  have  had  no  more  beauty  than  remains,  except  youth.  She 
is  civil  and  easy,  but  German  and  ordinary.  Lady  Ailesbury 
made  a  small  assemblage  for  her  on  Monday,  and  my  curiosity 
was  satisfied.  Mr.  Conway,  and  Lady  A.,  L'*  and  Lady  Frederic 
Campbell,  and  Mrs.  E.  Hervey,  and  Mrs.  Hervey  *  breakfasted 
with  me  that  morning  at  Strawberry.] 

I  have  had  no  letter  from  you  since  Monday  se'nnight,  but 
as  I  had  three  almost  at  once,  and  as  Mrs.  Darner  received  one 
two  days  ago,  I  am  in  no  fright  about  you ;  indeed  I  do  not 
like  y"^  sitting  and  writing  so  much,  which  is  bad  for  you. 
All  the  difference  now  is,  that  I  have  nothing  to  answer ;  and 
having  nothing  to  tell,  this  will  be  very  brief. 

[Mrs.  Damer,  who  returned  in  such  Spanish  health,  has  al- 
ready caught  an  English  north-eastern  cold,  with  pains  in  all  her 
limbs  and  a  little  fever ;  and  yesterday  was  not  above  two  hours 
out  of  bed.  Her  father  came  to  me  from  her  before  dinner, 
and  left  her  better,  and  I  shall  go  to  her  presently.  These  two 
days  may  boldly  assume  the  name  of  June  without  the  courtesy 
of  England.  Such  weather  makes  me  wish  myself  at  Straw- 
berry.] 

Next  week  I  must  go  to  Doctors'  Commons  —  don't  be 
alarmed — I  have  not  heard  a  syllable  against  either  of  you ; 
but  a  poor  old  gentlewoman  in  the  country  has  made  me  her 
executor  and  trustee  for  her  two  daughters — and  they  need  not 
alarm  you  neither — tho'  somehow  or  other  there  was  a  connec- 
tion between  the  families,  which  it  is  not  proper  to  explain  by 
the  post,  and  I  must  repair  into  the  city  to  prove  the  will. 
Some  trouble  I  shall  have,  for  there  are  disagreeable  circum- 
stances attending  both  daughters,  who  are  not  of  the  compos-ite 
order.  Well !  one  must  do  the  best  one  can,  and  make  he  best 
of  everything.  It  is  a  cheqiiered  world,  and  surely  I  have  no 
reason  to  complain  of  my  lot  in  it ! — a  truly  hard  fate  is  that  of 
two  of  the  most  amiable  young  women  in  the  world,  punished 
without  a  fault,  and  befoi^e  they  were  capable  of  having  a 
fault,  not  for  the  fault,  but  for  the  virtues  of  their  father  !  But 
justice  is  not  only  blind,  as  she  ought  to  be,  when  sitting  on  the 

*  Elizabeth,  a  niece  of  Alderman  Beckford. 


1791]  KING  AND   QUEEN   OF   FRANCE   AREESTED.  307 

bench  in  her  scarlet  robe  and  furs,  but  when  she  is  at  home  en 
famille. 

Friday,  noon,  3rd. 

I  sat  with  Mrs.  D.  an  hour  last  night,  and  found  her  much 
mended.  To-day  the  message  is,  '  much  better,'  and  if  she 
proved  so,  she  told  me  she  woud  ask  y'  friend  Mrs.  Chol'meley 
to  meet  me  there  this  evening.     Adieu  ! 

P.S. — Hastings  made  his  defence  yesterday,  but  the  trial  is 
put  off  till  the  next  session,  as  the  Pari,  is  to  be  prorogued  next 
week.  Nothing  decided  about  the  Eussian  War,  nor  a  Secretary 
of  State  yet,  but  Dundas,  it  is  said,  is  to  be  the  man. 

His  letters  of  June  Sth,  14t]i,  and  23rd,  already  pub- 
lished, are  an  amusing  chronicle  of  all  he  hears  and  sees. 

Strawberry  HiU,  June  28,  1791. 
I  am  glad  you  recovered  my  strayed  letter,  because  one  lost 
leaves  a  gap  in  a  correspondence  that  one  thinks  might  contain 
something  material,  which  I  do  not  believe  was  the  case.  You 
was  right  in  concluding  I  should  disapprove  of  y""  visiting  hos- 
pitals. One  ought  to  surmount  disgust  where  it  is  one's  duty, 
or  one  can  do  any  good,  or  perform  an  act  of  friendship  ;  but  it 
is  a  rule  with  me  to  avoid  any  disagreeable  object  or  idea,  where 
I  Tiave  not  the  smallest  power  of  redress  or  remedy.  I  would 
not  read  any  of  the  accounts  of  the  earthquakes  in  Sicily  and 
Calabria ;  and  when  I  catch  a  glimpse  of  a  report  of  condemned 
malefactors  to  the  Council,  I  clap  my  finger  on  the  paragraph, 
that  I  may  not  know  when  they  are  to  suffer,  and  have  it  run 
in  my  head.  It  is  worse  to  go  into  hospitals — there  is  contagion 
into  the  bargain.  I  have  heard  of  a  French  princess,  who  had 
a  taste  for  such  sights,  and  once  said, '  II  faut  avouer,  que  j'ai 
vu  aujourd'hui  une  agonie  magnifique.'  Your  tender  nature  is 
not  made  for  such  spectacles  ;  and  why  attrist  it,  without  doing 
any  service  ?  One  needs  not  recur  to  the  index  of  the  book  of 
creation  to  hunt  for  miserable  sufferers.  What  would  I  give  not 
to  have  heard  the  calamities  fallen  on  the  heads  of  the  King  and 
Queen  of  France !  I  know  no  more  yet  than  of  their  being 
betrayed  and  stopped  at  Clermont,  and  ordered  back  to  Paris, 
with  their  children  !  What  superabundance  of  woe !  To  expect 
insult,  ignominy,  a  prison,  perhaps  separation  or  death,  without 

X  2 


308  LETTERS.  [1791 

a  ray  of  comfortable  hope  for  their  infants.  That  their  im- 
prisonment and  danger  should  have  been  grievous,  I  do  not 
wonder — but  to  await  dissention  amongst  their  tyrants  and 
anarchy,  was  the  best  chance  the  King  and  Queen  had  in  store ; 
but  tho'  both  will  still  happen  in  time,  I  still  believe,  what 
advantage  either  or  both  will  produce  to  those  victims  may  be 
very  doubtful.  That  their  flight  was  ill-advised  is  plain,  from 
that  wofully  false  step  of  leaving  his  recantation  behind  him, 
before  he  was  safely  out  of  the  country.  It  was  strange  that  his 
intention  being  divulged,  he  should  not  have  learnt  the  pre- 
parations made  to  prevent  it,  and  desisted!  It  is  equally 
strange  that  he  should  have  escaped,  tho'  so  watched  and 
guarded !  ' 

Wednesday,  29th. 

I  received  y^  No.  36  on  Monday,  to  which  I  have  partly  been 
replying ;  and  to-day  I  have  been  so  happy  as  to  get  No.  37  too, 
to  which  I  will  now  answer,  as  I  have  heard  nothing  more  yet 
of  the  poor  French  Royalties,  who  must  already  have  felt  a 
thousand  times  worse  than  ever,  after  a  glimpse  of  safety,  and 
then  expecting  everything  that  brutal  barbarity  can  inflict,  and 
which  nobody  but  French  and  Dr.  Price  could  be  so  shameless 
as  to  enjoy. 

I  am  glad  you  escaped  from  the  hospital  without  infection ; 
and  I  will  trust  to  your  sweet  feelings  for  y''  never  going  again 
unnecessarily  to  view  800  persons  in  pain  and  misery. 

I  have  told  you,  and  can  only  repeat,  that  I  did  admire  Mrs. 
Chomley  much,  as  I  did  former^.  It  is  a  very  clear,  sound, 
well-informed  understanding,  as  far  as  I  saw ;  but  that  was  but 
four  or  five  times  at  most,  and  chiefly  in  company,  where  there 
were  not  many  of  quite  her  calibre.  She  seemed  to  me  rather 
modestly  proper  and  reserved,  but  not  out  of  spirits. 

I  am  assured,  as  you  justly  guessed,  that  the  pamphlet  which 
Mons''  de  Lally  showed  to  you  is  by  no  means  Mr.  Burke's 
genuine  second  pamphlet,  but  a  spurious  one  fabricated  at 
Paris,  and  spread  about  there,  to  hurt  his  credit.  This  I  heard 
last  Friday,  five  days  before  I  received  y"^  letter ;  so,  if  M.  de 
Lally  answers  it,  he  will  be  the  dupe  of  his  own  enemies.  Mr.  B. 
has  advertised  a  new  letter  to-day  to  the  Whigs,  but  I  have  not 
yet  seen  it. 

Your  Italian  paper  is  thin,  but  perfectly  good.    Cliveden  will 


1791]  HOME   AND   FOREIGN   NEWS.  309 

look  beautiful  with  your  Narcissuses.  I  wish  you  were  all  there 
to-day,  for  we  ai'e  again  soused  into  Florentine  weather,  and  have 
scarce  had  a  teacup  of  rain,  which  makes  us  not  look  so  green 
as  the  Cascines,  tho'  generally  we  have  fifty  thousand  acres  of 
such  verdure — thus  I  have  answered  y'  chief  articles. 

Late  at  night. 

I  have  been  at  Eichmond,  where  I  have  seen  a  letter  from 
good  authority.  The  King  and  Queen  were  brought  to  Paris 
amidst  numerous  thousands,  and  without  much  insult;  but 
they  have  been  separated,  and  the  Queen  has  been  confined  at 
the  Val  de  Grace,  where  she  was  to  be  examined  two  days  ago ; 
and  they  talk  of  bringing  her  to  trial  for  carrying  away  the 
Child  of  the  State,  whom  the  Assembly  wish  to  crown  under  a 
regent,  while  the  Jacobins  are  for  a  republic.  I  soon  after  saw 
a  gentleman  from  town,  on  whose  intelligence  I  do  not  always 
depend.  He  says  the  King  lost  sis  unnecessary  hours  on  the 
road  in  eating  and  drinking ;  and  that  Mess"  de  Choiseul  and 
Damas,  who,  I  suppose,  attended  the  King,  are  brought,  not 
only  in  chains  to  Paris,  but  with  each  a  grenadier  sitting  in  his 
lap  the  whole  way— such  unnecessary  torture,  that  it  must  be 
the  taste  of  the  nation  to  inflict  it,  if  true. 

All  this,  and  fifty  times  more,  true  and  false,  you  will  hear 
long  before  you  receive  this ;  but  of  what  can  one  talk  else  ? 
Kate  Macaulay  was  so  unlucky  as  to  die  a  few  days  ago ;  but 
she  will  gossip  over  it  with  Dr.  Price. 

Frank  North,  tho'  abroad,  has  a  musical  comedy  acting  at  the 
little  Hay  market,  and  coldly  received.  His  friends  say  the 
music  was  ill-chosen  or  the  singers  unequal  to  it.  I  had  had 
great  expectations,  for  he  certainly  has  much  humour  and  wit. 
I  have  seen  excellent  verses  of  his  in  that  style.  His  brother 
Frederic  was  stopped  from  going  to  Constantinople  by  the 
plague,  and  is  supposed  on  his  road  home. 

Mrs.  Darner  is  to  come  to  me  on  Friday  for  two  days ;  and 
Madame  D'Albany,  at  her  own  desire,  is  to  breakfast  here  on 
Saturday ;  and,  at  her  desire,  Alfieri  too.  Whatever  her 
feelings  are  here,  she  must  rejoice  at  having  been  only  titular 
Queen  of  France ! 

NiTie  months  are  gone  and  over.  I  trust  there  are  but  four 
to  come  e'er  we  meet.  Do  not  set  a  foot  amongst  the  Basillis- 
sophagi  I     Monsieur  and  Madame  have  done  right  in  retiring ; 


310  MTTEES.  [1791 

none  of  the  family  should  stay  in  Paris,  but  a  paltry  Duke  of 
Orleans  with  his  affected  trull,  Mad.  de  Sillery — and  I  should  not 
be  sorry  if  they  were  pelted  out  of  it  with  contempt. 

Lady  Clackmannan  was  here  this  morning ;  puss  jumped  into 
her  lap.  I  said  '  Mad™,  do  you  dislike  cats  ? '  '  Oh,  no  !  I  like 
all  dumb  creatures.'  Aye,  thought  I,  and  so  do  I,  but  I  am 
not  the  better. 

France,  it  seems,  will  supply  my  letters  with  matter,  and  I 
shall  not  be  reduced  to  village-chat — yet  I  had  rather  have  no 
letters  to  write.    Adieu  ! 

Strawberry  Hill,  Monday,  July  4,  1791. 
Mrs.  Damer  has  been  here  on  Friday  and  Saturday,  and 
returned  to  town  yesterday.  She  has  already  repaired  the 
eagle's  beak  with  wax,  so  that  he  can  again  receive  company ; 
but  as  that  has  not  force  enough  to  execute  the  commands  of 
Jove,  nor  to  crush  the  fingers  of  those  who  presume  to  touch 
his  sacred  person,  he  will  soon  have  another  of  marble.  Madame 
D'Albany  and  her  cicisbeo  breakfasted  with  us  on  Saturday, 
and  seemed  really  delighted — consequently,  'c'estla  plusgrande 
reine  du  monde.'  I  really  found  she  has  more  sense  than  I  had 
thought  the  first  time  I  saw  her ;  but  she  had  like  to  have 
undone  all,  for  when  I  showed  her  the  '  Death  of  Wolsey,'  with 
which  Mrs.  D.  is  anew  enchanted,  and  told  her  it  was  painted 
by  her  acquaintance.  Miss  Agnes  Berry,  she  recollected  neither 
of  you — but  at  last  it  came  out  that  she  had  called  you  Miss 
Barrys.  I  cannot  say  that  whitewashed  her  much  in  my  eyes : 
how  anything  approaching  to  the  sound  would  strike  me  at  any 
distance  of  time — which,  I  trust,  will  never,  while  I  exist,  exceed 
four  months.  Apropos,  t'other  night  I  visited  at  the  foot  of 
Eichmond  Bridge,  and  found  a  whole  circle  of  old  and  young 
gossips.  Miss  assured  me  you  are  to  be  back  in  October,  which 
I  do  not  repeat  as  if  violating  my  promise  of  contenting  myself 
with  the  very  commencement  of  November,  but  to  give  an 
opportunity  of  saying  that  Cliveden  will  be  quite  ready  to 
receive  you  in  October;  and,  as  I  conclude  the  lease  of  y' 
house  in  town  will  not  be  out  then,  your  best  way  will  be  not 
to  stop  a  moment  in  London,  but  to  drive  directly  hither,  and 
stay  all  three,  &c.,  with  me  till  you  can  settle  yourselves  in 
Cliveden.  This  will  not  only  be  the  most  convenient  to  your- 
selves, but  you  are  sure  the  most  agreeable  to  me ;  and  thus 


1791]  SYMPATHY   FELT   FOE  MAKIE   ANTOINETTE.  311 

you  will  have  time  to  unpack  and  arrange  yourselves,  without 
being  broken  in  upon  for  some  days  by  visits,  nor  expected  to 
make  them.  With  all  my  warmth  for  those  I  love,  I  have  a 
rebuffing  coldness,  that  does  not  glue  people  to  a  chair  in  my 
house. 

Miss  Au-pr^s-du-pont  told  me  Miss  A.  had  written  to  her  of 
my  misery  about  your  nose.  I  was  sorry,  as  that  family  is  in 
daily  and  hourly  commerce  of  tattle  with  all  the  world,  and 
all  the  Grimalkins  in  the  parish  will  conclude  I  am  in  love 
with  your  nose,  which  I  vow  I  am  not ;  but  if  I  love  you  both 
most  affectionately,  as  I  do,  can  either  of  you  wound  her  nose 
by  a  dreadful  fall,  and  I  not  feel  for  it  ?  Miss  Dupont  soon 
quitted  the  subject  to  put  such  a  volume  of  interrogations  to 
me  about  L^  Strafford's  will,  that  at  last  I  was  forced  to  say, 
•  Madam,  indeed  I  cannot  answer  all  those  questions  ;'  on  which 
she  did  close  her  incessant  lips,  and  the  ball  was  resumed  by 
the  Signora  Madre.  Oh !  those  righteous  scorpions,  that  will 
not  touch  a  card,  but  meddle  with  everybody's  affairs  with 
which  they  have  nothing  to  do,  and  never  ask  themselves 
whether  what  they  hear  is  true  or  false,  but  repeat  both  as 
conscientiously  as  the  postman  delivers  letters  without  knowing 
what  they  contain.  Thus  every  falsehood  is  propagated,  like 
seeds  that  bii'ds  drop  out  of  their  bills.  For  Truth — I  believe 
she  died  a  maid,  and  left  no  issue. 

Thence  I  will  not  talk  on  France,  for  one  is  overwhelmed 
with  reports  contradicting  one  another,  according  to  the  pro- 
pensities of  the  senders  and  receivers.  Of  one  thing  I  am 
certain,  of  pitying  the  Queen ;  which  was  so  generally  felt  here 
as  soon  as  the  reverse  of  her  escape  was  known,  that  I  was  told 
that,  if  money  could  serve  her,  an  hundred  thousand  p"*^  would 
have  been  subscribed  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour  at  Loyd's  Coffee- 
house. There  is  a  wretch,  a  quondam  Prince  du  Sang,  who  has 
snapped  at  this  moment  for  making  himself  more  ridiculously 
contemptible  than  ever,  by  protesting  he  does  not  wish  for  the 
Eegency,  which,  I  suppose,  would  as  soon  be  offered  to  me.  I 
remember  an  old  French  refugee  here,  a  Marquise  de  Montandre 
(the  Mademoiselle  Spanheim  of  the  '  Spectator'),  who,  on  the 
strength  of  her  pinchbeck  marquisat,  pretended  to  precede  our 
sterling  countesses ;  but  being  sure  of  it's  not  being  allowed, 
she  thus  entered  her  claim :  when  at  a  visit  tea  was  brought 
in ;  before  the  groom  of  the  chambers  could  offer  it  to  anybody. 


312  LETTERS.  [1791 

she  called  out,  •  I  would  not  have  any  tea ;'  and  then,  when  she 
had  thus  saved  her  dignity,  she  said  to  him,  after  others  had 
been  served,  *I  have  betought  myself;  I  tink  I  will  have 
one  cup.' 

Berkeley  Square,  Thursday  evemng,  7tli. 

I  might  as  well  write  of  French  affairs,  as  I  have  nothing  else 
to  write.  Apropos,  we  have  had  such  violent  west  winds,  that 
I  have  no  letter  from  you  this  week.  A  disagreeable  affair, 
with  which  I  will  not  tire  you  long,  brought  me  to  town  on 
Tuesday.  My  disdrdered  ward,  whom  I  mentioned  to  you,  was 
to  come  to  me  on  Tuesday  from  Chichester ;  I  was  to  bring 
her  to  town  yesterday,  and  send  her  with  Kirgate  and  his 
daughter  to-day  into  Kent,  where  I  had  found  a  private  lodging 
for  her  with  excellent  people,  who  had  a  poor  gentleman,  in 
the  same  way,  with  them,  and  had  treated  him  with  the  utmost 
tenderness.  She  had  consented  and  promised  to  come,  with  a 
worthy  lawyer,  employed  by  the  D.  of  Eichmond,  and  his 
daughter,  who  had  submitted  to  attend  her ;  but  on  Monday 
night  she  changed  her  mind  and  would  not  stir.  I  sat  till 
eleven  at  night  expecting  her  every  minute,  and  starting  up 
at  the  rattle  of  every  chaise  that  past.  The  same  next  morning 
till  the  post  came  in,  when  a  letter  from  the  lawyer  acquainted 
me  she  was  so  disordered,  that  he  had  called  in  the  apothecary, 
who  declared  compulsion  must  be  used.  To  that  I  have  posi- 
tively refused  my  consent,  unless  to  prevent  her  from  destroying 
herself;  and  have  ordered  all  the  gentlest  methods  to  be  used 
as  long  as  possible,  and  to  offer  her  to  settle  herself  wherever 
she  likes  best — -for  she  is  not  constantly  out  of  her  mind.  It  is 
a  most  unfortunate  history,  and  I  find  will  give  one  great 
trouble.  I  was  forced  to  come  to  consult  Mr.  Churchill,  joint 
trustee  with  me. 

Last  night  I  supped  at  Mrs.  Damer's  (who  goes  to  Park 
Place  to-morrow  for  three  weeks),  with  Madame  D' Albany, 
the  D.  and  Dss.  of  Richmond,  the  men  Mt.  Edgcumbes,  Mrs. 
BuUer,  and  'the  charming  man,'  and  to-morrow  return  to 
Strawberry. 

The  Gunnings  are  not  only  resettled  in  St.  James's  Street  as 
boldly  as  ever,  but  constantly  with  old  Bedford,  who  exults  in 
having  regained  them;  but  their  place  in  the  town-talk  is 
occupied  by  Lady  Mary  Duncan,  who,  on  receiving  tickets  for 


1791]  HOME  NEWS.  313 

his  benefit  from  Badini,  at  the  Pantheon,  where  Pacchierotti 
does  not  sing,  she  returned  them  with  a  most  abusive  letter, 
calling  him  impudent  monster  and  wretched  poet.  This  has 
given  somebody  an  opportunity  of  returning  an  answer  (in  his 
name)  ten  times  more  scurrilous,  and  which  is  cried  up  as  full 
of  humour ;  but  by  what  has  been  repeated  to  me  out  of  it,  I 
only  found  it  exceedingly  coarse  and  indelicate.  However,  she 
cannot  be  pitied,  having  committed  herself  by  being  the 
aggressor  towards  such  a  fellow.  Adieu  !  I  have  exhausted  my 
small  sack  of  gatherings. 

[Strawljerry  Hill,  Tuesday  night,  July  12, 1791. 

I  had  had  no  letter  from  you  for  ten  days,  I  suppose  from 
west  winds,  but  did  receive  one  this  morning,  which  had  been 
three  weeks  on  the  road — and  a  charming  one  it  was.  Mr.  Batt, 
who  dined  with  me  yesterday,  and  stayed  till  after  breakfast  to- 
day, being  here,  I  redde  part  of  it  to  him,  and  he  was  as  much 
delighted  as  I  was  with  y''  happy  quotation  of  Incedit  Regina, 
If  I  could  spare  so  much  room,  I  might  fill  this  paper  with  all  he 
said  of  you  both,  and  with  all  the  friendly  kind  things  he  begged 
me  to  say  to  both  from  him.  Last  night  I  redde  to  him  certain 
reminiscences,  and  this  morning  he  slipped  from  me  and  walked 
over  to  Cliveden — and  hopes  to  see  it  again  much  more  agree- 
ably. I  hope  so  too  and  that  I  shall  be  with  him.]  Now  to 
answer  you. 

The  Duke  of  Argyll  and  Lady  Charlotte  are  at  Inverary,  and 
he,  they  say,  is  very  low,  and  not  at  all  well.  Lady  Derby  is  at 
Richmond — I  hear,  much  as  usual.  Mrs.  D.  is  at  Park -place  for 
three  weeks,  has  been  here  as  I  told  you  in  my  last,  is  perfectly 
well,  and  looks  better  than  ever  I  saw  her.  Mrs.  Hervey  is  gone 
thither  to-day  from  Hampton,  where  she  has  been  two  or  three 
days  with  the  Johnstones  (I  did  not  know  of  such  intimacy) ; 
they  all  and  Mrs.  Anderson  were  here  yesterday  morning,  and  I 
dined  with  all  but  Mrs.  Hervey  at  Mrs.  Garrick's  last  Saturday. 
Mr.  Batt  and  Clackmannan  were  there  too. 

[I  wish  there  were  not  so  many  fetes  at  Florence ;  they  are 
worse  for  you  both  than  Italian  sultriness ;  but  if  you  do  go  to 
them,  I  am  glad  you  have  more  northern  weather. 

News  I  have  none,  but  that  Calonne  arrived  in  London 
on  Sunday — ^you  may  be  sure  I  do  not  know  for  what — ^in  a 


314  LETTERS.  [1791 

word,  I  have  no  more  opinion  of  his  judgment,  than  of  his 
integrity. 

Now  I  must  say  a  syllable  about  myself — but  don't  be  alarmed ! 
it  is  not  the  gout ;  it  is  worse,  it  is  the  rheumatism,  which  I 
have  had  in  my  shoulder  ever  since  it  attended  the  gout  last 
December.  It  was  almost  gone  till  last  Sunday,  when  the 
Bishop  of  London  [Porteous]  preaching  a  charity  sermon  in  our 
church,  whither  I  very,  very  seldom  venture  to  hobble,  I  would  go 
to  hear  him,  both  out  of  civility,  and  as  I  am  very  intimate  with 
him.  The  church  was  crammed,  and  tho'  it  rained,  every  window 
was  open.  However,  at  night  I  went  to  bed  and  to  sleep ;  but 
waked  with  such  exquisite  pain  in  my  rheumatic  right  shoulder, 
that  I  think  I  scarce  ever  felt  greater  torture  from  the  gout.] 

It  was  so  grievous,  that  I  considered  whether  I  should  not 
get  out  of  bed — but  the  thought  that  I  might  kill  myself, 
and  consequently  not  live  to  Cliveden-tide,  checked  me— 
upon  my  honour  this  is  true — I  lay — not  still,  but  writhing 
about,  till  about  five  o'clock,  when  I  fell  asleep.  I  have  had 
but  very  moderate  pain  since.  I  own  I,  did  tremble  at  night, 
but  I  had  my  usual  comfortable  night  composed  of  one  whole 
dose  of  sleep,  and  could  not  be  very  bad  yesterday,  as  I  could 
read  to  Mr.  Batt  for  two  hours  and  half  without  reposing,  nor 
worse  to-day,  when  I  have  been  writing  this  prolix  syllable  to 
you,  in  my  lap  indeed,  without  deputing  Kirgate.  Tho'  the 
gout  could  never  subdue  my  courage,  nor  make  me  take  any 
precaution  against  catching  cold,  the  rheumatism  and  Cliveden 
have  made  a  coward  of  me.  I  now  draw  up  my  coach  glasses, 
button  my  breast,  and  put  a  hat  on  the  back  of  my  head,  for  I 
cannot  yet  bear  it  to  touch  my  forehead,  when  I  go  into  the 
garden.  You  charged  me  to  be  particular  when  I  am  not  well — 
I  think  I  have  been  circumstantial  enough  !  If  I  am  in  love 
with  your  nose  and  long  to  see  it,  quite  recovered,  take  root 
at  Cliveden,  at  least  your  Corydon  does  not  forget  that  he  is 
seventy-four,  nor  conceal  one  particle  of  his  rheumatism.  His 
dread  of  being  gone  before  November  does  not  look  as  if  he 
thought  himself  immortal — and  yet  as  a  true  knight,  no  Oron- 
dates  ever  suffered  more  for  his  mistress,  than  I  did  heroically 
on  Sunday  night  in  not  getting  out  of  bed. 

Thursday  evening. 
I  cannot  finish  this  with  my  own  hand,  for  yesterday  morning 


1791]  EETUEN   OF   GOUT.  313 

I  had  a  good  deal  of  pain,  the  incorporated  society  of  rheumatism 
and  gout  have  got  down  to  my  elbow  and  wrist,  and  I  cannot 
move  my  arm  at  all — however,  as  the  pain  is  locomotive,  I  trust 
it  will  soon  go  quite  away.  I  will  write  again  on  Tuesday,  tho' 
a  hors-d'ceitvre ;  and  I  could  have  wished  to  write  more  myself 
to-day,  for  this  morning  I  received  another  charming  letter  from 
you,  with  a  most  picturesque  description  of  the  Great  Duke's 
Inthronization  in  thePan-Athenioninthe  Piazza  del  Gran  Duca 
— there,  there  are  as  many  long  words  as  Dr.  Johnson's  !  and  you 
may  roll  them  out  to  the  bottom  of  the  page,  since  I  cannot  give 
it  its  usual  complement,  for  tho'  the  spirit  is  willing,  the  flesh  is 
weak.     Adieu ! 

Mr.  Walpole  continued  too  mucli  disabled  to  write,  but 
dictated  the  two  following  letters  to  Kirgate  :  — 

Strawberry  Hill,  Sunday  nigtt,  July  17, 1791. 

Next  to  being  better  I  am  rather  a  little  glad  I  am  worse, 
i.  e.,  the  gout  is  come  to  assert  his  priority  of  right  to  me,  and 
when  he  has  expelled  the  usurper,  I  trust  he  will  retire  quietly 
too ;  in  the  meanwhile,  my  case  is  party  per  pale  good  and  bad : 
I  slept  last  night  without  waking,  but  if  I  want  still  more  gout, 
I  think  I  can  draw  upon  my  right  knee,  where  there  seems  to 
be  a  little  in  store  for  me.  In  good  earnest,  the  rapid  shifting 
of  my  complaint  makes  me  flatter  myself  that  it  will  not  be 
permanent. 

I  have  not  said  a  word  to  you  of  the  apprehensions  that  had 
been  conceived  of  some  mischief  to  happen  on  Thursday  last, 
the  second  intended  celebration  of  the  French  Eevolution.  I 
thought  you  might  be  alarmed,  and  remain  anxious  for  a  fort- 
night ;  now  I  can  tell  you  that  it  totally  miscarried.  The  Ee- 
volution Club  wished  to  hold  their  Jubilee  at  the  Opera-house 
or  Eanelagh,  both  were  refused ;  they  had  intended  to  have 
exhibited  flags  and  National  cockades  sent  from  France,  but 
those  sent  thence  were  stopt  at  the  Custom  House ;  and  tho' 
some  cockades  were  exhibited  in  a  shop  or  two,  nobody  wore 
one.  Numbers  of  Paine's  pamphlet  were  distributed,  but 
equally  without  success.  At  last  the  meeting  was  fixed  at  the 
Crown  and  Anchor,  and  circular  letters  of  invitation  were  sent 
to  all  sorts  of  persons,  and  at  most  did  not  produce  a  thou- 
sand head:    Mr.  Fox  was  sounded,  but  declined;  then,  even 


316  LETTERS.  [1791 

their  solitary  peer,  Lord  Stanhope,  withdrew.  Mr.  Sheridan 
was  persuaded  not  to  go,  and  they  had  not  one  man  of  conse- 
quence but  Mr.  Pigot  the  Prince's  Solicitor,  who  has  not  made 
his  court  by  it.  In  short,  it  ended  with  contempt  and  ridicule, 
and  without  any  disturbance,  except  that  at  eleven  at  night 
some  glaziers  and  tallow-chandlers  broke  a  few  windows  in  the 
Strand  and  Cheapside,  to  force  people  to  put  out  lights,  but  all 
was  immediately  suppressed  by  the  magistrates. 

There  has  been  a  much  worse  tumult  at  Birmingham  on 
the  same  day.  The  Faction  had  stuck  up  most  treasonable 
papers  with  long  extracts  from  Dr.  Price's  sermon,  but  as  soon 
as  the  people  perceived  the  drift  of  them,  they  arose  with  in- 
dignation and  demolished  two  or  three  meeting-houses,  and  the 
evening  papers  of  last  night  said.  Dr.  Priestly's*  house  too,  but 
I  was  told  before  dinner  that  the  last  is  not  true. 

A  remarkable  circumstance  has  happened:  somebody  has 
found  and  reprinted  a  sermon  by  Dr.  Price,  preached  some  years 
ago,  in  which  he  displays  at  length  the  superior  happiness  of 
this  country  to  all  others,  particularly  by  the  increase  of  liberty 
from  taking  off  general  warrants,  &c. 

I  am  tired,  and  will  say  no  more  now ;  but  will  reserve  the 
rest  of  my  paper  till  to-morrow,  when  I  hope  to  give  you  a 
better  account  of  myself,  and  as  good  of  the  public. 

Monday  evening. 
I  have  had  another  good  night.  I  have  nothing  to  do  but 
to  recover  as  fast  as  any  tortoise  in  Christendom.  News  I  have 
none  to  send  you,  nor  desire  to  have,  of  home  manufacture.  In 
France,  I  believe,  they  will  have  enough  to  do  to  consume  their 
own,  without  seeing  their  fashions  adopted,  as  they  used  to  be, 
by  other  countries.     Adieu !  my  good  Friend. 

Strawberry  Hill,  "Wednesday  evening,  July  20tli,  1791. 

Tho'  a  supernumerary  letter  set  out  for  you  from  London  but 
yesterday  evening,  yet  I  will  not  lose  my  ordinary  FHday's  post, 
and  begin  this  now  for  two  reasons ;  first,  I  am  sure  you  will  be 
glad  to  hear  that  I  am  much  better,  tho'  an  accident  that  hap- 

*  Dr.  Priestly,  a  distinguished  dissenting  divine,  'bom  1733;  died  1804. 
He  wrote  '  A  Discourse  on  tlie  Death  of  Dr.  Price,'  and  'An  Appeal  to  the 
Public  on  the  Subject  of  the  Eiot  at  Birmingham,'  &c.  &c. 


1791]  A  MISTAKE.  317 

pened  to  me  on  Monday  night  might  have  had  ugly  consequences. 
Having  had  a  good  deal  of  fever,  I  take  saline  draughts :  a  fresh 
parcel  came  on  Sunday  night,  with  a  bottle  in  a  separate  paper, 
which  I  concluded  was  hartshorn,  which  I  had  wanted.  They 
were  laid  on  the  window,  and  next  morning  I  bade  James  give 
me  one  of  the  draughts:  he  thinking  it  one  of  the  former 
parcel,  gave  me  the  separate  draught,  and  I  swallowed  it  direct- 
ly, but  instantly  found  it  was  something  very  different,  and  sent 
for  the  apothecary  to  know  what  I  had  taken ;  yet  before  he 
could  arrive,  I  found  upon  enquiry,  and  by  the  effects,  that  it 
was  a  vomit  designed  for  one  of  the  maids — to  be  sure,  in  pain 
and  immoveable  all  down  my  right  side,  it  was  not  a  pleasant 
adventure,  but  it  had  not  the  least  bad  effect,  and  I  dictated 
the  conclusion  of  my  letter  to  you  that  very  night,  tho'  I 
would  not  then  mention  the  accident,  lest  you  might  suspect  me 
poisoned  before  this  could  arrive  to  convince  you  of  the  con- 
trary. I  was  very  well  all  yesterday,  and  so  I  am  to-day,  and 
should  have  walk'd  about  the  house  but  have  had  company 
the  whole  of  the  day.  Before  I  arose  Gen.  Conway  came  to 
breakfast  with  me  from  London,  on  his  way  back  to  Park  Place : 
then  came  Lady  Charlotte  North  and  Mrs.  Gr.  Cholmondeley, 
from  Bushy;  Mrs.  Grrenville  from  Hampton  Court,  and  the 
Mount  Edgecumbes  from  Eichmond,  whilst  three  different  com- 
panies were  seeing  the  house  by  a  confusion  I  had  made  during 

my  pain  in  giving  out  three  tickets  for  the  same  day all  this 

is  a  trumpery  story,  but  at  least  will  show  you  that  I  am  very 
well  now. 

My  second  reason  for  writing  now  is,  that  I  received  yesterday 
a  most  kind  letter  from  your  father,  for  which  I  give  him  a 
thousand  thanks  ;  particularly  for  the  good  account  he  gives  me 
of  your  nose ;  and,  as  he  desires,  I  blend  my  answer  with  this 
to  you  too  :  he  also  hints  at  what  I  expected,  and  do  not  dislike, 
that  he  finds  Florence  not  more  delightful  than  England,  and 
shall  not  be  sorry,  for  which  I  again  thank  him,  to  set  up  his 
staff  at  Cliveden. 

Gen.  Conway  told  me  that  the  latest  accounts  last  night  in 
Town  from  Birmingham  were,  that  all  was  quieted  there  on  the 
arrival  of  the  military,  but  that  the  populace  were  gone  into 
Worcestershire,  some  said  in  pursuit  of  Dr.  Priestly ;  and  that 
they  had  threatened  Eagley,  Lord  Beauchamp's  Seat,  in  their 


318  ,   LETTERS.  [1791 

own  county,  for  his  having  been  for  taking  off  the  Test  Act ; 
but  as  the  Edgecumbes  were  here  at  three  o'clock  and  had  heard 
nothing  new,  I  conclude  and  hope  all  is  over.  Great  mischief 
has  been  done  at  Birmingham,  and  indeed  the  provocations  there 
and  in  London,  and  in  other  places,  have  been  grievous.  Vast 
numbers  of  Paine's  pamphlet  were  distributed  both  to  regiments 
and  ships,  but  were  given  up  voluntarily  to  the  officers,  and 
even  money  was  tried  on  the  guards,  but  to  no  purpose  :  the  most 
seditious  hand-bills  were  stuck  up  in  London  and  Birmingham, 
and  Dr.  Priestly  is  said  to  have  boasted  that  at  the  latter,  he 
could  raise  20,000  men ;  and  so  indeed  he  has,  but  against 
himself. 

As  not  the  least  spirit  of  dissatisfaction  has  appeared  any- 
where, I  trust  the  French  Revolutionists  will  not  hazard  any 
more  attempts :  nor  is  France  at  all  likely  to  emerge  out  of  its 
own  dreadful  calamities,  which  will  now  tempt  no  other  nations 
to  imitate  them.  I  inclose  the  best  printed  account,  I  have 
seen,  of  the  riots  at  Birmingham  from  yesterday's  paper. 

Thursday  evening. 
The  moment  I  had  finished  dictating  this  last  night,  I  received 
yours  with  the  continuation  of  y""  fetes ;  the  conflagration  of 
the  ball-room  at  the  Cascines,  and  y""  first  news  of  the  flight  of 
the  poor  French  Majesties,  to  all  which  I  have  left  myself  no 
paper  to  answer :  but  I  have  written  these  three  lines  with  my 
own  hand,  which  I  am  vain  enough  to  think  will  satisfy  you 
more.     Thrice,  Adieu ! 

The  letter  of  July  26tlL  is  again  in  his  own  hand- 
writing, and  was  followed  by  those  of  August  3rd,  8th, 
and  10th. 

[Strawberry  Hill,  July  26,  1791. 
Lady  Cecilia  tells  me  that  her  nephew,  Mr.  West,*  who  was 
with  you  at  Pisa,  declares  he  is  in  love  with  you  both — so  I  am 
not  singular.  You  two  may  like  to  hear  this,  tho'  no  novelty 
to  you,  but  it  will  not  satisfy  Mr.  Berry,  who  will  be  impatient 
for  news  from  Birmingham,  but  there  are  no  more,  nor  any 
whence  else.  There  has  not  been  another  riot  in  any  of  the 
three  kingdoms.     The  villain  Paine  came  over  for  the  Crown 

*  The  Hon.  Septimus  West,  uncle  to  the  present  Lord  De  la  Warre.    He 
died  the  year  after. 


1791]  EIOTS   IN   THE   PROVINCES.  319 

and  Anchor,  but  finding  that  his  pamphlet  had  not  set  a  straw 
on  fire,  and  that  the  14*''  of  July  was  as  little  in  fashion  as  the 
ancient  Gunpowder  Plot,  he  dined  at  another  tavern  with  a  few 
quaking  conspirators,  and  probably  is  returned  to  Paris,  where 
he  is  engaged  in  a  controversy  with  the  Abb6  Sieyes  about  the 
plus  or  minus  of  rebellion.  The  rioters  in  Worcestershire, 
whom  I  mentioned  in  my  last,  were  not  a  detachment  from 
Birmingham,  but  volunteer  incendiaries  from  the  capital,  who 
went,  according  to  the  rights  of  men,  with  the  meer  view  of 
plunder,  and  threatened  gentlemen  to  burn  their  houses,  if  not 
ransomed.  Eleven  of  these  disciples  of  Paine  are  in  custody ; 
and  Mr.  Merry,  Mrs.  Barbauld,  and  Miss  Helen  Williams  will 
probably  have  subjects  for  elegies.  Deborah  and  Jael,  I  believe, 
were  invited  to  the  Crown  and  Anchor,  and  had  let  their  nails 
grow  accordingly ;  but  some  how  or  other  no  Poissonnieres  were  ' 
there,  and  the  two  prophetesses  had  no  opportunity  that  day  of 
exercising  their  talents  or  talons.  Their  French  allies,  cock 
and  hen,  have  a  fairer  field  open,  and  the  Jacobins,  I  think,  will 
soon  drive  the  National  Assembly  to  be  better  Eoyalists  than 
ever  they  were,  in  self-defence.] 

I  know  nothing  else,  but  it  is  early  in  the  week.  Yes,  Mrs. 
Keppel  has  let  her  house  at  Isleworth  to  Sheridan,  for  400?.  a 
year —  an  immense  rate — and  yet  far  from  a  wise  bargain.  He 
has  been  just  forced  out  of  his  house  in  Bruton-street  by  his 
landlord,  who  could  get  no  rent  from  him :  almost  the  night  he 
came  to  Isleworth,  he  gave  a  ball  there,  which  will  not  pre- 
cipitate Mrs.  K.''  receipts. 

Wednesday  evening,  27th. 

This  morning  I  received  yours  of  the  12th,  so  it  was  but  a 
fortnight  on  its  journey — I  wish  all  journeys  from  Florence 
could  be  as  rapid.  I  am  now  beginning  my  fears  about  roads, 
bad  inns,  accidents  and  winds  at  sea;  and  they  will  increase 
from  the  first  of  September. 

[You  have  indeed  surprised  me  by  y'  account  of  the  strange 
credulity  on  poor  King  Louis's  escape  in  safety]  In  these 
villages,  we  heard  of  his  flight*  late  in  the  evening,  and  the 
very  next  morning  of  his  being  retaken.  Much  as  he — at  least 
the  Queen — has  suffered,  I  am  persuaded  the  adventure  has 
hastened  general  confusion,  and  will  increase  the  Koyal  party ; 

*  To  Varennes. 


320  LETTEES.  [1791 

tho'  perhaps  their  Majesties,  for  their  personal  safeties,  had 
better  have  awaited  the  natural  progress  of  anarchy.  The 
enormous  deficiency  of  money,  and  the  total  insubordination  of 
the  army,  both  apparent  and  uncontradicted  from  the  reports 
made  to  the  National  Assembly,  show  what  is  coming.  Into 
what  such  a  chaos  will  subside,  it  woud  be  silly  to  attempt  to 
guess.  Perhaps  it  is  not  wiser  in  the  exiles  to  expect  to  live  to 
see  a  resettlement  in  their  favour.  One  thing  I  have  for  these 
two  years  thought  probable  to  arrive — a  division,  at  least  a  dis- 
memberment, of  France.  Despotism  could  no  longer  govern  so 
unwieldy  a  machine ;  a  republic  would  be  still  less  likely  to 
hold  it  together.  If  Foreign  Powers-  should  interfere,  they  will 
take  care  to  pay  themselves  with  what  is  a,  leur  bienseance, 
and  that  in  reality  would  be  serving  France  too.  So  much  for 
my  speculations,  and  they  have  never  varied. 

We  are  so  far  from  intending  to  new  model  our  Grovernment, 
and  dismiss  the  Eoyal  Family,  annihilate  the  Peerage,  cashier 
the  Hierarchy,  and  lay  open  the  land  to  the  first  occupier,  as 
Dr.  Priestly  and  Tom  Paine,  and  the  Revolution  Club  humbly 
proposed,  that  we  are  even  encouraging  the  breed  of  Princes. 
It  is  generally  believed  that  the  Duke  of  York  is  going  to 
marry  the  Princess  of  Prussia,  the  King's  daughter  by  his  first 
wife,  and  his  favourite  child.  I  do  not  affirm  it,  but  many 
others  do.] 

You  will  be  sorry  for  Mr.  Batt :  when  he  left  me,  he 
was  going  to  Ld.  Frederic  Campbell's,  but  was  sent  for  to 
Oxford,  where  his  only  brother,  a  clergyman,  was  dying,  and  is 
dead,  of  a  putrid  fever.  He  was  fifteen  years  younger  than  Mr. 
Batt,  and  much  beloved  by  him.  Mrs.  Grarrick  came  and  told 
me  of  it  in  tears.  Another  person  has  told  me  that  in  point  of 
circumstances  it  may  enrich  Mr.  Batt;  they  have  a  very  rich 
old  uncle,  whose  partiality  was  for  the  younger. 

Thank  you  for  remembering  the  Cardinal  of  York's  medal; 
how  welcome  it  will  be,  for  from  what  hand  am  I  to  receive  it ! 
There  is  another  dear  hand  from  which  I  wish  I  sometimes  saw 
a  line  !  I  can  and  do  write  to  both  at  once,  and  think  to  and  of 
both  at  once ;  but  methinks  letters  all  from  one  hand  are  not 
the  same  thing.  I  shall  not  think  I  am  as  equally  dear  to  both 
as  they  are  to  me,  if  I  never  hear  but  from  one.  Mary  is  con- 
stant, but  I  shall  fear  Martha  is  busy  about  many  other  things ! 
Mr.  Berry  is  so  good  as  to  write  to  me.     I  say  no  more. 


1791]  WALPOLE'S   anxieties   FOE   HIS   FRIENDS.  321 

Thursday  nigkt,  late. 
I  heard  nothing  at  my  dinner,  but  I  have  since  been  at 
Eichmond,  and  heard  that  Lady  Valetort  is  brought  to  bed  of  a 
daughter,  so  this  time  Lady  Mount  will  cry  with  but  one  eye. 
[But  Lady  Di  has  told  me  an  extraordinary  fact.  Catherine 
Slayczar*  sent  for  Mr.  Fawkener,  and  desired  he  will  order  for 
her  a  bust  of  Charles  P''ox,  and  she  will  place  it  between 
Demosthenes  and  Cicero  (pedantry  she  learnt  from  her  French 
authors,  and  which  our  schoolboys  would  be  above  using),  for 
his  eloquence  has  saved  two  great  nations  from  a  war,  by  his 
opposition  to  it :  s'entend — so  the  peace  is  no  doubt  made.  She 
could  not  have  addressed  her  compliment  worse  than  to  Mr. 
Fawkener,  sent  by  Mr.  Pitt,  and  therefore  so  addressed,  and 
who  of  all  men  does  not  love  Mr.  Fox — and  Mr.  Fox,  who  has 
no  vain  glory,  will  not  care  a  straw  for  the  flattery,  and  will 
understand  it  too.     Good  night.] 

Strawberry  Hill,  Aug.  3,  1791. 
How  cruel  to  know  you  ill  at  such  a  distance  !  how  shocking  to 
must  have  patience,  when  one  has  none  !  I  do  hope  I  shall  have 
another  line  this  week,  and  yet  the  wind  is  westwardly !  Your 
fever,  I  am  persuaded,  was  no  slight  one.  Your  fetes  and  balls 
and  the  heat  have  occasioned  your  illness ;  you  both  left  England 
in  search  of  health,  and  yet  have  done  as  much  as  you  could  have 
performed  in  London,  where  at  least  the  cold  can  tolerate  crowds 
and  fatigue.  Nor  have  you  been  temperate  even  since  your 
fever ;  you  have  aired  too  long,  and  why  see  four  or  five  persons 
so  soon,  and  sit  up  with  them  till  eleven  ?  All  this  kind  Agnes 
has  owned,  tho'  she  says  she  is  perfectly  easy  about  you — can  I 
be  so,  who  may  be  a  week  without  knowing  whether  you  have 
had  no  return  ?  I  longed  to  see  Agnes's  writing,  and  she  never 
could  have  sent  it  more  apropos,  since  there  was  occasion  for  it 
— you  yourself  were  both  kind  and  unkind  to  write  so  much — 
but  burn  the  French !  why  write  so  much  about  them  ?  For 
heaven's  sake  be  more  careful;  you  are  both  of  you  delicate 
and  far  from  strong.  You  bid  me  take  care  of  myself — to  what 
purpose  do  I  cocker  myself  against  November,  if  you  two  fling 
away  your  healths — nay,  I   will  now  not  look  so  early  as  to 

*  The  Empress  Catherine  II. 
VOL.  I.  T 


322  LETTERS.  [1791 

November.  Do  not,  I  implore  yon,  set  out  in  great  heats. 
Fatigue  and  hot  bad  inns  may  lay  you  up  where  there  is  no 
assistance.  Oh !  I  now  feel  again  all  the  aversion  I  felt  last  year 
to  y""  journey !  Travel  slowly,  I  beseech  you ;  I  had  rather  wait 
months  for  you,  than  have  you  run  any  risk.  Surely  you  will 
keep  very  quiet  till  you  begin  y'^  journey,  and  perfectly  recruit 
your  health.  Dear  Mr.  Berry,  exert  your  authority,  and  do  not 
suffer  them  to  be  giddy  and  rash,  nor  plunge  into  any  more 
diversions. 

I  cannot  write  about  the  French,  nor  think  about  them  now, 
tho'  -I  heard  of  nothing  else  all  yesterday,  for  Petty  France 
dined  here  yesterday,  and  I  went  back  with  them  to  Eichmond. 
They  firmly  believed  that  all  Europe  in  arms  will  march  to 
Paris  by  Tuesday  se'nnight,  drive  the  Assembly  and  the  Jacobins 
into  the  Eed  Sea,  and  borrow  our  fleet  to  replace  the  exiles 
here  in  their  own  hotels  sur  le  quai.  I  forget  why  they  believe 
all  this,  nor  shall  I  recollect  why  till  I  have  another  letter  from 
you.  I  believe  too  that  I  have  not  heaxd  a  tittle  of  news,  but 
that  you  have  had  a  fever  at  Florence,  and  that  y'  bedchamber 
is  very  noisy — oh !  how  quiet  you  would  have  been  at  Cliveden' — 
and  that  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Legge  have  been  divinely  kind,  and 
lent  you  one  more  tranquil ;  what  charming  people  they 
must  be ! 

Mrs.  Damer  passed  Sunday  with  me;  her  leg  is  not  well 
again ;  she  goes  to  Goodwood  on  Fridaj',  and  thence  to  the 
sea. 

Thursday,  noon. 

I  am  not  at  all  more  easy,  tho'  I  have  slept  since  I  heard  of 
your  fever.  Your  journey  haunts  me;  you  will  not  be  strong 
enough  to  undertake  it  so  soon  as  you  intended ;  you  w^  begin 
it  when  the  weather  is  too  hot,  and  finish  it  when  too  cold. 
No,  I  had  rather  you  did  not  set  out  till  March — tho'  I  might 
never  see  you  more;  it  had  better  be  prevented  by  my  exit 
than  by  yours.  Everything  terrifies  me  for  you;  tho'  I  have 
little  faith  in  a  speedy  invasion  of  France,  yet  I  believe  it  when 
you  may  be  to  pass  thro'  armies  and  camps.  My  dear,  dear 
wives,  be  cautious !  no  risks  by  land  or  sea !  in  short,  I  am 
unquiet  to  the  greatest  degree.  I  had  almost  forgot  to  thank 
you  about  the  medals:  bring  me  but  yourselves  safe  and  in 


1791]  WALPOLE'S   anxieties   FOR   HIS   FRIENDS.  323 

good  health,  and  I  care  about  nothing  else — yes,  I  do,  for 
another  letter.  I  ought,  when  you  desire  it  and  are  not  well, 
to  try  to  amuse  you ;  but  seriously,  if  I  have  heard  any  news,  I 
have  forgot  it — but  I  think  I  have  heard  nothing,  but  that  Lord 
Henry  Fitzgerald  and  Miss  Boyle  are  to  be  married  to-day; 
and  that  Miss  Ogilvie's  match  with  the  rich  Irish  heir  apparent 
is  off;  her  brother  Lord  Edward  carried  her  dismission  of  him, 
and  did  not  deliver  it  in  dulcet  words. 

If  I  receive  good  accounts  from  Florence,  my  next  letter 
shall  tell  you  anythiug  I  learn  ;  if  I  persisted  in  adding  to 
this,  I  could  only  specify  a  million  more  of  apprehensions  and 
execrations  of  your  journey,  from  the  10th  of  October  to  the 
16th  of  March,  when  you  had  y^  fall,  and  then  to  y"^  fetes  and 
fever  in  July.  St.  Jannes's  day  has  been  my  only  holiday  in 
ten  months — do  not  give  him  a  post-vigil  that  may  destroy  his 
festival.  Adieu !  adieu !  what  would  I  not  give  for  another 
letter  this  moment ! 

P.S. — jNIy  dearest  Agnes,  tho'  you  have  no  fever,  yet  as  you 
have  undergone  the  same  heats  and  fatigues  with  Mary,  I 
entreat  you  to  take  four  or  five  grains  of  St.  James',  that  if 
you  have  any  lurking  disorder,  it  may  remove  it  before  you  set 
out,  and  prevent  y'  falling  on  the  road,  which  I  dread — tho'  I 
wish  y"^  journey  to  be  delayed.  If  you  are  quite  well,  the 
powder  will  have  no  effect  at  all.  I  hope  you  will  all  three 
observe  a  very  strict  regimen  before  you  set  out  for  at  least  ten 
days ;  I  have  not  forgotten  Italian  inns,  and  how  totally  void 
they  are  of  comforts  and  assistance.  This  fever  has  frightened 
me  horridly. 

Monday  niglit,  Aug.  8, 1791. 

I  have  received  no  second  letter^  but  Mrs.  Darner  had  one  on 
Saturday,  which  says  you  go  on  as  well  as  possible.  Perhaps 
I  may  have  one  to-morrow.  I  have  been  in  twenty  minds 
whether  I  should  write  again  before  my  usual  Friday,  for  I  feel 
I  shall  only  tire  you  with  an  anxiety  about  a  fever  that  I 
hope  will  have  been  quite  gone  a  fortnight  at  least  before  you 
receive  my  letter :  yet  write  I  must.  I  am  sure  you  have  been 
very  ill,  and  now  I  dread  your  setting  out  too  soon,  as  much  as 
I  was  afraid  of  your  not  coming  at  the  time  you  had  fixed  ; 

r  2 


324  LETTERS.  [1791 

and  I  was  tolerably  uneasy  about  the  last.  To  know  you  in 
bad  inns,  and  not  even  know  where !  fearful  of  not  receiving 
y""  letters  regularly- — uncertain  whether  you  will  get  mine. 
Well,  only  determine  on  the  most  prudent  and  safe  measures 
that  can  be  taken,  and  I  shall  forget  all  when  I  see  you 
return  well,  how  long  soever  it  be  first.  I  give  up,  I  disclaim, 
I  protest  against  all  promises,  that  could  make  you  think  of 
setting  out  one  instant  before  you  are  fit  for  it.  I  have  been 
too  selfish  already ;  I  have  not  an  atom  of  self-love  when  your 
health  is  in  question. 

My  poor  letters  that  you  say  are  not  so  barren  as  I  foretold 
they  would  be  in  summer,  will  now  I  doubt  have  the  additional 
desagrement  of  being  teazing  and  full  of  repetitions.  Can  one 
attend  to  or  inquire  after  news,  when  one's  mind  is  occupied 
about  one  family  and  anxious  about  every  step  they  take?  Can  one 
relate  with  interest  what  does  not  interest  one  ?  Will  it  amuse 
you  to  be  told  daily  that  I  went  to  Boyle-farm  this  morning  to 
visit  Lord  Henry  Fitzgerald  and  his  bride,  and  carried  in  my 
coach  an  old  Lady  Clifden  (oh !  not  a  Cliveden),  her  aunt, 
who  is  at  Mr.  Ellis's,  and  told  me  a  whole  chronicle,  about  which 
I  did  not  care  a  straw,  of  the  no-match  of  Miss  Ogilvie  ?  Then 
I  went  and  dined  at  Mrs.  Grarrick''s  with  Les  BoufHers,  Madame 
de  Cambis  and  the  Johnstones,  and  Mrs.  Anderson, — and  the 
French  being  afraid  of  the  highwaymen,  would  not  return  over 
the  common,  and  desired  me  to  convoy  them  through  Bushy- 
park,  which  I  did.  They  wished  me  to  return  with  them  to 
Eichmond,  but  I  chose  to  alight  here,  and  write  to  you, 
tho'  I  had  nothing  better  to  send  you  than  this  dull  day's 
work. 

Mr.  Lenox  has  got  a  son.  There  is  to  be  a  ball  at  Windsor 
on  Friday  for  the  Prince's  birthday,  which  has  not  lately  been 
noticed  there.  Lord  Lorn  and  seven  other  young  men  of  fashion 
were  invited  to  it.  It  seems  they  now  crop  their  hair  short 
and  wear  no  powder,  which  not  being  the  etiquette  yet,  the 
youths,  instead  of  representing  that  they  are  not  fit  to  appear 
so  docked,  sent  excuses  that  they  were  going  out  of  town,  or 
were  unavoidably  engaged, — a  message  one  w'^  think  dictated 
by  Old  Prynne  or  Tom  Paine,  and  certainly  unparalleled  in  all 
the  books  in  the  L"*  Chamberlain's  office. 

This  being  the  sum  total  of  my  gazette's  knowledge,  I  will  not 


1791]  WALPOLE'S   anxieties   FOE   HIS    EMENDS.  325 

trust  my  pen  with  the  rest  of  my  paper,  which  you  may  guess 
how  it  would  fill  if  I  gave  a  loose  to  it.  I  will  suffer  it  to  ask 
but  one  question — Shall  you  not  recollect  Charing-cross  before 
you  set  out?  It  would  give  me  a  pleasure  that  would  balance 
my  not  seeing  you  so  soon  as  I  expected,  and  you  owe  me  a  par- 
ticular mark  of  friendship  for  the  uneasiness  y''  fever  has  given 
me.     Adieu !  adieu ! 

Strawberry  Hill,  Aug.  10,  1701. 

Your  letter  of  the  25th  of  last  month,  which  I  received  yes- 
terday, assures  me  that  you  are  completely  recovered — nay,  bet- 
ter than  before  y"^  fever.  I  do  my  utmost  to  believe  so ;  but 
belief  is  not  like  faith,  one  cannot  swallow  it  whole  at  a  gulp 
without  proof,  and  alas  !  I  am  at  too  great  a  distance  to  receive 
them !  I  am  persuaded  you  have  been  very  ill ;  and  hy  the  bet- 
ter than  before,  that  your  fever  was  generating.  Your  good 
nature  induces  you  to  make  me  as  easy  as  you  can ;  but  how 
can  I  be  easy,  when  you  are  so  far  off,  have  been  very  weak, 
have  such  a  journey  to  take,  and  while  I  am  uncertain  when  I 
shall  see  you  again — or,  if  ever  I  I  do  not  recant  a  word  in  my 
two  last.  I  wish  you  to  decide  on  your  return  from  the  state  of 
your  health,  strength,  and  inclination.  The  great  blow  to  me 
was  your  going  abroad  at  all,  and  I  interested  myself  in  it  much 
more  than  I  had  any  right  to  do.  It  has  been  followed  by  all 
kind  of  disquiets,  which  I  will  not  recapitulate.  Your  last  gives 
me  a  new  alarm:  I  had  flattered  myself  with  your  coming 
directly  to  Cliveden.  I  now  see  a  hitch  even  in  that !  I  must 
be  obstinate  and  foolish  indeed  if  I  nurse  any  more  visions,  and 
attempt  to  harmonise  ages  so  dissonant  as  yours  and  mine,  and 
attempt  to  make  their  purposes  coincide :  yet  I  declare,  tho' 
my  own  happiness  has  a  great  share  in  my  plan,  its  ultimate 
object  is  to  make  you  two  a  little  more  comfortable  when  I 
shall  be  out  of  the  question.  If  you  have  any  speculations 
more  rational,  I  relinquish  mine  with  pleasure.  One  point 
I  can  by  no  means  abandon:  set  not  your  feet  on  French 
ground ;  I  hear  daily  of  insults  and  violence  offered  to  English 
travelling  to  or  through  that  frantic  country  :  a  Lady  Webster 
was  lately  illused  on  the  frontiers  of  Swisserland,  and  her 
pockets  would  have  been  ransacked,  had  not  her  husband  inter- 
posed roughly.  You  cannot  have  a  lower  opinion  of  that  whole 
nation  than  I  have:  the  residents  are  barbarians,  the   exiles 


326  LETTERS.  [1791 

have  wanted  spirit,  and  neither  have  any  sense.  Impatience 
I  have  none  for  Lally's  book ;  like  Necker,  he  imagines  Europe 
occupied  about  him,  or  would  make  it  so.  Miss  Gunning  acted 
fainting  t'other  night  at  the  play  on  Lord  Lorn  entering  the 
next  box ;  but  momentary  meteors  have  no  second  benefit. 

The  Emperor,  by  rejecting  Noailles  now,  will  have  acted 
sillily,  if  he  does  not  do  more.  Had  he  refused  to  receive  him 
at  first,  very  well ;  it  would  have  been  condemning  rebellion, 
and  would  have  called  for  no  more,  if  he  did  not  chuse  to  make 
war ;  but  now,  when  the  King  is  not  a  whit  more  a  prisoner 
than  he  was  two  years  ago,  it  will  be  the  anger  of  a  tame  eagle. 
Still  I  think  the  distresses  and  calamities  of  France  will  present 
more  favourable  moments  than  even  the  present, — tho'  I  believe 
the  National  Assembly  frightened  almost — into  their  senses. 

The  Duke  of  York's  marriage  is  certain ;  the  Duke  of  Clarence 
told  me  so  himself  yesterday.  He  graciously  came  hither  yes- 
terday, tho'  I  had  not  been  to  pay  my  court :  indeed  I  concluded 
he  had  forgotten  me,  as  at  his  age  was  very  natural.  Not  having 
cropt  my  hair,  I  went  to-day  to  thank  him.  He  could  not  see 
me,  but  sent  to  desire  I  would  call  on  him  to-morrow.  I  asked 
the  page  at  what  hour  it  would  be  proper  ;  he  answered,  '  be- 
tween ten  and  eleven.'  Mercy  on  me !  to  be  dressed  and  at 
Petersham  before  eleven !  I  am  not  got  down  to  modern  hours ; 
but  neither  am  I  reverted  to  those  of  Qaeen  Elizabeth,  nor 
to  those  of  Louis  Douze,  who  is  said  to  have  hastened  his 
death  by  condescending,  in  complaisance  to  his  young  Queen 
Mary  Tudor,  to  dine  at  so  late  an  hour  as  eleven  in  the  morn- 
ing. I  at  least,  before  I  am  so  rakish,  will  wait  the  arrival  of 
my  own  Queen  Mary. 

Mrs.  Buller  a  month  ago  told  me  she  should  pass  a  fortnight 
here  at  Twickenham  in  her  sister  Lady  Basset's  house — yonder, 
you  know.  Her  son  was  ill,  and  she  came  not  till  last  Sunday, 
and  then  only  for  a  night  with  him  and  Miss  Wilkes.  They 
came  and  drank  tea  here. 

As  I  wrote  to  you  but  three  nights  ago,  I  will  make  no  excuse 
for  the  brevity  of  this,  which  is  only  to  acknowledge  yours,  and 
to  fall  in  with  my  own  Friday.  If  you  are  really  quite  well, 
and  set  out  nearly  to  the  time  you  intended,  I  expect  that 
our  correspondence  will  be  much  deranged.  News  you  will 
not  lose  of  consequence — September  is  most  inactive  but  against 


1791]  WALPOLE'S  IMPATIENCE  FOE  HIS  EEIENDS'  EETUEN.  327 

poor  partridges,  and  in  horseraces,  neither  of  which  have  places 
in  my  gazettes.     Adieu  ! 

Mr.  Walpole's  letter  of  August  I7t]a  has  only  been 
published  in  part,  and  without  the  verses  to  which  he 
aUudes,  and  which  are  here  included. 

[Strawberry  Hill,  Aug.  17,  1791. 

No  letter  from  Florence  this  post,  tho'  I  am  wishing  for  one 
every  day !  The  illness  of  a  friend  is  bad,  but  is  augmented 
by  distance.  I  dont  write  with  any  view  to  hastening  that, 
which  I  trust  will  entirely  depend  on  the  state  of  y'  health 
and  strength  —  nay,  I  depend  on  Mr.  Berry's  not  leaving 
it  to  your  own  discretion — but  I  am  impatient  to  know  y"^ 
intentions :  in  short,  I  feel  that  from  this  time  to  y"^  arrival 
my  letters  will  grow  very  tiresome.  I  can  think  of  nothing 
but  y""  journey,  which  fills  me  with  fears.  I  have  heard  to-day 
that  Lord*  and  Lady  Sheffield,  who  went  to  visit  Mr.  Gribbon 
at  Lausanne,  met  with  great  trouble  and  impertinence  at  almost 
every  post  in  France.  In  Swisserland  there  is  a  furious  spirit 
of  democracy  or  demonocracy;  they  made  great  rejoicings  on 
the  re-capture  of  the  King  of  France.  Oh  !  when  will  you  sit 
down  on  the  quiet  banks  of  the  Thames  ? 

Wednesday  night. 

Since  I  began  my  letter,  I  have  received  yours  of  the  2'* — two 
days  later  than  usual,  and  a  most  comfortable  one  it  is !  My  belief 
and  my  faith  are  now  of  the  same  religion — I  do  believe  you 
quite  recovered. 

The  stocks  are  transported  with  the  pacification  with  Eussia, 
and  do  not  care  for  what  it  has  cost  to  bully  the  Empress  to  no 
purpose,  and  say  we  can  afford  it ;  nor  can  Paine  and  Priestly 
persuade  them,  that  France  is  much  happier  than  we  are  by 
having  ruined  itself.  The  poor  French  here  are  in  hourly- 
expectation  of  as  rapid  a  counter  revolution,  as  what  happened 
two  years  ago.  Have  you  seen  the  King  of  Sweden's  letter  to 
his  minister,  enjoining  him  to  look  dismal,  and  to  take  care 
not  to  be  knocked  on  the  head  for  so  doing?  It  deserves  to  be 
framed  with  M.  de  Bouille's  bravado.] 

Mr.  Gilpin  was  here  on  Saturday,  and  desired  me  to  say  a 

*  The  father  of  the  present  Earl  Sheffield. 


328  LETTEKS.  [1791 

thousand  civil  things  from  him.  Lord  Derby  and  the  Farrens 
were  to  dine  here  to-morrow,  but  the  Earl  has  got  the  gout, 
and  the  party  is  put  off.  Our  weather  for  this  week  has  been 
worthy  of  Florence,  with  large  showers,  very  reputable  lighten- 
ing, and  a  decent  proportion  of  thunder,  and  yet  the  warmth 
has  stood  the  shock  bravely.  I  wish  it  may  keep  up  its  courage 
till  next  Monday,  when  Lord  Eob.  Spencer  is  to  give  a  cup  for 
a  sailing  match  at  Richmond  in  honour  of  the  Duke  of 
Clarence's  birth-day.  I  beg  y''  pardons,  but  I  dont  think  Lord 
Dysart's  and  Cambridge's  meadows*  on  such  an  occasion,  will 
yield  the  apple  to  the  Cascines. 

[You  say  you  will  write  me  longer  letters  when  you  know  I 
am  well :  your  recovery  has  quite  the  contrary  effect  on  me ; 
I  could  scarce  restrain  my  pen  while  I  had  apprehensions  about 
you — now  you  are  well,  the  goose-quill  has  not  a  word  to  say — 
one  would  think  it  had  belonged  to  a  physician. 

I  shall  fill  my  vacuum  with  some  lines  that  General  Conway 
has  sent  me,  written  by  I  know  not  whom,  on  Mrs.  Harte, 
Sir  W.  Hamilton's  pantomime  mistress  or  wife,  who  acts  all 
the  antique  statues  in  an  Indian  shawl.  I  have  not  seen  her 
yet,  so  am  no  judge,  but  people  are  mad  about  her  wonderful 
expression,  which  I  do  not  conceive,  so  few  antique  statues 
having  any  expression  at  all — nor  being  designed  to  have  it.] 
Here  are  the  verses  : — 

ATTITUDES— A  SKETCH. 

To  charm  the  sense,  the  taste  to  guide, 
Sculpture  and  Painting  long  had  tried  : 
Both  call'd  ideal  beauty  forth ; 
Both  claim'd  a  disputable  worth : 
When  Nature,  looking  down  on  Art, 
Made  a  new  claim,  and  show'd  us  Harte ; 
All  of  Correggio's  faultless  line ; 
Of  Guide's  air  and  look  divine ; 
All  that  arose  to  mental  view 
"When  Raphael  his  best  angels  drew : 
The  artist's  spell,  the  poet's  thought, 
By  her  to  beauteous  life  is  brought. 
The  gazer  sees  each  feature  move, 
Each  grace  awake  and  breathing  love ; 
From  parts  distinct  a  matchless  whole : 
She  finds  the  form,  and  gives  the  soul. 

*  The  meadows  on  each  side  of  the  Thames  immediately  above  Rich- 
mond Bridge. 


1791]  PISA.  329 

Altogether  it  is  a  pretty  little  poem  enough,  tho'  not  very 
poetically  expressed,  but  Dr.  Darwin  has  destroyed  my  admira- 
tion for  any  poetry  but  his  own — do  you  recollect  how  he  has 
described  some  antique  statues?  That  Canto  is  not  yet 
published. 

The  letter  of  the  23rd*  of  August  was  an  account  of 
his  having  been  to  the  Duke  of  Queensbury's,  and  met 
Sir  William  Hamilton  and  Mrs.  Harte  (afterwards  Lady- 
Hamilton),  of  whose  grace  and  singing  he  writes  in 
raptures.  He  had  also  been  in  company  there  with  Madame 
du  Barry,  and  he  recounts  the  visit  to  England  of  the 
soi-disante  Margravine  of  Anspach,  and  of  his  Highness 
the  Margrave  having  informed  her  brother.  Lord  Berke- 
ley,j-  that  they  have  an  usage  in  his  country  of  taking  a 
wife  with  the  left  hand,  that  he  had  espoused  his  lord- 
ship's sister  in  that  manner,  and  that  when  she  became  a 
widow  he  would  marry  her  with  the  right  hand  also. 

Thus  end  the  letters  addressed  to  the  Miss  Berrys  by 
Mr.  Walpole  during  their  residence  at  Florence  and  at 
Pisa.  Unfortunately  the  letters  from  the  Miss  Berrys  to 
Mr.  Walpole  have  been  sought  for  in  vain,  and  were 
probably  destroyed  by  themselves  after  his  death. 

Miss  Berry's  Journal  must  now  be  resumed  from 
February  8th,  at  Pisa. 


JOUENAL. 

February,  8th. — The  Duomo  at  Pisa  was  built  in  the  be- 
ginning of  the  eleventh  century  by  Breschetto  da  Duhchio, 
as  most  people  think  a  Greek  by  birth,  and  about  a  century 
or  more  afterwards  the  Battisterio,  built  by  Dioti  Salvi  de 

'  Published. 

t  Lord  Craven  died  September  1791 ;  and  his  -widow,  the  soi-disante  Mar- 
gravine, mai-ried  the  Margrave  at  Lisbon,  on  the  30th  October  of  the  same 
year.     She  died  la  1828. 


330  JOUENAL.  [1791 

Petroni ;  both"  of  them  astonishing  buildings  for  the  time 
of  day,  and  unxivalled  for  above  two  centuries  afterwards. 

In  the  outside  wall  of  the  Duomo  are  inserted  many- 
pieces  of  ornaments  of  ancient  sculpture,  having  evidently 
belonged  to  some  magnificent  buildings,  probably  at  the 
time  when  Pisa  was  a  flourishing  Eoman  colony. 

Epitaph   upon  the   monument   of  the   famous   Marie 
Mancini,  in  the  church  of  the  S.  Sepulcro  in  Pisa.    It  is 
upon  a  marble  in  the  pavement  above  her  arms,  D.  0.  M. 
'  Marie  Mancini  Columnia, 
Pulvis  et  Cinis.' 

Below  the  arms  it  says  that  her  son,  the  Cardinal  Colonna, 
put  this  humble  epitaph  by  his  mother's  express  desire. 
She  died  in  the  year  1715. 

Monday,  April  \%th. — Left  Pisa  this  morning  ;  stopped 
at  Lucca :  the  town  has  altogether  the  air  of  a  capital, 
though  the  streets  in  themselves  are  neither  wide  nor  long. 
The  Duomo  is  in  the  same  style  of  architecture  as  that  of 
Pisa,  though  I  do  not  know  its  date.  It  has  a  fine  modern 
mosaic  pavement.  The  walls  which  surround  the  town  are 
planted  with  trees,  and  the  bastions  at  certain  distances 
are  little  groves.  The  view  is  charming  from  hence  of  a 
small,  wen  cultivated  plain,  surrounded  by  mountains. 

From  Lucca  we  took  six  horses  to  Borgo  a  Buggiano, 
for  the  road  is  hUly,  rough,  and  stony,  but  the  country 
uniformly  beautiful. 

At  Borgo  k.  Buggiano  we  were  obliged  to  rest  our 
horses,  all  those  at  the  post  having  been  sent  for  upon  the 
road  to  Eome  to  forward  the  Queen  of  Naples. 

Pistoia  is  a  handsome  town,  with  very  fine,  wide,  long 
streets.  They  say  it  is  not  half  peopled  (from  want  of 
manufactures,  I  suppose) :  of  this  I  could  be  no  judge. 
At  Prato,  a  large  Borgo,  the  post-house  is  in  a  square,  or 
what  we  should  call  a  green.  When  we  passed  a  httle 
before  sunset,  all  the  people  were  out  amusing  themselves, 
and  the  scene  was  gay  and  beautiful. 


1791]  THE   LAURENTIAN   LIBEAEY  331 

We  arrived  at  Florence  by  the  finest  moonlight  that 
ever  V7as,  which  I  should  have  enjoyed  much,  had  it  not 
been  for  a  cruel  head-ache  which  made  me  the  more  re- 
gret to  find  the  Porta  del  Prato  shut,  as  is  the  custom, 
about  half  an  hour  after  sunset,  and  we  were  obhged  to  go 
round  to  another  gate,  making  a  difierence  of  not  less  than 
a  couple  of  mUes. 

From  Pisa  to  Florence,  including  delays,  about  thirteen 
hours.  In  a  light  carriage,  it  might  be  done  in  much  less. 

Wednesday,  27  th. — Florence. — Went  to  see  the  Lau- 
rentian  Medicean  Library.  It  is  in  a  long  gaUery,  built  by 
Michael  Angelo,  for  the  reception  of  these  valuable  manu- 
scripts :  the  vestibule  is  hkewise  of  his  architecture,  and 
though  the  upper  part  is  unfinished,  it  is  admirable.  Though 
small  (it  is  only  30  feet  English  by  30  or  32),  from  being 
divided  into  large  parts  and  not  overcharged  with  orna- 
ments, it  has  an  air  of  grandeur.  The  ornaments  are. 
all  executed  in  a  dark-coloured  stone,  and  the  masonry 
admirable.  In  the  Library,  everything,  even  to  the  orna- 
ments of  the  desks  where  the  books  are  kept,  and  the 
design  which  is  executed  in  the  brick  floor,  are  by  Michael 
Angelo  ;  the  ceiling,  too,  is  fine,  carved  wood,  but  being 
of  its  natural  brown  colour  and  not  arched,  has  to  me 
a  heavy  efiect.  The  books  are  aU  manuscripts,  of  which 
there  are*  placed  upon  and  under  desks,  like  pews 

in  a  church  going  up  each  side  of  the  long  gallery,  at 
which  one  can  sit  to  read. 

The  librarian,  a  very  civil  Canonico  Bandini,  showed  us 
the  VirgU  of  the  fourth  century,  which  they  call  the  oldest 
existing ;  it  is  very  fairly  written,  but  less  easy  to  read 
than  the  one  in  the  Vatican.  We  saw,  too,  the  Horace 
that  belonged  to  Petrarch,  with  some  notes  in  it  by  his 
own  hand.  It  is  in  large  quarto,  and  not  a  beautiful 
manuscript  from  the  number  of  notes  and  schohastes 
interrupting  and  confusing  the  text.      The  librarian  is 

*  9,000.— Murray's  Handbook. 


332  JOURNAL.  [1791 

educating  a  little  boy,  an  orphan,  who  now,  at  twelve  years 
old,  reads  and  understands  Latin,  Greek,  and  Hebrew, 
from  which  last  language  he  explained  to  us  a  part  of  the 
Bible. 

In  this  library  is  the  famous  original  copy  of  Justinian's 
Pandects,  which  we  are  to  see  another  day. 

From  the  Laurentian  we  went  to  the  Marucelliana  Li- 
brary, another  public  collection  of  books  left  to  the  public 
by  Marucelha,  a  lawyer,  in  the  year*  .  It  contains  a 
very  considerable  collection  of  prints,,  a  complete  collec- 
tion of  the  works  of  M.  Antonio,  chiefly,  I  fancy,  of  use  to 
artists. 

August. — Memoranda  :  Florence. — In  the  palace  of 
the  Duke  of  Strozzi,  one  exquisite  picture,  a  portrait 
by  Titian  of  a  child  of  the  family  about  five  or  six  years 
old,  leaning  against  a  table  and  feeding  a  dog  with  a 
biscuit,  dressed  in  white  with  curling  hair  :  the  colouring 
and  composure  of  the  infantine  expression  charming. 

In  the  Palazzo  Attorite,  a  portrait  of  Eaffael  by  him- 
self— an  undoubted  original,  as  he  was  known  to  be  pro- 
tected by  the  family,  and  to  have  given  them  his  picture. 
It  is  a  head  and  shoulders  in  his  last  and  most  finished 
manner  ;  it  most  resembles  the  portrait  of  himself  which 
he  has  put  into  his  School  of  Athens,  but  is  much  hand- 
somer than  that  or  any  of  the  other  pictures  of  him.  It 
is  a  countenance  of  much  genius  and  expression. 

The  outside  of  the  Palazzo  Attorite  is  adorned  with 
marble  thermes  en  pilaster  with  heads  in  profile ;  they 
have  a  very  ugly  effect,  but  curious  from  being  all  por- 
traits of  the  family — one  of  the  oldest  of  the  republic. 

In  the  Palazzo  Gerardi  a  most  numerous  collection  of 
pictures.  Those  that  struck  me  most  were  the  Vulture 
preying  upon  Prometheus,  by  Salvator  Eosa,  a  wonderful 
picture  for  expression,  but  the  attitude  ungraceful — at  a 
little  distance  the  figure  looks  like  the  Duke  of  AthoU's 

*  Died  in  1703.     Library  opened  in  1752. 


1791]  LETTKE   FEOM   MRS.    DAMEE.  333 

arms  ;  *  and  The  Crucifying  St.  Andrea,  a  group  in  small 
whole-lengtli,  by  Carlo  Dolce,  of  which.  Mr.  Duncomb  has 
either  a  copy  or  a  duphcate- 

In  the  cloisters  of  the  convent  of  Sante  Croce,  a  beauti- 
ful portico  by  Brunelleschi,f  which  has  many  faults  in  de- 
tail, but  altogether  an  air  of  grandeur  which  will  stamp 
a  character  of  excellence  upon  any  architecture  to  which 
it  belongs. 

The  Eoyal  Academy  consists  of  seven  schools — of  paint- 
ing, sculpture,  architecture,  ornament,  design,  &c.  &c. 

With  these  memoranda  of  Florence  the  journal  of  their 
residence  alternately  at  Florence,  and  at  Pisa  terminates. 

Mr.  Walpole's  were  not  the  only  letters  of  interest  ad- 
dressed to  the  Miss  Berrys  at  this  time,  which  have  been 
preserved.  The  following  extracts  from  Mrs.  Darner's 
letters  give  a  hvely  and  interesting  description  of  her  life 
at  Lisbon,  and  of  her  journey  home;  and  a  letter  from  Mr. 
Brand,  whose  name  appears  in  Miss  Berry's  journal  of 
1784,  must  also  have  been  received  just  before  they  left 
Florence. 

Lisbon,  Jan.  20,  1791. 
.  .  .  Though  there  are  not  many  things  to  see  at  Lisbon, 
there  are  some — some  respectable  Grothic  churches  in  particular— 
which  will  bear  seeing  more  than  once.  One  of  the  most  ancient 
it  is  horrid  to  look  at — almost  totally  destroyed  by  the  earth- 
quake, little  else  but  the  outward  walls  standing.  This  church 
they  are  slowly  attempting  to  rebuild  in  the  Grothic  style,  but  I 
doubt  the  success.  The  Castle,  formerly  a  Moorish  palace,  was 
nearly  made  a  ruin.  You  see  here  and  there  a  bit  of  column 
&c.  stuck  in  little  better  than  a  mud  wall,  but  this  her  Majesty 
does  not  think  of  rebuilding.  She  has  at  immense  expense 
built  a  church,  called  the  Convento  Nuovo  or  the  Coracao  de 
Jesu  (the  heart  of  Jesus),  in  the  worst  taste,  adorned  by  many 
colossal  statues  in  the  style  of  Bernini  exaggerated.    The  works 

*  Miss  Berry  must  allude  to  the  Manx  Arms  of  the  three  legs  quartered 
by  the  Duke  of  Atholl. 

t  Philip  BruneUeschi,  bom  1377 ;  died  1446. 


334  LETTEES.  [1791 

of  a  Portuguese  artist  in  this  church,  the  great  altar-piece,  and 
several  others,  are  painted  by  Pompeo.    One,  by  the  Princesses 

.     In  this  convent  is  the  Queen's  great  favourite,  a  nun 

recommended  to  her  by  her  late  confessor  as  a  santa ;  they  say 
really  a  shrewd,  sensible  woman,  and  spoken  well  of.  There 
were,  they  say,  many  line  pictures  by  the  best  masters,  most  of 
them  swallowed  up  or  destroyed,  some  stolen  and  sold.  At  the 
Marquis  Pamela's  there  is  one  called  a  Eaphael,  which  it  may 
be ;  it  is  very  fine,  but  has  been  miserably  painted  over,  which 
I  gained  much  credit  by  finding  out,  though  it  is  as  plain  as  the 
nose  in  one's  face.     For  to-day,  farewell ! 

Lisbon,  Jan.  81, 1791. 
I  returned  from  the  morning  party  as  much  fatigued  and  no 
more  amused  than  I  expected.  It  was  to  see  armouries  and 
founderies,  all  of  which  I  have  seen  and  re-seen  at  other  places. 
I  could  not  avoid  going,  as  among  other  things  I  was  to  be 
shown  the  model  of  the  statue  in  the  Great  Place  here.  The 
statue  is  colossal,  of  bronze,  of  Joseph  I.,  the  late  King.  It  was 
modelled  and  cast  at  Lisbon,  and  though  heavy,  really  is  not 
without  merit. 

Monday  morning. 

Yesterday  I  got  some  letters  by  one  packet,  the  other,  as  they 
say,  is  coming.  None  from  Mr.  Walpole,  and  what  Jerningham 
writes  to  me  quite  sinks  my  spirits.  The  letter  is  of  the  18th 
Jan.  He  says  that  Mr.  W.  was  detained  at  Strawberry  by  the 
gout ;  that  he  does  not  suffer,  but  that  his  hands  are  numbed, 
and  that  he  has  no  use  of  them.  What  his  not  suffering  is 
often,  I  know,  and  the  rest  is  a  sad  uncomfortable  account. 
Why  would  he  not  let  Kirgate  write  me  a  line  from  himself  ? 
This  is  the  last  date  I  can  have  now,  and  I  may  not  hear  again 
before  I  leave  Lisbon.  I  do  hope  to  God  that  you  will  go  to 
him  in  the  autumn.  The  thoughts  of  that  will  support  him. 
If  you  can,  I  know  that  you  will.  ...  It  will  not  now  be 
long  before  I  leave  this  place,  and  all  the  first  part  of  my  jour- 
ney I  hope  even  to  find  the  climate  better  than  this.  I  mean 
to  set  out  the  21st;  to  go  to  Seville  and  Granada,  see  Cordova 
and  Toledo,  the  Escurial  and  II  de  Fonse.  These  are  my  chief 
objects  in  this  journey. 

I  rejoice  that  you  follow  your  Latin  so  closely,  and  for  your 


1791]  liTFE   IN   LISBON.  335 

stupidity  I  shall  say  nothing.  Even  two  months,  with  what 
you  already  know,  will  do  much.  How  very  few  ever  read  the 
books  most  worth  reading  except  at  an  age  when  they  are  not 
capable  of  receiving  any  real  satisfaction  from  them.  Many 
construe  Homer,  Virgil,  Plato,  and  Cicero,  but  few  read  them. 
With  your  taste,  this  will  be  a  constant  source  to  you  even  of 
something  more  than  amusement. 

Lisbon,  Peb.  17, 1791. 
.  .  .  My  mules  are  on  the  road,  and  will  be  ready  on 
Monday  next,  and  that  evening  or  Tuesday  I  shall  probably 
cross  the  water,  and  begin  my  journey,  and  from  the  time  I 
leave  Lisbon  till  I  arrive  at  Madrid,  I  shall  not  have  a  single 
letter. 

.  .  .  I  will  not  talk  of  Mr.  W.'s  silence — I  cannot ;  cer- 
tain it  is  I  pity  him  from  my  soul.  He  must  have  suffered 
much.  The  letter  you  say  you  wrote  to  him  he  must  have  got 
soon  after  I  heard  last  from  England.  That  will  comfort  him, 
for  I  think  that  he  will  not  pay  much  attention  to  your  reasons 
for  staying  in  Italy,  and  though  there  is  eight  months  of 
absence  to  come,  the  hope  of  seeing  you  six  months  sooner,  and 
not  passing  another  melancholy  winter  without  you,  will  quite 
revive  his  spirits.  I  am  certain,  whatever  may  be  the  event  of 
this  miserable  illness,  that  you  will  feel  infinite  satisfaction  in  the 
marks  of  affection  and  friendship  that  you  have  shown  him.  .  . 
One  suffers  here  so  much  unnecessarily  from  cold  that  it  is  quite 
provoking ;  for  even  now  there  are  often  hours  in  the  day  when 
walking  in  the  shelter,  with  the  heat  of  the  sun  it  is  pleasant, 
could  one  come  home  or  go  out  to  a  good  fire,  but  the  houses 
are  insufferably  cold.  Every  one  complains,  and  no  one  attempts 
a  remedy.  It  is  diSEcult  to  give  an  idea  how  much  behindhand 
we  are  here  with  the  rest  of  Europe.  You  ask  me  in  what  their 
luxuries  consist.  In  sitting  wrapped  up  in  their  cloaks  almost 
the  whole  day,  playing  with  their  maids  and  attendants,  many 
of  whom  are  of  a  something  better  sort,  like  retainers  bred  in 
the  families  from  father  to  son,  not  forgetting  dwarfs,  foundlings, 
and  natural  children.  Such  tribes  !  there  are  many  in  the  great 
houses,  eating  comfortably  many  times  in  the  day,  ex  gratia 
cold  fowls  and  hams  in  the  morning,  not  forgetting  the  mirenda 
in  the  evening,  which,  with  the  addition  of  dinner  and  supper, 
helps  to  make  the  day  pass  ;  growing  fat  of  course,  which  all  the 


336  LETTEES.  [1791 

young  women  do  at  four  or  five  and  twenty.  .  .  ;  In  gene- 
ral, there  is,  I  believe,  no  harm  in  them.  They  seem  very  good- 
natured,  and  would  be  civil  if  they  knew  how ;  but,  as  I  have 
before  said,  they  leave  their  own  national  manners,  and  attempt, 
most  awkwardly,  those  of  other  nations.  I  like  to  see  them,  as 
I  have,  sitting  cross-legged  in  numbers  in  the  churches,  with 
their  nets,  and  their  fine  hair  combed  partly  over  their  faces, 
and  the  men,  with  their  cloaks  thrown  gracefully  over  their 
shoulders,  leaning  against  the  walls,  or  standing  by  them. 
Coming  to  Portugal  is  really  instructive  to  one  who  sees  things 
with  the  eye  of  an  artist  or  an  observer. 

Vendas  Novas,  Feb.  25,  1791. 
.  .  .  Yesterday,  I  passed  the  water  in  the  evening,  as  the 
tide  served  at  that  time,  and  arrived  at  a  small  place  called 
Aldega  Gralega,  on  the  coast,  at  sunset.  The  inn  being  bad,  I 
was  recommended  to  a  'private  house.  No  house  ever  deserved 
the  epithet  less,  for  ray  room  was  full,  from  the  moment  I  came 
till  I  got  away,  of  the  whole  family,  the  padrone  (a  little  shop- 
keeper), the  padrona  de  casa,  all  the  children,  and  all  the 
maids,  talking  to  me,  staring  at  me,  or  kissing  my  hand.  As  I 
turned  them  out  of  their  room,  and  that  everything  they  wanted 
was  in  that  room,  even  when  they  would  consent  to  leave  me, 
there  was  every  instant  something  to  be  fetched  out  of  a  drawer,  or 
a  closet.  To-day,  drawn  by  seven  mules,  I  have  been  composedly 
travelling  along  an  immense  sandy  plain — sometimes  through 
woods  of  the  most  beautiful  pines,  always  shrubs  and  plants, 
that  only  really  grow  in  fine  climates.  I  am  now  settled  in  a 
room  where  (to  be  sure)  there  is  not  much  furniture  ;  but  I  think 
rather  upon  the  whole  better  than  one  often  finds  in  Italy. 

Badajoz,  Tuesday  evening,  MaTch  1st. 
I  write  to  you  from  the  first  Spanish  town — and  a  dismal  place 
it  is — with  neglected  walls,  from  whence  there  is  a  distant  view, 
and  ruined  towers  and  castles  of  the  Moors.  Within  these  walls, 
considerable  remains  at  the  top  of  the  hill,  that  seem  to  have 
been  left  and  never  repaired.  To  make  up  for  this,  there  is  a 
beautiful  bridge  of  twenty-nine  arches  over  the  Gruadiana.  It  is 
simple  and  noble,  built  by  the  Eomans.  Elvas,  the  last  town  in 
Portugal,  is  in  perfect  repair,  to  appearance,  and  a  remarkably 
pretty  town.    I  wonder  this  does  not  make  the  Spaniards  a  little 


1791]  SEVILLE.  337 

ashamed  of  this  place,  for  these  two  towns  are  looking  at  each 
other,  and  not  above  eight  or  nine  miles  distant.  I  arrived  here 
this  morning  without  accident  or  difficulty,  or  any  serious  dis- 
tress. My  calessiere  I  like  of  all  things  ;  he  drives  with  Spa- 
nish dexterity,  and  as  to  the  carriage,  with  English  care.  I  can 
just  keep  up  with  my  mules  for  an  hour  or  so  on  foot. 

Seville,  Sunday  morning,  March  6. 
I  have  been  wishing  for  these  two  days  to  write  to  you,  but  I 
have  felt  so  fatigued  with  my  journey  through  the  Sierra  Morena 
that  I  could  not  take  out  my  letter.  I  feel  ashamed  when  I 
complain,  because  this  being  a  mere  voluntary  journey,  the 
answer  must  be,  '  Tu  I'a  voulu,  Greorge  Dandin.'  However,  the 
real  truth  is,  that  I  did  not  know  the  roads  were  impassable  for 
a  carriage  with  four  wheels.  Nobody  told  me  that  there  was  any 
real  difficulty,  otherwise,  for  a  journey  of  mere  amusement,  I 
would  not  have  undertaken  it ;  but  now  it  is  over,  I  am  glad.  My 
carriage  has  escaped,  I  hope,  any  very  essential  mischief  that 
may  stop  my  progress,  and  I  have  seen  some  of  the  most  beau- 
tiful wild  scenes  that  can  be  imagined,  which,  con  rispetto,  are 
of  all  scenes  those  that  delight  me  most.  If  there  are  moments 
in  my  life  when  I  breathe  freely,  without  the  oppression  of 
painful  reflections — when  the  world  seems  nothing  to  me,  and  the 
idea  of  those  I  love  everything — it  is  in  walks  when  I  can  undis- 
turbed enjoy  what  is  grand,  beaxitiful,  and  awful  in  nature. 

'  For  near  twelve  miles  before  coming  to  a  poor  small  village, 
called  Santa  Oleio,  was  the  Sierra  Morena.  Nothing  can  exceed 
the  beauty  of  the  mountains.  They  are  not  very  high,  but  rocky, 
covered  with  shrubs,  heaths,  plants,  and  flowers,  growing  to  a 
wonderful  height  and  size,  and  numbers  of  clear  streams  rolling 
among  the  rocks  and  stones.  It  gives  one  the  idea  of  an  eternal 
spring.  You  then  come  to  an  open  forest  of  neglected  cork  trees 
and  Ilex,  with  such  rocks,  and  such  picturesque  masses  !  formed 
evidently  of  the  sand  worn  into  a  thousand  shapes  by  the 
streams  of  water  and  torrents,  in  a  course  of  ages  far,  far  beyond 
our  pitiful  annals.  The  evening  was  delightful,  and  I  walked 
till  I  could  walk  no  longer.  The  inn  was  a  miserable  place. 
That  I  should  not  have  minded,  but  so  troublesome  were  the 
people,  and  so  noisy,  that  I  got  little  repose  till  towards  morn- 
ing, when  it  was  nearly  time  to  set  out,  for  a  sad  day,  most  of 
which  I  was  obHged  to  walk,  and  not  paid  for  the  trouble,  as 
VOL.  I.  Z 


338  LETTERS.       .  [1791 

there  is  no  beauty  in  the  views.  Such  roads  I  really  never  saw. 
Men,  mules,  everything  were  ready  to  die,  and  the  expectation 
of  seeing  the  carriage  broken  to  pieces,  in  an  actual  desert  as 
to  assistance,  was  really  quite  disagreeable.  However,  owing  to 
the  skill  of  the  best  driver,  without  exception,  I  ever  saw,  we 
arrived  last  night  safely  at  another  small  village,  called  Castello 
Blanco,  and  this  evening  at  Seville,  all  the  bad  road  over. 
The  town,  the  dresses,  the  look  of  the  people — all — is  as  com- 
pletely different  from  anything  I  have  ever  seen,  as  I  can  wish, 
and  as  diverting. 

Granada,  Maroli  19,  1791. 

I  stayed  one  day  longer  at  Seville  than  I  intended,  left  it  on 
the  10th,  and  got  here  last  night — this,  partly  wishing  to  recover 
my  fatigues  of  the  Sierra  Morena,  and  partly  from  being  charmed 
■with  the  town,  and  the  softness  of  the  climate.  Its  known  an- 
tiquity is  interesting.  The  cathedral  I  think  very  fine;  it  is 
gloomy,  and  the  Gothic  architecture  simple ;  full  of  the  most 
beautiful  windows  of  painted  glass.  I  happened  by  chance  to 
hear  some  good  music  there,  which  as  it  was  hy  chance  was  the 
more  striking — for,  if  I  am  to  be  dressed,  stuck  up,  and  stuffed 
up  to  hear  or  see  anything — adieu  all  effect  for  me ! 

I  was  much  pleased  also  with  the  Alcayas  or  Palace :  the 
Moorish  part  is  admirable,  and  I  feel  myself  at  open  war  with 
Mr.  Swinburne,*  whom  I  now  think  a  very  inaccurate  writer,  at 
least  as  to  his  descriptions ;  his  history  may  be  right  for  what  I 
know.  Granada  and  the  Alhambra  by  no  means  answer  to  his 
account, — I  mean  merely  according  to  matter  of  fact,  taste  out 
of  the  question.  What  the  Alhambra  ^as  been  it  is  easy  still 
to  see,  and  it  still  is  admirable,  but  miserably  ruined,  out  of  all 
repair,  and  neglected.  By  his  account  I  imagined  that  I  was  to 
have  seen  great  part  of  it  as  if  the  Moorish  kings  and  their 
queens  had,  hand  in  hand,  just  walked  out  of  their  palace.  There 
cannot  be  a  greater  admirer  of  Moorish  style  for  the  inside  of 
houses  than  I  am.  Were  I  a  great  king  in  a  fine  climate  I 
should  copy  it  for  my  palace — in  the  summer.  However,  though 
Granada  is  not  now  all  it  has  been,  it  is  well  worth  the  sacrifice 
of  a  week  to  see,  which  is  about  the  difference  of  time  it  makes 
to  me. 

*  Henry  Swinbume,  Esq.,  a  traveller,  wrote  '  Travels  througli  Spain  '  in 
1775,  illustrated  by  drawings  on  tlie  spot :  died  1803. 


1791]  ,       GRANADA.  339 

I  shall  only  stay  to-morrow,  but  must  return  for  two  days 
by  the  same  road  I  came.  I  am  in  the  greatest  admiration  of 
many  parts  of  Andalusia,  and  have  found  no  difficulties  since 
Seville.  The  road  really  may  be  called  good,  except  here  and 
there  where  it  is  rocky,  and  where  torrents  are  quicker  in  their 
operations  than  the  king's  officers  in  their  reparations — you 
know  how  that  is  in  many  parts  of  Italy.  I  have  had  many 
charming  solitary  walks,  I  may  almost  call  them ;  for  when  I 
can  walk  away  from  the  carriage,  I  forget  it.  Of  the  minor 
evils,  want  of  rest  is  the  only  serious  complaint.  The  inns  are 
often  very  noisy.  After  being  up  ages  before  daylight,  tired  and 
jumbled,  one  comes  iato  an  inn  that  looJcs  uninhabited :  four 
white  walls,  a  chair  or  two  at  most,  and  a  deal  table,  on  which 
they  set  a  lainp.  One  thinks  it  hard,  by  the  time  one's  bed  is 
set  up,'  one's  things  ready,  that  the  house  should  grow  lively, 
voices  and  noises  of  various  sorts  continue  till  within  a  few 
hours  of  the  tim.e  to  set  out  the  next  day.  Yet  this  is  really  the 
case,  and  whatever  travellers  may  say,  the  roads  and  inns  are 
much  frequented.  I  have  found  it  to  my  cost.  One  night,  when 
I  thought  I  was  to  sleep  quietly,  arrived,  after  I  was  in  bed,  the 
Corrigedor  de  Granada,  his  wife,  I  know  not  how  many  signoras, 
and  a  dozen  servants,  as  many  little  dogs  vdth  bells,  four  or  five 
carriages :  their  supper  was  to  be  prepared.  The  talking,  scream- 
ing, and  scolding  was  beyond  imagination ;  and  then  the  next 
morning,  as  I  went  down  to  my  carriage,  there  was  the  Cor- 
rigedor and  his  wife  waiting  at  the  door  to  see  me,  and  expect- 
ing that  I  should  make  them  a  compliment — hope  that  they 
had  slept  well,  and  wish  them  a  good  journey,  which,  as  well  as 
I  could,  I  did  not  omit.  Everything,  high  and  low  in  Spain, 
expects  to  be  spoken  to ;  they  are  not  satisfied  with  a  bow  if  you 
are  near  them.  No  matter  what  one  says,  which  for  me  is  lucky 
in  Spanish,  though  indeed,  with  Italian  and  a  little  Portuguese, 
one  is  sure  to  be  understood.  I  confess  that  there  is  a  cordiality 
in  this  that  I  think  pleasing,  and  there  is  something  so  dignified 
and  fine  in  the  look  of  the  common  people,  that  I  like  to  hear 
them  say  to  me,  Condeos,  which  I  translate,  God  bless  you ; 
and  then  they  seem  so  pleased  with  the  same  attention.  When 
I  say  that  the  people  are  good  looking,  I  mean  the  men  ;  they 
are  uncommonly  genteel,  and  I  admire  their  dress;  In  Andalusia, 
they  wear  Montero  cap  and  cloaks,  and  the  same  in  Granada. 

z  2 


340  LETTERS.  [1791 

The  women  a  black  or  -white  piece  of  silk  or  stuff  over  their 
heads,  much  as  they  do  at  Venice.  I  find  a  great  difference  of  cli- 
mate between  this  place  and  Seville,  a  sharpness  in  the  air  to  which 
I  am  always  sensible,  and  this  must  be  the  case,  for  the  town  is 
almost  close  to  that  immense  chain  of  mountains,  the  Sierra 
Nevada,  the  tops  of  which  are  always  covered  with  snow.  .    .    . 

Herrera,  Maroli  19tli. 
I  left   Grranada,    as  I  proposed,  the  day  before   yesterday. 
Having  in  a  second  visit  passed  some  hours  in  the  Alhambra, 
and  examined  everything  over  and  over,  I  do  not  change  my 
opinion :  it  is  curious  and  beautiful  in  its  way,  must  have  been 
in  its  glory  delightful,  but  is  miserably  ruined  and  neglected ; 
the  only  verj  evident  repair  is  whitewashing,  which  without 
the  least  mercy  thej'^  have  done  in  many  and  many  parts,  where- 
ever  the  gilding  and  colours  were  less  fresh.    If  the  governors 
take  to  this  mode  much  oftener,  those  who  wish  to  judge  of 
Moorish  plaister-work  and  carving  must  make  haste  and  take 
their  journey  to  Grranada.     ...     I  saw  not  a  creature  at 
Grranada,  except  a  Spanish  banker  for  five  minutes.    I  have  had 
letters  for  all  the  places  I  was  to  stop  at,  but  have  avoided  as 
much  as  possible  giving  them  ;  the  Portuguese  and  Spanish  are 
so  very  civil  on  these  occasions  I  find,  that  it  is  to  me  of  all 
things  the  most  embarrassing.    However,  I  must,  for  the  sake  of 
truth,  say  that,  at  Seville,  I  saw  a  gentleman  who  was  very  little 
trouble,  and  gave  me  much  real  information ;  but  this  cannot 
happen  often.     I  did  not  tell  you  what  gave  me  a  more  than 
common  horror  of  being  shovjn  civilities.      Elvas  being  the 
frontier  town  in  Portugal,  I  was  told  to  ask  for  a  letter  to  the 
Grovemor,  that  my  baggage  might  not  be  stopped.  This  happened 
to  be  a  brother  of  old  Mello's,  who  was  in  England  many  years, 
and  much  at  my  father's  house  before  you  were  born.    Besides 
giving  me  a  letter,  he  chose  by  way  of  a  fine  thing  to  write  to 
the  Grovemor  his  brother,  who  chose  to  order  that  I  should  be 
received  with  the  honours  of  ivar.     Some  miles  from  the  town 
I  met  a  guard  of  thirty  horsemen  who  escorted  me,  and  I  came 
into  the  town,  drums  beating,  trumpets  sounding,  and  cannon 
firing  (it  is  literally  true) ;  was  dragged  to  the  Grovernor's  house 
instead  of  going  quietly  to  my  inn,  and  sat  down  almost  instan- 
taneously to  a  great  dinner  with  a  dozen  or  fourteen  ofiicers ; 
they  carried  me  all  over  the  town,  and  with  the  greatest  diffi- 


1791]  AKANJUEZ.  341 

culty  I  got  rid  of  the  company  in  the  evening  by  saying,  what 
was  too  true,  that  I  was  so  much  fatigued  I  must  go  to  my 
bed. 

Aranjuez,  March  30, 1791. 

I  have  since  I  kst  wrote  crossed  the  Sierra  Morena,  but  by  a 
most  magniii<;ent  winding  road,  began  and  made  (they  say) 
within  these  ten  years  :  it  is  cut  in  the  solid  rock,  and  I  think 
the  finest  thing  of  the  sort  that  I  have  seen  :  how  long  it  may 
remain  in  this  state  of  perfection,  or  rather  how  short  a  time,  I 
will  not  answer,  for  when  rocks  and  torrents  are  concerned  you 
know  how  it  is ;  and  in  Spain  they  make  a  road  and  then  leave 
it,  which  ill  agrees  with  the  mutable  state  of  this  world.  I  have, 
in  general,  dragged  along  a  road  sometimes,  indeed,  sandy  and 
sometimes  stony,  but  of  which  there  is  nothing  to  complain, 
since  Cordova,  and  not  much  to  admire ;  at  Anducar,  however, 
where  I  arrived  early  in  the  evening,  I  saw  a  fine  ancient 
bridge  of  sixteen  arches,  over  the  Gruadalquiver,  of  which  I  had 
never  heard  a  single  word,  and  some  very  curious  remains  of 
Moorish  towns,  and  walls  round  the  towns.  For  four  days  I 
travelled  through  La  Mancha,  which  is,  without  exception, 
the  most  odious,  frightful  country  I  ever  yet  saw ;  a  nasty, 
dusty,  sandy  plain,  without  tree  or  shrub,  with  bare  mountains 
that  scarcely  deserve  the  name.  Here  I  arrived  last  night, 
within  a  day's  journey  of  Madrid. 

I  have  seen  some  charming  antique  statues  in  the  garden  of 
this  palace,  treasures  unnoticed  and  neglected  here.  There  is  no 
expressing  the  fool  I  am  when  I  see  anything  very  fine  quite  by 
surprise,  which  is  much  the  case  in  Spain,  for  you  are  shown 
nothing,  nor  can  you  get  the  least  degree  of  information  where 
the  arts  are  concerned.  It  has  been  the  fashion  in  this  garden 
to  make  everything  or  anything  serve  as  the  ornament  of  a 
fountain,  and  to  my  astonishment,  sitting  in  the  middle  of  a  large 
marble  bason  of  water,  did  I  see  the  most  beautiful  little  Etruscan 
bronze  figure:  it  is  one  of  those  often  repeated,  which  I  am  sure 
you  recollect,  the  boy  taking  a  thorn  but  of  his  foot,  but  far  su- 
perior to  any  I  have  seen.  In  another  there  was  a  Venus,  which 
they  call  Diana ;  another,  the  fountain  of  Apollo,  because  all 
the  figures  and  relievos  represent  the  labours  of  Hercules  (this 
is  modern) ;   and  so  they  go  on. 


342  LETTERS.  [1791 

Madrid,  April  1,  Friday  morning. 
I  was  interrupted  by  L*  St.  Helen's,*  our  Minister,  and  then 
the  Consul :  the  first  is  an  agreeable  man ;  I  have  seen  him 
formerly  at  different  times  and  places  ;  he  is  civil  and  obliging 
and  not  in  a  troublesome  way.  Thank  Heaven !  I  have  had  a 
letter  from  Mr.  W.,  in  his  own  hand,  and  I  do  believe  that 
he  is  recovering.  I  hear  of  him  from  all,  and  satisfactory 
accounts.  Poor  dear  man !  he  says,  '  I  am  afraid  to  flatter 
myself  again  about  October ;'  and  then  that  he  shall  say  no  more 
about  it,  and  would  not  interrupt  your  content;  but  he  does 
flatter  himself,  whether  he  knows  it  or  not,  by  the  indication  of 
his  spirits — flatter,  it  is  not,  I  am  well  assured.  I  am  glad  you 
like  the  Andrea  so  much,  I  always  thought  it  one  of  the  most 
delicate  and  most  elegant  of  compositions,  and  therefore  one  of 
the  most  touching.  When  you  have  leisure,  read  some  of 
Cicero's  letters  to  Atticus,  his  friend :  they  are  very  curious, 
from  being,  at  least  in  my  opinion,  so  clearly  written  without  an 
idea  of  ever  being  made  public ;  and  so  natural,  there  you  see 
him  with  all  his  weaknesses  and  without  disguise. 

Escurial,  April  10, 1791. 

Waiting  for  a  permission  from  Court  to  see  this  monastery,  and 
settling  with  my  muleteers,  delayed  me  till  to-day. 

.  ,  .  Such  a  detestable  climate  as  Madrid,  from  what  I  saw,  and 
from  what  I  heard,  I  believe  woidd  be  difiicult  to  find.  I  must 
say  that  the  ton  of  the  society  to  which  I  found  myself  admitted 
at  Madrid  was  very  grateful  to  my  ears :  this,  perhaps,  struck  me 
the  more  as  (to  you  I  may  say  it)  there  was  scarcely  anything 
where  I  passed  the  winter  that  had  not  a  tinge  of  vulgarity 
or  barbarism. 

Valladolid,  16tli. 

I  have  been  walking  about  the  town,  and  by  dint  of  civil  holes 
I  suppose,  for  my  speeches  are,  as  you  may  think,  tres-bomes  in 
Spanish,  making  my  way  into  the  cloister  of  a  monastery  of 
Dominican  Friars,  where  I  saw  some  fine  Gothic  architecture  and 
other  curious  things,  at  the  Escurial  some  divine  pictures,  and 
at  St.  Ildefons  some  first-rate  statues,  besides  the  place  itself, 

*  AUeyne  FitzHerbert,  created  Baron  St.  Helen's,  in  Ireland,  1791 ;  and 
Baron  St.  Helen's,  in  England,  1801 ;  was  employed  in  many  diplomatic 
situations  of  high  importance  in  several  of  the  European  Courts. 


1791]  SPANISH   MANNERS.  343 

■which  I  think  delightful — like  an  enchanted  castle.  Had  you 
crossed  Spain  in  my  carriage,  you  would  have  been  pleased,  and 
I  do  believe  have  thought  little  of  inconveniences :  I  think  I 
could  venture  a  journey  with  you.  The  elements  have  been 
making  such  a  pother  over  my  head,  such  a  storm  of  thunder — 
but  it  seems  over — the  weather  has  been  for  some  days  soft  and 
charming.  I  am  really  now  tired  of  seeing,  which  I  cannot 
help  doing  with  attention,  and  should  to  the  last,  and  tired  of 
travellings^  wish  for  quiet.  Yet  I  am  diverted  with  the  idea  of 
passing  through  France,  and  curious  to  see  it  in  its  new  state 
(tecum  loquor)  :  I  shall  be  just  as  careful  not  to  run  my  head 
into  any  scrape,  should  the  possibility  occur,  as  if  I  was  fright- 
ened out  of  my  senses. 

Vjttoria  in  Biscay,  Wednesday,  April  20,  1791. 
.  .  .  I  have  not  found  the  roads  by  any  means  what  they  were 
represented :  the  magnificent  road  they  talk  of  is  only  made,  that 
is  finished  here  and  there,  for  a  few  leagues,  and  then  you  come 
plump  down,  and  are  dragged  through  sands,  or  jumbled  over 
stones,  for  I  know  not  how  many  miles  more.  The  inns  are 
infinitely  better,  some  really  good,  and  the  one  I  now  write  from 
particularly  so.  A  good  room,  a  good  fire,  and  a  good  bed,  and 
I  shall  for  the  first  time  quit  my  pallet  since  I  left  Lisbon.  I 
have  now,  I  think,  done  with  seeing  in  Spain,  at  least  buildings. 
The  cathedral  at  Burgos  is  famous,  as  you  probably  know.  Wish- 
ing to  see  it  thoroughly,  and  particularly  the  cloister,  and  not 
being  sure  of  the  same  indulgence  I  met  with  from  my  Domini- 
can Friars  at  Valladolid,  I  went  in  U  Spencer's  fashion,  but 
did  not  write  my  name :  this  dress,  with  the  large  cloak  and 
boots,  is  what,  in  point  of  decency,  the  bench  of  bishops  could 
not  object  to,  and  the  next  thing,  comparatively,  to  the  ring  of 
Gryges  which,  if  I  mistake  not,  made  the  wearer  invisible,  for  you 
pass  unnoticed;  but  an  unfortunate ZacZi/  is  persecuted  to  death.  I 
believe  I  never  told  you  how  I  have  been  tormented,  because  I 
often  sit  down  to  tell  you  one  thing  and  a  thousand  others  crowd  in 
upon  my  mind  .  .  .At  Seville,  the  first  day,  I  went  out  dressed 
like  a  Portuguese,  exactly  as  the  women  there  walk  :  they  called 
me  Francese,  ran  after  me,  and  put  me  in  no  small  passion.  The 
next  day  I  met,  as  I  told  you,  with  my  ephemerid  friend,  who 
carried  me  all  about  in  the  Intendant's  coach.  Since  that  I  have 
commonly  gone  about  in  one  of  their  vile  mantillo's,  a  piece  of 


344  LETTERS.  [1791 

silk  or  linen  thrown  over  the  head  and  then  crossed  and  twisted 
round  the  waist,  and  let  to  hang  down ;  without  this  no  woman,  in 
Spain,  can  go  into  a  church,  or  indeed  walk  about  a  town.  What 
provokes  me  is,  that  putting  on  this  odious  thing,  that  you  can 
scarcely  see  or  turn  your  head  with,  does  not  always  do  :  the 
moment  you  examine  anything  with  the  least  attention,  or  look 
higher  than  your  head,  which  I  suppose  Spanish  women  never 
do,  you  are  discovered  to  be  foreign,  and  a  foreign  Lady  is  so 
great  a  wonder,  that,  from  that  instant,  they  follow  you,  get 
before  you,  pursue  and  persecute  you  in  a  manner  that  far  ex- 
ceeds anything  of  the  sort  that  I  haVe  ever  seen  in  any  other 
country.  The  people  in  Spain  do  not  seem  to  gain  by  civiliza- 
tion ;  for  away  from  great  towns,  their  manner  is  quite  engaging. 
I  must  return  to  my  cathedral  at  Burgos,  and  tell  you  that  there 
are  the  finest  remains  of  Grothic  architecture  I  believe  in  the 
world,  at  least  of  Gothic  sculpture ;  there  is  stone  worked,  and 
that  particularly  in  the  cloister,  in  a  manner  and  with  a  sharp- 
ness and  spirit  that  I  did  not  think  the  material  admitted  of, 
and  two  heads  that  are  really  fine  ;  foliage,  without  end,  that  is 
quite  admirable.  I  think  I  took  a  sort  of  lesson.  Many  things 
in  the  carvings  in  wood,  and  in  stone,  that  one  sees  is  all  old 
Grothic,  incomprehensibly  strange  and  impossible  to  describe. 

Bayonne,  Sunday,  April  24tli. 

I  was  interrupted  by  the  most  ridiculous  personage  that  can 
be  imagined,  a  sort  of  Eagotin  in  figure,  round,  fat,  with  the 
tightest  silk  dress,  not  a  tooth,  a  mouth  that  went  every  way, 
and  the  voice  of  a  frog.  'Madame,  je  suis  le  Banquier,  je 
m'appelle  de  Broc,  Maire  de  la  ville.'  Maire  de  la  ville,  and 
Ipse  Eex,  for  without  this  creature  I  could  neither  have  money, 
passeport,  horses,  nor  permission  to  go  out  of  the  town.  I  saw 
how  it  was,  from  his  manner  of  announcing  himself,  and  imme- 
diately kneiu  beforehand  all  his  power  and  consequence.  Before 
the  visit  was  over  we  were  such  friends  that  he  gave  me  some  of 
his  verses  on  C  Fox,  and  if  there  is  a  corner  in  this  letter,  I 
must  send  them  to  you,  for  I  was  delighted  and  desired  to  have 
them.  He  is  gone,  he  says,  pour  se  mettre  en  quatre  (which  I 
think  he  can  well  afford)  for  my  service,  and  if  possible  I  shall 
be  furnished  with  the  means  of  setting  out  to-morrow  morning 
early.   ,  I  am  much  fatigued  with  the  last  days  passed  of  my 


1791]  LINES   TO   MB.    FOX.  345 

journey.  The  roads  in  Biscay,  so  much  praised,  are  dreadfully 
jumbling,  almost  entirely  a  sort  of  pavement ;  and  a  pavement  is 
not  only  particularly  disagreeable  when  rough,  but  really  affects 
me  ;  and  what  made  this  worse  was  the  weather  being  cold  with 
an  incessant  rain ;  it  seemed  as  if  for  these  two  months  it  had 
saved  itself  and  been  collecting  to  pour  deluges  with  greater 
violence.  This  made  it  impossible  for  me  to  walk  at  all.  .  . 
Seven  or  eight  days  will  bring  me  to  Paris,  where  I  shall  hear 
from  you,  and  know  if  your  horrid  accident  has  had  no  further 
consequence.  I  had  no  letter  here  from  Mr.  W.,  but  a  confirma- 
tion of  his  good  health  from  his  sister,  with  whom  he  had  dined. 
I  really  think  that  he  tries  to  persuade  himself  and  you  that 
he  can  bear  a  longer  absence  in  order  to  leave  you  at  liberty — 
indeed  he  said  what  is  to  that  effect  in  one  of  his  last  letters. 
You  understand  that  I  mean  by  leaving  you  at  liberty,  that  he 
wishes  not  to  take  advantage  of  your  kindness  and  good  nature, 
which  he  thinks  may  make  you  for  his  sake  do  what  you  dislike. 
What  is  in  my  power  you  know  that  you  may  depend  on,  I 
will  endeavour  to  make  him  enjoy,  by  anticipation,  the  satis- 
faction you  prepare  for  him. 

Bordeaux,  Thursday  morning,  April  28tli. 
...    I  only  got  here  last  night,  owing  still  to  the  roads.    Every- 
thing seems  perfectly  quiet.     Some  bustle  there  has  been  at 
Paris,  but  nothing  to  affect  an  insignificant  traveller  .... 

P.S.  A  l'Oeateuk  Fox. 

Tel  qu'un  aerostat  occupant  I'horizon, 

Fox  occupe  au  Senat  le  barre  de  Polymnee  ; 
L'un  captive  le  feu,  dans  le  char  d'Uranie, 

Et  I'autre  le  reprend  dans  la  belle  oraison. 

My  little  Ragotin  I  cannot  think  of  without  an  inclination  to 
laugh.  Among  other  things,  he  told  me  that  he  had  some  very 
fine  tea,  some  of  which  he  should  send  me ;  then  looking  up, 
and  considering  a  moment,  quite  gravely  added,  'Mais  du 
ponehe  je  n'en  ai  pas,  j'ai  peur,  je  ne  sais  pas  comment  nous 
ferons.'  I  assured  him  that  I  never  drank  punch,  and  was 
remarkably  fond  of  tea,  which,  however,  luckily  he  never  sent, 
nor  a  national  cockade  which  he  offered.  In  the  evening  he 
returned,  and  brought  one  of  his  clerks  to  read  the  gazette  to 


346  LETTEES.  [1791 

me,  who  read  through  his  nose  in  the  most  ridiculous  manner, 
and  he  kept  screaming  to  Mm,  '  Plus'  haut,  monsieur — plus 
haut.'     Quite  a  mistake  I  thought. 

Paris,  Tuesday  night,  May  3, 1791. 
I  tried  to  persuade  myself  that  I  was  less  alarmed  about  your 
fall,  because  I  so  plainly  saw  the  care  and  pains  you  took  to 
prevent  my  anxiety ;  but  your  image,  pale  and  bleeding,  has 
been  continually  before  my  eyes.  I  calculate  the  time  when 
it  happened,  and  exactly  believe  that  you  think  yourself  no 
worse  than  you  say,  and  from  thence  derive  much  comfort. 
My  reason  trusts  that  the  danger  of  the  accident  is  over  .... 
When  I  talked  of  being  here  by  the  2"*,  I  had,  I  know  not 
how,  given  April  31  days.  I  have  made  all  the  diligence  I 
could  ;  indeed  I  scarcely  dare  tell  you  that,  for  these  five  days, 
I  have  been  thirteen  and  fifteen  hours  de  suite  in  my  carriage, 
after  your  kind  injunction  not  to  travel  too  fast,  even  when  I 
could,  clattering  and  tearing  along  to  the  sound  of  words  nobody 
understands,  instead  of  Jesu  Maria,  and  the  Santa  Virgine, 
with  a  bow  to  St.  Antonio  upon  a  pinch. 

Wednesday  morning. 
I  this  moment  received  your  two  letters,     I  wish  that  I  could 
express  to  you  the  satisfaction  they  give  me.     I  do  now  feel 
easy  about  your  accident ;  your  health  is  better ;  and  every- 
thing you  say  is  calculated  to  please  and  comfort  me 

I  rejoice  that  you  have  a  letter  so  pleasing,  from  dear 
Mr.  W.  You  say  most  truly  of  friendship  when  the  vas 
est  sincerus,  nil  acescit,  and  all  comes  right,  when  explained, 
because  all  is  meant  right.  I  too  have  had  a  charming  letter 
from  him,  mostly  on  your  subject.  He  says  of  your  fall,  '  I  am 
persuaded  all  danger  is  over  of  any  bad  consequence,  and  that 
even  the  scar  on  the  sweetest  of  all  earthly  noses  (I  never  saw 
the  houris)  will  scarce  be  discernible  by  the  first  of  November, 
by  which  day  they  have  vowed  their  return.'  You  see  that  you 
have  convinced  him ;  that  difficulty  is  taken  off  my  hands,  and  you 
see  the  effect  of  that  conviction  by  the  return  of  his  own  lively 
style  .  .  .  My  telling  you  a  foolish  story  of  my  Ragotin  at 
Bayonne  was  at  that  time  a  little  like  les  enfants  qui  chantent 
la  nuit  quand  ils  out  peur;  but  if  you  could  laugh  at  my  other 
stories,  I  think  you  will  at  that.     I  am  quite  pleased  that  any 


1791]  THE  POISSABDES   OF   PARIS.  347 

of  them  should  have  diverted  you  both  (when  you  learn  Greek 
you  will  know  a  certain  dual  number  that  would  here  be  most 

elegant) I  made  more  visits  yesterday  evening  than 

I  thought  I  had  to  make.  Found  for  a  long  time  only  an  old 
grumpy  man,  who  did  not  talk — ce  n'etait  pas  mon  affaire.  At 
last  I  went  to  Mad°^  de  Balbi,  who  I  found  a  sa  toilette,  sur- 
rounded by  I  know  not  how  many  people^l'Abbe  Mauri  among 
others — and  talking  of  everything  jvist  as  I  could  wish.  Things 
are  essentially  quiet  at  present ;  little  local  disturbances — as, 
for  example,  the  Pope  was  burned  two  days  ago,  dans  toute  les 
formes,  and  the  Spanish  ambassador,  who  happened  to  pass, 
desired  to  contribute  to  the  bonfire,  which  he  generously  did, 
and  passed  on.  Many  supposed  the  Nonce  will  leave  Paris  on 
this;  others  that  he  will  not;  others  that  he  need  not,  as  it 
was  only  le  peuple. 

M.  cte  La  Fayette,  as  you  probably  kaow,  after  that  dis- 
turbance which  was  about  the  King's  going  to  St.  Cloud, 
when  they  imagined  he  meant  to  make  ses  paques  in  his 
own  way  with  the  non-jurant  priests,  has  again  accepted. 
All  these  things  pass,  and  I  am  told  nobody  minds  them. 
They  go  about  Paris,  walk  the  streets,  return  at  all  hours,  and 
no  harm  happens ;  indeed  I  see  nothing  for  strangers  to  appre- 
hend. Paris  is  much  as  usual,  I  think  more  entertaining, 
though  many  certainly  have  left  it,  and  are  leaving  it.  I  do 
not  pretend  to  say  what  it  will  or  -may  be,  but,  for  some  time 
I  fancy,  much  as  it  now  is.  I  shall  go  and  look  at  the  Champ 
de  la  Federation  from  your  descriptions,  and  to-morrow  Mad™° 
de  Balbi  has  offered  to  carry  me  to  the  Assemblee  Nationale, 
which,  you  may  guess,  I  have  net  refused.  I  was  determined 
to  see  that  somehow  or  'Other. 

Calais,  Tuesday  morning,  May  10,  1791. 
I  Avill  finish  my  Paris  history.  Soon  after  I  sent  you  my  letter 
from  thence,  I  received  a  visit  I  little  expected,  and  for  which 
I  was  quite  unprepared.  I  had  not  even  had  time  to  dress  my- 
self on  account  of  my  letters ;  in  this  state  I  heard  a  violent 
noise  in  the  aate-Toom  of  strange,  vociferous  sounds,  and  a  pro- 
digious bustle.  The  Poissardes,  my  maid,  who  looked  not  a  little 
alarmed,  told  me  were  there  and  insisted  on  coming  in ;  they 
had  brought  me  «,  bouquet  and  see  me  they  would,  and  there 
they  were  &t  the  door.     I  guessed  that  a  return  for  the  bouquet 


348  LETTERS.  [1791 

was  the  object,  which  my  hair-dresser  confirmed,  and  out  I  went 
to  them.  Of  the  two  evils  the  least,  so  I  thought  I  had  a  better 
chance  of  retreating  than  getting  them  out  of  my  room.  I  con- 
fess, as  I  have  a  horror  of  these  illustrious  personages,  that  in- 
terieurement  I  felt  much  discomposed,  however  I  thought,  I  must 
put  on  a  good  face  upon  the  occasion.  I  gave  them  six  f", 
which  they  desired  to  have  doubled,  and  then  I  hoped  I  was  off; 
but  my  amabilitS  I  suppose  was  so  great,  that  one  of  them  pro- 
posed to  embrace  me,  and  I  really  did  not  dare  refuse,  and 
thanked  my  stars  when  it  was  over,  that  I  was  not  to  run  the 
gauntlet,  for  there  were  six  or  seven  there,  and  I  know  not  how 
many  in  the  court  below.  It  seems  that  these  ladies  now  make 
a  practice  of  going  about  where  or  to  whom  they  please,  toutes 
les  fois  que  cela  leur  passe  jpar  la  tete,  and  neither  porters  nor 
servants  dare  stop  them,  for  reasons  I  need  not  enumerate. 
They  go,  and  I  suppose  will  go,  to  travellers  in  this  way  to  get 
money.  The  other  day  there  being  a  report  that  Monsieur  was 
going  away,  they  went  to  him  in  a  body,  in  number  forty,  to 
know  if  this  was  true  ;  he  was  obliged  to  come  out  to  them  and 
assured  them,  foi  de  Prince,  that  it  was  no  such  thing :  with 
this  they  were  so  much  pleased  that  they  all  embraced  him, 
and  insisted  on  seeing  Madame  and  performing  the  same  cere- 
mony, which  was  granted.  I  was  assured  of  the  truth  of  this ; 
and  a  French  lady  I  cannot  doubt,  told  me  that  they  often  came 
to  her,  and  she  gave  them  something  more  to  be  excused ;  that 
I  would  willingly  have  done,  you  may  believe,  but  my  thoughts 
were  not  so  bright. 

I  went  to  the  Champ  de  Mars ;  but  all  is  destroyed,  and  a 
new  altar,  &c.,  for  the  annual  ceremony  just  beginning.  In 
the  evening  I  went  to  the  Theatre  de  Monsieur.  Pray,  if 
you  have  not  already,  see  it ;  I  mean  for  the  cowp  d'ceil ;  it 
is  remarkably  elegant,  and  out  of  the  common  way,  and  some 
of  the  figures,  though  I  believe  executed  in  paper,  finely 
modelled.  The  next  day,  thanks  to  Mad"*  de  Balbi,  who 
has  been  so  uncommonly  civil  to  me  without  my  having  the 
least  right  or  title  to  expect  it,  I  saw  the  Assemblee  Nationale 
without  trouble  or  fatigue,  on  which  to>  you  I  need  make 
no  comments.  Most  extremely  glad  I  am  to  have  seen  it,  for 
it  is,  as  you  observed,  what  one  cannot  form  any  idea  of.  She 
had  invited  me  to  dinner,  and  afterwards  a  friend  of  hers  came 


1791]  MES.  damek's  keturn.  349 

in,  -whom  I  had  not  seen  since  the  first  time  I  was  at  Paris.  He 
remembered  that  I  had  seen  him  and  where,  a. sort  of  memory 
that  I  believe  belongs  to  that  station ;  his  manner  is  obliging 
and  gentle,  and  he  seems  not  to  be  without  information  :  all  this 
together  made  me  feel  a  great  degree  of  pity.  Her  house  or 
apparteTnents  is  of  that  degree  of  perfection,  for  taste  and  con- 
venience, that  you  have  seen  at  Paris,  but  never  elsewhere  so 
completely.  Afterwards  in  a  drive,  which  I  took  by  myself  to 
the  ruins  of  the  Bastile,  I  made  many  reflections  on  all  that 
had  passed  before  my  eyes  that  day ;  returned  to  my  hotel,  and 
the  next  day  set  out.  If  I  did  not  tell  you,  you  will  see  by  my 
account,  that  I  found  all  those  I  knew  at  all  particularly,  gone. 
They  say  that  Paris  in  point  of  numbers  is  not  much  diminished, 
but  it  is  much  changed  in  that  of  names.  I  began  to  think 
yesterday  that  my  adventures  were  not  over,  for  on  the  road 
and  at  Boulogne  they  told  me  that  there  was  a  quarrel  here  be- 
tween the  English  and  French  captains  of  the  packets,  and  that 
none  of  ours  were  suffered  to  take  passengers  ;  others,  that  none 
were  there ;  and,  in  short,  a  thousand  things,  that  there  was  no 
making  head  or  tail  of.     ...     . 

London,  Friday  morning,  May  13. 

Waiting  a  day  at  Calais,  and  a  long  passage  the  next,  prevented 
my  getting  here  till  last  night.  I  got  to  town  between  ten  and 
eleven,  stayed  at  my  father's,  where  I  had  been  figuring  to  my- 
self that  I  should  find  them  either  at  home,  or  expected  to  sup- 
per. Perhaps  dear  Mr.  Walpole  alone,  sitting  by  the  fire,  as  I 
often  have,  waiting  their  arrival.  I  drove  up  to  the  door ;  out 
came  my  mother's  maid,  saying,  '  Nobody  at  home ! '  they  were 
gone  to  my  uncle  Frederick's  to  pass  the  evening,  and  the  car- 
riao-e  not  ordered  there  till  twelve.  This  was  not  what  I  wished : 
but  still  I  could  not  give  up  seeing  them,  and  go  composedly 
home  to  bed.  I  was  in  a  state  when  no  fatigue  is  felt.  Away  I 
drove  to  Arlington  Street.  How  many  coaches  I  saw  there  I  can- 
not tell,  but  so  many  that  I  began  to  be  doubtful  what  I  should 
do :  half  vexed,  half  angry,  that  things  went  so  little  to  my 
fancy,  to  consider  if  I  should  go  up  stairs,  or  not,  among  so  many 
people.  A  loud  knock,  which  my  servant  gave  at  the  door, 
without  my  order,  brought  Lady  Frederick  down  stairs  :  in  an 
instant  out  I  flew,  my  mother  and  father  followed  her,  and  at 


350  LETTERS.  [1791 

the  top  I  saw  Mr.  Walpole.  He  seemed  and  is  as  well  as  ever ; 
/  perceive  no  difference,  not  thinner,  less  lively,  or  less  all  that 
you  left  him,  or  all  that  you  can  wish, — so  at  least  he  appeared 
to  me  last  night.  If  I  see  any  reason  to  change  my  opinions  I 
will  tell  you  with  sincerity ;  you  never  shall  have  a  sort  of  mi- 
nagement  from  me,  that  I  dislike  so  much  myself  from  those  and 
about  those  I  love. 

From  Mr.  Brand : — 

Mentz,  Mayence,  Magonza,  August  19,  1791. 

It  is  true  that  I  began  to  be  very  impatient  at  not  hearing 
from  you,  and  was  actually  stepping  into  the  carriage  on  leaving 
Carlsruhe  when  I  receiv'd  your  letter.  I  was  very  much  con- 
cern'd  to  find  you  had  been  so  ill.     Heav'n  avert  relapses ! 

I  need  not  assure  you  how  happy  your  letter  made  me.     I 

prefer  such  insipid  stuff,  as  you  modestly  call  it,  to  all  the 

accuracy  and  elegance  of  your  Cicero  to  his  Atticus.     The  least 

vibration  of  the  heart  is  worth  the  completest  gratification  of 

the  understanding.     Before  I  venture  upon  anything  that  may 

seduce  me  into  long  descriptions  and  digressions,  I  shall  give 

you  an  account  of  our  probable  motions,  in  hopes  that  we  may 

be  able  to  fix  our  rendezvous.     We  leave  this  place  to-morrow, 

and  shall  get  to  Munich  about  the  31*'.     We  shall  stay  there  a 

fortnight,  and  after  that  at  Saltzburg,  which  will  bring  us  to 

Inspruck  about  the  22^  of  September.    We  can  either  wait  there 

till  your  arrival,  or  meet  you  at  Verona.     Verona  will  be  the 

most  likely  place  to  meet  you.    Indeed,  I  should  prefer  it.    The 

country  of  Catullus  and  Paolo  Cagliari,  and  Eomeo  and  Lance 

is  infinitely  better  suited  to   our  elegant  minds  than   a  vile 

German  town,  which  can  never  have  produc'd  anything  beyond 

an  abbess  or  a  commentator,  a  juris-oonsult,  or  a  music-master 

to  a  piping  bullfinch.     Yet  dare  not  I  promise  too  much  for 

my  young  lordling,  who  will  perhaps  be  impatient  to  run  away 

from  Munich  as  he  was  from  Carlsruhe,  from  his  unfortunate 

anxiety  to  try  whether  a  new  place  can  dispel  his  constant 

ennui.     We  are  now  at  the  most  northern  point  of  our  tour.     I 

feel  a  powerful   attraction  towards  England,  but  alas !   Biis 

aliter  visum. 

Frankfort,  21st. 

We  have  here  found  letters  which  will  probably  oblige  us  to 


179i]  ENGLISH   VISITORS   AT   FEAKKFORT.  351 

stay  a  few  days  at  Eatisbon,  but  this  will  make  very  little 
difference  in  our  plan,  as  it  may  perhaps  abridge  our  stay  at 
Munich. 

After  I  wrote  to  you  from  Zuric  or  Lucerne,  we  had  most 
wretched  weather,  which  not  only  made  the  remainder  of  our 
scheme  uncomfortable,  but  even  prevented  a  material  part  of 
it, — the  passage  of  the  Monte  Aquila  from  Feldkirch  to  Inspruck. 
We  were  therefore  oblig'd  to  take  the  direct  road  of  Augsburg, 
where  we  found  the  little  Baron,  who  was  most  active  in 
showing  us  civility,  gave  us  sour  krout  and  chevreuil,  and 
introduc'd  us,  not  only  to  his  own  chapter,  but  to  a  chapter 
of  Chanoinesses.  On  these  chapters  I-  could  write  a  curious 
chapter,  but  it  would  perhaps  be  as  well  suppress'd.  We 
stopp'd  a  day  at  Stutgard,  where  we  saw  a  regiment  of  meagre 
ill-made  giants,  none  less  than  7  feet  high,  and  vast  repositories 
of  horses,  carriages,  and  Traineaux.  The  last  are  worthy  of 
curiosity.  They  are  made  in  every  sort  of  whimsical  form,  and 
the  caparisons  of  the  horses  of  heavy  embroidery,  surrounded 
with  thousands  of  little  silver  bells,  put  you  in  mind  of  the 
pomp  of  Amadis  and  Esplandion,  or  the  dreams  of  Comte 
Hamilton.  We  were  unlucky  at  Carlsruhe.  The  Margrave  and 
all  the  family  were  on  the  poiat  of  leaving  it  for  some  time, 
but  we  had  two  dinners  and  a  supper  before  they  went.  Much 
as  I  detest  Courts,  I  regretted  their  departure.  The  Margrave 
speaks  English  as  well  as  you  or  I,  and  with  the  language  seems 
to  have  imbib'd  the  steady  sense  and  simplicity  of  the  nation, 
not  but  that  he  has  had  his  travers,  and  had  I  not  seen  and 
conversed  with  him,  I  should  have  been  tempted  to  insert  his 
name  in  the  registers  of  Moria,  for  he  was  once  tinctured  with 
magnetism  and  Lavaterism,  but  good  sense  prevail'd,  and  he 
now  blushes  at  the  name  of  Mesmer,  and  perhaps  still  more  at 
that  of  Gablia-dore.  Perhaps  you  are  unacquainted  with  this 
gentleman  or  lady,  for  I  know  not  of  which  sex  it  is,  or  whether 
of  any.  But  it  is  the  name  of  Mr.  Lavater's  familiar,  his  sylph, 
the  regulator  of  his  sympathetic  correspondence  with  the  true 
'  Illumines,'  &c.  &c. !  I  felt  great  attraction  towards  the  Heredi- 
tary Princess,  not  from  her  beauty,  but  from  her  ease,  affability, 
and  good  sense.  You  would  take  her  daughters  for  charming 
Englishwomen, — they  might  be  your  sisters;  and  the  young 
Julius  is  as  fine  a  curl'd-pated  wild  nankin  boy  as  ever  you  saw 


352  LETTERS.  [1791 

roll  on  an  English  carpet  or  frisk  upon  a  lawn.  We  found 
there  two  English  families,  a  Col.  and  Mrs.  Gibbs  and  two  Miss 
G-ibbs,  good  unaffected  people,  and  a  Mrs.  Philips  and  her 
daughters,  who  are  collecting  flames  in  Germany  to  set  Bath  in 
a  future  blaze !  But  the  most  valuable  acquaintance  I  made  was 
a  Prussian  lady,  whom  I  admire  much,  and  for  whom  I  have 
conceiv'd  that  delicious  sentiment  which  is  more  moderate  than 
love  and  warmer  than  friendship,  the  same  which  I  have'  long 
felt  for  other  worthy  personages  in  a  still  greater  degree,  tho'  they 
neither  of  them  speak  so  well  the  language  of  music,  that  lan- 
guage so  persuasive  to  my  frame,  as  Madame  de  Madeweis.  .  .  . 
Ainsi  soit-il !  Carlsruhe  and  its  environs  are  very  pleasant,  but 
horribly  infested  with  gnats,  not  that  they  are  the  worst  plagues 
which  torment  the  Margrave  and  his  firstborn.  A  swarm  of 
more  offensive  insects  have  beset  him,  and  tho'  I  dare  say,  like 
the  Pharaoh  of  Egypt,  he  would  part  with  his  jewels  of  silver 
and  jewels  of  gold  to  drive  them  into  the  wilderness,  it  is  im- 
possible. Need  I  say  that  these  are  the  Refugies  aristocrats  ? 
All  we  had  seen  in  Italy,  compared  to  those  of  Carlsruhe,  are 
Platos  in  reasoning  and  Socrateses  in  moderation !  The  whole 
country  from  thence  to  Mayence  is  full  of  white  cockades,  but 
they  are  all  officers,  and  there  is  not  even  a  shadow  of  that 
arm/y  which  sounds  so  formidable  on  the  other  side  of  the  Alps. 
They  seem  to  me  to  wait  for  the  contre-revolution  as  Jews  for 
the  coming  of  the  Messiah !  We  spent  three  days  very  pleasantly 
at  Mayence,  where  we  were  recommended  to  Comte  Stadion,  a 
Chanoine  of  the  metropole,  by  his  brother  the  Imperial  Minister 
in  England.  Were  all  canons  like  this,  my  chapter  would  be 
worth  reading ! 

Tho'  there  is  little  faith  to  be  put  in  the  accounts  we  hear, 
yet  I  believe  you  had  better  not  venture  thro'  France.  The 
article  of  money  is  very  troublesome ;  you  can  get  none,  and 
you  can  carry  none  away.  My  paper  fails  me,  or  I  could  tell 
you  of  the  great  Tun  at  Heidelbuvg,  of  an  English  youth  who 
made  a  German  commit  suicide  from  jealousy,  &c.  &c.  ...  As 
we  did  not  go  to  Inspruck,  I  could  not  execute  Gianfigliazzi's 
commission  there.  I  will  beg  you  to  tell  him  that  the  innkeeper 
at  Coire  will  take  care  to  procure  L*  Clive  some  seeds  of  the 
pine  he  mentioned,  but  they  will  not  be  ripe  time  enough  to 
send  them  by  you.     .... 


1791]  JOUENAL.  353 

I  must  put  this  in  a  cover.  I  believe  it  will  not  cost  a  baiocco 
more ;  if  it  does,  I  will  give  you  a  choice  anecdote  of  the  K.  of 
Naples  richly  worth  it.  The  Due  of  Wurtemberg,  among  his 
other  treasures  at  Stutgard  and  the  neighbourhood,  has  a  re- 
markably fine  breed  of  cattle  in  one  of  his  pai-ks.  They  had 
the  honour  of  a  visit  from  their  Neapolitan  Majesties,  with  a 
vast  suite  of  hommes  and  dames  d'honneur  of  Naples  and 
Wurtemberg.  Lo  Re  was  in  extasy  1  '  Dio  benedetto ! '  says  he, 
and  in  the  enthusiasm  of  admiration,  ran  to  a  very  beautiful 
cow,  seiz'd  her  dug  with  rapture,  and  whilst  the  Queen  was 
blushing  with  shame  and  indignation,  and  the  Wurtembergers 
were  ready  to  die  of  stifled  laughter  .  .  .  the  cow  was  most 
royally  iniWd ! !  What  a  pendant  for  Cincinnatus  with  a  plough 
in  his  hands ! 

My  best  comp*'  to  M'  Berry.  .  .  .  Adieu,  my  dear  friends ! 
Accept  my  thanks  for  your  correspondence,  and  my  sincerest 
wishes  for  your  happiness.     Yours  most  faithfully, 

T.  B. 

Miss  Berry's  journal  of  their  return  home  from  Florence 
is  little  more  than  travelling  notes,  which  show  the  facili- 
ties and  difficulties  of  travelling  on  the  Continent  at  that 
time. 


JOUENAL. 

Saturday,  Septemher  17th. — ^Left  Florence  with  a  voi- 
turier.  The  view  from  Maschiere  beautiful.  The  voiturier 
engaged  to  carry  us  to  Bologna  in  two  days. 

Sunday,  18th. — About  a  rmle  and  a  half  from  Loiana 
the  perch  of  our  carriage  broke  almost  in  two  ;  luckily 
the  body  only  fell  forward  upon  the  box,  and  we  all  got 
out  without  being  either  frightened  or  hurt ;  luckily, 
also,  there  was  a  sort  of  blacksmith's  shop — a  soUtary 
cottage — in  a  valley  just  below  where  the  accident 
happened,  and  from  thence  the  people  came  running  up 
with  wood  and  cord,  and  they  and  the  voiturier,  and 
some  occasional  passengers  upon  the  road,  helped  to  get 

VOL.  I.  A  A 


354  MISS   beret's   journal.  [1791 

it  tied  up  together,  so  as  to  be  able  to  drag  it  along. 
This  operation  lasted  nearly  three  hours,  during  which 
time  we  were  sitting  guarding  the  trunks  and  luggage  by 
the  wayside.  When  at  last  it  was  en  etat  de  marche,  we 
walked  on  before  to  Loiana,  and,  finding  it  was  impossible 
it  could  bear  our  weight  within,  we  took  at  the  post  two 
little  sort  of  caleches,  such  as  the  peasants  use  to  go  to 
market,  and,  after  a  thousand  delays,  got  post-horses  to 
these  conveyances,  leaving  one  servant  to  come  on  slowly 
with  the  coach,  my  father  and  I,  with  Joseph,  in  one,  and 
my  sister  and  the  maid  in  the  other.  We  proceeded  to 
Pianora,  and  from  thence  to  Bologna,  where  we  arrived 
about  eleven  o'clock  at  night. 

We  were  kept  near  an  hour  at  the  gates,  till  the  keys 
were  sent  for  to  the  vice-legate — a  ceremony  which 
seems  to  mean  nothing  more  than  giving  five  pauls  to  the 
corporal  upon  guard,  which  I  should  think  might  be  con- 
trived in  a  manner  less  troublesome  to  travellers. 

Monday,  19^A. — Our  carriage  came  up  at  eight  o'clock 
in  the  morning,  and  not  more  broken,  which  was  all  we 
could  expect.  In  the  evening  arrived  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Legge 
and  Mr.  Gianfighazzi,  to  comfort  us  in  our  misfortunes. 
Sent  to  the  Chevalier  Poggelini,  whom  we  had  seen  at 
Florence,  to  recommend  a  coachmaker  to  us.  Came 
himself,  and  offered  us  his  services.  The  man  he 
recommended  was  out  of  town,  and  did  not  return  tiU 
the  next  day  (Tuesday),  and  the  day  after  (Wednesday) 
being  a  fete,  it  could  not  be  touched  till  Thursday ;  he 
promised,  however,  to  let  us  have  it  on  Saturday  even- 
ing, and,  contrary  to  my  expectations,  on  Saturday 
evening  it  came,  finished,  to  the  inn.  We  made  no 
bargain  beforehand,  as  our  friend  the  chevaHer  pro- 
mised to  settle  that  matter  for  us.  The  man's  bill  was 
thirty-two  sequins  —  we  paid  twenty-seven  ;  for  this 
country  it  was  tolerably  reasonable. 

Monday,  2&th. — ^Left  Bologna  for  Ferrara  ;  the  roads. 


1791]  FROM   FADUA   TO   STEKZING.  355 

after  the  twenty-four  hours'  rain,  heavy  stiff  mud,  in  a 
country  as  flat  as  Leicestershire.  At  Cento  we  were 
obUged  to  wait  till  the  horses  were  refreshed,  as  there 
were  none  others,  and  the  poor  tired  beasts  could  hardly 
even  make  a  trot,  the  road  worse  and  worse  near 
Ferrara. 

Tuesday,  27?A.— Eeached  Padua.  After  crossing  the 
river,  the  clay  was  half-way  up  to  the  axles  of  the  wheels  ; 
the  six  horses  never  went  out  of  a  walk.  We  were  six 
hours  and  a  quarter  coming  eighteen  miles. 

Thursday,  29^A. — Left  Padua.  Arrived  at  Venice  in  a 
barge,  drawn  by  a  horse  on  the  bank,  till  we  came  to 
Pusina,  when  another  hghter  bark,  with  four  rowers,  took 
us  in  tow.  Much  time  lost  on  the  canal  at  the  different 
locks,  of  which  there  are  five  or  six. 

Thursday,  October  %th. — The  road  from  Padua   to 
Vicenza  good.     The  inn  at  Vicenza  very  good ;   paid  for  ' 
the  apartment  fifteen  pauis.     Tun  at  Verona  very  good. 

Sunday,  9  th. — ^Left  Verona.  Between  Volargone  and 
Peri  ascended  a  very  steep  hill,  the  Clusi,  with  an  old 
ruined  fort  at  the  bottom,  which  in  fact  shuts  up  the 
valley.  Between  Peri  and  Ala  twice  stopped  by  the 
custom-house.  The  Venetians  have  no  right  to  demand 
anything  on  going  out  of  their  dominions  ;  on  entering 
those  of  the  emperor,  they  give  a  bulletin  for  four  or  five 
pauls,  and  search  nothing.     Arrived  at  Trent.* 

Monday,  lOth. — Left  Trent  about  7  A.M.  No  horses 
to  be  had  at  Botzen  ;  f  obhged  to  stay  there  all  night. 

Tuesday,  11th. —  From  Botzen  to  SterzingJ  the  road 
so  excellent,  that  with  anything  but  German  postilions  one 
might  go  eighty  or  ninety  miles  a  day.     The  road  from 

*  One  of  the  most  importaait  cities  in  the  Tyrol — the  Tridentum  of  the 
RomEms.     The  chief  products  around  it  are  wine  and  silk. 

t  Now  one  of  the  most  flourishing  commercial  towns  in  the  Tyrol. 
X  A  very  ancient  town,  on  the  site  of  the  Roman  station  Vipetenum. 

A   A   2 


356  MISS  BEEEI'S  JOURNAL.  [1791 

Botzen  beautifully  romantic,  always  winding  round  the 
bottom  of  a  highly-cultivated  and  much-peopled  valley, 
with  a  river,  sometimes  narrow,  sometimes  broad,  running 
through. 

Wednesday,  12th. — ^Left  Sterzing.  Arrived  at  Inspruck. 
The  country,  the  whole  way  from  Botzen,  becomes  at 
every  step  more  strikingly  beautiful ;  the  road  good,  and 
no  great  ascent  till  Sterzing.  From  thence  to  Brenner  is 
a  continual  steep  ascent,  for  which  we  were  obhged  to 
take  six  horses.  The  situation  of  Inspruck,  in  a  large  and 
richly-cultivated  valley,  as  seen  from  the  mountain  we 
descended,  very  beautiftd.  The  town  itself  has  a  sort  of 
air  of  German  magnificence — wide  streets  and  large  un- 
couth palaces. 

Saturday,  15th. — Left  Inspruck.  Arrived,  in  twelve 
hours,  at  Leermoos.  Detained  at  Nassereit  for  want  of 
horses.  The  country  from  Inspruck  more  beautiful  and 
romantic  than  any  other  part  of  the  Tyrol  that  I  have 
seen. 

Left  Leermoos.  Arrived  at  Kaufbeeren  in  eleven 
hours.  At  Fiissen  a  large  convent.*  On  the  other  side  of 
Fiissen  we  passed  a  gateway  and  sort  of  fortification 
which  shuts  up  the  pass  of  the  mountains.  The  moun- 
tains here  begin  gradually  to  diminish,  and  after  Stettin 
the  country  is  open  and  only  gently  waved.  We  set  out 
with  four  horses,  but  between  Fiissen  and  Stettin  took 
two  more  from  a  village. 

Sunday,  16th. — Arrived  at  Augsburg  about  mid- 
day. The  road,  the  whole  way,  through  a  beautifully- 
cultivated  and  much-peopled  coimtry ;  the  villages 
frequent,  aU  clean,  well  built,  and  with  an  appearance 
of  perfect  comfort ;  and  in  each  village  is  to  be  seen  one 
or  more  large  good-looking  inns. 

*  The  most  remarkable  building  in  the  town  is  the  sequestered  Abbey  of 
St.  Magnus,  now  the  property  of  Prince  Wallenstein. — Vide  Murray's 
Handbook. 


1791]  ULM.  357 

The  whole  Tyrol,  indeed,  is  most  justly  celebrated  as 
well  for  the  beauty  of  the  country  as  for  the  comfortable 
appearance  of  the  inhabitants.  If  its  mountains  are  less 
sublime  than  those  of  Savoy,  they  are  more  cheerful  and 
better  cultivated.  There  is  a  ruined '  castle  upon  the 
top  of  a  httle  island  in  a  small  lake,  surrounded  by  high 
wooded  mountains,  between  Nassereit  and  Leermoos, 
that  is  fit  for  the  residence  of  an  enchanted  princess  in 
a  romance.  As  the  road  winds  round,  one  sees  it  in  a 
thousand  diiFerent  and  picturesque  points  of  view. 

There  is  another  castle,*  upon  a  hiU  between  Fiissen 
and  StettiQ,  less  ruinous  but  fuUy  as  romantic.  The  cul- 
tivation in  the  Tyrol  is  so  neat,  and  the  turf  so  beauti- 
fully fine,  that  the  road  for  many  miles  between  Inspruck 
to  Augsburg  looks  like  a  drive  through  the  best-kept 
park  one  ever  saw.     No  vines  after  leaving  Sterzing, 

Tuesday,  \%ih. — Left  Augsburg.f  Arrived  at  Ulm  in 
ten  hours ;  the  road  excellent,  through  a  finely- waved, 
open,  well-cultivated,  and  much-inhabited  country ;  the 
pavement  of  all  the  httle  towns  abominable.  Baron 
d'Hornstein  had  left  Augsburg,  and  got  to  the  first  post  in 
time  to  have  breakfast  prepared  for  us. 

Ulm  is  a  considerable  old  town,  most  of  the  houses  what 
is  called  in  England  post  and  pan  ;  the  streets  wide,  but 
very  irregular  and  horridly  paved.  The  cathedral,  which 
is  a  Lutheran  church,  is  in  the  inside  very  pretty  Gothic, 
and  imposing  from  its  great  length  ;  |  the  spiral  sort  of 
ornament  over  the  pulpit  beautiful. 

Wednesday,  l^th. — ^Left  Ulm.     Arrived  at  Moeskirch 

*  Tie  Castle  of  the  Bishops  of  Augsburg  stands  on  a  rocky  height ;  it  is 
still  tolerahly  perfect,  retaining  much  of  the  splendour  of  a  baronial  resi- 
dence of  the  14th  century.  It  now  belongs  to  the  king. — Murray'i  Sand- 
hook. 

f  A  city  now  of  upwards  of  31,000  inhabitants :  above  18,000  Roman 
Catholics,  and  above  11,000  Protestants. 

X  Considered  one  of  the  six  finest  Gothic  cathedrals  in  Germany ;  begim 
in  1377,  and  continued  down  to  1488. — Murray's  HanMook. 


358  MISS  bekry's  journal.  [1791 

in  twelve  hours ;  the  road  very  rough,  and  through  a 
flat  uninteresting  country;  the  posts,  too,  are  badly  served. 

Thursday,  2^th. — Arrived  at  Schaffhausen.  The  road 
from  Moeskirch  to  Stockach*  very  rough  and  bad,  and 
through  an  ugly  country ;  we  did  not  go  three  miles  an 
hour.  Stockach  is  a  clean-looking  town ;  the  road  better, 
and  the  country  finely  wooded.  Vines  again  cultivated  ; 
great  vineyards  about  Schaffhausen. 

Friday,  21st. — Left  Schaffhausen  at  8  a.m.  ;  arrived  at 
Waldshutf  about  4  p.m.  The  situation  of  Schaffhausen  is 
romantic  and  beautiful;  the  groimd  rises  round  it  on 
every  side.  About  half  a  mile  from  the  town,  turned  out 
of  the  road  to  go  to  the  famous  fall  of  the  Ehine.  Being 
in  our  own  loaded  carriage,  we  did  not  carry  it  farther 
than  the  village,  about  half  a  mile  out  of  the  road.  A 
caleche,  or  any  light  carriage,  may  go  down  quite  to  the 
water's  edge.  We  walked,  and  looked  at  it  first  from 
above  and  then  from  below  ;  and  then  walked  round  the 
sort  of  bay  that  it  makes  to  the  spot  where  there  are  two 
or  three  strange  uncouth  coggling  sort  of  boats  to  ferry 
over  to  the  other  side.  Here  one  mounts  a  very  steep 
bank  to  a  chateau  situated  directly  over  the  fall,  and 
which,  indeed,  greatly  adds  to  the  beauty  of  the  scene. 
From  the  summer-house  of  this  chateau  is  seen  a  view  of 
the  fall  from  above ;  but  the  really  striking,  the  truly 
magnificent,  view  is  from  a  httle  sort  of  redout  under 
the  high  bank  on  which  the  chateau  stands,  and  from 
which  the  water  is  precipitated.  One  is  here  in  a  manner 
under  the  fall,  and  sees  it  passing  with  a  degree  of  violence 
and  rapidity  which  at  first  almost  turns  one's  head  ;  but 
it  is  by  far  the  most  splendid  view — the  only  one,  indeed, 
where  one  has  a  just  idea  of  the  whole,  and  the  only  one 
where  one  has  a  just  idea  of  the  prodigious  body  and 

*  A  town  of  1,300  inhabitants,  three  miles  distant  fl:om  the  Lake   of 
Constance, 
t  A  walled  town  on  the  outskirts  of  the  Black  Forest. 


1791]  FROM   BASLE   TO   LANGEES.  359 

force  of  water.  It  is,  I  think,  certainly  less  beautiful,  less 
picturesque,  than  that  of  Terni  or  even  of  Tivoli,  and 
certainly  gave  me  less  pleasure ;  but  from  this  point  more 
sublime  and  more  magnificent.  The  water,  they  said,  was 
uncommonly  low,  which  of  course  makes  a  considerable 
difierence. 

Saturday,  Tlnd. — ^Arrived  at  Basle. 

Monday,  ^'iih. — Left  Basle.  About  a  league  from  Basle 
we  were  stopped  and  asked  if  we  had  no  contraband ; 
and  on  answering  in  the  negative,  and  giving  the  man 
half-a-crown,  were  allowed  to  proceed ;  no  passport  or 
permission  asked  for  anywhere,  nor  who  nor  what  we 
were.  The  posts  well  served,  and  the  road,  though  hilly, 
good.  Belfort  is  a  small  ville  de  guerre,*  at  which  we 
saw  all  sorts  of  uniforms.     Eeached  Lure. 

Tuesday,  25th. — Arrived  at  Fayl  Billot  in  eleven  hours 
and  a  half.  The  roads  from  Lure  to  Pont-sur-Soane 
abominable,  with  great  holes  and  large  pieces  of  rock 
laying  in  them  ;  it  is  wonderful  how  any  carriage  escapes 
breaking. 

Vesoul,  the  only  town  we  passed  to-day,  a  neatish- 
looking  small  place.  All  the  villages  particularly  ragged 
and  vsTetched-lookiQg,  and  the  country  open  and  un- 
interesting.f 

Wednesday,  26th ^From  Fayl  Billot  to  Bar-sur-Aube 

in  twelve  hours  and  a  half  They  have  the  best  materials 
for  making  roads  upon  the  whole  route  ;  and  if  they  had 
not  been  much  neglected  for  these  two  years  past,  would 
be  some  of  the  finest  in  France.  Langres  is  a  considerable 
town,  mean,  and  badly  built.J  The  country  this  whole 
day  bare  and  uninteresting,  the  cottages  and  villages  very 
thinly  scattered  and  very  miserable. 

*  Fortified  by  Vauban. 

t  Vesoul  is  now  a  town  of  more  than  6,000  inhabitants. 
J  Langres  is  an  ancient  town,  mentioned  by  Caesar.     It  is  now  a  sort  of 
French  Shelfield,  and  produces  the  best  French  cutlery. 


360  MISS  BEERY'S  JOUENAL.  [1791 

Thursday,  21th. — From  Bar-sur-Aube  to  Nogent  in 
eleven  hours  and  a  half ;  the  roads  admirable.  At  Granges 
the  pav^  begins.  Troyes  is  a  large  old-fashioned  iU-built 
town,  with  a  finely-ornamented  front  to  the  Gothic  cathe- 
dral.* Between  Pont-sur-Seine  and  Nogent  are  two  fine 
chateaux,  and  these,  with  another  shabby  one  we  passed 
yesterday,  are  the  only  chateaux  within  sight  on  the 
whole  road  from  Basle. 

Friday,  28?A.— Left  Nogent  at  half-past  4  A.M.,  and  we 
should  have  arrived  at  Paris  by  2  p.m.,  for  the  roads  were 
good,  the  posts  short,  and  the  driving  quick ;  but  at 
Guignes  the  fore-axle  was  discovered  to  be  broken  nearly 
through  ;  it  was  vilely  patched  together  with  two  iron 
hoops,  which  broke  before  we  had  gone  two  miles,  and  we 
were  then  obhged  to  get  out  to  reheve  the  coach  of  our 
weight ;  the  weak  part  was  bound  up  with  straps  and 
ropes,  and  sent  on  slowly  to  the  next  post  (Brie-C'°-Eobert), 
whilst  we  walked  to  Coubert,  the  first  village,  above  a 
league  distant.  There  we  waited  in  a  little  auberge  till 
a  cabriolet  from  the  post  was  sent,  and  into  this  we  aU 
four  crammed  ourselves,  and  arrived  at  Brie  about  four 
o'clock.  Finding  our  coach  had  got  on  so  far  without 
breaking  more,  we  agreed  with  the  post-mistress  for  four 
horses  to  carry  it  on  slowly  into  Paris  with  one  servant, 
and  taking  her  cabriolet  for  ourselves,  with  the  other 
servant  on  horseback.  We  arrived  in  this  conveyance  at 
half-past  seven  at  the  door  of  the  Hotel  d'Orleans  at 
Paris.  Here  I  thought  all  our  troubles  would  end,  and 
that  we  were  sure  of  an  apartment — point  du  tout.  It 
was  aU  full.  I  then  bethought  me  of  the  H6tel  de  Bourbon 
close  by,  in  the  Eue  Jacob  :  thither  we  drove,  and  got  a 
comfortable  enough  apartment  au  premier,  consisting  of 
three  pihces  and  an  ante-chamber,  at  the  rate  of  three 
and  a  half  louis  a  week. 

*  In  tHs  cathedral,  May  20,  1420,  our  King  Henry  V.  was  aiEanced  to 
tlie  Princess  Catherine ;  and  on  the  following  day  was  signed  the  Treaty  of 
Troyes. — Murray's  Handbook. 


1791]  LETTER    FEOM   ME.   WALPOLE.  361 

On  the  17th  of  September,  according  to  Miss  Berry's 
Journal,  they  had  left  Florence.  The  first  letter  addressed 
to  them  by  Mr.  Walpole  on  their  homeward  journey  was 
dated  September  5th,  and  directed  to  Venice. 

Strawberry  Hill,  Sept.  5,  at  night,  1791. 

I  write  on  my  intermediate  post-day,  both  to  overtake  you, 
and  to  apologize  for  the  lamentations  in  my  last,  tho'  I  had  not 
even  imputed  the  cause  of  them  to  you.  That  letter  perhaps 
you  will  not  receive.*  On  Friday  the  2%  the  morning  on  which 
my  letter  had  gone  to  town,  I  received  y"  of  the  7*''  and  9*'' 
of  August,  with  the  very  order  for  changing  my  direction,  but 
it  was  too  late  to  recall  mine ;  I  am  less  surprised  at  y"  being 
so  long  as  23  or  24  days  on  the  road,  for  I  believe  it  had  been 
opened,  the  seal  being  quite  flat,  and  scarce  any  mark  of  im- 
pression left.  Another  proof  of  its  having  been  delayed,  is,  that 
on  Saturday  I  received  a  second  of  the  15""  of  August,  and  they 
certainly  ought  to  have  arrived  at  once. 

The  last  contains  a  charming  letter  from  my  Agnes,  and  both 
this  and  the  former  contain  deserved  encomiums  on  Mr.  Lock,t  to 
which  I  totally  agree.  He  has  as  much  modesty  as  genius,  which 
is  saying  that  he  is  the  most  modest  genius  in  the  world ;  and  his 
virtues  are  as  uncommon  as  both.  lam  overjoyed  you  have 
met  him ;  and  now  I  shall  be  impatient  to  have  him  see  the 
copy  of  his  Wolsey,  which  I  am  sure  will  surprise  and  strike 
him,  as  much  as  the  original  did  us.  He  little  thinks  that  his 
new  scholar  is  worthy  of  being  his  rival.  In  y""  letter  of  the  9^^ 
there  was  a  word  which  I  could  not  read,  or  at  least  not  under- 
stand. You  say  Mr.  Lock  coloured  a  drawing  in  black  lead 
with  a  stump,  or,  a  thuwjp,  and  advised  Miss  Agnes  to  use  the 
same  method  —  either  nostrum  applied  to  the  black  lead,  I 
suppose,  had  the  effect  of  Prussian  blue,  and  made  the  draw- 
ing black  and  blue,  which  may  assist  connoisseurs  in  knowing 
hands ;  but  I  own  I  do  not  wish  to  have  y""  sister  practice  that 
mode  of  sketching ;  nor  should  like  to  be  told,  '  I  am  sure  this 
was  done  by  your  wife's  fist.^  It  would  not  be  of  a  piece  with 
her  or  Mr.  Lock's  indolence.     Hers  I  certainly  would  not  have 

*  The  letter  alluded  to,  and  numbered  by  Mr.  Walpole  50,  was  perhaps 
never  received,  as  it  is  neither  in  the  printed  nor  in  the  MS.  collection. 
f  Mr.  Lock  of  Norbury, 


362  LETTERS.  [1791 

her  conquer  at  the  price  of  a  headache ;  nor  would  have  you  both 
venture  travelling  too  soon  in  the  great  heats.  Great  as  my 
impatience  to  see  you  both,  you  surely  know  that  my  impa- 
tience is  doubled  by  my  alarms  about  y' journey. 

Lally  s'est  ravise  prudently  in  suppressing  his  pamphlet ;  it 
would  not  be  popular  here,  where  the  Demonocratic  Stock  is 
wofuUy  fallen.  The  sober  Presbytyrants  are  ashamed  of  Priestly 
and  his  imps ;  and  tho'  they  would  burn  the  houses  of  others, 
they  would  not  like  to  venture  their  own ;  nor  is  the  distress  of 
France  inviting.  Barnave  and  Lameth  may  have  tried  to  nego- 
tiate with  the  Princes,  but  having  miscarried,  if  they  did  attempt 
it,  their  being  desperate  will  produce  more  violence.  I  should 
think  they  had  tried,  as  I  see  Lameth  has  lately  been  outrageous 
— yet  I  am  told  that  when  the  Chevalier  de  Coigny  presented 
himself  (on  that  errand)  to  the  Comte  de  Provence,  whom  he 
found  in  a  Circle  of  exiles,  and  desired  a  private  audience, 
Monsieur  said,  'Tons  ces  Messieurs  sont  mes  amis,  et  je  leur 
dirois  d'abord  tout  ce  que  vous  me  diriez.' 

Madame  de  Stael  is  returned  to  Paris ;  her  husband  an- 
nounced his  King's  commands  of  affuching  triatesse :  elle  s'en 
est  moquee  and  sees  everybody.  Her  father  is  said  to  be  follow- 
ing her  with  a  new  plan  of  Constitution  and  Finance,  both 
which  no  doubt  he  can  more  easily  settle  now  that  both  are 
fifty  times  more  difficult  than  he  could  at  first  when  he  had  all 
the  power  of  the  Crown,  or  the  second  time  when  he  was  the 
idol  of  the  people.  Everybody  has  seen  his  incapacity  but 
himself,  and  his  restless  vanity  and  ambition  of  a  name  will 
make  his  name  a  proverb  of  ridicule.  He  always  puts  me  in 
mind  of  the  Gunnings.  The  T)'^  of  B.  is  having  her  house  new- 
painted,  and  retired  to  her  niece  Mad.  de  Kutzleben.  The 
Gunnings  went  and  took  her  away,  and  have  carried  her  to 
their  lodging  in  St.  James's  Street ;  yet  cannot  make  even  the 
newspapers  talk  of  them. 

As  this  departs  on  Tuesday,  it  is  not  likely  I  shall  have  any- 
thing to  add  on  Friday ;  therefore  my  next  you  will  probably 
find  at  Basle ;  as  you  had  better  wait  a  few  days  and  find  one 
arrived  before  you,  than  wait  longer  for  one  to  recall,  or  to  be 
sent  after  you.  I  fear  we  must  mutually  prepare  for  disappoint- 
ments while  you  are  on  the  road,  and  I  will  remember,  if  I  can, 
to  be  prepared ;  but  I  think  impatience  about  you  two  is  the 


1791]  walpole's  solicitude.  363 

quality  on  which  74  has  had  the  least  eiFect !  I  wonder  you 
had  not  heard  of  y""  tenant's  retreat,  for  your  housekeeper  told 
Philip  ten  days  ago  that  y"^  house  was  ready  for  you — and  so 
will  Cliveden  be. 

I  assure  you  the  provocations  given  by  the  Eevolutionists 
were  so  far  from  being  exaggerated  by  the  newspjipers  on  the 
Court's  side,  that  much  worse  was  suppressed  than  has  been  ever 
told,  nor  was  any  other  care  taken  by  the  Grovernment  till  the 
approach  of  the  14*''  of  July  had  made  every  precaution  neces- 
sary, and  had  even  kept  away  from  the  Crown  and  Anchor  every 
man  of  any  consequence,  even  of  the  Opposition.  All  the  coun- 
try newspapers  and  evening  posts  had  been  hired  by  the  Faction. 
Eemember,  I  never  warrant  my  news,  unless  I  speak  very  posi- 
tively :  I  have  told  you  that  Truth  died  a  virgin,  and  left  no 
children ;  and  often  when  she  herself  is  said  to  be  here  or  there, 
it  is  as  untrue  as  that  King  Arthur  is  still  alive,  or  St.  John  in  the 
Isle  of  Patmos.  I  did  I  think  everything  but  prove  that  Perkin 
Warbeck  was  the  true  Duke  of  York,  and  had  not  been  mur- 
dered in  the  Tower ;  but  as  he  was  beheaded  afterwards  as  pub- 
lickly  as  the  Duke  of  Monmouth,  I  do  not  believe  he  is  still 
living,  tho'  Mons""  de  Saintfois  chose  the  latter  should  have  been 
the  Masque  de  fer,  but  forgot  the  best  argument  in  defence  of 
that  hypothesis,  which  was,  that  the  Masque  de  fer  was  to  con- 
ceal the  loss  of  the  Duke's  real  head.     Adieu ! 

The  next,  dated  September  11th,*  is  directed  to  Basle, 
and  full  of  anxiety  as  to  their  journey. :—' Accidents, 
inns,  roads,  mountains,  and  the  sea  are  aU  in  my  map ; 
but  I  hope  no  slopes  to  be  run  down,  nor  fStes  for  a  grand 
duke.' 

Those  of  September  16th  and  25th,  also  directed  to 
Basle,  have  only  been  published  in  part. 

[Strawberry  HiL,  Friday  night  late,  Sept.  16,  1791. 

Yesterday  was  red-lettered  in  the  almanacks  of  Strawberry  and 

Cliveden,  supposing  you  set  out  towards  them  as  you  intended. 

The  sun  shone  all  day,  and  the  moon  all  night,  and  all  nature 

for  three  miles  round  looked  gay.     Indeed,  we  have  had  nine  or 

•  Published  in  1846. 


364  LETTERS.  [1791 

ten  days  of  such  warmth  and  serenity  (here  called  heat),  as  I 
scarce  remember  when  the  year  begins  to  have  grey,  or  rather 

yellow,  hairs The  setting  sun  and  long  autumnal  shades 

enriched  the  landscape  to  a  Claude  Lorrain.  Guess  whether  I 
hoped  to  see  such  a  scene  next  year.  If  I  do  not,  may  you ! — 
at  least,  it  will  make  you  talk  of  me  !] 

The  Johnstonehood  dined  here  on  Wednesday,  and  Lady 
Clack,  and  some  Eichmondians.  The  first  family  depart  for 
Bath  tomorrow :  the  good  general  is  not  at  all  well,  and  falls 
away  much.  The  Marchioness  of  Abercorn  is  dead,  and  the 
Marquis  of  Blandford  literally  married,*  malgr6  the  duchess. 
The  papers  of  to-day  say  Mons"^  de  la  Luzerne  is  dead,  but 
Madame  de  BoufHers  did  not  know  it  last  night.  I  have  heard 
nothing,  nor  probably  shall  learn  more  in  town  on  Monday, 
whither  I  shall  go  for  two  nights  on  business. 

The  gorgeous  season  and  poor  partridges  I  hear  have 
emptied  London  entirely,  and  yet  Drury-lane  is  removed  to 
the  Opera-house.  Do  you  know  that  Mrs.  Jordan  is  acknow- 
ledged to  be  Mrs.  Ford,  and  Miss  Brunton  to  be  Mrs.  Merry, 
but  neither  quits  the  stage.  The  latter's  captain,  I  think, 
might  quit  his  poetic  profession  without  loss  to  the  public. 
My  gazettes  will  have  kept  you  so  much  au  courant,  that  you 
will  be  as  ready  for  any  conversation  at  y''  return,  as  if  you  had 
only  been  at  a  watering-place — in  short,  a  voire  intention,  and 
to  make  my  letters  as  welcome  as  I  can,  I  listen  to  and  bring 
home  a  thousand  things,  which  otherwise  I  should  not  know  I 
heard.     .     .     . 

Sunday,  noon. 

I  this  moment  receive  y'^  of  Aug.  29th,  in  which  you  justly  re- 
prove my  jealousies  and  suspicions  of  y"  delaying  y"^  return,  at  the 
moment  you  are  preparing  to  make  such  a  sacrifice  to  me,  as  I  am 
sensible  it  is.  I  do  not  defend  or  excuse  myself;  but  alas!  is  it 
possible  not  to  have  doubts  sometimes,  when  I  am  not  only  on  the 
very  verge  of  75,  but,  if  I  have  a  grain  of  sense  left,  must  know 
how  very  precariously  I  retain  this  shattered  frame  ?  Nay,  my 
dragging  you  from  the  country  you  prefer,  would  be  inexcusable 
were  self  my  only  motive.     No,  beloved  friends,  I  am  neither  in 

*  George  Marqvds  of  Blandford,  afterwards  4th  Duke  of  Marlborough, 
married  September  16, 1791,  to  Susan,  daughter  of  John  Earl  of  Galloway. 


1791]  '         walpole's  feaes  fok  his  friends.  365 

love  with  either  of  you,  nor,  tho'  doating  on  y'  society,  so 
personal  as  to  consult  my  own  transitory  felicity  to  y""  amuse- 
ment The  scope  of  all  I  think  and  do  is,  to  make  y'  lives  more 
comfortable  when  I  shall  be  no  more ;  and  if  I  do  suffer  the 
selfish  wish  of  seeing  you  take  possession,  to  enter  into  my  plan, 
forgive  it !  Mr,  Berry  does  not  as  a  father  meditate  y"^  happi- 
ness more  than  I  do,  nor  has  purer  affection  for  you  both ;  nor, 
tho'  a  much  younger  man,  has  he  less  of  that  weakness  that  often 
exposes  old  men.  I  am  vain  of  my  attachment  to  two  such  un- 
derstandings and  hearts;  and  the  cruel  injustice  of  fortune 
makes  me  proud  of  trying  to  smooth  one  of  her  least-rugged 
frowns ;  but  even  this  theme  I  must  drop,  as  you  have  raised  a 
still  more  cruel  fear !  You  talk  uncertainly  of  y"^  route  thro' 
France  or  its  borders,  and  you  bid  me  not  be  alarmed !  Oh ! 
can  you  conjure  down  that  apprehension  !  I  have  scarce  a  grain 
of  belief  in  German  armies  marching  against  the  French,  yet 
what  can  I  advise  who  know  nothing  but  from  the  loosest 
reports.  Oh  !  I  shall  abhor  myself — yes,  abhor  myself — if  I 
have  drawn  you  from  the  security  of  Florence  to  the  smallest 
risk,  or  even  inconvenieiice.  My  dearest  friends,  return  thither, 
stay  there,  stop  in  Swisserland,  do  anything  but  hazard  y'selves. 
I  beseech  you,  I  implore  you,  do  not  venture  thro'  France,  for 
tho'  you  may  come  from  Italy,  and  have  no  connection  of  any 
sort  on  the  whole  Continent,  you  may  meet  with  incivilities  and 
trouble,  which  even  pretty  women,  that  are  no  politicians,  may 
be  exposed  to  in  a  country  so  unsettled  as  France  is  at  present. 
If  there  is  truth  in  my  soul,  it  is  that  I  w'*  give  up  all  my  hopes 
of  seeing  you  again,  rather  than  have  you  venture  on  the  least 
danger  of  any  sort.  When  a  storm  could  terrify  me  out  of  my 
senses  last  year,  do  you  think,  dearest  souls,  that  I  can  have  any 
peace  till  I  am  sure  of  y"^  safety  ?  and  to  risk  it  for  me !  Oh ! 
horrible !  I  cannot  bear  the  idea ! 

[Berkeley  Sijuare,  Monday  night,  19th. 
I  have  been  making  all  the  inquiries  I  could  amongst  the 
foreign  Ministers  at  Eichmond  and  here  in  town,  and  I  cannot 
find  any  belief  of  the  march  of  armies  towards  France.  Nay, 
the  Comte  d'Artois  is  said  to  be  gone  to  Petersburgh,  and  he 
must  bring  back  forces  in  a  balloon,  if  he  can  be  in  time  enough 
to  interrupt  your  passage  thro'  Flanders.     One  thing  I  must 


366  LETTEES.  [l79i 

premise,  if,  which  I  deprecate,  you  should  set  foot  in  France,  I 
beg  you  to  burn  and  not  bring  a  scrap  of  paper  with  you.  Mere 
travelling  ladies,  as  young  as  you,  I  know  have  been  stopped, 
and  rifled  and  detained  in  France  to  have  their  papers  examined, 
and  one  was  rudely  treated,  because  the  name  of  a  French  lady 
of  her  acquaintance  was  mentioned  in  a  private  letter  to  her, 
tho'  in  no  political  light.  Calais  is  one  of  the  worst  places  you 
can  pass,  for  as  they  suspect  money  being  remitted  thro'  that 
town  to  England,  the  search  and  delays  there  are  extremely 
strict  and  rigorous.     .     . 

Tuesday,    r 

I  am  told  that  on  the  King's  acceptance  of  the  constitution, 
there  is  a  general  amnesty  published,  and  passports  taken  off. 
If  this  is  true,  the  passage  thro'  France  for  mere  foreigners  and 
strangers  may  be  easier  and  safer ;  but  be  assured  of  all.  I  w'* 
not  embarrass  y""  journey  unnecessarily,  but,  for  heaven's  sake, 
be  well  informed.  I  advise  nothing.  I  dread  everything  where 
your  safeties  are  in  question,  and  I  hope  Mr.  Berry  is  as  timor- 
ous as  I  am.  My  very  contradictions  prove  the  anxiety  of  my 
mind,  or  I  should  not  torment  those  I  love  so  much ;  but  how  not 
love  those  who  sacrifice  so  much  for  me,  and  who,  I  hope,  for- 
give all  my  unreasonable  inconsistencies.     Adieu !  adieu !] 

[Strawberry  Hill,  Sept.  25, 1791. 

How  I  love  to  see  my  numeros  increase  I  *  I  trust  they  will 
not  reach  60 !     .     .     . 

It  is  now,  I  think,  certain  that  there  will  no  attempt  against 
France  be  made  this  year- — still  I  trust  that  you  will  not  decide 
till  you  are  assured  that  you  may  come  thro'  France  without 
trouble  or  molestation;  and  I  still  prefer  Germany,  tho'  it  will 
protract  y""  absence.] 

Pray  write  me  nothing  but  notes  on  y"^  journey,  with  '  We 
arrived  here  last  night  perfectly  well ;  have  caught  no  colds  nor 
accidents ;  and  set  out  to-morrow  for  our  next  stage.'  Adven- 
tures, I  hope,  you  will  have  none  to  relate ;  and  you  shall  not 
be  writing  when  you  are  fatigued,  very  hot,  very  cold,  or  very 
hungry.  This  civilly  calls  itself  a  prayer,  but  is  a  command — 
and  if  I  open  a  letter,  and  see  more  than  three  lines,  I  shall  be 

*  Mr.  Walpole  had  numbered  all  Ms  letters  written  to  Miss  Ben:y  while 
abroad. 


1791]  WALPOLE   ON   TKAVELLING.  367 

alarmed,  and  think  some  mischief  has  happened,  and  then  I 
shall  not  know  what  I  read,  till  I  read  the  whole  letter  over 
again,  which  has  been  the  case  several  times  since  you  went, 
as  after  the  storm,  after  y"^  fall,  after  your  fever — and  I  believe 
oftener — but  those  are  the  great  epochs  in  my  almanack. 

Mrs.  Darner  came  hither  from  Goodwood  last  Thursday,  staid 
all  Friday,  went  to  town  yesterday,  returns  hither  next  Friday, 
takes  Madame  de  Cambis  to  Park-place  on  Saturday,  and  the 
next  day  I  shall  follow  them  thither.  This  is  the  sum  total  of 
my  history,  and  I  believe  everybody's  else — at  least,  to  my 
knowledge.  I  have  not  a  paragraph  of  politics  for  Mr.  Berry — 
nay,  I  am  sure  there  is  none,  for  my  neighbour  at  the  foot  of 
the  bridge  was  here  this  morning,  and  had  nothing  to  tell  me, 
but  that  Mr.  Stevens  is  just  coming  out  with  his  Shakespear. 
I  said  '  S"',  if  he  does  not  come  in,  it  is  perfectly  indifferent  to 
me  when  he  com^  ouV 

[I  am  sorry  you  was  disappointed^  of  going  to  Valombroso. 
Milton  has  made  everybody  wish  to  have  seen  it ;  which  is  my 
wish ;  for  though  I  was  thirteen  months  at  Florence  (at  twice), 
I  never  did  see  it — in  fact  I  was  so  tired  ofjeemg  when  I  was 
abroad,  that  I  have  several  of  those  pieces  of  repentance  on  my 
conscience  when  they  come  into  my  head — and  yet  I  saw  too 
much,  for  the  quantity  left  such  a  confusion  in  my  head,  that 
I  do  not  remember  a  quarter  clearly.  Pictures,  statues,  and 
buildings  were  always  so  much  my  passion,  that  for  the  time  I 
surfeited  myself;  especially  as  one  is  carried  to  see  a  vast  deal 
that  is  not  worth  seeing.     *     .     .] 

Monday,  26th. 
I  am  alarmed  again !  1  heard  at  Eichmond  last  night  that 
Ld.  Binning  has  a  relation  just  come  thro'  France,  who  was 
searched  and  very  ill-treated,  so  I  revert  to  y''  coming  thro' 
Germany,  whence  I  am  persuaded  there  will  be  no  movement, 
all  the  rodomontades  issuing,  I  believe,  from  Calonne's  brain, 
which  can  produce  armed  Minervas,  but  not  one  Mars.  I  repeat 
ib,  and  you  may  be  confident  of  it,  that  I  had  rather  hear  you 
was  returned  to  Florence,  than  have  you  expose  yourselves  to 
any  risk  anywhere — and  I  do  now  heartily  repent  my  soliciting 
y""  return.  I  wish  I  had  prevailed  as  little  there  as  I  did  against 
your  journey  ! — but  you  have  friends  in  Swisserland — why  not 
remain  with  them  for  some  time  ?     France  may  grow  tranquil 


368  LETTEES.  [1791 

on  the  King's  acceptance  and  the  general  amnesty ;  and  as  En- 
gland is  at  perfect  peace  with  them,  and  will  certainly  remain 
so,  they  will  undoubtedly  encourage,  not  discourage,  English 
travellers.  Well!  may  you  he  inspired  with  what  is  best  for 
you !     I  shall  only  weary  you  with  my  anxiety.    Adieu  ! 

The  next  letter,  of  October  3rd,  was  addressed  to 
Augsburg. 

Park  Place,  Monday,  Oct.  3, 1791. 

I  had  exhausted  Basle,  was  at  the  end  of  my  map,  and  did 
not  know  a  step  of  my  way  farther,  when  on  Saturday  I  was  so 
happy  as  to  receive  two  letters  at  once,  bidding  my  pen  drive  to 
Augsburg.  Your  dates  were  of  the  11th  and  16th  September, 
and  you  was  to  leave  Florence  on  the  morrow.  I  do  not  won- 
der at  Mrs.  Legge*  for  liking  to  accompany  you  to  Bologna; 
but  tho'  my  justice  can  excuse  her,  I  do  not  love  her  a  bit  the 
better  for  detaining  you  two  days,  for  which  I  am  sure  of  being  out 
of  pocket  in  November,  "With  more  days  I  shall  part  with  plea-r 
sure,  if,  as  you  seem  to  intend,  you  prefer  the  road  thro'  Ger- 
many, provided  Brussels  is  quite  tranquil,  which  the  newspapers, 
which  I  never  believe  but  quand  il  s'agit  de  vous,  represent  as 
still  growling.  I  hope  Mr.  Berry  has  no  more  courage  than  I 
have,  but  will  listen,  like  a  hare  in  its  form,  to  every  yelp  even 
of  a  puppy. 

I  trust  you  have  received  my  letter  in  which  I  explained  that 
I  never  thought  of  your  settling  at  Cliveden  in  November. 
When  I  proposed  your  landing  at  Strawberry,  it  was  because  I 
thought  your  house  in  Audley  Street  was  let  till  Christmas ;  and 
I  remembered  your  description  (for  what  do  I  forget  that  you 
have  told  me  ?)  of  how  uncomfortable  you  found  yourselves  at  y' 
last  arrival  from  abroad.  A  house  in  which  you  would  be  as 
much  at  home  as  in  your  own,  would  be  preferable  to  an  hotel — 
7)iais  voila  qui  est  fini.  I  did,  and  certainly  do  still  hope,  that 
when  you  shall  have  unpacked  y'^selves,  shall  have  received  and 
returned  some  dozen  of  double  kisses  from  and  to  all  that  are 
delighted  to  see  you  again,  or  are  not,  you  will  give  a  couple  of 
days  at  Strawberry,  that  on  the  morning  of  the  second  I  may 

*  Wife  of  Heneage  Legge,  Esq.,  of  Aston  in  Staffordshire.  She,  with 
her  husband,  had  been  spending  all  the  summer  at  Florence  and  in  its 
immediate  neighbourhood. — M.B, 


1791]  WALPOLE'S   hopes   AND  FEARS.  369 

carry  you  to,  and  install  and  invest  you  with,  Cliveden.  To  that 
day  I  own  I  look  with  an  eagerness  of  impatience  that  no  words 
would  convey,  unless  they  could  paint  the  pulse  of  fifteen  when 
it  has  been  promised  some  untasted  joy,  for  which  it  had  long- 
hoped  and  been  denied,  and  which  seldom  answers  half  the  ex- 
pectation ;  and  there  I  shall  have  the  advantage,  if  I  live  to 
attain  it — for  my  felicity  cannot  but  be  complete  if  that  day 
arrives ! 

Here  is  nobody  but  Mrs.  Damer  and  Madame  de  Cambis,  and 
I  am  glad  there  is  not.  I  shall  return  home  on  Wednesday,  and  at 
the  end  of  the  week  shall  hope  to  receive  a  direction  farther,  but 
scarce,  I  doubt,  shall  know  so  soon  that  your  final  determination 
on  y""  route  is  fixed.  The  company  is  come  in  from  walking, 
and  I  should  not  have  time  to  write  more  if  I  had  wherewithal, 
but  the  totality  of  my  intelligence  is  bounded  to  the  death  of 
Lord  Craven,  who  this  morning's  Eeading  paper  says  is  dead,  of 
which  an  express  came  last  night,  and  it  is  probably  credible, 
as  his  house  is  so  near  Eeading.  The  moment  the  courier 
arrives  at  Lisbon,  I  suppose  the  new  Margravine*  will  notify 
her  marriage  and  accession  to  the  devout  Queen  of  Portugal, 
who  will  bless  herself  that  she  is  made  an  honest  woman — if 
a  heretic  can  be  so.     Adieu !  adieu ! 

In  the  last  published  letter  of  Mr.  Walpole's  to  the 
Miss  Berrys  on  their  journey,  dated  October  9th,f  and 
directed  to  Augsburg,  he  sums  up  his  great  anxieties ;  to 
which  he  adds  : — 

[It  will  be  a  year  to-morrow  since  you  set  out.  ...  I 
have  still  a  month  of  apprehensions  to  come  for  both !  All 
this  mass  of  vexation  and  fears  is  to  be  compensated  by  the 
transport  of  your  return,  and  by  the  complete  satisfaction  on 
your  installation  at  CHveden.  But  could  I  have  believed  that 
when  my  clock  had  struck  74,  I  could  pass  a  year  in  such 
agitations !] 

On  the  28th  of  October  Mr.  Berry  and  his  daughters 
reached  Paris,  and  here,  unfortunately,  during  their  short 

*  Elizalietli  Berkeley,  Lady  Craven. 
t  Published  in  1846. 

VOL.  I.  B  B 


37  0  LETTERS.  [1791 

stay,  the  Journal  ceases.  The  only  entry  made  in  one  of 
Miss  Berry's  note-books,  relating  to  Madame  de  Stael, 
betrays  some  little  feelings  of  mortification  at  the  change 
that  had  taken  place  in  her  former  acquaintance's  manner. 

We  returned  from  Italy  to  Paris  the  end  of  October  1791, 
and  found  her  the  Swedish  Ambassadress  in  the  Eue  de 
Bac,  in  the  height  of  her  passion  for  Talleyrand.  Sup  at  her 
house,  invited  by  her  husband,  who  sees  us  every  day.  She, 
too  much  occupied  with  her  passion  de  s'apercevoir  de  mon 
existence. 

The  two  following  letters  were  directed  to  Brussels,  and 
forwarded  to  Paris  ;  the  third  and  last  was  addressed  to 
Paris. 

Strawberry  Hill,  Sunday,  Oct.  16,  1791. 

You  had  said  you  would  write  from  Padua  if  you  found  a  good 
opportunity ;  but  I  have  not  received  a  letter  thence ;  I  am  not 
much  disappointed,  as  I  saw  I  had  only  a  chance ;  and  besides 
have  prepared  myself  for  miscarriages,  while  you  are  on  the 
road,  resting  my  consolation  on  the  trust  of  seeing  you  soon,  and 
knowing  that  from  Venice  every  mile  will  bring  you  nearer.  I 
call  a  month  soon,  but  only  with  reference  to  the  twelve  that 
are  gone.  That  month  may  be  composed  of  five  or  six  weeks^ 
and  my  impatience  is  not  apt  to  treat  my  Almanac  with  super- 
numerary days — but  I  will  add  a  codicil  of  philosophy  to  the 
eagerness  I  have  betrayed,  in  hopes  of  effacing  some  of  it,  and 
making  a  better  impression  against  we  meet ! 

Having  no  letter,  and  no  direction  beyond  Augsburg,  this 
will  be  an  adventurer  without  credentials,  and  will  take  its 
chance  for  your  finding  it  at  Brussels.  Having  no  other  busi- 
ness than  merely  to  welcome  you  so  far,  it  shall  be  brief.  News 
I  have  none,  nor  will  you  have  missed  any  by  being  on  the 
road. 

The  dowager  Lady  Effingham  is  dead  and  makes  a  vacancy  in 
the  Queen's  bedchamber,  which  it  is  supposed  will  be  filled  by 
the  younger  Lady  Ailesbury,  Lady  Cardigan,  or  Lady  Howe. 

Mrs.  Jordan,  whom  Mr.  Ford  had  declared'  his  wife  and  pre- 
sented as  such  to  some  ladies  at  Eichmond,  has  resumed  her 
former  name,  and  is  said  to  be  much  at  a  principal  villa  at 


1791]  ■  WALPOLE    ROBBED   BY  A   SERVANT.  371 

Petersham,  -which  I  do  not  affirm— far  be  it  from  me  to  vouch 
a  quarter  of  what  I  hear.  If  I  let  my  memory  listen,  it  is  that 
I  may  have  some  ingredients  for  my  letters,  and  to  which  you 
are  apprised  not  to  give  too  much  credit,  tho',  while  absent,  it 
is  natural  to  like  to  hear  the  breath  of  the  day,  which  at  home 
you  despise,  as  it  commonly  deserves. 

Berkeley  Square,  Tuesday,  IStli. 
I  am  come  to  town  suddenly  and  unexpectedly ;  my  footman 
John  had  pawned  a  silver  strainer  and  spoon,  which  not  being 
found  out  till  now,  as  it  had  been  done  here,  he  ran  away  in  the 
night,  and  I  have  been  forced  to  come  and  see  if  he  had  done  no 
worse,  which  I  do  not  find  he  has — and  I  want  another  footman  in 
his  room.  I  received  yours  from  Padua  and  Venice  last  night, 
but  with  no  further  direction.  I  had  begun  this,  and  now  cannot 
finish  it,  for  the  post  is  going  out,  and  by  coming  so  unexpected, 
I  have  neither  ink  nor  pen  to  write  with,  as  you  perceive — but  I 
will  write  again  on  Friday  if  I  receive  any  direction. 

Berkeley  Square,  Oct.  20,  1791. 

I  wrote  to  you  a  very  bit  of  a  letter,  but  two  days  ago,  in  a  great 
hurry  from  being  in  fear  of  being  too  late  for  the  post  from 
various  clashing  circumstances.  This  therefore  is  but  the  second 
part  of  that  letter,  or  rather  an  explanation  of  it.  I  think  I  did 
tell  you  that  I  was  come  to  town  on  a  sudden,  one  of  my  footmen 
having  pawned  a  little  of  my  plate  and  run  away — This  was  very 
true,  and  a  woful  story,  as  you  will  hear — but  I  had  other  mo- 
tives. I  have  had  for  some  time  a  very  troublesome  erysipelas 
on  my  left  arm.  Mr.  Gilchrist,  my  apothecary  at  Twickenham,  is 
dangerously  ill  at  Tunbridge.  Dreading  to  be  laid  up  where  I 
had  no  assistance  nor  advice,  I  determined  to  come  away — and 
did — which  has  proved  fortunate.  Mr.  Watson,  my  oracle,  at- 
tends my  arm,  and  it  is  so  much  better  that  I  passed  the  evening 
yesterday  at  Mrs.  Darner's,  with  Lord  and  Lady  Frederic  Camp- 
bell, Mrs.  and  Miss  Farren,  Lord  Derby,  and  Miss  Jennings, 
and  staid  there  till  past  twelve — but  now  comes  the  dreadful 
part  of  my  story ! 

As  I  rose  out  of  bed,  Philip  told  me  he  would  not  disturb  my 
rest  last  night,  but  before  I  came  home,  a  messenger  had  arrived 
from  Strawberry  to  say  that  at  five  yesterday  in  the  evening  one 

B  B  2 


372  LETTEHS.  [1791 

of  my  gardener's  men  had  in  my  wood-walk  discovered  my  poor 
servant  John's  body  hanged  in  a  tree  near  the  chapel  and  already 
putrified ! — so  he  must  have  dispatched  himself  on  the  Friday 
morning  on  which  he  disappeared— I  had  then  learnt  to  my 
astonishment  that  he  had  not  even  taken  away  his  hat  with  him, 
and  had  dropped  down  from  the  library  window,  a  dangerous 
height !  All  this  it  seems  was  occasioned  by  the  housekeeper,  as 
she  always  does,  locking  all  the  doors  below  as  soon  as  she  knows 
everybody  is  in  bed — and  thus  he  could  not  get  his  hat  out  of  the 
servants'  hall — if  poor  soul !  he  did  look  for  it — probably  not ! 

This  remain  of  shame  and  principle  goes  to  my  heart ! — 
happily  for  me,  I  had  not  even  mentioned  to  him  the  discovery 
that  had  been  made  of  his  pawning  my  plate,  and  Philip  and 
Kirgate  had  urged  him  in  the  kindest  manner  to  confess  it  on 
Thursday  evening,  which  he  then  would  not — but  a  few  hours 
afterwards  owned  it  to  the  coachman,  and  told  him  he  would  go 
away.  I  since  hear  that  he  had  contracted  other  debts,  and 
probably  feared  all  would  be  found  out — and  he  should  be 
arrested  and  thrown  into  prison^by  me  I  am  sure  he  would  not, 
for  I  had  not  even  thought  of  discharging  him — but  should  rather 
have  tried  by  pardoning  to  reclaim  him,  for  I  do  not  think  he 
was  more  than  eighteen  ! — nay,  on  Thursday  evening,  after  I 
knew  the  story,  I  had  let  him  go  behind  my  coach  to  Eichmond 
as  he  used  to  do,  and  had  not  spoken  a  harsh  word  to  him. 

I  beg  y'  pardon  for  dwelling  on  this  melancholy  detail,  but 
you  may  imagine  how  much  it  has  affected  me.  It  is  fortunate 
for  me  I  was  absent  from  Strawb :  when  the  body  was  found.  Kir- 
gate is  gone  thither  this  evening  to  meet  the  coroner  to-morrow  ; 
the  corpse  was  carried  into  my  chapel  in  the  garden — I  shall  cer- 
tainly not  return  thither  before  Monday  at  soonest.  My  greatest 
comfort  is  that  I  cannot  on  the  strictest  inquiry  find  that  even 
an  angry  word  had  been  used  towards  the  poor  young  man.  I 
may  be  blamed  for  taking  his  fault  so  calmly — but  I  know  how 
my  concern  would  be  aggravated  if  a  bitter  syllable  from  me  had 
contributed  to  his  despair  ! 

I  have  written  all  this,  that  you  may  know  the  exact  situation 
of  my  mind,  and  because  I  conceal  nothing  from  you,  and  lest 
from  the  abrupt  conclusion  of  my  last,  you  should  suspect  I  was 
ill.  The  impression  of  the  unhappy  accident  will  wear  off,  as 
I  neither  contributed  to  it,  nor  could  foresee  it  nor  prevent  it. 


1791]  WALPOLE'S   ANTICIPATIOlSiS   AND  PEAES.  373 

I  talk  of  nothing  else  to  you,  because,  except  of  you,  as  you 
see,  and  of  y"^  journey,  I  have  for  these  five  last  days  been 
occupied  only  by  that  adventure,  and  by  my  own  arm.  I  write 
to  Brussels  still,  as  I  compute  that  this  must  arrive  there  before 
you ;  but  to-morrow  or  Saturday  I  shall  hope  for  another  letter ; 
and  amidst  my  distresses  I  am  not  insensible  to  the  hope  of 
November  having  a  most  happy  sera  in  store  for  me !  Adieu ! 
Adieu ! 

P.S. — As  I  understand  that  you  do  not  go  to  Basle,  but  have 
ordered  the  letters  sent  thither  to  meet  you  at  Augsburg,  here 
are  my  dates,  that  you  may  know  whether  you  receive  all.  To 
Venice,  Sept.  6 ;  to  Basle,  Sept.- 12,  20,  27  ;  to  Augsburg,  Oct. 
4,11;  to  Brussels,  18,  20. 

Berkeley  Square,  Oct.  27, 1791. 

Nobody  could  be  more  astonished  than  I  was  last  night !  Mr. 
C.  and  Lady  A.  are  in  town  for  a  few  days,  and  I  was  to  sup 
with  them  after  the  play  at  Mrs.  D.'s,  whither  I  went  at  nine, 
and  found  her  reading  a  letter  from  you,  saying  that  you  should 
be  at  Paris  to-day,  the  27th.  I  did  not  know  whether  her  eyes 
or  my  ears  had  lost  their  senses  !  I  had  had  no  letter  from  you 
after  your  first  from  Venice,  and  was  reckoning  that  you  would 
be  at  Brussels  by  the  beginning  of  next  week.  To  think  you 
are  so  near  me  to-day  gave  me  a  burst  of  pleasure ;  but  it  was 
soon  checked.  I  am  not  sure  you  are  there!  Can  I  be  sure 
you  have  arrived  there  without  any  embarras  ? — can  I  be  certain 
that  while  you  stay  there  everything  will  remain  as  quiet  as  it 
has  done  lately  ?  I  have  no  reason,  it  is  true,  to  apprehend  the 
contrary ;  but  Reason's  logic  is  lost  against  Affection's  assertions, 
and  you  may  guess  whether  I  can  be  overjoyed  at  y''  being  at 
Paris — or  anywhere  that  is  not  as  tranquil  as  the  Fortunate 
Islands ! 

My  next  surprise,  tho'  marvellously  inferior,  is,  that  tho'  you 
have  received  all  my  letters,  even  the  5th,  you  should  still  ask 
Mrs.  D.  whether  I  wish  you  to  land  at  Strawberry  Hill  first.  I 
think  I  have  over  and  over  explained  that  I  do  not  wish  it ; — 
nay,  thought  it  would  be  very  uncomfortable  to  you,  till  you  had 
unpacked  y'selves,  seen  some  few  persons,  adjusted  y"'  family, 
&c. ;  nay,  if  your  arrival  were  known,  and  that  you  are  not  in 
London,  you  would  be  tormented  with  letters,  notes,  questions, 
and  after  that  be  stiU  to  rest  and  settle  y'selves.     To-day  I  have 


374  MISS  beeky's  journal.  [1791 

had  the  satisfaction  of  three  letters  at  once  from  you,  from 
Venice,  Inspruck,  Augsburg.  Mr.  "Watson  has  consented  to  let 
me  go  to  Strawberry  for  two  or  three  days,  where  I  have  left 
my  family,  my  bills  unpaid,  &c. ;  and  if  I  did  not  settle  those 
things  before  the  moments  of  expecting  you,  I  should  be  in  a 
confusion  very  inconvenient  and  distressing.  I  shall  now  finish 
all  my  business,  return  to  Mr.  "Watson,  and  be  well  and  quiet, 
and  fit  to  receive  you,  first  here  in  town,  and  then  at  Straw- 
berry, and  have  the  installation.  Be  assured  that  this  plan  is  the 
safest  and  best  I  can  form ;  and  as  you  know  how  earnest  I  am 
to  be  well  at  y'  return,  you  may  be  certain  I  would  do  nothing 
to  counteract  a  plan  that  has  been  rooted  in  my  head  and  heart 
for  twelve  months.  Pray  do  not  reprove  me  for  it ;  your  reproof 
would  not  be  in  time  to  stop  me ;  and  as  I  trust  you  will  find 
me  quite  well,  tho'  much  older  than  you  would  expect  in  a  year, 
let  all  my  faults  and  impatience  be  forgotten,  that  our  meeting 
again,  which  I  doubted  might  not  happen,  may  be  as  cloudless, 
as  to  me,  I  am  sure,  it  will  be  much  greater  happiness  than  I 
thought  could  fall  to  the  lot  of  seventy-five ! 

I  reserve  all  answer  to  y''  three  last  letters  till  we  meet,  when 
we  may  talk  of  them  and  of  all  you  have  seen  and  done.  At 
present  nothing  occupies  me  but  y""  actual  residence  and 
route  home,  and  y'  passage  from  Calais  to  Dover :  we  have  had 
tremendous  storms  lately  !  I  shall  grow  very  sea-sick  towards 
the  tenth  of  next  month !  Adieu  !  I  hope  this  will  be  my  last  to 
the  Continent,  and  that  I  shall  not  even  reach  to  No.  60. 


JOUENAL. 

Monday,  November  7th. — Left  Paris  at  half-past  6  a.m. 
Eeached  13reteuil  at  4  p.m.  ;  the  road  the  whole  way  very 
good.  A  number  of  handsome  chateaux  on  every  side 
between  Clermont  and  Paris.  Met  three  English  carriages 
going  to  Paris. 

Tuesday,  8th. — Left  Breteuil.  Eeached  Montreuil  in  thir- 
teen hours ;  the  roads  excellent,  and  the  posts  well  served 

Wednesday,  9th. — Left  Montreuil.   Arrived  at  Boulogne 


1791]  .         SAFE   RETUEX   HOME.  375 

in  four  liours  and  a  half.  The  master  of  the  hotel  there 
persuaded  us  that,  both  the  wind  and  tide  being  fair  for 
us,  we  should  have  a  shorter  passage  thence  than  from 
Calais  ;  we  stopped,  therefore,  at  his  house,  but  we  had 
missed  the  morning  tide  by  about  an  hour,  and  must 
therefore  wait  till  between  ten  and  eleven  o'clock  at  night, 
so  we  resolved  to  go  on  to  Calais.  Finding  the  wind 
tolerably  fair,  and  it  being  full  moon  and  a  fine  night, 
agreed  to  sail  at  eleven  o'clock,  when  the  tide  served. 

Left  the  Lion  d'Argent  at  half-past  nine,  as  one  cannot 
get  out  of  the  gates,  even  on  foot,  after  that  hour.  Sat 
about  an  hour  in  a  little  dirty  house  on  the  port.  Entered 
our  vessel  a  few  minutes  before  eleven ;  got  under  way. 
The  wind  fell  about  midnight,  and  we  were  obhged  to  lay 
to  for  a  considerable  time.  Landed  at  Dover  pier  at  half- 
past  nine  o'clock  on  Thursday  morning.  Paid  for  the 
packet  five  guineas  and  one  guinea  for  the  carriage  ;  gave 
two  guineas  to  the  captain  (Sayer)  and  crew.  Left  Dover 
at  3  P.M. ;  arrived  at  Canterbury  at  six. 

Friday,  Wth. — Eeached  North  Audley  Street  in  about 
ten  hours. 

Mr.  Walpole's  anxiety  for  the  return  of  his  friends  had 
induced  them  to  alter  their  plans  and  give  up  their  inten- 
tion of  remaining  abroad  during  the  winter.  It  was  a 
kind  sacrifice  ;  and  even  if  he  had  been  a  little  unreason- 
able in  his  wish  for  their  return,  it  was  a  very-proper 
sacrifice  for  those  in  the  flower  of  youth  to  make  to  the 
feehngs  of  so  warm  a  friend,  on  whom  the  infirmities  of 
age  and  disease  had  sorely  pressed  during  their  absence. 

Mr.  "Walpole  had  provided  for  their  reception  the  former 
abode  of  his  friend  and  neighbour  Kitty  Clive ;  and 
'  CHveden,'  as  he  calls  it  in  his  letters,  though  better  known 
now  by  the  name  of  Little  Strawberry  Hill,  became  from 
that  time  till  long  after  his  death  the  country  residence  of 
the  Miss  Berrys  and  their  father. 


376  LETTERS.  -  [1791 

On  December  5th,  the  month  following  their  return, 
Mr.  Walpole's  nephew  George,  third  Earl  of  Orford,  died, 
and  the  title,  'with  a  small  estate  loaded  with  debt,' 
devolved  upon  him.  The  inheritance  was  far  from  wel- 
come. In  a  letter  to  a  friend,  he  says  he  does  not  under- 
stand the  management  of  such  an  estate,  and  is  too  old  to 
learn. 

[A  source  of  lawsuits  amongst  my  near  relations,  endless 
conversations  with  lawyers  and  packets  of  letters  to  read  every 
day,  and  answers, — all  this  weight  of  new  business  is  too  much 
for  the  rag  of  life  that  yet  hangs  about  me.]* 

Mr.  Walpole's  (now  Lord  Orford)  anxious  wish  for  the 
return  of  his  friends,  and  for  their  estabhshment  at  Clive- 
den, appears  to  have  been  made  the   subject  of  some 
offensive  observations  in  a  newspaper.     The  anonymous 
writer  evidently  inflicted  much  pain  by  this  unprovoked 
attack  on  those  whose  lives  and  actions  were  as  strictly 
private  as  they  were  blameless  ;  and  the  correspondence 
to  which  these  paragraphs  gave  rise  are  touching  proofs 
of -the  deep  and  delicate  affection  entertained  by  Lord 
Orford  for  his  young  friends,  and  of  the   high-spirited 
indignation  with  which  Miss  Berry  repudiated,  for  herself 
and  family,  such  unworthy  or  interested  motives  as  had 
apparently  been  attributed  to  their  friendship  for  one  to 
whom  every  grateful  attention  on  their  part  was  due. 

From  Lord  Orford. 

Oct. 
You  have  hurt  me  excessively  I  We  had  passed  a  most  agree- 
able evening,  and  then  you  poisoned  all  by  one  cruel  word.  I 
see  you  are  too  proud  to  like  to  be  obliged  by  me,  tho'  you  see 
that  my  greatest,  and  the  only  pleasure  I  have  left,  is  to  make 
you  and  y'  sister  a  little  happier  if  I  can ;  and  now,  when  it  is 
a  little  more  in  my  power,  you  cross  me  m  trifles  even,  that 
would  compensate  for  the  troubles  that  are  fallen  on  me.     I 

*  Vide  Letter  to  John  Pinkerton,  Esq.,  Dec.  26, 1791. 


1791]  MISS   BEEEY's   INDEPENDEXT   SPIRIT.  377 

thought  my  age  would  allow  me  to  have  a  friendship  that  con- 
sisted in  nothing  but  distinguishing  merit — you  allow  the  vilest 
of  all  tribunals,  the  newspapers,  to  decide  how  short  a  way 
friendship  may  go !  Where  is  your  good  sense  in  this  conduct  ? 
and  will  you  punish  me,  because  what  you  nor  mortal  being 
can  prevent,  a  low  anonymous  scribler  pertly  takes  a  liberty 
with  y"^  name  ?  I  cannot  help  repeating  that  you  have  hurt  me ! 
To  Miss  Mary  Berry. 

From  Miss  Berry. 

Friday  night,  Oct.  12. 

I  did  not  like  to  show  you,  nor  did  I  myself  feel  while  with 
you,  how  much  I  was  hurt  by  the  newspaper.  To  be  long 
honoured  with  your  friendship  and  remain  unnoticed,  I  knew 
was  impossible,  and  laid  my  account  with ;  but  to  have  it 
imagined,  implied,  or  even  hinted,  that  the  purest  friendship 
that  ever  actuated  human  bosoms  should  have  any  possible  ^ , 
foundation  in,  or  view  to  interested  motives  |  and  that  we,  whose 
hereditar^ljmglect  jjfLJiortune  jias  deprived  us  of  what  might,  ,  t 
and  ought  to  have  been  our  own,  that  we  should  ever  afterwards 
be  supposed  to  have  it  in  view,  or  be  described  in  a  situation, 
which  must  mislead  the  world  both  as  to  our  sentiments  and 
our  conduct,  while  our  principles  they  cannot  know,  and  if  they 
could,  would  not  enter  into.  All  this  I  confess  I  cannot  bear ; 
not  even  your  society  can  make  up  to  me  for  it. 

Would  to  God  we  had  remained  abroad,  where  we  might 
still  have  enjoyed  as  much  of  your  confidence  and  friendship, 
as  ignorance  and  impertinence  seem  likely  to  allow  us  here. 

Even  Cliveden,  which  sensible  as  I  am  to  the  compliment  of 
settling  us  near  you,  I  declare  I  consider  as  our  least  obligation 
to  you,  if  it  is  always  to  be  foremost  in  the  eyes  of  the  world, 
and  considered  as  the  cause  of  our  affection  for,  and  attentions 
to  you.  If  our  seeking  your  society  is  supposed  by  those  igno- 
rant of  its  value,  to  be  with  some  view  beyond  its  enjoyment, 
and  our  situation  represented  as  one,  which  will  aid  the  belief 
of  this  to  a  mean  and  interested  world,  I  shall  think  we  have 
perpetual  reason  to  regret  the  only  circumstance  in  our  lives 
that  could  be  called  fortunate.  Excuse  the  manner  in  which  I 
write,  and  in  which  I  feel.  My  sentiments  on  newspaper  notice 
have  long   been  known  to  you,  with  regard  to  all  who  have 


378  LETTERS.  [1791 

not  so  honourably  distinguished  themselves,  as  to  feel  above 
such  feeble,  but  venomed  shafts. 

Do  not  plague  yourself  by  answering  this.  The  only  conso- 
lation I  can  have  is  in  the  knowledge  of  your  sentimeDts,  of 
which  I  need  no  conviction.  I  am  relieved  by  writing,  and 
shall  sleep  the  sounder  for  having  thus  unburthened  my  heart. 
Good  night. 

From  Lord  Oxford. 

Dec.  13,  1791. 

Mt  deaeest  Angel, — I  had  two  persons  talking  law  to  me, 
and  was  forced  to  give  an  immediate  answer,  so  that  I  could  not 
even  read  y"'  note  till  I  had  done — and  now  I  do  read  it,  it 
breaks  my  heart !  If  my  most  pure  affection  has  brought  grief 
and  mortification  on  you,  I  shall  be  the  most  miserable  of  men. 
My  nephew's  death  has  already  brought  a  load  upon  me  that  I 
have  not  strength  to  bear,  as  I  seriously  told  General  Conway 
this  morning.  Vexation  and  fatigue  have  brought  back  the 
eruption  in  my  arm,  and  I  have  been  half  an  hour  under  Mr. 
Watson's  hands  since  breakfast ;  my  flying  gout  has  fallen  into 
my  foot ;  I  shall  want  but  your  uneasiness  to  finish  me.  You 
know  I  scarce  wish  to  live  but  to  carry  you  to  Cliveden !  But  I 
talk  of  myself  when  I  should  speak  to  your  mind.  Is  all  your 
felicity  to  be  in  the  power  of  a  newspaper  ?  who  is  not  so  ?  Are 
your  virtue  and  purity,  and  my  innocence  about  you ;  are  our 
consciences  no  shield  against  anonymous  folly  or  envy  ?  Would 
you  only  condescend  to  be  my  friend  if  I  were  a  beggar  ?  The 
Duchess  of  Gloucester,  when  she  heard  my  intention  about 
Cliveden,  came  and  commended  me  much  for  doing  some  little 
justice  to  injured  merit.  For  your  own  sake,  for  poor  mine, 
combat  such  extravagant  delicacy,  and  do  not  poison  the  few 
days  of  a  life,  which  you  and  you,  only  can  sweeten.  I  am  too 
exhausted  to  write  more ;  but  let  y"^  heart  and  y""  strong  under- 
standing remove  such  chimeras.  How  could  you  say  you  wish 
you  had  not  returned ! 

To  Mis8  Mary  Berry. 

I  am  in  the  utmost  anxiety  to  know  how  you  do.  I  dread 
lest  what  I  meant  kindly  should  have  made  you  ill.  I  saw  the 
struggle  of  both  y""  noble  minds  in  submitting  to  oblige  me, 
and  therefore  all  the  obligation  is  on  my  side.     You  both  have 


1791]  walpole's  generosity.  379 

made  the  greatest  sacrifice  to  me  ;  I  have  made  none  to  you — 
on  the  contrary,  I  relieve  my  own  mind, whenever  I  think  I  can 
ward  off  any  future  difficulty  from  you,  tho'  not  a  ten  thousandth 
part  of  what  I  would  do  were  it  in  my  power.  All  I  can  say  is, 
that  you  must  know  by  your  own  minds  how  happy  you  have 
made  mine,  and  sure  you  will  not  regret  bestowing  happiness 
on  one  so  attached  to  you,  and  attached  so  reasonably;  for 
where  could  I  have  made  so  just  a  choice,  or  found  two  such 
friends  ?  What  did  I  not  feel  for  both !  Your  tears  and  Agnes's 
agitation,  divided  between  the  same  nobleness,  and  her  misery 
for  your  sufferings,  which  is  ever  awake,  wo»ld  attach  me  more 
to  both,  if  that  were  possible.,  Dearest  souls,  do  not  regret 
obliging  one  so  devoted  to  you — it  is  the  only  sincere  satisfaction 
I  have  left ;  and  be  assured  that  till  to-day,  I  have,  tho'  I  said 
nothing,  had  nothing  but  anxiety  since  y""  father's  illness,  so 
impatient  have  I  been  for  what  I  received  but  yesterday ! 
Adieu ! 

To  Miss  Berry. 


380  LETTERS.  [1792 


LETTEES. 

1792. 

Miss  Beeey's  only  entry  for  the  years  1792  and  1793 
is — '  Eemaining  generally  at  Little  Strawberry.  Went  in 
the  summer  for  three  months  to  Yorkshire  to  see  my 
grandmother.' 

In  the  month  of  May  1792,  Lord  Orford,  writing  to 
Lady  Ossory,  speaks  thus  of  his  favourites,  Miss  Berrys  :  — 

[May  29,  1792. 

I  am  indeed  much  obliged  for  the  transcript  of  the  letter  on 
my  '  wives.'  Miss  Agnes  has  a  finesse  in  her  eyes  and  counte- 
nance that  does  not  propose  itself  to  you,  but  is  very  engaging 
on  observation,  and  has  often  made  itself  preferred  to  her  sister, 
who  has  the  most  exactly  fine  features,  and  only  wants  colour 
to  make  her  face  as  perfect  as  her  graceful  person :  indeed, 
neither  has  good  health,  nor  the  air  of  it.  Miss  Mary's  eyes 
are  grave,  but  she  is  not  so  herself:  and  having  much  more 
application  than  her  sister,  she  converses  readily,  and  with  great 
intelligence  on  all  subjects.  Agnes  is  more  reserved,  but  her 
compact  sense  very  striking  and  always  to  the  purpose.  In 
short,  they  are  extraordinary  beings,  and  I  am  proud  of  my 
partiality  for  them ;  and  since  the  ridicule  can  only  fall  on  me, 
and  not  on  them,  I  care  not  a  straw  for  its  being  said  that  I  am 
in  love  with  one  of  them — people  shall  choose  which ;  it  is  as 
much  with  both  as  either,  and  I  am  infinitely  too  old  to  regard 
the  qu^en  dit  o».] 

The  same  fear  of  being  supposed  to  have  any  intention 
of  marrying  gave  rise  to  the  following  lines  : — 

EPITAPHIUM  VIVI  AUCTORIS,  1792. 

An  estate  and  an  earldom  at  seventy-four  !  ■> 

Had  I  souglit  them  or  wisli'd  them,  'twould  add  one  fear  more —  j- 
That  of  making  a  Countess  when  almost  fourscore.  J 


1792]  PAEODT   ON   THE   CREED.  381 

But  Fortune,  wlio  scatters  her  gifts  out  of  season, 
Thougli  unkind  to  my  limbs,  has  still  left  me  my  reason ; 
And  whether  she  lowers  or  lifts  me,  I'll  try  "j 

In  the  plain  simple  style  I  have  liv'd  in,  to  die  :     [■ 
For  ambition  too  humble — ^for  meanness  too  high.  J 

Miss  Berry  warmly  participated  in  the  sentiments  o 
horror  and  indignation,  so  vividly  expressed  on  aU  occa- 
sions by  Horace  Walpole,  at  the  atrocities  of  the  French 
Eevolution  ;  and  though  the  taste  of  parodying  the  Creed 
can  only  be  excused  by  the  general  laxity  of  expression  in 
those  days  on  serious  subjects,  the  point  and  justice  of  its 
weU-merited  satire  cannot  be  denied. 

[August,  1792. 

I  believe  in  the  French,  the  makers  of  all  fashions.  I  ac- 
knowledge their  superiority  in  conversation,  and  their  supremacy 
in  dancing.  I  believe  in  their  fanaticism  for  what  is  new,  not 
in  their  enthusiasm  for  what  is  great,  and  I  expect  neither  con- 
sistency in  their  plans  nor  constancy  in  their  sentiments.  I 
believe  in  the  King,  the  weakest  and  most  injured  of  mortals, 
and  in  the  Queen,  as  equal  to  him  in  sufferings  and  surpassing 
him  in  understanding;  and  in  the  Dauphin,  whose  kingdom 
will  never  come.  I  believe  equally  in  the  folly  of  the  Princes, 
the  baseness  of  their  counsellors,  and  the  cruelty  and  madness 
of  their  enemies. 

I  expect  neither  the  resurrection  of  order,  nor  the  regene- 
ration of  morals,  and  I  look  neither  for  the  coming  of  liberty, 
nor  the  permanence  of  their  constitution.     Amen !] 


382  LETTERS.  [1793 


LETTEES. 
1793. 

Lord  Oefoed's  letters  of  this  year  to  the  Miss  Berrys  have 
been  preserved,  and,  with  the  exception  of  the  following, 
dated  May  29th,  were  addressed  to  them  during  their 
visit  of  three  months  to  their  relatives  in  Yorkshire  : — 

Berkeley  Square,  April  1  (old  style),  May  29  (new  style). 

'  Tenez,  mon  Enfant,  il  n'y  a  que  Moi  qui  ai  toujours  raison.' 
"Was  not  I  in  the  right  to  take  a  fancy  to  Dumourier  ?  He  has 
declared  himself  Duke  of  Albemarle ;  and  sent  to  the  Regicides, 
that  all  the  armies  France  can  raise  now,  w'*  not  be  able  to 
resist  the  mighty  powers  coming  against  them  ;  that  there  must 
be  an  end  of  folly,  and  kingly  government  must  be  restored. 
The  Municipality  got  wind  of  his  intentions,  and  stormed  the 
National  Assembly,  demanding  vengeance  on  Dumourier.  They 
answered  they  were  apprised  of  his  treachery,  and  had  actually 
named  Commissioners  to  fetch  him  to  justice,  with  many  bloody 
resolutions.  Those  five  Commissioners,  of  whom  Bournonville 
was  the  chief,  arrived,  and  were  instantly  clapped  in  chains  by 
Moncke  the  second,  and  sent  by  him,  with  his  compliments,  to 
General  Clairfait,  only  desiring  a  receipt  for  them,  which  he 
granted,  and  has  sent  them  to  Mons. 

Dumourier  harangued  his  army,  whose  pulses,  to  be  sure, 
he  had  previously  felt ;  and  tearing  his  tricolor  cockade  out 
of  his  hat,  took  a  white  one  from  his  pocket,  and  hoisted  it 
above  his  damaged  laurels,  and  was  followed  by  the  whole  army, 
at  least  with  bits  of  white  paper;  and  he  and  they  are  on  full  trot 
to  Paris,  denouncing  bitter  revenge  for  any  mischief  that  may 
ensue  there.  I  hope  this  menace  will  not  have  the  conse- 
quences that  the  Duke  of  Brunswick's  had  !  The  notorious  chiefs 
will  probably  prefer  the  Dauphin  for  King  to  the  Pinchbeck 
Regent,  or  carry  him  and  the  Queen  away  as  hostages  to  the 
South ;  but  what  may  one  not  fear  from  the  brutal  madness  of 
the  mob ! 


1?93]  WALPOLE'S   elation   AT   FEE>'CH   XEWS.  383 

You  may  depend  on  -wtat  I  have  been  relating.  G-en.  Conway 
heard  the  particulars  from  S""  Eob.  Keith,  who  has  seen  L'* 
Auckland's  letter,  which  cites  Clairfait's  dispatch  to  Metternich 
Governor  of  Brussels.  Macbride  has  sent  the  same  account 
from  Ostend,  and  a  like  is  come  from  Dunkirk. 

As  soon  as  I  heard  the  news,  I  went  to  the  Due  de  Fleury,  and 
to  the  Duchesse  de  la  Tremouille,  who  was  dressing,  but  her 
servant  said  the  Due  de  Choiseul  had  been  before  me,  and  I  met 
Mad.  de  Gaud  going  to  her.  I  called  on  Mrs.  Buller,  too,  but 
she  and  her  bishop  are  gone  to  Windsor.  On  you,  you  may 
swear,  I  called,  not  expecting  to  find  you,  but  as  you  are  to 
come  at  six  I  shall  come  up  to  you  soon  after,  but  write  this  for 
you  to  find,  that  I  may  have  the  pleasure  of  being  the  first  to 
acquaint  you  with  such  welcome  news.  Oh,  it  is  not  the  small- 
est part  of  my  joy  that  the  brave  et  loyale  Noblesse  Frangoise 
will  now  leave  us.  I  hope  we  shall  not  be  to  help  reinstate 
them  ;  nor  desire  to  have  Aquitaine  and  Normandy  again  when 
the  High  Allies  are  paying  themselves  for  their  trouble  and 
expense  by  dismembering  that  Monarchy,  as  I  am  persuaded  and 
trust  they  will  do,  especially  as  the  King  of  Prussia  and  Dantzig 
has  declared  he  will  not.  A  bauble  or  two,  such  as  a  Pitt's 
Diamond,  might  he  accepted  here,  if  they  were  not  already  gone 
the  Lord  knows  whither.     Adieu !  for  half  an  hour. 


In  spite  of  Lord  Orford's  frequent  asseverations  that  Ms 
admiration  and  affection  for  the  Miss  Berrys  never  passed 
the  boundaries  of  friendship,  it  was  hardly  to  be  expected 
that  he  should  always  make  others  view  his  devotion  to 
their  society  in  the  same  hght.  The  following  extracts  of 
Miss  Berry's  letter  at  this  time  to  a  friend  show  how 
warmly  she  rejected  the  idea  of  ever  acting  against  those 
high  principles  of  honour  and  disinterestedness  by  which 
she  had  hitherto  been  guided  ;  and  in  doing  so  she  makes 
the  first  allusion  to  be  found  in  any  of  her  papers  and 
journals,  of  that  dangerous  incense  of  flattery,  which  had 
been  so  freely  offered  on  past  occasions,  and  which, 
having  failed  to  satisfy  her  judgment  or  gratify  her  heart, 
had  left  a  taint  of  bitterness  to  succeed  its  ephemeral 
sweetness. 


384  LETTERS.  [1793 

August  20, 1793. 
Mt  Dear  Fkiend, — I  was  thinking  of  writing  to  you  to-day 
when  I  received  your  letter  of  the  17th,  which  puts  the  pen  im- 
mediately into  my  hand.  Your  saying  that  some  circumstances 
you  had  heard  from  your  mother  and  brother  had  made  you 
'  very  thoughtful '  on  my  subject,  leads  me  to  suppose  that  you 
are  not  so  well  informed  as  I  thought  you  were  (as  I  thought  I 
had  myself  informed  you)  of  our  situation.  As  good  fortune  is 
always  exaggerated,  so  bad  is  often  made  worse,  and  ill  nature 
is  perhaps  more  frequently  concerned  in  this  exaggeration  than 
the  other,  for  which  reason  I  will,  when  we  meet,  enter  into  every 
particular  on  the  subject.  At  present,  suffice  it  to  say  that  when 
we  lose  my  father,  we  lose  with  him  the  annuity  of  a  thousand 
a  year  settled  on  him  by  that  brother  who  has  robbed  him  of 
everything  but  the  peace  of  mind  attendant  on  a  guiltless  con- 
science. There  will  then  remain  to  us  an  income  of  700L  a 
year,  or  to  one  of  us  remaining  unmarried  (which  is  the  proper 
light  for  ME  to  consider  the  subject)  of  half  that  sum.  Do  not 
suppose  that  I  have  not  considered,  and  accustomed  myself  to 
consider,  aye,  and  exerted  much  philosophy  in  considering,  how 
little  can  be  done  with  such  a  sum,  and  to  what  insignificance 
it  reduces.  Be  assured  no  mortification,  no  inconveniences 
arising  from  it. 

Nova  mi  facies  aut  inopinata  surget.  , 

Omnia  prsecepi  atque  animo  mecum  ante  peregi." 

And  yet  after  all,  of  how  little  will  it  deprive  me  !  I  shall 
still  be  welcome,  and  be  dear  to  the  warm  hearts  of  one  or 
two  people  who  really  know  me,  and  neglected  by  all  the 
world  beside.  And  what  have  I  ever  been  while  feeling  myself 
the  (often  envied)  possessor  of  natural  advantages,  which  wealth 
could  noTTpurchase,  arid  rank  sighed  for  in  vain?  I  write 
proudly,  for  I  feel  so.  You,  my  dear  friend,  have  not  fol- 
lowed me  through  life ;  you  neither  saw  or  knew  me  in  bril- 
liant scenes,  made  more  dazzling  by  their  novelty,  receiving 
honiagfi^the  more  intoxicating  as  it  was  purely  personal,  sur- 
rounded and  encouraged  by  worldly  principles  and  worldly 
examples ;  in  most  seducing  circumstances  acting  always  up 
to  those  high-flown  principles  of  honour  and  integrity,  to  that 
scrupulous  delicacy  of  mind,  of  which  others  contented  them- 
selves with  talking.    ,    .    .   Forgive  the  burst  of  feeling,  such 


1793]  MISS   BEEEY'S  NOBLENESS   OF  MIND.  385 

as  can  only  be  poured  into  the  bosom  of  partial  friendship,  and 
which  often  overcharges  my  own.  Do  not  think  me  romantic. 
Nobody  is  farther  removed  from  it,  nor  do  I  now  at  all  approve 
my  conduct,  whatever  pride  I  may  feel  in  my  prvriciples.  It  has 
led  to  nothing  but  mortification,  neglect,  and  misunderstanding. 
.  .  .  But  alas  !  I  fear  were  I  now  to  abandon  my  principles 
I  should  only  have  the  humiliating  feeling  of  apostacy,  without 
either  the  cleverness  or  the  confidence  to  profit  by  it.  You 
will  easily  see  how  all  this  applies.  Besides,  although  I  have 
no  doubt  that  Lord  Orford  said  to  Lady  D.  every  word  that  she 
repeated  to  your  brother — for  last  winter,  at  the  time  the  C.'s 
talked  about  the  matter,  he  went  about  saying  all  this  and  more 
to  everybody  that  would  hear  him, — but  I  always  thought  it 
rather  to  frighten  and  punish  them  than  seriously  wishing  it 
himself.  And  why  should  he  ?.  when,  without  the  ridicule  or  the 
trouble  of  a  marriage,  he  enjoys  almost  as  much  of  my  society, 
and  every  comfort  from  it,  that  he  could  in  the  nearest  connec- 
tion ?  As  the  willing  offering  of  a  grateful  and  affectionate  heart, 
the  time  and  attentions  I  bestow  upon  him  have  hitherto  given 
me  pleasure.  Were  they  to  become  a  duty,  and  a  duty  to  which 
the  world  would  attribute  interested  motives,  they  would  be- 
come irksome.  Of  the  world,  its  meanness,  its  total  indifference 
to  everything  but  interest,  in  some  shape  or  other,  be  assured 
you  cannot  think  so  badly  nor  so  truly  as  I  do.  *  They  best ' 
believe  'it  who  have  felt  it  most-' 

In  Lord  Orford's  letter  to  the  Miss  Berrys,  dated 
September  17th,  he  thus  affectionately  alludes  to  the  great 
addition  to  his  happiness  produced  by  his  friendship  with 
them,  and  also  of  his  motives  for  allowing  some  to  think 
that  he  had  other  views  at  heart  towards  them : — 

[I  have  been  threescore  years  and  ten  lookiug  for  a  society  that 
I  perfectly  like,  and  at  last  there  dropped  out  of  the  clouds  into 
Lady  Herries'  room  two  young  gentlewomen,  who  I  so  little 
thought  were  sent  thither  on  purpose  for  me,  that  when  I  was 
told  they  were  the  charming  Miss  Berrys  I  would  not  even  go  to 
the  side  of  the  chamber  where  they  sat.  But  as  Fortune  never 
throws  anything  at  one's  head  without  hitting  one,  I  soon  found 
that  the  charming  Berrys  were  precisely  ce  qu'il  me  fallait, 

VOL.  I.  C  C 


386  LETTEES.  [1793 

and  that  tho'  young  enough  to  be  my  great-granddaughters, 
lovely  enough  to  turn  the  heads  of  all  our  youths,  and  sensible 
enough,  if  said  youths  have  any  brains,  to  set  all  their  heads  to 
rights  again, — yes,  sweet  damsels,  I  have  found  that  you  can 
bear  to  pass  half  your  time  with  an  ante-diluvian  without  disco- 
vering any  ennui  or  disgust,  tho'  his  greatest  merit  towards  you 
is  that  he  is  not  one  of  those  old  fools  who  fancy  they  are  in 
love  in  their  dotage.  I  have  no  such  vagary,  tho'  I  am  not  sorry 
that  some  folks  think  I  am  so  absurd,  since  it  frets  their 
selfishness.] 

Lord  Orford's  correspondence  with  the  Miss  Berrys 
was  very  frequent  during  their  absence  in  Yorkshire. 
The  three  following  letters  ate  amongst  those  addressed  to 
them  in  September : — 

Tuesday,  3  o'clock,  Sept.  24, 1793. 

You  ordered  me  to  write  tomorrow,  that  you  may  receive  this 
on  Friday.  I  begin  to  obey  you  on  St.  Morrow's  vigil — a  good 
deal  out  of  humour — not  with  you,  more  than  I  always  am,  but 

with  that  Hen-Belial,  Mrs  A .     As  the  busybody  had  told 

me  that  the  Duchess  of  York  talked  of  coming  hither  to-day, 
I  could  not  help  being  prepared,  tho'  I  did  not  trust  to  such 
authority,  and  had  received  no  formal  notice  as  I  had  been  pro- 
mised. In  short,  I  was  ready  by  noon,  my  fires  lighted,  and  my 
whole  house  made  as  spruce  as  beer.  You  will,  scold  me  for 
having  believed  what  I  did  not  believe,  for  can  any  truth  come 
out  of  Nazareth  ?  But  consider,  I  had  a  better  motive  for  cre- 
dulity than  young  NicKs.  I  had  been  told  the  visit  should  be  made 
at  the  end  of  last  week,  or  at  the  beginning  of  this.  Now,  pray 
ladies,  when  a  week  never  yet  contained  more  than  seven  days, 
by  what  almanack  can  its  beginning  last  longer  than  Tuesday  ? 
Wednesday  or  Thursday  may  quarrel  for  the  middle,  but  should 
it  be  given  even  for  the  former,  y'^  argument  will  not  be  a  jot 
the  better,  for  here  at  a  good  three  of  the  clock,  I  have  received 
no  notice  to  expect  her  Eoyal  Highness  tomorrow,  and  which 
of  the  three  last  days  are  to  be  created  the  first,  I  do  not  pretend 
to  guess.  The  sum  total  is,  that  I  am  extremely  distressed  and 
kept  in  suspense,  and  cannot  go  to  town,  as  I  want  to  do,  and 
yet  must  wait  till  I  am  delivered  of  my  princess. 

The  Gazette  will  reach  you  sooner  than  this,  and  will  have 
told  several  welcome  articles,  as  Elphinstone's  noble  preserva- 


1793]      CAPTURE   OF  THE   FRENCH   FLEET  AT  TOULON.        387 

tion  of  Toulon,  the  reprisal  of  Menin,  and  the  reveil  of  the  Duke 
of  Brunswick,  whom  the  French  were  so  silly  as  to  awaken  by  a 
drum  at  his  ear,  and  paid  for  disturbing  him.  To-day's  Trwe 
BHton  says  O'Hara  is  to  command  at  Toulon.  No  mortal  more 
fit,  but  I  hope  he  will  not  be  wanted.  The  honest  men  of  the 
Convention,  who  speak  truth  as  conscientiously  as  Mrs.  A.,  have 
told  the  Parisians  that  Caxteaux*  was  marching  to  the  relief 
of  Toulon  with  forty  thousand  men.  Capt.  Elphinstone,  who 
had  no  very  obvious  reason  for  depreciating  his  own  victory, 
reduces  that  beaten  army  to  about  eight  hundred.  One  may 
presume  that  the  Convention  are  a  little  nearer  to  the  truth 
when  they  paint  so  deplorably  the  annihilation  of  their  marine 
by  the  capture  of  their  fleet  at  Toulon. 

This  is  all  I  know  or  am  likely  to  know  before  this  sets  out 
tomorrow.  I  do  not  mind  its  brevity;  you  will  have  long 
ones  enough  before  two  months  are  gone  and  over ! 

I  am  impatient  for  the  account  of  your  journey.  It  rained 
outrageously  yesterday  from  two  to  four,  and  has  not  been  dry 
this  afternoon.  How  did  Agnes  bear  travelling  ?  Well,  I  long 
to  hear.    How  did  you  find  good  grandmama  ?  | 

Well,  I  will  add  no  more,  when  I  have  really  nothing  to  say ; 
but  let  it  be  a  precedent,  when  you  have  anything  better  or  else 
to  do — as  you  must  have — I  have  not;  and  when  I  take  up 
so  much  of  y''  time  here,  it  would  be  most  unjust  and  unfair  to 
keep  you  employed,  when  in  the  midst  of  y'  family  and  old 
friends,  of  whom  you  see  so  little.  Adieu ! 

Ditto,  P.S.  at  night. 
Just  as  I  had  begun  my  dinner,  I  received  a  note  from  Greneral 
Bude  to  tell  me  the  D''  of  York  was  but  then  returned  from  Wind- 
sor (whither,  I  suppose,  she  had  been  to  see  her  Augustan  and 
Adolphian  brother-in-law),  and,  recollecting  her  engagement 
with  me,  would  come  tomorrow  about  noon,  if  not  a  very  bad 

*  On  August  30th  the  French  republican  General  Carteaux  appeared 
with  a  force  of  800  men,  some  cavalry,  and  10  pieces  of  camion,  at  two 
places  about  six  miles  from  Toulon.  Captain  Elphinstone,  R.N.,  ■with  a 
force  of  600,  dislodged  them,  capturing  their  cannon,  ammunition,  flags,  &c. 

Ann.  Reg. 
t  Mrs.  Seton,  Miss  Berry's  grandmother,  then  living  with  her  daughter, 
Lady  Cayley,  of  Brompton  in  Yorkshire,  to  whom  the  Miss  Berrys  had 
gone  to  make  a  visit. — M.B. 

c  c  2 


388  LETTEES.  [1793 

morning,  and  if  not  inconvenient  to  me.  Padrona,  but  I 
shall  pray  for  fair  weather,  for  it  will  be  sad  to  put  off  my 
going  to  London  again.  I  tried  at  my  dessert  to  have  eaten  y*" 
healths  in  your  melon.  I  hope  they  are  better  than  it,  for  it 
was  as  hard  as  a  stone  and  as  white.  I  did  not  attempt  to  save 
the  seeds,  for  I  believe  they  would  thrive  nowhere  but  in  a 
quarry. 

P.S.  the  I  don't  know  how  manyth. — I  had  a  few  lines  to-day 

from  your  Philander,  Mr.  P .    He  wants  me  to  assist  him  in 

consulting  Bishop  Douglas  about  some  point  of  Scottish  history. 

There,  thank  my  stars,  my  whole  commission  ends ; 
Salisbury  and  I  are  luckily  no  friends  ! 

He  does  not  notify  his  marriage  to  me,  nor  begs  my  interest 
with  any  wife  of  mine. 

Should  tomorrow  be  ever  so  brilliant,  I  shall  scarce  have  time 
before  the  post  goes  out,  to  give  you  an  account  of  the  Eoyal 
visit.  It  has  rained  again  all  the  evening,  I  hope  instead  of 
tomorrow.  I  am  sitting  at  home  comfortably,  writing  post- 
scripts to  Yorkshire  without  end. 

Pray,  grandmama,  pray  to  Grod  to  bless  me  and  make  me  a 
good  boy  !  and  pray  keep  my  wives  as  long  as  you  please,  and 
pray  send  them  directly. 

On  the  25tli  of  September  he  writes  them  an  account 
of  a  visit  to  Strawberry  Hill  from  the  Duchess  of  York ; 
on  the  27th  and  29th,  the  following  accounts  of  aU  he  has 
seen  and  heard :  — 

Sept.  27,  Thursday  evening. 

Dont  be  frightened ;  I  am  not  going  to  send  this  away  this 
evening,  having  already  sent  one  to  you  this  morning ;  but  I 
find  I  cannot  reconcile  myself  to  y  absence,  unless  I  am  always 
talking  to  you,  and  that  is  not  so  comfortable  as  your  talking 
to  me. 

I  have  been  at  Oatlands  this  morning,  but  the  Duchess  was 
gone  to  the  Drawing-room  at  St.  James's,  as  in  truth  I  hoped 
she  would  be,  unless  prevented  by  her  foot ;  yet  as  fairy  as  it  is, 
it  is  well  again.  On  the  lawn  before  the  palace  I  found  Bude 
and  young  Nick  just  going  to  mount  their  horses.  I  suppose 
she  had  come  to  learn  the  particulars  of  yesterday,  that  she  may 


1793]  POKTHAIT   OF   MADAME   DU   DEPFAND.  389 

pretend  at  the  Pavilions  to  have  been  of  the  party,  as  she  did 
about  Jerningham.  I  am  sorry  for  Bude;  she  probably  will 
hook  him  into  some  scrape  by  lies  that  she  will  tell  him,  or  say 
that  he  told  her. 

Just  as  I  was  setting  out  I  received  a  note  from  the  Princesse 
d'Hennin  desiring  to  come  to  me  with  a  niece  of  hers  just 
arrived  from  Paris,  who  had  brought  something  for  me  that  the 
Prince  de  Beauvau  had  ordered  by  his  will  to  be  delivered  to 
me.  Surprised  and  impatient  as  I  was  to  know  what,  I  was 
forced  to  beg  to  be  excused  till  I  should  have  made  my  court, 
but  went  the  moment  I  got  back  to  Twickenham, 

What !  thought  I  to  myself,  has  he  been  seized  with  a  peni- 
tent pang,  and  restored  the  papers  of  which  he  defrauded  me 
on  Madame  du  Deffand's  death  ?  I  beg  pardon  of  a  Frenchman 
for  suspecting  him  of  conscience,  or  of  doing  justice  to  an 
Englishman.  I  never  knew  one  of  the  nation  but  that  dear  old 
woman  who  thought  there  was  any  more  justice  due  to  us 
than — at  last,  they  have  shown  they  think  they  owe  to  one- 
another. 

So  you  have  been  guessing  at  my  legacy — never  were  two 
young  ladies  wider  from  the  mark.  The  Princess  and  the 
Prince  de  Poix,  putting  on  funeral  faces  for  the  loss  of  so 
worthy  a  relation  as  the  Marechal,  for  whose  death  you  know 
they  have  not  been  sorry  this  month,  delivered  me  a  transcript 
of  the  article  of  the  will  and — a  picture.  It  is  an  indifferent 
copy  of  the  washed  drawing  that  I  have  of  Madame  du 
Deffand  (but  which  copy  the  judicious  testator  calls  a  print), 
but  instead  of  the  figure  of  the  Duchess  of  Choiseul  in  the 
original,  there  is  a  servant  in  livery  presenting  to  my  dear  old 
friend  a  portrait  of  the  Marechal  de  Beauvau,  not  a  whit  the 
better,  as  she  was  stone  bUnd,  for  its  being  very  like — but  in 
short  it  was  a  present  to  himself  of  his  own  resemblance,  and 
now  one  to  me,  who  value  it  no  more  than  if  I  were  blind  too. 
Here  are  the  words  of  the  curious  bequest : — 

'  J'ai  a  ccEur  que  Ton  fasse  tenir  par  la  premiere  occasion  a 
Mons'  Valpol  une  estampe  representant  Madame  du  Deffand 
qui  est  a  cote  de  la  cheminee  de  ma  chambre :  on  mandera  a 
Mons'  Valpole,  que  cette  dame  nous  ayant  aimes  tons  deux, 
et  ayant  ete  aimee  de  nous,  j'ai  pense  que  son  image  devoit 
appartenir  au   survivant.'     I  loved  her  writings  too,  and  she 


390  LETTERS.  [1793 

left  them  all  to  me ;  the  Prince,  it  seems,  loved  them  better, 
detained  several,  and  did  not  think  that  the  survivor  ought  to 
have  them  even  after  him. 

Sept.  27,  1793,  at  nigM. 
In  my  disconsolate  widowhood  I  have  been  this  evening  with 
the  Cambridges,  and  I  am  glad  I  have,  for  I  have  transacted 
important  business  with  them.  Greorge  was  at  home,  and  he 
as  well  as  the  farrier  are  decidedly  of  opinion  that  Agnes's  mare, 
which  is  worse  for  going  to  London,  will  infallibly  relapse  if 
she  sets  out  for  Yorkshire  before  next  Wednesday ;  and  then  all 
riding  would  be  lost  during  your  journey,  from  which  I  hope  so 
much  benefit  to  your  sister.  I,  as  lord  and  master  in  my  own 
domestic,  have  authorised  Mr.  George  to  lay  an  embargo  oa  the 
mare's  progress  till  further  orders  and  advice  of  the  faculty; 
and  I  think  this  order  of  council  of  so  much  consequence,  that 
I  shall  send  this  away  to-morrow,  tho'  I  had  intended  to  reserve 
it  till  I  had  collected  some  news  for  you  in  town,  whither  I  go 
to-morrow. 

I  have  heard  no  more  of  Besanjon,  and  therefore  doubt  of 
its  revolt;  but  Miss  Cambridge  told  me  news,  for  which  I  am 
truly  concerned.  That  loveliest  and  perfectest  of  all  ancient 
mansions  Cowdry  was  on  Monday  night  last  totally  burnt  to 
the  ground  in  six  hours !  The  Dowager  Lady  Montagu  was  at 
Brighthelmstone,  the  young  lord  abroad,  and  probably  only  a 
few  unintelligent  servants  in  the  house.  It  is  a  grievous  loss  to 
us  Groths ! 

This  summer,  the  sweetest-tempered  ever  bOrn  in  England, 
has  quite  recovered  its  good  humour,  and  to-day  been  enchant- 
ing with  primaeval  verdure.  I  hope  it  has  accompanied  you  to 
Brompton.  I  long  to  hear  of  y  being  arrived  there.  Good- 
night. I  finish  without  any  douceurs ;  my  letters  par  cy,  par  la, 
have  enough  of  them,  I  believe. 

Friday  morning,  half-past  ten. 

P.S Oh,  thank  you,  thank  you !  I  this  moment  receive  y'  note 

from  Ferrybridge ;  y'  half  delights  me,  the  other  half  afflicts  me, 
to  find  my  sweet  Agnes  is  not  better,  but  worse  for  travelling. 
How  I  wish  her  under  the  wing  of  grandmama !  who  I  hope 
will  send  her  back  to  me  quite  well  again. 

The  post-office,  I  believe,  will  think  it  our  honeymoon  still : 
you  have  been  gone  but  five  days,  and  I  have  written  to  you  on 


1793]  WALPOLK'S   SOLICITUDE.  391 

three  of  them  running.  As  you  know  I  am  not  partial  to  the 
moon,  I  shall  desire  to  christen  the  sera  of  my  double  marriage 
our  honey  sun;  but  then  you  must  both  be  in  good  health,  and 
that  alas !  both  of  you  seldom  are  for  two  days  together !  As 
y"  last  night's  letter  will  arrive  here  to-morrow  when  I  shall  be 
in  town,  I  leave  orders  for  it  to  be  sent  after  me  by  the 
coach. 

Sunday  Night,  Sept.  29,  1793. 

Having  written  to  the  bone  all  I  had  to  say,  I  have  let  my 
pen  rest  for  three  days — aye,  but  why  ?  Not  from  a  fit  of  idleness, 
but  I  have  not  received  your  second  letter,  and  which  now  I 
cannot  get  before  Tuesday.  I  expected  it  yesterday,  and  your 
servant  expected  one  too,  but  neither  arrived.  He  may  bear 
his  disappointment  as  stoically  as  he  pleases,  I  have  no  such 
apathy.  You  know  how  apt  I  am  to  be  alarmed  when  I  do  not 
hear  from  you  at  the  moment  I  intend ;  I  imagine  that  one  of 
you  is  ill,  or  that  both  have  been  overturned.  I  can  no  more 
persuade  myself  out  of  all  fears  than  any  one  else  could  persuade 
me  out  of  them,  nobody's  reason  being  half  so  eloquent  as  one's 
own  feelings ;  for  words  only  go  into  the  ear,  die  of  their  own 
sound,  and  never  sink  to  the  heart.  The  post  never  miscarries, 
but  when  it  has  nothing  to  carry,  tho'  persons  pretend  to  have 
written  when  they  have  not.  As  you  promised  to  write  again 
as  soon  as  you  arrived  at  Brompton,  I  can  only  suppose  that 
something  (the  Lord  knows  what)  detained  you,  and  that  you 
did  not  get  thither  till  Friday,  too  late  to  save  the  post ;  or  that 
it  is  too  far  from  the  post-town ;  or  that  a  Yorkshire  Sunday  is 
as  prudish  as  Mrs.  Cambridge,  and  will  let  nobody  move  hand 
or  foot,  tho'  the  tongue  may  gallop  as  fast  as  it  lists,  and  fetch 
and  carry  scandal  all  over  the  parish.  My  chief  dread  is  lest 
Agnes  should  have  been  forced  to  stop  on  the  road :  the  moment 
your  letter  comes  my  eye  will  hurry  over  it  to  look  for  her 
name;  and  as  usual,  till  I  read  it  a  second  time,  I  shall  scarce 
know  what  it  contains. 

I  went  to  town  on  Friday  to  give  orders  about  new  papering 
and  distempering  my  dining  room,  and  it  would  be  finished  in 
ten  days,  if  there  were  one  tradesman  in  London  that  ever 
spoke  truth.  In  half  an  hour  after  my  landing,  walked  into  my 
room  General  Conway,  come  only  for  a  single  day.  In  the 
evening  we  went  together  to  Miss  Farren's,  and  besides  her 


392  LETTERS.  [1793 

duenna-mother,  found  her  at  piquet  with  her  unalterable  Earl 
(of  Derby). — Apropos,  I  have  observed  of  late  years,  that  when 
Earls  take  strong  attachments,  they  are  more  steady  than  other 
men. 

The  next  evening  I  sat  with  Mrs.  Buller  above  two  hours ; 
there  was  her  Unique,*  who  soon  went  down  to  his  violin,  and 
Mr.  Cocks,  a  banker,  Mr.  Churchill  called  on  me  before 
dinner ;  but  from  none  did  I  gather  one  tittle  of  news,  military 
or  naval.  Eumours  there  have  been  for  some  days,  and  still 
are,  of  overtures  having  been  made  from  Brest  to  Lord  Howe — 
but  his  lordship  is  not  rapid ;  he  moves  like  a  king  at  chess  at 
the,  end  of  a  game,  one  square  inch  from  Torbay,  and  the  next 
back  again.  I  do  not  love  to  censure  men  of  a  profession  I  do 
not  at  all  understand,  and  therefore  suppose  there  are  good 
reasons  for  his  stationary  inactivity.  Our  friend  O'Hara  is 
certainly  made  Governor  of  Toulon.  Good  night  for  to-night — • 
I  hope  some  of  the  most  unimportant  of  my  guesses  at  having 
no  letter  may  be  the  true  one ! 

Monday  night. 

Y"  man  James  has  been  here — how  I  thank  him !  and  has 
relieved  my  mind,  and  will  send  me  tranquil  to  bed.  He  had 
been  in  town  this  morning,  and  before  seven  this  evening 
brought  me  y''  letter  to  him,  which  mentioning  no  mishap,  I 
trust  none  happened ;  and  now  I  am  confident  of  receiving  a 
letter  myself  tomorrow,  and  will  reserve  the  rest  of  my  paper  for 
answering  that. 

Tuesday  morning,  10  o'clock,  Oct.  1. 

The  letter  is  come,  and  tells  me  all  I  wished  to  hear,  except 
of  Agnes's  cold;  however,  as  she  carried  it  with  her,  I  hope  the' 
country  will  soon  cure  it,  and  do  everything  else  it  possibly  can 
for  you  both.  Dont  purloin  much  of  y"^  time  from  y'  good 
family  for  me.  My  numerous  letters  to  you  are  my  chief 
amusement,  and  rob  nobody  of  anything  that  is  at  their  service. 
You  can  have  few  events  to  relate  that  I  am  curious  to  hear, 
but  what  regards  yrselves,  and  those  are  of  consequence  to  me 
to  know.  All  Europe  is  engaged  to  furnish  me  with  articles^ 
it  has  not  presented  me  with  one  to-day  yet.  The  changes  you 
wot  of  were  of  the  town's  making,  not  the  King's.     Nobody  is 

*  Her  only  child. 


1793]  MISS  AGNES'S  MAKE   FOKWAEDED   TO   HER.  393 

gone  out  or  in,  but  S'  Gilbert  Elliot,  and  he  is  made  commissioner 
at  Toulon. 

I  am  glad  you  approve  of  our  transactions  about  the  mare, 
James  thought  last  night  that  she  will  be  able  to  set  out  on 
Wednesday,  but  he  is  to  call  on  me  after  seeing  the  Cambridge 
Junto,  and  then  I  shall  know  more,  which  shall  be  in  the  post- 
script.  Adieu !  mes  belles  voyageuses ! 
Y"^  devoted, 
Le  survivant  de  M.  le  Marechal  de  Beauvau — 
His  principality  I  outlived  four  years  ago.* 

P.S. — James  is  come,  and  the  Savii  hold  that  the  mare  may 
safely  go  to  London  on  Wednesday,  and  set  out  for  Brompton 
on  Thursday;  but  the  Infallible  is  to  be  at  Twickenham 
to-night,  and  to  decide  on  the  soundity  or  risk  of  the  journey — 
but  all  that  you  will  learn  fully  from  Miss  Cambridge's  letter 
to  y'  sister,  which  she  has  sent  me  to  frank,  as  I  have. 

In  the  month,  of  October  the  correspondence  is  still 
more  full. 

Strawberry  HiU,  Oct.  2,  1793. 
James  brought  me  most  favorable  testimonials  of  the  mare 
this  morning,  and  Mr.  George  Infallible  came  afterwards  and 
confirmed  the  report,  and  gave  very  prudent  directions,  and  it  was 
settled  that  she  should  go  gingerly  to  London  this  evening,  and 
proceed  to  you  by  easy  stages,  which  may  take  up  about  ten  days. 
All  this  I  determined  to  notify  to  you  to-day.  It  was  as  fine  a 
morning  for  writing  as  heart  could  wish;  but  trifling  away  the  time 
in  reading  the  newspaper,  and  finding  nothing  to-day  to  tell  you 
from  it,  the  neat  old  LadyMurrays  came,aiid  brought  their  friend. 
Lady  Charlotte  Wen  tworth,  with  whom  I  was  acquainted  vicesimo 
sexto  Georgii  Secundi,  to  show  her  my  house ;  but  before  I  could 
begin  my  tale,  hark !  a  most  violent  clap  of  thunder  came  out 
of  an  extempore  dark  cloud,  intended,  no  doubt,  for  the  sultry 
weather  in  July,  or  that  should  have  fallen  on  the  French 
Convention,  and  such  swinging  hail  and  rain,  that  we  could 
scarce  see  one  another.  However,  according  to  the  unexampled 
good  humour  of  this  singular  year,  it  grew  fine  again,  and  they 
saw  the  house.     By  that  time  the  post  was  gone,  and  luckily, 

*  He  means  by  tbe  abolition  of  nobility  in  France. — M.S. 


394  LETTERS.  [1793 

for  behold,  I  have  not  a  word  more  to  say,  and  my  letter  must 
wait  till  some  good  Christian  tells  me  some  truth  or  lie,  which 
you  shall  have  faithfully  without  addition  or  diminution. 

Thursday  niglit,  3rd. 

Your  letter  of  the  SO***,  and  not  of  this  month,  for  a  certain 
reason  that  shall  be  nameless,  arrived  this  morning  in  statutable 
time ;  yet  I  could  not  continue  this.  First  came  my  steward 
from  Crostwick  with  accounts  and  a  lease  to  be  signed.  Then 
the  good  Whelers  from  Eichmond,  where  they  are  to  stay 
about  a  week,  and  then  she  goes  to  the  sea-side  ;  and  last  the 
Duchess  of  Grloucester  and  Lady  Mary  Mordaunt.  The  former 
told  me  she  had  sent  to  invite  you  two  to  the  Pavilions  about  a 
week  ago,  but  found  you  were  gone  to  Yorkshire,  whither  I 
think  I  remember  you  talked  of  going.  By  the  time  I  became 
alone  again,  the  post  must  have  been  got  half  way  to  London, 
and  there  did  not  seem  anything  so  important  in  this  letter,  or 
likely  to  be  in  it,  as  to  create  a  necessity  of  sending  a  messenger 
to  town  with  it,  notwithstanding  my  alacrity  at  sending  one ; 
but  I  should  have  been  ashamed  now,  when  I  had  so  heroically 
conquered  that  inclination,  last  week,  on  being  disappointed 
for  two  days  of  your  first  letter  from  Yorkshire.  You  have 
accounted  for  that  delay  pretty  much  as  I  did ;  and  therefore, 
having  discovered  that  I  have  a  little  sense  of  reasoning  when 
I  allow  myself  time,  I  will  try  my  hand  at  it  another  time — tho' 
I  had  rather  have  no  occasion  for  it. 

How  very  happy  I  am  that  you  think  my  dear  Agnes  a  little 
mended  already,  and  that  even  your  kind  grandmother,  who  is  too 
fond  not  to  have  keen  eyes,  foimd  her  much  less  altered  than  you 
expected — but  you  are  like  me,  and  too  easily  alarmed  for  those 
you  love  so  much.  Mrs.  Seton  is  like  me  too  (in  short,  there 
is  a  sort  of  family  likeness  amongst  us)  in  consenting  so  readily 
to  parting  with  you  to  Scarborough.  I  hope  it  will  answer  to 
her,  and  am  persuaded  it  will.  I  have  experienced  such  benefit, 
and  so  astonishingly  sudden,  from  sea-air,  that  I  have  great  trust 
in  it  being  salutary  to  y""  sister. 

Dont  talk  of  sending  me  letters  not  worth  a  farthing.  What 
are  any  letters  worth  but  according  to  the  person  from  whom 
they  come  ?  Do  you  think  that  if  I  had  expected  last  week 
one  of  the  best  letters  that  Madame  de  Sevigne  ever  wrote,  and 


1793]  NEWS   FROM   FRANCE.  395 

that  I  had  never  seen,  but  had  heard  it  was  coining,  I  should 
have  b^en  wretched  for  two  days  because  it  was  not  arrived  ? — 
pho  !  dont  tell  me  of  letters  not  worth  a  farthing — let  me  but 
have  those  I  desire,  and  leave  it  to  me  to  see  the  value  of  them. 

If  the  want  of  matter  and  news,  and  everything  foreign  to 
the  writer  and  receiver,  constitutes  a  trumpery  letter,  behold 
one  that  John  Nichols  would  not  print  in  the  '  London  Maga- 
zine,' where  he  has  condescended  to  preserve  even  Dr.  Johnson's 
notes  to  his  printer,  with  a  number  of  others  equally  illustrating 
nothing.  It  is  certain  that  from  the  different  persons  that  I  have 
seen  for  these  two  days  1  have  not  learnt  a  single  new  fact, 
either  from  London  or  the  Continent ;  but  from  their  own  papers 
I  have  seen  articles  proposed  in  the  Convention  that  stiffen  one 
with  horror.  Would  you  have  believed,  even  three  months 
ago,  that  that  ripaire  of  two-legged  hyenas  could  have  invented 
new  atrocities  to  add  to  their  mass  of  crimes  ?  Oh !  but  they 
could,  they  have !  have  proposed  to  thrust  all  suspected  persons 
— that  is,  all  against  whom  they  have  no  proofs — into  large 
buildings,  undermined  on  purpose  for  blowing  them  up  if  a 
counter-revolution  happens !  I  hope  this  Pandaemoniac  proposal 
was  suggested  by  the  last  sob  of  despair  ! 

How  mankind  is  improved  in  the  manufacture  of  malice  and 
mischief  since  the  Greeks,  inspired  by  the  Goddess  of  Wisdom 
herself,  contrived  so  silly  and  untoward  a  project  as  to  present 
to  a  besieged  town  of  their  enemies  a  Brobdignag  mare  full  of 
armed  men ! 

Well,  to-morrow  is  a  new  day,  and  the  True  Briton  may  help 
me  to  something  more  to  say ;  if  not,  dixi. 

Strawberry  Hill,  Oct.  10, 1793. 

As  far  as  I  can  foresee,  this  will  be  a  dwarf  letter  in  propor- 
tion to  its  predecessors,  for  I  do  not  know  a  haputh  of  news, 
and  only  begin  mine  to  tell  you  I  have  just  received  yours  of 
Sunday  last  from  Scarborough,  and  it  gives  me  vast  pleasure  to 
hear  y''  sister  continues  to  mend,  tho'  her  mare  be  not  arrived. 
I  calculate  that  she  will  have  it  by  Saturday  at  farthest,  and 
I  hope,  in  good  rideability.  In  consideration  of  their  zeal  about 
her,  I  went  again  last  night  to  the  Cambridges,  but  found  him 
alone.  His  wife  was  confined  above,  in  her  own  cherry  tree, 
with  her  rheumatism  and  an  additional  fever. 


396  LETTEKS.  [1793 

To  my  home-gazette  I  have  but  one  article  to  add :  while  it 
lasted  it  -was  vexatious.  The  panic  or  blunder  Master-general 
had  asked  me  for  a  ticket  for  some  French,  tho'  it  is  a  fortnight 
past  my  exhibitory  season,  but  said,  with  a  petitioning  face, 
'  I  think  you  allow  only  four  at  a  time.'  '  Why,'  said  I,  '  my 
lord,  to  tell  you  the  truth,  I  am  not  so  strict  about  foreigners ; 
they  may  have  but  a  day  or  two,  and  may  not  know  our  rules ' 
— in  short,  I  allowed  him  to  add  to  four — give  him  an  inch, 
and  guess  how  many  ells  he  will  take — five,  six,  seven — and 
when  you  have  counted  seventeen  you  will  not  have  exceeded 
the  number  !  Nanny's  cap  stood  on  end !  I  thought  the  inva- 
sion of  100,000,  that  the  Convention  have  decreed,  were  come 
over  in  balloons,  as  they  formerly  intended.  The  little  parlour 
would  not  hold  them,  the  green  closet  less,  the,  star-chamber 
still  less — and  the  poor  cabinet !  I  trembled,  and  so  had 
Nanny  ;  for  the  moment  they  were  gone,  she  came  running  to 
me,  and  said,  'Well,  they  have  broke  nothing!'  EecoUect 
that  these  seventeen  dozen  have  passed  the  whole  summer  at 
Richmond,  and  might  have  come  in  detail. 

Ah !  your  good  grandmother !  I  shall  be  jealous,  and  think 
she  loves  you  both  better  than  I  do — but  come,  I  will  be  noble 
too,  and  think  you  ought  to  stay  longer  in  the  North,  and 
repay  her  the  fortnight  you  have  filched  from  her. 

Pray  was  not  your  sea  monster  like  the  Duke  of  Orleans,  or 
one  of  the  Convention  ? 

At  night. 

I  have  been  at  Lady  Betty  Mackinsy's,  where  were  both 
politicians  and  French,  but  I  did  not  learn  one  new  military 
event.  The  poor  old  Due  de  Nivernois  was  ten  days  .under 
arrest,  but  has  been  acquitted  and  released.  The  Duchesse  de 
Grrammont  and  Mad.  du  Chatelet,  the  latter  in  a  bad  state  of 
health,  are  seized  also.  All  these,  it  is  supposed,  it  was  only 
meant  to  squeeze.  It  is  hoped  they  will  soon  squeeze  the 
plunderers  amongst  themselves,  and  spare  them  no  more  than 
they  do  their  own  generals.  You  justly  scoff  at  their  re-baptising 
the  days  of  the  week ;  but  in  everything  they  do  is  there  not  a 
layer  of  horror  and  a  layer  of  folly  ?  I  hope  they  have  opened 
the  eyes  of  mankind,  and  that  it  will  be  remarked  at  last  that 
the  nation  never  did  possess  sound  sense.  Their  egregious 
vanity  was  the  consequence  of  their  extreme  ignorance.     They 


1793]  PRINCESSE   D'HENNIK PRINCE   DB   POIX.  397 

would  not  condescend  to  know  what  was  out  of  their  own 
country,  scarce  what  was  out  of  Paris ;  and  each  Frenchman, 
master  of  theii-  own  usages,  thought  himself  qualified  to  dictate 
to  the  rest  of  the  world.  They  sent  dolls  dressed  in  their  own 
fashions  to  other  countries,  and  imagined  they  were  communi- 
cating universal  knowledge;  and  indeed  there  was  little  dif- 
ference between  the  jointed  baby  and  the  prototype.  The 
memoii'es  of  Mons'  de  Maurepas,  so  veteran  a  minister,  show  of 
what  shreds,  and  patches,  and  trifles,  like  a  harlequin's  jacket,  a 
French  statesman's  head  is  composed.  Their  women,  who  had 
sense,  found  out  the  futility  of  the  men,  and  governed  them 
universally ;  but  they  were  French  women,  and  le  pais  s'enres- 
sentoit. 

SatiU'day. 

My  letter  shall  set  out,  for  probably  it  has  got  its  complement. 
The  Prince  of  Cobourg  is  endeavouring  to  hem  in  the  French 
army  at  Maubeuge,  and  the  King  of  Prussia  is  returned  to 
Berlin.  I  hope  he  has  not  taken  or  given  the  Duke  of  Brunswick 
another  sleeping  draught ! 

John  St.  John  is  dead.     I  expect  Stumpety  Stump  to  dine 

'  with  me  to-day  and  stay  till  to-morow,  and  the  Churchills  on 

Sunday — are  not  these  very  important  pieces  of  intelligence  to 

send  to  the  North  of  England  ?     It  is  making  bricks  with  straws. 

Adieu ! 

P.S. — My  sweet  Agnes,  Mrs.  Seton  is  not  happier  than  I  am 
that  you  took  this  journey,  since  Scarborough  agrees  so  well 
with  you. 

[Strawberry  Hill,  Tuesday  evening,  8  o'clock,  Oct.  15,  1793. 
I  called  on  the  Princesse  d'Hennin,  who  has  been  in  town 
a  week.  I  found  her  quite  alone,  and  I  thought  she  did  not 
answer  quite  clearly  about  her  two  knights.  The  Prince  de 
Poix  has  taken  a  lodging  in  town,  and  she  talks  of  letting  her 
house  here — if  she  can — in  short,  I  thought  she  had  a  little  of 
an  Ariadne  air — but  this  was  not  what  I  was  in  such  a  hurry  to 
tell  you.  She  showed  me  several  pieces  of  letters,  I  think  from 
the  Duchesse  de  Bouillon ;  one  says,  the  poor  Duchesse  de  Biron* 
is  again  arrested  and  at  the  Jacobins,  and  with  her  une  jeune 

*  The  Duchess  was  guillotined  the  foUowing  year. 


398  LETTERS.  [1793 

etourdie,  qui  ne  fait  que  chanter  toute  la  journee ;  and  who  think 
you  may  that  be  ?  only,  our  pretty  little  wicked  Duchesse  de 
Fleury!    .    .    . 

My  poor  old  friend  the  D''  de  la  Vali^re,  past  ninety  and 
stone-deaf,  has  a  guard  set  upon  her,  but  in  her  own  house ;  her 
daughter  the  C'  de  Chatillon,  mother  of  the  D'^Me  laTremouille, 
is  arrested,  and  thus  the  last,  with  her  attachment  to  the 
Queen,  must  be  miserable  indeed :  but  one  would  think  I  feel 
for  nothing  but  duchesses ;  the  crisis  has  crowded  them  together 
into  my  letter,  and  into  prison ;  and  to  be  prisoner  among  cani- 
bals  is  pitiable  indeed  !] 

Wednesday  morning,  11  o'clock. 

As  the  summer  improves  every  day  this  autumn,  I  have  just 
been  at  Cliveden,  lest  it  should  grow  so  hot  that  I  should  be 
tanned  if  I  staid  till  November.  I  went  to  see  the  second 
festoon  over  Agnes's  door,  and  am  glad  I  did,  for  it  is  much  too 
small  and  too  faint.  Kirgate  will  carry  both  to  the  poor  Painter 
at  Richmond,  and  have  them  made  to  resemble.  Cliveden  never 
looked  more  like  Paradise,  and  Mrs.  Eichardson,*  with  all  her 
poultry  about  her,  made  a  very  matron-like  Eve.  I  received 
y"^  father's  letter,  and  franked  and  forwarded  it  as  you  ordered. 

The  Nymph  of  the  Cherry  tree  f  continues  ill,  and  I  think  her 
mate  looks  on  her,  as  in  a  declining  way. 

I  have  had  a  letter  from  the  Bishop  of  Dromore  of  seven 
sides  of  paper,  the  object  of  which  was,  to  induce  me  to  add  to 
my  Noble  Authors  some  meditations  by  a  foolish  Countess  of 
Northumberland,  and  to  set  me  to  inquire  after  a  MS  Tract  of 
Earl  Algernon  ;  with  neither  of  which  I  have  complied  or  shall. 
The  Bishop  having  created  himself  a  Percy,  is  gone  mad  about 
that  family,  tho'  the  Percys  are  more  remembered  for  having 
lost  their  heads,  than  for  ever  having  had  a  head  that  was  a  loss 
to  lose. 

Thursday  morning,  17th,  past  10. 

I  assure  my  Twin  Wives  that  much  as  I  delight  in  their  being 

and  liking  to  be  at  Cliveden,  I  am  much  happier  in  having 

contributed  to  persuade  their  northern  journey.     What  can 

please  me  so  much   as  to  see  them  return  in  health !      The 

*  Miss  Berry's  housekeeper. 

t  Mrs.  Cambridge,  so  called  from  a  joke  of  society  not  worth  recalling. 
—M.B. 


1798]  IMPROVED    HEALTH   OF   THE   MISS   BERETS.  399 

safe  arrival  of  the  mare  is  a  great  codicil  to  my  satisfaction,  and 
with  a  longer  stay  at  Scarborough,  which  I  beg  may  be  pro- 
tracted as  long  as  this  miraculous  season  will  please  to  last,  I 
shall  hope  that  you  will  both  be  fortified  to  support  a  winter 
campaign  in  London.  Surely  the  good  Grandam  will  come  to 
you.  I  will  send  you  to  her  no  more,  if  she  prefers  any  thing 
to  re-establishing  your  healths. 

You  are  very  kind  in  being  content  with  my  letters  unin- 
teresting as  they  are,  for  here  I  learn  nothing  till  it  has  been 
mangled  in  the  newspapers,  and  commonly  proved  to  have  been 
false  there.  To-day's  True  Briton  talks  of  prodigious  success 
crowning  the  Eoyalists  in  Bretagne.  Yesterday  there  seemed 
to  be  some  stop  put  to  the  breaking  up  of  our  camps,  but  no 
reason  assigned.  The  papers  oh  use  to  make  the  Prince  de  Saxe 
Coburg  meditate  an  attack  on  the  strong  camp  at  Maubeuge ; 
but  I  have  been  told,  and  think  it  more  probable,  that  he  will 
endeavour  to  starve  them  to  a  surrender.  He  did  not  approve  of 
the  last  vivacity  at  Dunkirk ;  and  as  the  French  affairs  become 
more  desperate  every  day,  some  patience  may  be  the  wisest 
measure ;  but  I  will  not  reason  upon  what  I  do  not  understand, 
nor  on  what  I  do  not  know  authentically.  I  see  I  mistake  some- 
thing or  other  every  post.  I  thought  the  King  of  Prussia  going 
off — ^^to-day  he  has  made  a  new  treaty  with  us — if  that  is  any 
security.     Adieu! 

To  Miss  Agnes  Berry. 

Thiirsday  evening,  Oct.  17, 1793. 

Mt  sweet  Lamb, — I  am  not  content  with  having  only  thanked 
you  in  my  bigamy-letter  which  was  almost  finished  when  your 
postscript  arrived,  which  made  me  so  happy,  and  for  which  I  am 
the  more  obliged,  as  you  do  not  love  writing.  Your  great 
amendment  I  fully  believe,  for  y''  sister  assures  me  of  it  too. 
She  is  more  apt  to  be  alarmed  about  you  than  anybody,  and 
would  not  be  satisfied  with  a  trifling  improvement.  I  rejoice  in 
the  arrival  of  your  mare ;  yet  I  have  still  more  confidence  in 
the  sea-air,  and  shall  now  be  impatient  to  hear  Mrs.  Seton  has 
joined  you  at  Scarborough,  where  I  hope  she  will  keep  you  as 
long  as  the  weather  remains  tolerable.  You  say  kindly,  you 
hope  I  am  not  better  pleased  with  y'  absence  than  I  was : 
indeed  and  in  good  deed  but  I  am,  since  it  has  had  such  pros- 


400  LETTERS.  [1793 

perous  ejBfect.  Tho'  it  should  last  longer  than  I  expected,  as  I 
now  most  seriously  wish  it  may,  I  shall  be  amply  repaid  by  seeing 
you  both  return  looking  perfectly  well.  Absence  is  charming 
to  lament  in  ditties  of  Lovers,  but  when  founded  on  the  best 
reasons,  it  goes  to  none  of  Friendship's  tunes.  I  can  quote 
but  one  poetic  line  that  suits  my  present  mood,  and  to  which  I 
hope  you  will  bring  back  the  most  satisfactory  answer : — 

Eose,  what  is  become  of  your  delicate  hue  ? 

Reply  :  La  voici. 

Whether  I  am  as  comfortable  as  when  you  are  a;t  Cliveden,  you 
may  judge  by  my  innumerable  letters.  Mary  cites  an  authority, 
that  I  have  not  the  assurance  to  adopt ;  that  a  man  proves  his 
affection  to  a  woman  that  gives  up  his  time  to  her.  Ah !  me ! 
I  doubt  my  being  constantly  writing  to  you  both,  entertains 
myself  much  more  than  it  does  you  two.  In  short,  I  feel  con- 
versing with  you,  and  prefer  it  to  going  to  Eichmond  and 
Hampton  Court,  which  used  to  be  my  resources  formerly,  when 
I  was  tired  of  sitting  whole  evenings  alone.  I  now  return  to 
my  letters  of  the  common  of  Two  Grenders. 

Miss  Hotham  has  given  warning  to  Mr.  Pigou  to  quit  the 
smaller  and  far  more  beautiful  house  at  Marble  Hill,  intending 
to  inhabit  it  herself.  Poor  S'  Charles  does  not  come  to  town 
this  winter,  thinking  himself  too  ill ;  but  his  staying  where  he 
is  and  leading  the  dismal  life  he  does,  is,  I  believe,  his  chief 
illness :  but  am  not  I  sending  you  coals  to  Newcastle  ?  I  will 
pause  till  I  have  better  fuel. 

Friday  morning,  after  breakfast. 

The  coach  has  just  brought  me  from  Park-place  a  grove  of 
lavender  plants  for  you,  of  which  Mrs.  Damer  had  given  me 
notice.  My  gardener  is  gone  to  distribute  them  about  Cliveden, 
which  I  hope  next  summer  will  be  as  odoriferous  as  Mount 
Carmel.  They  have  brought  to  my  recollection  the  tag 
of  an  old  song  that  I  learnt  in  my  first  babyhood,  that  I  am 
sure  has  not  been  in  my  head  these  threescore  years  and  ten, 
but  suits  incomparably  with  my  second  infancy : — 

Kosemary's  green,  diddle  diddle,  layender's  blue ; 
If  you'U  love  me,  diddle  diddle,  I  wiU  love  you. 

Were  Mrs.  Stanhope  to  know  what  pretty  things  I  say  to  my 


1793]  DEATH   OF   DE.    HUNTER.  401 

wives,  I  believe  slie  would  not  covet  such  a  superannuated 
galant ;  but  you  will  not  expose  our  curtain-douceurs ! 

At  noon. 

I  have  had  no  letters  to-day,  and  the  newspaper  tells  nothing, 
but  new  distresses  announced  to  the  vile  Convention,  and  which 
they  only  pretend  to  combat  by  new  bravados,  yet  evidently 
tremble  for  Maubeuge.  I  trust  their  inhuman  career  approaches 
to  its  termination ! 

This  is  a  hors-d'oeuvre,  and  so  shall  go  away.     Adieu,  Both  ! 

Strawlberry  Hill,  Oct.  19,  1793. 
As  I  wrote  to  Agnes  and  you  yesterday,  and  to  you  and  Agnes 
the  day  before,  I  shall  say  but  few  words  now,  and  only  in  an- 
swer to  yours  of  Wednesday  last  about  my  health.  Trifles  seem 
serious  at  a  distance,  and  one  is  receiving  and  writing  letters 
about  them  after  one  has  forgot  them.  I  am  quite  vexed  that 
Mrs.  Darner  sent  you  word  of  my  disorder,  having  begged  her 
not.  I  did  go  to  Lady  Betty  Mackinsy's  as  soon  as  I  was  better, 
but  surely  that  was  very  different  from  going  to  Park-place, 
naturally  the  coldest  house  in  the  world,  and  now  unroofed  and 
uncieled,  and  whither  you  know  I  had  no  mind  to  go  this  year, 
and  which  I  hope  I  shall  avoid,  as  they  are  gone  to  Nuneham 
to-day  ;  and  next  week  Mr.  Conway  must  go  and  kiss  hands  for 
his  idle  Truncheon,*  and  by  that  time  I  conclude  this  immortal 
summer  mil  go  into  winter  quarters,  and  I  shall  have  no  inch- 
nation  to  commence  a  campaign  in  November.  You  wiU  smile 
at  my  remedy ;  but  I  was  cured  by  port  wine,  which  is  as  nau- 
seous to  me  as  anything  from  the  apothecary's,  and  therefore  I 
suppose  it  succeeded. 

I  have  just  heard  that  Dr.  Hunterf  is  dead  suddenly  at  St. 
Greorge's  Hospital  in  a  fit,  to  which  he  was  subject.  It  is  a 
great  blow  to  his  family,  as  he  was  in  such  repute.  I  am 
heartily  concerned  for  her,  who  you  know  is  a  great  favourite 
with  me.  You  will  not  see  me  soon  sitting  between  Lady  Louisaf 
and  Mrs.  Carter  I§ 

*  He  was  appointed  a  Field  Marshal, 
t  Dr.  John  Hunter. 

t  Lady  Louisa  Macdonald,   sister  to    the    first  Duke   of  Sutherland, 
married  to  Sir  Archibald  Macdonald,  Chief  Justice  of  the  Common  Pleas. 
§  The  translator  of  Epictetus. 
VOL.  I.  D  D 


402  LETTERS.  [1793 

The  Churchills  dined  here  last  Sunday,  but  could  not  stay,  as 
they  have  bought  a  house  at  Lewisham,  in  Kent,  and  were  to  go 
to  it  next  morning.  Lady  Mount  Edgcumbe  is  to  have  a  pap- 
party  on  Monday,  as  it  -will  be  my  god-daughter's  first  birthday 
that  can  be  kept. 

Little  edge, 

Can  I  hedge 

In  a  rhyme 

By  that  time  ? 

If  you  cry, 

Granny  and  I 
"Will  sing  nought  but  Lullaby. 

I  know  nothing  else,  as  you  may  have  perceived  by  all  my  late 
silly  letters.  I  have  a  true  regard  for  nonsense,  on  which  I  have 
lived  man  and  boy  for  longer  than  I  will  say ;  but  as  you  are 
worthy  of  better  food,  I  had  rather  have  something  to  tell  you 
that  you  would  care  to  read.  The  newspaper  is  just  come,  and 
brings  not  a  tittle.     Adieu ! 

Tuesday,  Oct.  22,  1793. 

I  am  glad  for  you  sakes,  since  you  would  not  complain  of  it 
yourselves,  that  I  am  grown  tired  of  my  own  nonsense;  for 
the  future  I  will  send  you  nothing  but  matters  of  fact, — that  is, 
while  they  remain  matters  of  fact,  which  indeed  they  seldom  do 
longer  than  a  rainbow.  Last  night,  as  I  told  you  I  should,  I 
went  to  the  birthday  of  the  youngest  Edging.  I  found  dismal 
countenances !  The  panic  master  had  just  heard  that  the  siege 
of  Maubeuge  was  raised,  and  Lyons  taken — neither  entirely 
true  nor  false.  Mackinsy  came  in,  who  had  dined  with  Dundas, 
— '  No,  no,  the  siege  is  not  raised ;  but  part  of  the  Austrian 
army  has  been  attacked,  and  somewhat  beaten.' 

Of  Lyons  the  story  is  strange  indeed!  not  taken,  but  eva- 
cuated— by  thirty  thousand — whether  men  or  persons  I  don't 
know,  and  with  all  their  artillery,  ammunition — and  goods.  They 
are  marched  to  the  Grevaudam — and  then — I  know  nothing 
jjiore — but  this  is  called  good  news.  When  I  can  tell  why,  I 
will  tell  you. 

A  Don  Eicardos,  who  sounds  like  a  hero  out  of  a  comedy  of 
Mrs.  Behn,  has  slain  7000  French  and  taken  ten  pieces  of  canon. 
I  hope  he  is  an  officer  of  the  St.  Hermandad,  who  pursue  and 
hang  the  banditti — they  may  have  fine  sport  at  Paris. 


1793]  EXECDTIOX   OF   MAEIE   ANTOINETTE.  403 

There  is  again  a  potion  of  great  anti-revolutionary  distur- 
bances at  Brest,  I  have  not  settled  my  creed  about  all  these 
articles,  so  believe  them  or  not,  as  you  please.  Lord  George  Con- 
way has  galloped  home  with  some  success  of  General  Wurmser, 
who  is  as  punctual  and  circumstantial  as  an  English  member  of 
parliament  who  sends  his  constituents  a  faithfuU  account  of 
every  step  he  takes. 

I  shall  go  to  town  to-morrow  to  see  my  room,  the  paper- 
ing and  painting  of  which  is  finished,  and,  as  the  weather  has 
not  frowned  yet,  I  shall  return  hither  on  Friday. 

As  I  was  finishing  the  last  line,  the  Princess  and  Lally  came 
in ;  they  know  and  comprehend  the  evacuation  of  Lyons  no  more 
than  I  do ;  nay,  the  convention  stares  as  much  as  we  do,  for  in  the 
fact  everybody  agrees, — as  if  it  was  common  for  a  whole  large 
city  to  be  turned  inside  outwards !  How  many  hundred  generals 
will  be  guillotined  for  it ! 

Lady  Mount  Edgcumbe  had  sent  her  coach  this  morning  to 
Madame  de  Cambis  to  come  to  the  Princesse  d'Hennin ;  but  sent 
for  it  back  in  great  haste,  having  received  an  account  of  her 
Lord  being  very  ill,  and  she  is  going  to  him  at  the  Mount.  I 
am  alarmed  for  him  ;  he  has  had  some  bad  attacks  of  late. 

Lally  inquired  with  interest  about  you  both.  I  had  the  satis- 
faction of  telling  him  that  one  is  quite  well,  and  the  other  much 
better — I  hope  I  spoke  exact  truth;  I  never  wished  less  to 
deceive. 

Wednesday,  3  o'clock,  Berkeley  Square. 

I  am  just  arrived.  Nobody  that  can  give  me  any  certain 
information  on  anything,  especially  on  what  I  am  infinitely 
anxious  to  know,  the  fate  of  the  Queen  of  France  !  The  True 
Briton,  before  I  came  away,  had  told  me  she  had  been  tried, 
acquitted,  and  massacred  by  the  mob.  My  servants,  whom  I 
have  sent  about  to  learn  what  they  could,  bring  me  word  that 
she  was  tried  on  the  15th,  and  executed  on  the  16th.  I  am 
so  wretched  for  her,  that  it  will  be  a  kind  of  relief  to  know 
that  she  is  dead,  and  at  the  period  of  her  miseries — the  most 
dreadful  that  ever  human  being  suffered  for  so  long  a  term ! 

I  must  send  away  my  letter,  or  it  will  be  too  late  for  the 
post,  but  I  will  write  again  to-morrow,  when  I  may  be  able  to 
know  better  what  I  say. 

There  was  a  long  gazette  last  night,  making  the  most  of 

D  D   2 


404  LETTERS.  [1793 

Wurmser's  success — mumbling  about  Maubeuge,  silent  about 
Lyons,  and  assuring  us  about  Toulon,  which  seems  to  have 
been  in  peril — but  I  have  not  time  for  details,  and  you  will 
see  the  gazette  in  to-morrow's  paper. 

Berkeley  Square,  Oct.  24,  1793. 

The  horrible  tragedy  of  the  Queen  of  France  is  but  too  true  I 
Our  Eoyal  Family  put  off  going  to  the  play  last  night,  and  the 
Queen  has  no  drawing-room  to-day  as  was  appointed.  I  do  not 
know  any  of  the  shocking  circumstances.  I  saw  nobody  last 
night  but  Lady  Bute,  whom  I  found  confined  to  her  room  with 
the  gout,  and  old  Mrs.  Walkinshaw  with  her,  and  they  knew  no 
particulars — in  truth,  now  the  protracted  martyrdom  is  com- 
pleated,  I  shall  be  curious  to  learn  nothing  of  that  bloody  and 
atrocious  nation  but  its  punishment — indeed  they  seem  to  medi- 
tate it  themselves,  and  to  intend  to  lay  it  waste — it  is  fit  for 
nothing  but  a  desart  inhabited  by  wild  beasts — Lyons  they  have 
ordered  to  be  destroyed — of  that  history  I  am  as  ignorant  as  I 
was  yesterday.  The  siege  of  Maubeuge  the  True  Briton  owns 
is  raised.  I  expect  Marshal  Conway  in  town  to-day ;  he  was  to 
have  kissed  the  Queen's  hand  presently,  but  will  find  himself 
disappointed.  If  he  calls  here  before  half  an  hour  after  four 
(when  our  letters  go  to  the  post)  and  has  picked  up  anything 
material,  I  will  keep  this  open  to  add  it,  and  I  will  not  go  out 
before  dinner  lest  I  should  miss  him. 

The  Duchess  of  Ancaster  died  at  Lausanne  on  the  7*'^  of  this 
month  :  her  daughter  and  Lord  Cholmondeley  are  on  their  road 
to  England. 

The  Marshall  has  been  here.  He  believes  the  convention's 
account  of  Lyons,  and  that  the  fugitives — far  from  being  multi- 
tudes, were  pursued,  and  cut  to  pieces — the  siege  of  Maubeuge 
is — oh  !  no,  not  raised — see  how  big  my  pen  is  grown  in  a 
moment — before  I  could  write  is  raised.  Mr.  Conway  who  had 
left  me  but  while  I  wrote  those  two  lines  and  a  half,  stepped 
back  to  tell  me  much  better  news — before  he  had  got  out  of  the 
square  the  Prince  of  Wales,  whom  with  his  blindness  he  did  not 
know,  but  took  for  his  nephew  Lord  George,  stopped  him,  took 
him  by  the  hand  and  wished  him  joy,  telling  him  an  officer  is 
just  arrived  from  the  Prince  of  Saxe-Cobourg  who  has  compleatly 
defeated  the  army  of  the  French — The  True  Briton  said  so  this 


1793]  KUJIOUES   FROM   THE   CONTIXEXT.  405 

morning — but  who  dares  believe  anything  under  a  Prince  of 
"Wales  ? — Oh !  I  should  be  transported  if  I  could  in  a  moment 
forget  the  Queen  of  France — but  grief  and  joy  cannot  so  soon 
mis,  and  her  sufferings  ■will  long  lie  heavy  at  my  heart.  I  will  this 
evening  go  and  inquire  after  the  Duchesse  de  la  Tremouille — 
who  is  almost  the  sole  French  person  that  I  had  almost  rather 
never  behold  again — ^I  have  not  a  moment  for  more. 

Berkeley  Sqnaxe,  Oct.  25, 179.3. 

I  have  abjured  nonsense,  and  now  I  think  I  shall  renounce 
my  senses.  In  this  romancing  age  it  is  not  safe  to  believe  any- 
thing under  a  King ;  and  when  I  believe  one  of  them,  it  shall 
not  be  him  of  Prussia,  who  has  sworn  like  an  Irish  evidence  thro' 
thick  and  Poland,  and  perjured  himself  in  every  article.  I 
observe  it  is  the  universal  usage  to  say,  search  for  truth,  which 
implies  that  truth  is,  or  was,  a  simple  individual,  extremely  con- 
cealed, and  who  was  either  never  found,  or  died  a  virgin  and  left 
no  progeny.  We  do  know  who  was  the  Adam  to  that  Eve,  the 
Father  of  Lies,  but  as  the  marriage  was  never  solemnized,  it  must 
be  his  bastards  who  have  stocked  the  globe.  Those  imps  have 
misled  me,  who  have  been  one  of  the  fools  in  search  of  truth, 
to  pester  you  with  daily  letters  for  this  last  week — not  so  much 
even  for  the  sake  of  sending  you  events,  as  to  contradict  the 
falsehoods  I  had  too  impatiently  dispatched,  from  eagerness  to 
communicate  with  you  any  momentary  pleasure  I  tasted.  I 
must  now  lower  your  victorious  sails,  and  recall  the  Prince  of 
Cobourg's  laurels.  It  is  certain  that  they  were  most  generally 
believed  all  yesterday,  not  only  by  the  source  of  my  information, 
but  by  very  cool  reasoners ;  and  a  brother  of  Lord  Mornington 
was  cited  as  the  express — he  was  come,  but  was  messenger  of 
nothing,  and  early  this  morning  the  Flanders  mail  is  arrived, 
and  has  not  brought  a  leaf  that  would  cover  a  silver  penny. 

Well,  here  I  disclaim  gazetteering.  The  worst  news  of  all, 
the  death  of  the  Queen  of  France,  is  true, — the  particular 
horrors  I  do  not  know — but  as  the  execrable  hysenas  cannot 
staunch  their  thirst  of  innocent  blood,  they  have  offerred  a  large 
reward  for  discovering  (with  dispersing  his  likeness)  Edgworth, 
the  excellent  confessor  of  the  murdered  king.  Louis  and 
Antoinette  are  butchered,  Catherine  Slayczar  and  Prussian 
Frederic  live  and  triumph !   It  is  a  pity  that  they  are  not  King 


406  LETTERS.  [1793 

and  Queen  of  France,  then  the  sovereigns  and  nations  would 
be  properly  adapted.  Well  I  I  will  endeavour  to  remove  these 
horrible  images  which  haunt  my  imagination,  and  will  talk  only 
within  my  own  little  sphere. 

Last  night  I  supped  with  the  first  Marshal  at  my  sister's — 
besides  her  and  her  husband,  there  were  her  daughter  Sophia, 
Mr.  Fawkener,  Lady  Englefield  and  S"'  Harry.  Her  I  am 
always  glad  to  see,  and  was  particularly  so  last  night,  as  she 
has  so  lately  left  you  two.  She  said  she  left  you  both  very 
well,  and  as  a  proof,  that  she  had  seen  you  at  a  ball — the 
evidence  did  not  entirely  convince  me,  I  have  known  you  both 
go  to  balls  when  not  remarkably  in  health — the  proof  grew  still 
weaker  when  I  came  home  at  twelve  and  found  your  letter 
of  the  21'',  in  which  you  do  not  speak  so  sanguinely  of  y"^ 
sister's  looks — but  your  constant  anxiety  about  her  is  apt  to 
make  you  think  her  worse  than  she  is,  and  I  trust  to  those  who 
do  not  see  her  so  constantly  as  you  do.  Still  I  wish  Mrs.  Seton 
had  not  been  so  impatient  for  your  leaving  Scarborough.  I, 
who  will  not  allow  that  she  loves  you  better  than  I  do,  would 
gladly  consent  to  her  paying  herself  for  your  longer  stay  there, 
by  deducting  from  y""  return  as  much  time  as  you  should  stay 
more  than  you  intended  near  the  sea.  I  fear  I  am  too  late  to 
propose  this  now,  but  I  did  hint  it  before. 

I  own  I  was  exceedingly  vexed  at  Mrs.  D."  acquainting  you 
with  my  transient  indisposition.  She  and  you  have  both  hand-  ' 
somely  confessed  that  you  had  exacted  the  promise  from  her. 
Where  could  be  the  use  or  good  of  acquainting  two  persons,  who 
were  gone  a  long  journey,  partly  for  health,  and  who  were  very 
happy  and  gay,  with  the  indisposition  of  one  whom  I  am  con- 
vinced they  love — yes  I  am — and  who  was  sure  of  being  soon 
recovered  from  a  temporary  disorder. 

I  found  my  room  quite  finished,  and  clean  and  snug — but  I 
have  found  the  town  so  totally  empty,  that  I  shall  return  to 
Strawberry  to-morrow ;  and  nobody's  bible  oath  shall  make  me 
believe  any  news  again,  till  St.  Thomas,  who  was  no  giddy 
credulous  person,  assures  me  he  has  had  digital  proof  of  the  fact. 
Adieu ! 

StrawbeiTy  Hill,  Tuesday,  Oct.  29,  1793. 
I  have  just  received  y''*  of  the  26th,  and  begin  to  answer  it 
directly,  tho'  not  knowing  when  I  shall  dispatch  it,  as  I  cannot 


1793]        WALPOLE'S   EULOGY   OF   MARIE   ANTOINETTE.  407 

satisfy  you  nor  myself  in  half  one  wants  to  know  about  the  most 
interesting  of  all  events,  and  my  greatest  astonishment  consists 
in  the  execrable  monsters  having  let  enough  be  known  to  conse- 
crate Marie  Antoinette  to  immortal  glory,  and  to  devote  Paris 
and  all  its  fiends  to  the  horror  and  detestation  of  posterity. 

You  bid  me  go  to  the  P"==  d'Hennin  and  learn  what  I  can.  No, 
indeed ;  I  must  be  well  convinced  of  the  purity  of  sentiments 
of  any  French  man  or  woman,  before  I  would  go  to  them.  I 
would  rather  fly  their  sight ! — yet  mine  is  not  grief  now.  No,  it 
is  all  admiration  and  enthusiasm.  The  last  days  of  that  unpa- 
ralleled princess  were  so  superior  to  any  death  ever  exhibited  or 
recorded,  that  for  the  sake  of  her  glory,  I  think,  unless  I  could 
restore  her  to  happiness,  to  her  children,  to  her  untainted  friends, 
and  could  see  her  triumph  over  the  murderous  mobs  that  have 
massacred  her,  I  would  not  revive  her  if  I  could.  When  did 
there  ever  exist  such  august  simplicity !  What  mind  was  ever, 
I  will  not  say  so  firm,  but  so  perfectly  mistress  of  its  own 
thoughts  and  intentions,  that  could  be  attentive  to  every  cir- 
cumstance and  distracted  by  none  ?  Think  of  all  that  was  com- 
prehended in  that  question  to  the  monsters  called  her  counsel- 
lors, but  certainly  allotted  to  her  as  defamatory  spies,  '  Had  she 
assumed  too  much  dignity,  as  she  passed  to  her  trial,  for  she 
had  noticed  one  of  the  juries,  who  s'^,  "  How  proud  she  is." '  It 
proved  her  unaltered  presence  of  mind,  and  that  she  was  ready 
to  condescend,  if  it  would  better  become  her.  What  philosopher 
or  martyr  had  equal  possession  of  himself  in  similar  moments  ? 
None,  none,  not  one  !  And  then  recollect  the  length  of  her  suf- 
ferings, her  education,  exaltation  to  happiness,  and  supreme 
power,  her  sudden  fall,  the  disappointments  she  had  met,  the 
ingratitude  and  treachery  she  had  experienced,  the  mortifica- 
tions and  insults  heaped  upon  her,  and  studiously,  maliciously, 
aggravated  for  five  years  together ;  the  murder  of  husband,  the 
miseries  of  and  terrors  for  her  children  :  the  total  deprivation  of 
all  decent  comforts,  and,  perhaps  the  greatest  cruelty  of  all,  not 
to  have  had  one  friend ;  but  a  thousand  times  worse,  to  have 
fear  at  every  moment  in  the  hands  of  the  most  unfeeling  jailors. 
Sum  up  all  this  mass  of  woes,  and  perhaps  thousands  more  of 
which  we  have  never  heard,  and  then  see  this  phoenix  rise 
superior  to  hosts  of  torturing  spiteful  fiends,  and  hear  her  pro- 
nounce the  most  sublime  word  that  ever  passed  thro'  human  lips. 


408  LETTERS.  [1793 

When  they  (I  have  no  adequate  epithet  for  them)  had  declared 
sentence  and  asked  her  what  she  had  to  say,  she  said,  '  Eien.' 
Too  calm,  too  sensible,  too  collected,  and  unshaken,  she  was 
above  fear,  indignation,  and  sollicitation,  and  accountable  only 
to  herself,  she  showed  that  such  a  host  of  miscreants  was  not 
worthy  of  knowing  a  syllable  of  what  passed  in  perhaps  the 
greatest  mind  that  ever  existed.  Her  invisible  patience  was  all 
that  appeared,  and  that  was  a  negative,  but  as  unvaried  as  all  her 
illustrious  virtues,  and  great  qualities,  on  which  rancour  and  per- 
secution have  not  been  able  to  fix  a  speck  of  stain— let  history 
or  legend  produce  a  similar  model ! 

These  are  the  effusions  of  my  heart,  not  dictated  by  the  im- 
pulse of  the  moment,  but  the  result  of  my  cool  reflections  of 
three  days.  I  trust  them  in  perfect  confidence  to  your  honour, 
and  exact  from  the  fidelity  of  your  friendship  that  you  will  not 
communicate  nor  read  them  to  any  mortal  but  your  father  and 
sister,  nor  let  this  paper  pass  out  of  your  own  hands,  nor  suffer 
a  tittle  of  it  to  be  transcribed.  I  like  that  you  two  should  know 
my  sentiments  on  all  important  topics,  but  I  extend  this  confi- 
dence not  a  jot  farther.  I  firmly  believe  every  word  I  have  as- 
serted, because  all  the  facts  come  from  the  barbarians  themselves 
— but  as  I  cannot  be  positively  sure  they  are  true  I  will  not 
place  my  veracity  on  a  possibility  of  having  been  misinformed — 
and  therefore  I  depend  on  your  not  committing  me  by  showing 
my  letter — I  repeat  it  earnestly,  to  nobody  but  your  father  and 
sister,  and  beg  you  will  assure  me  that  you  have  not.  I  do  not 
mind  your  reading  trifles  oitt  of  my  dispatches,  though  certainly 
calculated  for  nobody  but  you  two— but  this  letter  I  do  most 
seriously  restrain  from  all  other  eyes. 

MidnigM. 

Mrs.  Darner  came  to  me  at  dinner  to-day,  and  goes  to  London 
to-morrow.  I  was  engaged  to  Lady  Betty  Mackinsy,  and  she  went 
thither  with  me  in  the  most  deplorable  of  all  nights — as  bad  as 
that  when  the  Conways  and  I  were  detained  so  late  at  Cliveden 
and  I  stepped  over  my  shoes  into  the  water.  We  heard  no- 
thing quite  new :  Nieuport  is  reckoned  safe  and  Ostend  safer, 
both  which  were  reported  taken.  Mr.  Batt,  whom  I  met  last 
night  at  Cambridge's,  is  as  confident  of  the  safety  of  Toulon.  He, 
not  Lord  Hood,  inquired  much  after  you,  Lord  Mount  Edgcumbe 


1793]  WALPOLE's   ANXIETY  ABOUT   THE   BEERYS.  409 

is  recovered.  The  charming  man  has  actually  a  tragedy  just 
coming  forth  at  Covent  garden. 

I  like  your  account  of  yourselves — but  hope  your  grandam 
will  not  sit  too  close,  but  let  you  both  have  air  and  exercise 
enough.     In  every  thing  else  I  quite  agree  with  her. 

Lady  Waldegrave  and  her  daughter  come  to  me  to-day  from 
the  Pavilions,  where  they  have  been  this  week,  and  will  stay  till 
next  morning.     Good  night. 

P.S. — I  fear  you  have  lost  y'  poor  friend  Mr.  Sept.  West. 

Lord  Orford's  strict  injunctions  that  his  letter  of  the 
29th  should  be  confined  only  to  the  perusal  of  the  Miss 
Berrys  and  their  father,  might  have  raised  a  question  as 
to  the  propriety  of  including  it  amongst  those  that  are 
now  published  upwards  of  seventy  years  after  this  was 
written  ;  but  as  he  gives  as  the  reason  for  this  injunction 
the  fear  lest  his  '  facts '  should  not  be  true,  and  that  he 
will  not  place  his  veracity  on  a  possibihty  of  having  been 
misinformed,  the  reason  for  its  suppression  has  ceased  ; 
and  though  there  may  be  some  exaggeration  in  the  tone 
of  his  enthusiastic  eulogy  of  the  unfortunate  Queen  of 
France,  who  would  not  sympathise  with  the  feehngs 
inspired  at  the  time  by  her  cruel  and  unmerited  sufferings  ? 

The  letters  from  Lord  Orford  during  the  month  of 
November  were  stiU  addressed  to  the  Miss  Berrys  in 
Yorkshire. 

Strawberry  Hill,  Not.  5,  1793. 
You  can,  I  trust,  guess  how  happy  your  letter  of  Friday  last 
makes  me,  by  telling  me  how  much  better  you  are.  I  am  not 
weaning  myself,  but  I  do  wish  you  to  stay  in  Yorkshire  as 
long  as  you  continue  to  find  any  amendment.  I  will  even  call 
it  a  selfish  wish,  for  it  certainly  is  misery  to  me  to  see  you  both 
so  perpetually  indisposed.  Can  I  love  you  so  much,  and  so 
sincerely,  and  not  be  anxious  in  the  very  first  place  for  your 
healths  ?  I  continually  reproach  myself  with  having  drawn  you 
from  Italy  sooner  than  you  intended — I  had  indeed  some  strong 
reasons  then — yet  I  shall  not  repeat  that  eagerness. 


410  LETTEES.  [1793 

Enjoy  the  fine  weather  as  long  as  it  will  meet  you  half  way. 
Unless  great  rains  or  snow  come,  I  shall  remain  here,  where  I 
am  warm  and  comfortable.  Tho'  I  pass  three  evenings  in  four 
quite  alone,  they  are  not  at  all  irksome,  which  they  would  be  in 
London,  where  I  have  neither  acquaintance  nor  amusements. 

Since  the  most  deplorable  of  all  tragedies,  I  have  heard  no 
great  event.  The  wolves,  in  great  droves,  came  out  and  at- 
tempted Nieuport  and  Ostend,  but  were  driven  back.  The 
Convention  pretends  that  the  Eoyalists  in  La  Vendee  are 
utterly  defeated,  but  I  do  not  receive  assignats  at  first  sight. 
It  is  true  that  there  was  great  slaughter  of  French  noblesse 
under  the  Prince  of  Conde,  when  Wurmser  stormed  the  lines 
of  Weissemberg.  This  was  more  to  their  credit  than  haggling 
for  rank.  To-day's  paper  is  not  come  in  yet,  so  my  intelligence 
is  not  very  fresh — but  I  will  wait  for  it  before  I  send  this  to  the 
post.  The  Convention  have  lost  a  good  friend — Lord  Greorge 
Grordon. 

Mrs.  Damer  passed  Tuesday  with  me,  and  Lady  Waldegrave 
and  her  daughter  two  days.  General  Johnstone  is  returned 
from  camp ;  he  and  Lady  Cecilia  and  Mrs.  Johnstone  were 
here  on  Monday.     These  lean  articles  are  all  I  have  to  send. 

What  cousin  of  yours  is  wounded  ?  is  it  S'  Gr.  Caley's  brother  ? 
— whichever,  I  hope  he  will  do  well. 

You  have  had  such  a  mass  of  my  letters  lately,  that  I  hope 
you  will  not  catch  cold  with  receiving  only  this  thin  one.  In 
truth,  my  mind  is  not  at  all  in  tune.  The  Queen  of  France  is 
never  for  three  minutes  out  of  my  head.  Long  as  I  have  lived, 
I  had  not  conceived  that  human  nature  was  capable  of  such 
execrable  barbarity  and  meditated  wanton  malice  as  the  French 
have  committed  within  these  five  years.  As  little,  indeed,  did 
I  conceive  that  one  human  mind  could  rise  to  so  exalted  a  pitch 
as  that  supernatural  woman's !  No  legendary  writer,  no  epic 
poet,  could  have  dared  to  draw  so  perfect  a  character  with  such 
excellent  sense  !  What  propriety  in  her  every  answer !  and 
how  accurate  a  memory  of  every  circumstance  that  was  neces- 
sary for  her  to  recollect,  with  no  confusion  even  of  dates.  The 
monsters  her  murderers  have  made  her  some  amends  by  de- 
posing a  thousand  times  more  truth  than  could  have  been 
believed  had  it  come  only  from  her  friends.  I  have  no  longer 
any  doubt — what  her  bitterest  foes  report  must  be  true.     It 


1793]  DOMESTIC   NEWS.  .  411 

was  their  business  to  blacken  her — they  have  made  her  im- 
mortal. 

The  paper  is  arrived.  You  will  see  several  advantages  gained 
by  us  and  allies.  The  Duke  of  York  has  had  good  success,  and 
our  prospect  is  better  than  you  thought.  I  have  not  time  to  say 
more,  if  I  had  wherewithal.     Adieu  ! 

[Strawberry  HiU,  Nov.  7,  1793. 

I  often  lay  the  egg  of  my  journals  two  or  three  days  before 
they  are  hatched.  This  may  make  some  of  my  articles  a  little 
stale  before  you  get  them ;  but  then  you  know  they  are  the 
more  authentic  if  the  echo  has  not  told  me  to  unsay  them. 
And  if  a  Prince  of  Wales  drops  a  thumping  victory  at  my 
door  as  he  goes  by,  you  have  it  hot  out  of  the  oven,  tho',  as 
happened  lately,  not  half  baked.    .     .     . 

Domestic  news  are  scanty,  but  dismal;  and  you  have  seen 
them  anticipated — as  the  loss  of  the  young  Lord  Montague 
and  Mr.  Burdett,*  drowned  in  a  cataract  in  Swisserland,  by  their 
own  obstinate  folly.] 

When  you  return  to  London,  if  you  spy  from  Highgate  a 
vast  edifice  peeping  over  the  shoulder  of  St.  Paul's,  dont  imagine 
that  the  Pope  has  sent  St.  Peter's  over  hither  to  secure  it  from 
French  atheists.  No,  it  is  the  new  Temple  of  Venus  in  Drury- 
lane.  I  assure  you  that  Lord  Derby  told  me  a  fortnight  ago 
that  he  had  seen  it  that  morning  from  Westminster-bridge 
towering  above  all  the  buildings  but  St.  Paul's.  They  say  the 
frontispiece  of  the  scaffolding  is  a  most  beautifull  sight. 

[Nov.  10. 

Victories  do  not  come  every  tide  like  mackarell  or  prizes  in 
the  Irish  Lottery.  Yesterday's  paper  discounted  a  little  of 
Neapolitan  valour,  but  as  even  the  Dutch  sometimes  fight  upon 
recollection,  and  as  there  was  no  account  yet  of  O^Hara's  arrival 
at  Toulon,  I  hope  he  will  laugh  or  example  Loro  Signori  into 
spirit.] 

I  do  confirm  my  assent  to  y'  staying  in  Yorkshire  as  long 
as  either  of  you  is  the  better  for  it.  As  for  the  horse,  I  am 
not  so  fond  of  young  ladies  riding  in  the  king's  roads.     Mr. 

*  Geo.  S.  Viscount  Montague,  b.  1769,  only  son  of  Anthony,  7th  Viscount 
Chas.  Sedley  Burdett,  brother  of  the  late  Sir  Francis  Burdett. 


412  •  LETTERS.  [1793 

i^itepatrick,  the  uncle,  was  once,  in  a  high  chaise,  near  over- 
setting the  Duchess  of  Queensberry,  who  was  on  horseback  there, 
and  she  called  out,  '  Oh,  pray,  Mr.  Kill^atrick,  dont  ride  over 
me.' 

[I  am  not  so  consentful  about  going  to  town  myself  yet. 
What  could  I  do  with  myself  in  London  ?  All  my  playthings 
are  here,  and  I  have  no  playfellows  left  there !  Lady  Herries's 
and  poor  Mrs.  Hunter's  *  are  shut  up.  Even  the  one  game  more 
at  cribbage-f  after  supper  is  on  table,  and  which  is  not  my 
supreme  felicity,  tho'  accompanied  by  the  Tabor  and  Pipe,|  is 
in  the  country — or,  to  say  all  in  a  word,  North  Audley  Street 
is  in  Yorkshire.  Eeading  composes  little  of  my  pastime  either 
in  town  or  country.  A  catalogue  of  books  and  prints,  or  a 
dull  history  of  a  county,  amuse  me  sufficiently;  for  now  I 
cannot  open  a  French  book,  as  it  w^  keep  alive  ideas  that  I 
want  to  banish  from  my  thoughts.] 

Monday  Morning,  llth. 

L.  says  S"^  Charles  Blagdon  is  arrived,  having  been  very  ill, 
and  looking  so  ;  the  Palmerstons  remain  in  Italy. 

[Mrs.  Piozzi  is  going  to  publish  a  book  on  English  Synonymes. 
Methinks  she  had  better  have  studied  them  before  she  stuffed 
her  travels  with  so  many  vulgarisms  !] 

One  o'clock. 

No  newspaper  is  come,  whether  a  symptom  of  no  news,  or 
rather  of  some  very  fresh,  how  can  I  tell  ?  whichever,  you  must 
wait  another  day,  for  this  must  go  to  the  post ;  and  if  you 
receive  no  codicil  to  it  the  next  morning,  you  will  be  sure  I  had 
nothing  more  recent  to  send.     Adieu  ! 

P.S. — By  a  symptom  of  no  news,  I  mean  that  the  news- 
writer  was  waiting  for  a  mail,  and  that  none  was  arrived; 
but  it  is  not  utterly  impossible  that  the  newspaper  itself 
may  have  failed,  a  case  that  happened  before  to-day. 

*  Widow  of  Dr.  John  Hunter. 

t  A  manner  of  designating  tlie  Countess  of  Ailesbury. —  Wright. 

X  Two  old  ladies  of  Ma  society  whom  he  thus  called. —  Wright. 


1793]         WALPOLE'S   HOEROE   OF   FEENCH    EXCESSES.  413 

Strawb.,  Thursday,  Nov.  14,  1793. 
Were  the  time  ever  so  fertile  in  entertaining  events,  still  I 
had  much  rather  talk  them  over  with  you  than  send  them  in 
journals.  How  irksome  then  must  it  be  to  interrupt  y"^  amuse- 
ments by  afflicting  details !  Not  that  I  am  now  going  to  grieve 
you  by  any  new  specific  horror,  tho'  some  are  apprehended ;  and 
the  countenance  of  the  age  is  so  gloomy,  that  one  can  scarce 
expect  to  be  the  messenger  of  glad  tidings.  Nay,  I  am  shocked 
at  being  forced  to  speak  of  butcheries  as  welcome  news.  Yet 
what  but  the  French  turning  their  massacres  on  themselves  can 
put  a  period  to  their  frenzy  and  abominations?  Every  day 
they  invent  and  propose  crimes  so  incredible,  that  nobody  can 
believe  they  will  be  practised  till  it  is  known  that  they  have 
been  committed.  When  rage  has  mounted  to  that  excess,  who 
can  be  sorry  to  hear  that  the  savage  Convention  has  at  once 
destroyed  one-and-twenty  of  their  own  murderers  ?  And  how 
striking,  that  seventeen  of  those  twenty-one  beheaded  had,  not 
eleven  months  ago,  voted  for  the  death  of  the  King !  At  the  same 
time,  who  can  comprehend  their  proceedings  ?  Several  of  those 
sacrificed  regicides  died  praying  for  the  republic — so  the  woman 
who  stabbed  Marat  seemed  to  be  of  the  same  faction,  or  near 
it.  What  does  it  show,  but  that  the  nation  holds  assassination 
due  to  the  slightest  variation  in  a  neighbour's  creed  from  the 
opinion  of  him  who  has  a  dagger  in  his  pocket?  In  such  a 
conflagration  of  all  virtues,  all  feeling,  all  humanity,  all  justice, 
and  of  all  religion,  who  can  dare  to  flatter  himself  that  the 
angelic  Madame  Elizabeth  will  escape  ?  Oh !  nothing  but  the 
monsters  making  their  tyranny  intolerable,  even  to  one  another, 
will  extirpate  the  hydra.  Poor  Mad.  de  Biron  is  still  in  prison, 
and  is  not  allowed  even  a  maid  servant.  It  has  been  proposed 
to  force  every  single  woman  to  accept  any  man  who  offers  to 
marry  her ;  and  this  diabolic  project  is  supposed  to  be  aimed  at 
the  violation  of  the  innocent  young  Princess,  sister  of  the  young 
King.    But  I  load  you  with  too  many  horrors — but  alas  !  you 

would  read  them  in  the  papers ! 

At  night. 

I  have  been  with  the  Cambridge's,  and  saw  him  and  both 
sons;*  the  hens  were  at  roost,  and  did  not  appear.    George  had 

*  Kichard  and  George  Cambridge.     The  latter  became  Archdeacon  of 
Middlesex, 


414  LETTERS.  [1793 

just  heard  that  Egalite  is  actually  beheaded;  comfortable  news 
for  the  doctors  of  his  sect,  who  may  see  that  no  crimes  are  a 
protection.  Well,  there  is  another  atonement  to  the  King  and 
the  Princesse  de  Lamballe,  and  no  cordial  to  Mad.  de  Sillery 
and  Pamela  Fitzgerald.*  No  bloodshed,  however,  allays  the 
national  frenzy :  they  have  now  declared  war  with  the  Genoese. 
Oh !  the  more  enemies  they  create  the  better — but  I  was 
grieved  this  morning  to  read  in  the  papers  that  poor  Jardin  and 
his  family  have  been  taken  by  a  French  privateer,  as  they  were 
going  to  Corunna. 

I  wish  I  could  revive  y''  spirits  by  any  gayer  scenes,  but 
where  to  seek  them,  or  how  to  blend  them  with  the  daily 
tragedies,  with  some  of  which  one  is  forced  to  pay  one's  self  for 
those  one  laments !  Oh  yes,  one  tragedy  will  furnish  an  agreeable 
paragraph.  Greorge  Cambridge  was  last  night  at  the  iirst  repre- 
sentation of  Jerningham's  new  play,  and  I  was  delighted  to 
hear  that  it  was  received  with  great  applause  and  complete 
success,  being  very  interesting.  The  Baviad  has  been  useful  to 
it,  for  there  is  no  love  in  it.  Mr.  Cambridge  desired  me  to  tell 
you  that  there  was  one  deficiency  in  it,  i.  e.,  y""  cousin  Miss 
Seton  should  have  played  in  it,  for  a  Governor  Seton,  and  his  , 
wife  and  two  sons,  are  the  principal  personages.| 

You  will  perhaps  ask  why  I  am  still  here  in  the  middle  of 
November  ?  because  in  any  other  year,  such  a  day  as  this  four- 
teenth of  November  would  have  been  thought  very  iine  and 
warm  in  the  end  of  August.  I  remember  that  at  Florence  they 
used  to  boast  of  their  Stagione  di  San  Martino — well,  to  be 
sure,  the  mornings  were  very  clear  and  bright,  but  as  cold  and 
sharp  as  Greenland.  Apropos,  I  see  Lord  Hood  has  been 
lecturing  the  little  great  Duke — very  proper — I  wish  he  had 
not  been  complaisant  to  that  dirty  fellow  Paoli.  I  would  not 
send  a  man  to  the  latter,  unless  it  were  his  panegyrist  Boswell, 
whose  pigmies  always  are  giants,  as  the  geese  of  others  are 
swans. 

When  your  codicil  of  visits  begins,  I  suppose  you  will  prepare 

*  Widow  of  Lord  Edw.  Ktzgerald,  married,  secondly,  to  M.  Piscaire, 
died  1831,  better  Imown  as  Madame  de  Genlis. 

t  It  was  called  'The  Siege  of  Berwick,'  founded  on  the  story  of  a 
remarkaUe  siege  of  that  place  in  early  Scottish  history,  when  it  was 
valiantly  defended  by  an  ancestor  of  the  name  and  family  of  Seton. 


1793]  DEATH   OF   LADY   WESTMORLAND.  415 

me  for  altering  my  directions.  If  I  have  no  letter  tomorrow,  as 
I  have  no  particular  reason  for  expecting  one,  I  shall  send  this 
away  on  its  old  route. 

Friday  noon. 
I  must  close  my  letter,  for  I  have  none  from  you,  nor  is  even 
the  newspaper  come  yet ;  but  what  signifies  whether  the  True 
Briton  or  I  confirm  or  postpone  the  execution  of  Orleans? 
Stay,  the  paper  arrives  and  says  he  is  dead — ah !  and  so  is  a 
happy  beauty  at  the  top  of  her  prosperity,  Lady  "Westmorland.* 
The  Doylies  told  me  of  her  danger  two  days  ago.  I  am  sorry 
for  her;  I  knew  her  a  little  before  she  went  to  Ireland,  by 
seeing  her  often  with  my  niece  Lady  Waldegrave,  and  liked  her 
good  humour,  as  well  as  admired  her  great  beauty ;  but  there  is 
no  moralizing  more  on  change  of  fortune,  after  the  enormous 
excess  of  it  in  the  case  of  the  Queen  of  France.     Adieu ! 

Tuesday  morning,  Nov.  19,  1793. 

As  fast  as  I  hear  events  that  are  worth  sending  to  you,  I 
begin  my  next  letter  :  that  not  having  been  the  case  since  my 
last,  I  this  moment  receive  yours  of  the  ]  6th,  which  sets  me  to 
answering — I  suppose  you  expected  it  would  set  me  to  crying, 
but  I  shall  disappoint  you.  In  short,  without  grimace  or  forced 
irony,  I  approve  of  your  protracting  your  stay,  and  giving  so 
much  pleasure  to  y''  good  family. 

My  own  motions  are  undecided  yet.  I  was  to  have  gone  to 
Hampton  last  Saturday  evening,  the  Johnstones  celebrating 
their  second  grandson's  baptism — no  great  occasion  of  joy,  I 
think ;  but  it  rained  so  hard,  and  was  so  foggy,  that  I  did  not 
chuse  a  voyage  over  the  heath.  Sunday  was  as  bad,  and  I 
resolved  to  go  to  London  on  Thursday;  but  yesterday  and  to- 
day have  fallen  on  their  knees,  and  beseeched  me  to  stay  a 
week  longer,  promising  to  be  as  fine  as  it  has  been  these 
six  months,  and  so  indeed  they  are — as  soft,  and  of  a  rich 
golden  colour  over  all  the  trees,  that  Golconda  is  not  more 
magnificent :  however,  Nolito  Frondi  credere — I  will  determine 
nothing,  I  will  wait  and  see,  and  the  delay  in  your  return  does 
not  increase  my  impatience  to  be  in  town. 

*  Sarah  Child,  the  first  wife  of  the  grandfather  of  the  present  Earl  of 
Westmorland. 


416  LETTERS.  [1763 

1  am  very  sorry  the  papers  have  been  so  spiteful!  to  the 
house  of  Seton ;  I  have  seen  none  of  those  criticisms ;  at  Eich-  ■ 
mond  all  the  reports  have  been  very  favorable. 

The  story  of  the  Frenchman  murdered  and  drowned  is  not 
fact,  tho'  founded  in  fact ;  but  you  know  that  I  maintain  that 
three  parts  in  four  of  the  articles  in  our  newspapers  are  lies ; 
and  if  the  writers  do  get  hold  of  a  truth,  they  are  sure  of  mixing 
it  up  with  a  blunder.  The  case  was  this :  a  young  Frenchman 
with  a  portmanteau  came  to  Eichmond  (not  to  Cross-deep),  and 
wanted  to  go  to  Kingston,  but  did  not  know  the  way ;  two  or 
three  blackguards  offered  to  show  him  the  road,  but  when 
out  of  the  town,  robbed  him  of  his  knapsack,  which  frighting 
hint,  and  he  being  strong  and  active,  ran  away  as  hard  as  he 
could,  and  saved  himself,  if  they  did  intend  worse. 

I  have  answered  y''  letter,  and  Mr.  Berry  I  see  grows  im- 
patient for  news,  but  as  I  said  in  the  beginning,  I  know  nothing 
specific:  the  True  Briton  is  not  come  in,  and  I  dread  it, 
expecting  nothing  but  new  murders  and  massacres.  There  is  a 
French  gentleman  at  Eichmond,  who  had  remained  quiet  at 
Paris  till  just  now,  but  perceiving  the  destroying  angel  abroad, 
applied  to  Barrere,  with  whom  he  had  been  intimate,  for  a 
passport ;  Barrere,  surprised  at  seeing  him  still  there,  felt  a 
drop  of  pity  on  his  red-hot  heart,  gave  him  the  pass,  but  added, 
'  Depart  directly,  for  we  have  gone  so  far,  that  now  we  must 
go  through.'  How  far  that  may  be,  Moloch  himself  cannot 
guess.  Of  Orleans's  exit  I  know  no  particulars,  nor  am  I 
curious  about  so  foul  a  wretch.  The  beheaded  Sillery*  was 
husband  of  the  too  well  known  woman  of  that  name ;  she  is  in 
Switzerland,  and  so  is  that  monster  Condorcet,  one  of  the  worst 
of  all,  if  there  are  any  shades  left  in  the  hue  of  infernals. 

It  is  believed  that  the  Eoyalists  in  La  Vendee  have  gained 
considerable  advantages,  tho'  Barrere  lately  pronounced  them 
demolished;  but  the  Convention  never  utters  a  sentence  of 
truth  but  when  they  publish  their  own  barbarities.  Lord 
Moira  is  said  to  be  going  on  a  secret  expedition,  and  it  is  sup- 
posed to  be  to  the  coast  of  France,  in  hopes  of  assisting  the 
Avengers. 

The  aspect  northward  is  not  so  propitious.  The  King  of 
Prussia  is  much  suspected  of  being  cooled;   L'*  Malmsberry 

*  Mai'c[uis  do  Sillery,  Comte  de  Genlis,  was  executed  Oct.  31, 1793. 


1793]  PROSPECTS   OP   THE   WAR.  417 

is  going  to  him,  but  if  he  does  not  carry  more  weight  than  the 
French  can  send,  I  shall  not  expect  much  from  his  address.  I 
shall  be  glad  not  to  prove  a  true  prophet,  tho'  I  have  appre- 
hended these  six  months,  that  unless  very  substantial  acquisi- 
tions were  made  that  would  compensate  the  expence,  a  grand 
alliance  would  not  hold  out  another  year.  I  shall  lament  any 
disunion,  yet  one  must  not  judge  immediately  from  events: 
how  did  we  grieve  last  year  for  the  Duke  of  Brunswick's  pause, 
yet  by  the  tedious  difficulty  we  have  had  in  taking  Valenciennes 
and  Conde,  and  in  not  taking  Dunkirk  and  Maubeuge,  is  not  it 
plain  that  if  that  Duke  (whom  still  I  do  not  admire)  had 
attempted  to  march  to  Paris,  he  w**  either  never  have  gotten 
thither,  or  never  have  gotten  back ;  yet  there  is  no  excuse  to  be 
made  for  bis  sacrificing  the  Emperor — and  so  his  highness 
seems  to  think  himself,  for  he  has  made  none. 

O'Hara  is  arrived  at  Toulon ;  and  if  it  can  be  preserved,  he 
will  keep  it. 

The  T7'ue  Briton  is  come  in,  but  without  an  important 
article. 

I  have  written  to  my  last  minute,  and  told  you  all  I  know. 
Lady  Westmorland's  vast,  enormously  vast  fortune,  goes  to  her 
eldest  daughter,*  and  will  make  Miss  Scott  but  a  middling 
heiress.     Adieu ! 

Strawberry  Hill,  Saturday,  Nov.  23,  2  o'clock,  1703. 

There  has  been  some  delay  or  neglect,  I  don't  know  where  or 
in  whom,  that  I  doubt  may  have  occasioned  some  confusion.  I 
received  here  on  Tuesday  last  yours  of  the  16'^^  announcing  your 
present  of  yourselves  to  y'  Gr.  M.  for  a  week  longer  ;  I  answered 
it  with  my  approbation  that  very  day,  and  told  you  I  should  go 
to  London  the  next  day  but  one  for  a  couple  of  days  ;  so  I  did, 
and  am  this  moment  returned,  when  I  find  on  my  table  yours  of 
the  14th,  dirty  and  a  little  tumbled — so  what  happened  to  it,  poor 
dear  thing,  I  cannot  tell;  but  suppose  the  postman  or  some 
servant  had  kept  it  in  his  pocket  and  forgotten  it  for  half  a 
week.  It  would  be  vain  to  inquire ;  one  never  gets  anything  but 
lies  on  such  accidents.  I  am  glad  at  least  that  it  has  reached  me 
at  last !  without  it  I  should  not  have  known  that  I  am  to  direct 

*  Sarab  Sophia,  afterwards  Countess  of  Jersey, 
VOL.  I.  E  E 


418  LETTEES.  [1793 

this  to  Bransby — and  super  all,  I  would  not  lose  one  of  y' 
letters.  I  want  no  news ;  what  I  contrive  to  learn  is  more 
than  half  for  y^  sakes,  and  what  I  wish  from  you  is  to  be 
told  that  you  ride  and  are  both  better.  My  Agnes,  I  trust, 
continues  improving,  tho'  I  wish  you  had  told  me  so  oftener  of 
late. 

My  jaunt  to  town  seemed  at  first  to  have  been  barren  indeed.  I 
called  at  Mrs.  Darner's.  She  was  gone  to  the  play  with  the  Marshal 
her  father — then  to  the  Churchills  ;  they  were  at  their  new  pur- 
chase at  Lewisham — then  to  Mrs.  BuUer,  not  at  home — then  to 
Miss  Farren ;  found  her  and  La  Signora  Madre  only.  From 
them  to  Lady  Bute,  and  there  only  Lady  Lonsdale  and  old 
Lady  Clavering,  and  for  a  moment  Lady  Erskine  and  her 
daughter.  With  y''  leave  I  thought  I  might  as  well  have  staid 
here.  Things  mended  at  night.  I  had  been  told  in  Sackvill  Street 
that  Mrs.  Darner  would  probably  bring  her  parent  home  to 
supper — and  she  did.  Soon  after  arrived — Oh  no  !  I  have 
jumbled  the  two  evenings — on  Thursday  there  were  only  father 
and  daughter ;  it  was  last  night  that  the  latter  had  collected  the 
rest  for  me,  who  were,  my  niece  Sophia,  Mrs.  BuUer  and  her 
son,  '  Mistress  Buller,'  and  the  Charming  Man  ;  and  we  had  a 
pleasant  supper.  I  congratulated  the  Charming  highly  on  the 
success  of  bis  tragedy,  and  on  his  prologue,  which  I  had  seen  in 
the  papers  and  like ;  the  epilogue  they  say  is  still  better.  All 
this  put  him  in  great  spirits,  and  once  or  twice,  apropos  derien, 
he  blurted  out  one  or  two  of  his  gross  naiveUs.  I  believe  you 
read  nothing  in  yom*  Yorkshire  but  Jacobin  papers,  for  I  have 
not  seen  a  word  against  the  tragedy  or  the  Story  of  y""  Ancestors, 
and  Mrs.  D.  says  it  has  been  abused  only  in  two  papers  of  that 
dye ;  and  because  there  are  compliments  in  the  play  or  epilogue 
to  the  Duke  of  York,  so  Fame's  quota  is  handsome.  The  Substan- 
tial I  fear  will  answer  worse.  Mrs.  Pope's  illness  has  interrupted 
the'  career.  That  is  a  disadvantage ;  and  Harris  the  manager 
has  behaved  most  shabbily,  and  allows  the  poet  but  the  sixth 
night  instead  of  the  third  and  sixth,  because  forsooth  there  are 
but  four  acts !  This  is  an  unprecedented  innovation,  to  which 
the  Charming  should  not  have  yielded ;  but  he  certainly  was 
not  born  to  squabble  with  a  Jew — and  besides,  I  could  swear, 
would  have  given  his  play  for  nothing  rather  than  not  have  it 
represented.     It  is  to  be  played  again  on  Wednesday,  and  the 


1793]  EXPEDITION   UNDER   LORD   MOIEA.  419 

Marshall  and  I  are  to  go  to  town  on  purpose ;  Mrs.  Darner  will 
have  a  box. 

You  will  be  happy,  I  am  sure,  to  know — perhaps  have  seen  in 

the  papers  already,  unless  you  see  none  but  Jacobin  prints — that 

poor  Jardin  and  his  family  were  retaJcen  by  a  Spanish  privateer 

from  the  French  one  who  had  taken  them,  and  have  been  carried 

to  the  spot  of  their  destination,  Corunna — vulgarice,  the  Groyne. 

Well !  but  do  I  say  nothing  of  the  war  ?      What  cares  Mr. 

Berry  how  many  visits  I  made  and  found  nobody  at  home  ?  he 

had  rather  I  had  gone  to  the  coffee-house  or  to  Lord  Onslow — 

patience,  my  good  S^    To-night  is  but  the  vigil  of  a  great  deal. 

It  has  been  known  for  some  days  that,  tho'  the  foul  fiend  Barrere 

proclaimed  to  the  Pandemonium  above  a  fortnight  ago  that  the 

Eoyalists  in  La  Vendee  were  totally  demolished,  they  have  a 

very  large  army  and  have  ta,ken  some  important  places.       Our 

Ministers  probably  know  much  more  than  I  do,  for  to-morow 

Lord  Moira  is  to  sail  with  a  great  force  for  the  coast  of  France. 

St.  Maloes  is  supposed  the  object,  but  no  doubt  that  has  not 

been  told.      He  certainly  carries  ten  thousand  men  and  400 

emigres  from  Jersey ;  the  French        General  Conway  goes  with 

him,  I  heard  of  no  other  of  the  refugees.     What  fleet,  military 

stores,  &c.,  the  papers  will  tell  you ;  I  cannot,  who  neither  love 

details,  nor  remember  them.    Most  anxious  I  shall  be,  and  most 

zealous   I  am  for  the  event — yet  I  am  not    sanguine.      The 

Ministers  seem  to  have  waited  till  the   crisis  was  mature — the 

measure  of  iniquity  was  certainly  full,  and  I  would  hope  has 

shocked  thousands  and  ten  thousands.     Some  of  the  wretches  in 

the  Convention  you  see  have  said  they  think  they  have  gone  far 

enough — I  do  not  think  they  have,  while  they  suffer  one  another 

to  breathe ;  however,  they  have  made  a  good  beginning  with 

Orleans,  Brissot,  &c.  &c.  &c. 

Lord  Moira's  behaviour  is  noble ;  he  offered  himself  for  this 
service  some  months  ago,  and  he  has  not,  since  his  father's  death, 
less,  with  the  estates  of  Huntingdon,  than  18,000L  a  y"".  Oh  ! 
but  it  is  a  joke  to  talk  of  a  great  fortune^ — why  Miss  Scott's  is 
sunk  to  be  of  the  second  rate.  The  whole  property  of  the  Childs 
vests  now  in  Lord  Westmorland's  eldest  daughter ;  and  Dent, 
Child's  partner,  says  before  she  is  of  age  (and  she  is  not  above 
six)  the  savings  will  be  above  a  million,  tho'  Osterley  and  the 
seat  in  Staffordshire  are  to  be  kept  up  at  the  great  expence  as 

£  £  2 


420  LETTERS.  [1793 

in  Mr.  Child's  life — the  shop  pays  25,000Z.  a  year.  I  am  glad 
the  expence  will  continue,  as  the  money  will  circulate,  but  I 
hope  Catherine  and  the  King  of  Prussia  will  not  attempt  a 
partition  of  the  property. 

Madame  D'Arblay  has  written  a  pamphlet  for  the  French  clergy. 
I  sent  for  it  in  town,  and  then  forgot  to  bring  it  with  me.  I 
shall  wait  with  patience  till  I  go  back,  for  Mrs.  D.  says  it  is  a 
meer  nothing. 

Sunday  night,  10  o'clock. 

It  cannot  rain,  but  it  thunders.  I  have  had  another  letter 
from  you  to-day,  and  there  is  strong  presumption  that  Lord 
Howe  has  taken  six  or  seven  French  men-of-war  of  the  line. 
My  heart  takes  joy  on  the  first,  and  my  head  will  on  the  second, 
if  confirmed  ;  for  they  are  in  different  departments,  my  heart 
presiding  over  home  affairs,  and  my  head  over  foreign.  Yoid 
the  marrow  of  the  rumour.  A  Lieutenant  arrived  yesterday  at 
the  Admiralty  from  L'^  Howe,  who,  learning  that  part  of  the 
Brest  fleet  had  sailed  to  meet  and  convoy  their  West  Indiamen, 
his  lordship,  26  strong,  had  set  out  post,  and  had  actually  got 
between  the  French  and  their  coast,  and  last  night  and  this 
morning  all  London  was  expecting  a  second  dispatch,  at  least 
this  evening.  All  I  can  do  here  is  to  listen  for  ringing  of  bells 
— they  do  not  ring  yet. 

Well,  now  for  your  letter,  which,  in  compliment  to  your 
curiosity,  I  postponed  answering  till  I  had  tapped  Lord  Howe. 

Y'  dear  good  Grrandam  !  I  hope  you  have  told  her  over  and 
over  how  much  I  approved  of  your  visit  to  her ;  how  constantly  I 
have  recommended  y'  staying  longer.  Y'  gratitude  and  affection 
for  her  have  always  charmed  me  ;  and  it  is  very  natural  that  I 
should  admire  how  two  young  women  can  show  and  feel  such 
kindness  and  attentions  to  antediluvians ! 

Our  weather  it  seems  still  continues  better  than  yours ;  yester- 
day was  as  mild  as  April  ought  always  to  be,  and  to-day  is  better 
than  most  English  Junes.  The  leaves  all  went  at  once,  but 
being  of  so  rich  a  hue,  the  garden  looks  like  the  country  of  El 
Dorado.  You  seem  to  apprehend  that  it  will  not  be  found 
intrinsically  resembling ;  but  I  find  that  in  y'  Riding  of  York- 
shire they  read  nothing  but  Jacobin  journals.  I  like  the  account 
of  y''  horse  much  better  than  of  your  politics.  I  shall  not  be  able 
to  report  his  health  to  y"^  friends  near  the  ferry,  whom  I  am  not 


1793]  REPORTED   NAVAL   VICTORY.  421 

likely  to  see  agaia  this  season.  I  am  still  less  likely  to  connect 
with  y"^  Mrs.  Osbaldiston — mercy  on  us  !  why  she  has  ten  children 
: — I  would  as  soon  visit  a  boarding  dame  at  Eton  School.  Lady 
Poulet's  house  would  not  hold  her  and  her  brood,  so  she  has  hu-ed 
Dr.  Duval's  parsonage,  which  is  much  less,  so  her  progeny,  I  sup- 
pose, are  to  go  to  grass  upon  the  glebe.  She  can  have  the  house 
but  for  seven  months,  and  pays  extravagantly  for  it,  100  guineas. 

Monday. 
I  have  waited  to  the  last  minute  of  the  post  time  for  news  or 
the  newspaper,  and  neither  come.     Is  this  a  good  symptom  or  a 
bad  one? 

Berkeley  Square,  Nov.  30,  1793. 

I  will  send  you  no  more  victories  of  Lord  Howe  till  he  sends 
them  himself.  In  what  a  hubbub  have  we  been  kept — aye,  and 
still  are,  ever  since  this  day  se'nnight,  when  we  were  told  he  was 
catching  sis  of  the  Brest  fleet.  Every  moment  we  expected  to 
see  him  saiUng  into  St.  James's  with  six  French  men-of-war  tied 
to  his  chariot's  wheels,  and  dragging  their  West  India  fleet  in 
tow.  Then  came  an  account  from  two  of  his  own  squadron  that 
had  left  him  actually  boxing  with  two  French  ships,  and  then — 
and  then — a  dead  silence.  Not  a  cockboat  as  big  as  you  can  see 
from  Dover  Cliff  has  come  in  with  a  syllable  for  five  days  !  All 
the  town  has  been  running  about,  asking,  guessing,  conjecturing, 
and  spreading  imaginary  reports.  '  Any  news  of  Lord  Howe  ? 
What !  no  news  yet ! '  Well !  this  morning  a  Danish  or  Dutch 
ship  has  told  somebody,  who  has  told  everybody,  who  have  told 
the  True  Briton,  who  has  just  told  me,  that  Lord  Howe  has 
taken  five  men-of-war,  and  will  be  here  with  them  presently. 
If  they  come  by  here  before  this  must  go  to  the  post,  you  shall 
know ;  if  not,  you  must  scold  the  east  wind,  they  say,  or  learn 
what  you  can  from  y'  Jacobin  newspapers,  who  will  not  tell 
you  a  word  of  truth  as  long  as  they  can  help  it.  I  must  go 
talk  of  something  that  interests  me  more  than  random  rumours. 

I  have  seen  y'  servant  John,  who  gives  me  an  excellent  ac- 
count of  you  both,  and  last  night  I  received  y"'  short  letter  of 
the  25th.  I  thank  you  most  cordially  for  letting  me  hear  so 
frequently.  My  Agnes  I  know  does  not  love  writing,  yet  me- 
thinks  I  should  like  now  and  then  to  see  a  line  from  her  dear 


422  LETTERS.  [1793 

hand,  were  it  but  in  a  postscript.  The  volumes  I  send  you  are 
my  great  occupation,  yet  I  shall  be  most  heartily  glad  when  I 
shall  have  no  longer  occasion  to  dispatch  them ;  besides  the  best 
cause  of  their  cessation,  my  poor  lame  fingers  have  no  great 
delight  in  the  business.  I  supped  at  Mrs.  Darner's  last  night 
with  the  D''  of  Eichmond,  Lord  Derby,  the  Farrens,  and  y' 
grandsire's  historian,*  and  shall  go  to  Lady  Lucan'sf  this  even- 
ing to  meet  Mr.  Burke  and  Mr.  Gibbon, — I  will  not  indulge 
its  unwilliDgness,  tho'  I  plead  it  to  any  other  occasional  cor- 
respondent and  employ  Kirgate;  but  I  really  should  be  ashamed 
to  dictate  even  to  him  all  the  trumpery  that  I  write  to  you, 
because  I  write  to  you  two  just  as  I  should  talk — the  only  com- 
fortable kind  of  letters. 

Poor  Lady  Harriot  Conyers  is  dead.  S'  Charles  Bladdon  is 
returned  alone,  having  been  extremely  ill.  He  looks  ill,  and  is 
much  emaciated,  yet  recovered.  He  inquired  after  you  both 
with  great  zeal,  which  I  liked. 

The  night  before  last  I  met  at  Lady  Bute's  the  Pope's  Nuncio, 
Mr.  Erskine,  who  told  us  this  story.  The  Eoman  mob  last  year, 
when  threatened  by  the  fiends  at  Paris,  rose  and  murdered  a 
Frenchman.  His  Holiness  sent  a  monsignore  in  his  coach  to 
appease  the  tumult,  but  he  could  not  prevail.  The  people 
insisted  on  the  expulsion  of  all  the  Gauls,  and  a  very  sensible 
tribune  leant  on  the  window  of  the  coach,  and  argued  with  the 
Legate,  who  at  last  said,  '  But  you  should  not  confound  all  the 
French  together  ;  there  are  some  good  and  some  bad.'  '  Very 
well,'  said  the  plebeian'  orator,  '  but  you  must  tell  our  holy  Fa- 
ther, that  unless  he  sends  away  all  the  French,  we  will  dispatch 
them,  and  send  the  good  to  heaven  and  the  bad  to  the  devil.' 

As  soon  as  we  fiTid  Lord  Howe,  we  shall  transfer  our  anxiety 
and  curiosity  to  Lord  Moira.  An  English  captain  of  a  sloop,  who 
was  one  of  the  250  prisoners  of  ours  that  were  transferred  from 
Dinant  to  St.  Maloes  before  they  were  sent  away  to  Guernsey,  has 
deposed  before  our  Cabinet  that,  complaining  of  the  badness  of 
the  bread  with  which  they  were  fed  while  confined  at  the  latter, 
the  chief  of  the  guard  said,  '  You  are  not  worse  treated  than 
we  ourselves,'  and  showed  him  a  black  loaf  composed  half  of 
sand. 

*  Meaning  Mr.  Jemingham,  autlior  of  '  The  Siege  of  Berwick.' 
t  Grandmother  of  the  present  Earl  of  Luoan. 


1793]  LAST   LETTER   TO   BRAXSBY.  423 

Half  an  hour  after  Three. 
I  have  this  moment  seen  a  person  who  has  just  been  at  the 
Secretary's  Office,  where  they  know  no  more  of  Lord  Howe  than 
the  man  in  the  moon,  or  perhaps  not  so  much,  for  there  they 
say  all  lost  things  are  "deposited.  So  I  will  go  and  be  dressed, 
and  you  must  satisfy  yourself  with  being  sure  that  you  know  as 
much  as  all  London.     Adieu  ! 

[Berkeley  Square,  Wednesday,  Dec.  4,  1793. 

I  begin  my  last  letter  to  Bransby  that  I  may  have  it  ready  to 
send  away  the  moment  I  shall  have  anything  worth  telling. 
What  is  become  of  Lord  Howe  and  Co.  you  may  guess  if  you 
please,  as  everybody  is  doing. 

I  am  weary  of  conjectures, 

but  shall  not  end  them  like  Cato,  because  I  take  the  fate  of  a 
whole  fleet  a  little  more  likely  to  come  to  a  solution  than  doubts 
in  metaphysics ;  and  if  Lord  Howe  should  at  last  bring  home 
two  or  three  French  men-of-war,  one  would  not  be  out  of  the 
way  to  receive  them.  In  the  mean  time  let  us  chat  as  if  the 
destiny  of  half  Europe  were  not  at  this  moment  in  agitation. 

On  Sunday  night  I  found  the  Comte  de  Coigni*  at  Lady 
Lucari's.  He  was  to  set  out  the  next  morning  with  Lord  Moira's 
expedition  as  a  common  soldier.  This  sounded  decent  and  well ; 
but  you  may  guess  that  he  had  squeezed  a  little  Frenchism  into 
his  intention,  and  had  asked  for  a  vessel  and  some  soldiers  to 
attend  him.  I  don't  know  whether  he  has  condescended  to  go 
without  them.  I  asked  him  about  his  daughter  ;f  he  said  he 
did  not  believe  she  is  in  prison :  others  say  it  is  the  Duchess  de 
Fleury,  her  mother-in-law.  I  have  been  surprised  at  not  seeing 
or  hearing  anything  of  poor  Fleury,J  but  I  am  told  he  has  been 
forced  to  abscond,  having  narrowly  escaped  being  arrested  by 
a  coachmaker  to  whom  he  owed  500?.  for  carriages,  which,  to 
be  sure,  he  must  have  had,  or  bespoken  at  Paris  before  the 
Eevolution.] 

.Tust  as  I  had  written  the  above,  a  ridiculous  accident  hap- 
pened.    The  postman  brought  me  a  letter,  directed  as  he  thought 

*  Younger  brother  to  the  Due  de  Coigni,  the  Grand  Ecuyer  of  Marie 
Antoinette,  and  great  uncle  to  the  present  Due  de  Coigni. — M.B. 
t  The  Duchess  de  Fleury. 
J  The  Due  de  Fleury,  the  Comte  de  Coigni's  son-in-law. 


424  LETTERS.  [1793 

to  me,  the  predominant  feature  on  which  was  Berkeley  Square, 
with  my  name  not  quite  so  distinct.  I  opened,  and  found  an- 
other within  for  Lady  Orford,  so  plain  as  I  thought,  that  tho' 
my  surprise  made  me  look  at  it  again,  I  still  saw  nothing  but  to 
Lady  Orftyrd.  You  know  my  extreme  stupidity  when  I  have  taken 
anything  into  my  head  or  my  eyes.  I  had  no  more  doubt  of  having 
seen  Lady  Orford  than  if  I  had  written  those  words  designedly 
myself.  The  next  step  was  to  conclude  that  this  was  some  joke, 
and  that  you  was  the  person  meant.  I  tore  it  open,  and  tho'  in 
the  second  line  stood  Lady  Oxford,  so  strongly  had  my  fancy 
taken  possession  of  me,  that  tho'  the  letter  consisting  of  four 
sides  of  congratulations  on  her  ladyship's  recent  marriage,  I 
could  perceive  nothing  but  a  dull  joke,  as  I  still  supposed  it,  till 
in  the  fourth  page  appeared  Lady  Oxford  in  still  larger  letters 
than  all  the  rest.  I  have  no  excuse  for  my  blunders,  but  that 
on  both  directions  the  x  was  so  ill  marked,  or  rather  only  half 
of  it,  that  it  looked  on  a  reinspection  more  like  an  r  than  an  x, 
and  being  coupled  with  Berkeley  Square,  where  L'^  Oxford  does 
not  reside,  it  appeared  indubitably  designed  for  me :  nor  indeed 
did  Lord  Oxford,  whom  I  never  saw,  nor  ever  heard  mentioned, 
and  whose  late  marriage  which  I  think  I  did  see  in  the  papers, 
but  did  not  in  the  least  recollect,  come  into  my  head  ;  tho'  above 
a  year  ago  something  of  the  same  kind  happened,  when  his 
steward  sent  me  accounts  of  the  races  at  Hereford  :  but  I  am  not 
apt  to  recollect  things  and  people  about  whom  I  don't  care  a 
straw  ;  for  you  are  sensible  how  much  I  care,  or  not  at  all.  I 
bundled  up  my  blunders  with  a  million  of  humble  excuses  to  their 
lordship  and  ladyship  ;  but  I  wish  the  man  would  have  a  house 
in  London,  or  I  am  very  capable  of  being  in  the  scrape  again,  as 
I  seldom  remember  to  read  a  direction,  nor  can  treasure  up  in 
mind  I  don't  know  who's  colts  or  weddings. 

Sophia  came  to  me  just  after  I  had  sent  my  packet  to  the  post. 
Had  she  arrived  half  an  hour  earlier,  would  it  have  been  very 
unlike  me  to  imagine  that  the  letter  to  Lady  Orford  was  wit  of 
hers,  and  that  she  came  to  see  what  effect  it  had  ?  I  am  very 
glad  I  did  not  make  that  mistake  too  ;  I  fear  I  should  not  have 
been  so  indifferent  about  it. 

[Thursday,  noon. 

Yesterday  came  a  letter  to  the  Admiralty  from  Penzance, 
notifying  that  Lord  Howe  has  taken  five  of  the  Brest  squadron. 


1793]  ME,.    JEKKIXGHAM'S    PLAY.  425 

8  o'clock. 
Another  account  is  come  to  Mrs.  Nugent*  from  her  husband, 
with  the  same  story  of  the  five  captive  French  men-of-war,  and 
so  that  reading  is  admitted;  but  for  my  part,  I  will  admit 
nothing  but  under  Lord  Howe's  own  hand.  It  is  tiresome  to  be 
like  the  scene  in  '  Amphitryon,'  and  cry  one  minute,  '  Obvious, 
obvious,'  and  the  next,  '  Dubious,  dubious.'  Such  fluctuability 
is  fit  only  for  a  stockjobber.  Adieu !  I  must  dress  and  dine, 
or  I  shall  not  be  ready  to  wait  on  y'  grandfather  Seton.] 

Wednesday,  past  11  at  night,  Dec.  6, 1793. 

That  there  may  have  been  such  persons  as  King  Arthur,  and 
the  Wandering  Jew,  and  Lord  Howe  and  his  fleet,  I  will  not 
take  on  me  to  deny ;  yet  as  History  is  silent  on  what  became  of 
them,  I  will  not  easily  credit  their  re-existence.  I  know  I 
have  been  told  late  this  evening  that  signals  of  a  fleet  have 
been  seen  off  Plymouth,  supposed  to  be  Lord  Howe's ;  but  as  it 
is  also  supposed  that  he  had  no  French  captures  with  him,  I 
don't  see  why  this  should  be  imagined,  unless  more  is  known 
than  has  come  to  my  knowledge ;  and  there  I  must  leave  this 
mystery  till  to-morrow. 

I  hope  to  have  a  letter  from  you  then  with  a  new  direction, 
for  that  to  Branshy]  I  trust  is  obsolete.  As  no  grandmother 
is  any  longer  an  obstacle,  I  unchain  my  impatience,  which  has 
behaved  like  an  angel,  and  I  shall  begin  to  look  for  signals 
from  Highgate  Hill. 

I  went  last  night  to  the  Charming's  tragedy,^  and  most 
sincerely  found  it  much  superior  to  my  expectation.  The  lan- 
guage is  very  good ;  there  are  pretty  similes  and  allusions,  no 
bombast,  nothing  low,  and  the  ordonnance  well  contrived.  It 
seldom  languishes,  and  a  scene  of  generous  contention  between 
your  two  uncles  really  fine.  Mrs.  Pope  plays  admirably,  and 
was  extremely  applauded ;  the  men  do  not  shine,  but  the  whole 
was  well  received,  without  a  single  murmur  against  any  part. 
y  pretty  friend  Mrs.  Stanhope  was  in  our  box,  and  supped 
with  us  afterwards  at  Mrs.  Darner's,  charging  me  to  say  much 
for  her  to  you.     Well !    there  have  I  been  twice  at  the  play 

*  The  wife  of  Admiral  Nugent. — M.£. 

t  The  seat  of  Francis  Cholmeley,  Esq.,  in  Yorkshire. — M.B. 

i  He  means  Mr.  Jerningham's  play, '  The  Siege  of  Berwick.' — M.B. 


426  LETTERS.  [1793 

this  week!  I  confess  I  felt  very  comfortably  this  morning, 
knowing  I  was  not  to  go  to  the  play  again  to-night.  I  had  not  the 
least  difficulty  in  getting  in  or  out  at  either  theatre,  nor  was 
fatigued ;  but  I  do  not  like  exhibiting  my  antiquity  in  public : 
it  looks  as  if  I  forgot  it. 

Monday  morning. 

I  had  no  letter  from  you  on  Saturday  as  I  expected,  with 
directions  for  a  new  direction  ;  and  if  I  receive  none  to-day,  as 
I  begin  to  fear  I  shall  not,  it  being  past  twelve,  I  shall  not 
venture  this  till  to-morow,  not  being  sure  where  you  are,  tho' 
Mrs.  D.  risked  one  on  Saturday  to  York  with  the  newspaper, 
and  I  desired  her  to  say  I  would  write  to-day.  If  I  do  not,  it 
is  your  fault  who  promised  me  a  direction. 

This  letter,  tho'  begun  three  days  ago,  will  clear  up  no 
mystery,  for  no  news  yet  from  Lord  Howe.  All  we  know  is, 
that  he  did  not  get  up  with  the  five  French  ships,  for  they 
escaped  him  and  are  returned  to  Brest.  You  may  perhaps 
expect  a  little  from  Lord  Moira,  the  French  having  had  time 
to  guard  all  the  coast,  and  the  Eoyalists  of  La  Vendee,  tho'  they 
have  twice  again  very  lately  beaten  the  Eepublicans,  being 
retired  to  the  Loire.  Not  a  tittle  do  I  know  of  other  news  of 
foreign  or  home  consumption. 

Past  one. 

I  this  moment  receive  the  double  letter  from  Dear  Both — 
but  suppose  I  shall  be  able  to  say  little  to  it,  tho'  its  Doublicity 
(for  I  had  rather  forge  a  word  than  use  one  so  repugnant  to  our 
triple  veracity  as  Duplicity)  makes  it  twice  as  welcome  as  its 
predecessors ;  but  it  is  the  hour  when  my  coffee-house  generally 
opens,  and  I  expect  to  be  interrupted,  and  have  heard  nothing 
to  add  within  this  half  hour.  My  Agnes's  letter  is  exactly  like 
her  modesty  about  her  own  drawings,  always  depreciating  herself; 
but  I  am  not  blind  to  the  merit  of  her  pencil  or  pen,  as  I  was 
to  the  letter  for  Lady  Oxford,  who  I  am  told  is  not  yet  so. 
Had  I  known  the  marriage  not  yet  solemnized,  I  should  have 
been  still  more  persuaded  that  it  was  levelled  at  one  of  you. 

You  bid  me  direct  to  the  post  office  at  York.  Hark ! — some- 
body knocks !  It  was  the  Duchess  of  Gloucester,  *  and  she  has 
staid  so  late,  I  must  hurry  and  finish,  only  that  I  cannot  forget 

*  His  niece,  one  of  the  daughters  of  his  brother,  Sir  Edward  Walpole. 


1793]  LORD    HOWE.  427 

what  it  is  so  important  to  me  to  ask — you  bid  me  direct  to 
York  till  I  direct  my  coachman  to  Audley  Street.  Why  ?  are 
you  to  arrive  in  a  balloon !  are  you  to  stop  no  where  ?  You 
tell  me  to  expect  you  on  Wednesday  or  Thursday  sevennight ; 
but  there  is  no  date  to  Agnes's  or  your  half  of  the  double  letter, 
which  I  conclude  was  written  on  Saturday,  but  by  not  mention- 
ing on  what  day  you  are  to  set  out,  nor  how  long  you  propose 
being  on  the  road,  can  I  guess  how  long  I  may  direct  to  York  ? 
I  am  to  sup  in  Sackville  Street  *  to-night,  and  will  learn,  if  I 
can,  greater  certainty.  Well,  the  middle  or  end  of  next  week 
(for  I  will  allow  for  accidental  delays)  will  I  trust  put  an  end 
to  difficulties  of  correspondence,  and  to  correspondence  hy 
letters.     Adieu ! 

[Dec.  13,  1793. 
You  will  not  wonder  at  my  dullness  about  the  time  of  y"" 
setting  out,  and  of  the  gites  you  are  to  make  on  the  road ;  you 
are  used  to  my  fits  of  incomprehension ;  and,  as  is  natural  at 
my  age,  I  believe  they  increase.  If  I  believed  Lord  Howe's 
success  too  rapidly,  you  have  seen  by  all  the  newspapers  that 
both  the  Ministers  and  the  public  were  equally  credulous  from 
the  collateral  channels  that  imported  such  assertions.  Well! 
if  you  have  been  disappointed  of  capturing  five  or  six  French 
men-of-war,  you  must  at  present  stay  y*^  appetite  by  some 
i  handsome  slices  of  St.  Domingo,  and  by  plentiful  goblets  of 
French  blood  shed  by  the  Duke  of  Brunswick,  which  we  firmly 
believe,  tho'  the  official  intelligence  was  not  arrived  last  night 
(Thursday).  His  Highness,  who  has  been  so  serene  for  above 
a  year,  seems  to  have  waked  to  some  purpose ;  and,  which  is 
not  less  propitious,  his  victory  indicates  that  his  principal,  the 
King  of  Prussia,  has  added  no  more  French  jewels  to  his  regalia. 
I  shall  like  to  hear  the  National  Convention  accuse  him  of  beinsc 
bribed  by  a  contrary  Pitfs  diamond.] 

If  you  have  seen  in  the  papers  the  relation  of  Lady  Wallace's 
brutality  to  Lady  Dashwood,  you  know  how  well  qualified  she 
was  to  be  an  advocate  for  Dumourier :  at  Paris  she  might  ha?e 
been  aide-de-camp  to  Mile.  Theroign.  Are  such  furies  of  the 
same  species,  of  the  same  sex  with  the  unparalleled  Marie 
Antoinette  ? 

[I  have  a  card  from  the  Margravine  to  sup  at  Hammersmith 

*  Where  Mrs.  Damer  then  lived. 


428  LETTEES.  [1793 

on  Tuesday,  whither  I  shall  certainly  not  go.  Do  you  think, 
if  the  whole  circle  of  Princes  in  Westphalia  were  to  ask  me  for 
7iext  Thursday  evening,  *  that  I  would  accept  the  invitation  ?] 

You  will  wonder  perhaps  that  I  have  tumbled  to  tittle-tattle, 
and  not  dropped  a  syllable  on  Lord  Moira  and  Toulon :  in  fact 
I  know  nothing  positive  about  either — am  very  sanguine  about 
neither.  My  hopes  are  that  the  Convention  will  be  distracted, 
and  not  know  which  of  their  armies  they  may  venture  to  di- 
minish to  support  the  most  urgent. 

[Saturday,  Dec.  14,  1703. 

I  am  not  going  to  dis-laurel  the  Duke  of  Brunswick,  but  not  a 
sprig  is  yet  come  in  confirmation.  Military  critics  even  con- 
jecture, by  the  journals  from  Manheim  and  Francfort,  that  the 
German  victories  have  not  been  much  more  than  repulses  of 
the  French,  and  have  been  bought  dearly.  I  confess  my  best 
hopes  are  from  the  Factions  at  Paris — if  the  gangreen  does  not 
gain  the  core,  how  calculate  the  duration  ?  One  wonders  now 
that  France,  in  its  totality,  was  not  more  fatal  to  Europe  than 
even  it  was.  Is  not  it  astonishing  that  after  five  years  of  such 
havoc,  such  emigrations,  expulsions,  massacres,  annihilation  of 
commerce,  evanition  of  specie,  and  real  or  impending  famine, 
they  can  still  furnish  and  support  armies  against  us  and  the 
Austrians  in  Flanders,  against  the  Duke  of  Brunswick  and 
Wurmser,  against  us  at  Toiilon,  against  the  King  of  Sardinia, 
against  Spain,  against  the  Eoyalist  in  La  Vendee,  and  along  the 
coast,  against  our  expedition  under  Lord  Moira ;  and  tho'  we 
have  got  fifteen  of  their  men-of-war  at  Toulon,  they  have  six- 
teen or  more  at  Brest,  and  are  still  impertinent  with  a  fry  of 
privateers.  Consider  too  that  all  this  spirit  is  kept  up  by  the 
most  extravagant  lies,  delusions,  rodomontade;  by  the  extir- 
pation of  the  usual  root  of  enthusiasm,  religion,  and  by  the 
terror  of  murder,  that  ought  to  revolt  all  mankind.  If  such  a 
system  of  destruction  does  not  destroy  itself,  there  is  an  end  of 
that  ignis  fatuus;  human  reason  and  French  policy  must 
govern,  or  exterminate  mankind. 

I  this  moment  received  your  Thursday's  note,  and  with  those 
sweet  words  '  You  need  not  leave  a  card,  we  shall  be  at  home.' 
I  do  not  believe  I  shall  send  you  an  excuse. 

*  The  evening  tlie  Miss  Benys  were  to  ai'rive. 


1793]  LORD    OEFOED's   LINES   TO   MISS   BERKY.  429 

The  Marshal  (Conway)  has  stepped  in  to  tell  me  he  has  just 
met  his  nephew  L'^  Yarmouth,  who  has  received  a  letter  from  a 
foreign  Minister  at  Manheim,  who  asserts  all  the  D.  of  Brunswick's 
victories  and  the  destruction  or  dispersion  of  the  French  army 
in  that  quarter.  The  Earl  maintains  that  the  King  of  Prussia's 
politics  are  totally  changed  to  the  right,  and  that  18,000  more 
of  his  troops  have  joined  the  Allies.  I  should  like  to  know 
and  to  have  the  Convention  know  that  the  murder  of  the  Queen 
of  France  has  operated  this  revulsion.     .     .     . 

There  !  there  end  my  volumes  to  my  great  satisfaction !  If 
we  are  to  have  any  honfires  or  illuminations,  you  will  be  here 
to  light  them  yourselves.     Adieu  to  Yorkshire  !] 

P.S. — As  I  was  going  to  fold  my  letter.  Lord  Derby  and 
Miss  Farren  came  in:  from  good  breeding  I  was  dumb  on 
politics  ;  at  last,  she  asked  me  if  any  news  ?  I  said  coolly,  as  if 
relating  some  trifle,  '  The  D.  of  Brunswick  has  totally  dispersed 
the  French  army.'  The  Earl's  circular  face  became  oblong.  I 
added  with  the  same  composure,  '  and  the  King  of  Prussia  has 
taken  his  part  decidedly.'  The  Earl  said,  '  I  suppose  he  is  well 
paid  for  it.'  And  then  to  comfort  himself,  added,  '  Macbride 
says  L'^  Moira  must  return,' — which  I  do  not  believe. 

In  the  month  of  December  this  active  correspondence 
closed  between  Lord  Orford  and  the  Miss  Berrys  ;  and  the 
following  lines,  signed  '  0,'  though  not  dated,  were  pro- 
bably addressed  to  his  pen  on  this  occasion  :  — 

TO 

MY    PEN, 

ON   THE   CESSATION   OP   OTTB   COEEESPONDENCB   BY  HER  EEItJRN. 

Here  rest  thou,  faithful  servant  of  my  heart ! 
With  thanks  I  quit  thee,  though  rejoic'd  to  part. 
Thou  iind  one,  hast  a  tongue  to  ahsence  lent, 
And  almost  chear'd  regret  into  content, 
For  while  each  thought  of  mine  thou  hast  conveyed, 
A  pen  still  kinder  has  each  note  repaid ; 
And  thus,  while  distance  urg'd  its  tyrant  laws, 
Our  converse  scarce  appear'd  to  feel  a  pause ; 
Yet  now  thy  freedom  I  with  joy  restore, 
And  thy  fond  service  hope  to  ask  no  more. 
To  Mss  B.  '  0. 


430  LETTERS.  [1793 

The  lines  addressed  to  one  of  Miss  Berry's  own  pens, 
by  Mr.  Edward  Jerningham,*  may  properly  be  here  intro- 
duced, though  written  on  new  year's  day, 

LINES  WRITTEN  BY  ONE  OF  HEE  OWN  PENS. 

TO   MISS    BERET, 

Thougli  wit's  brigM  sun  your  sportful  thoughts  display, 
And  through  your  converse  dart  a  dazzling  ray ! 
Yet  still  -we  praise  thy  magic's  softer  pow'r 
When  easy  friendship  smooths  the  social  hour  ! 
When  o'er  another's  pain  you  pour  the  balm, 
And  round  your  bow'r  diffuse  a  heartfelt  calm ! 
Thus  in  your  summer  mind  at  once  are  seen 
Italia's  skies  and  Albion's  soothing  green  ! 

Jan.  1, 1793. 

*  Edward  Jerningham,  so  often  alluded  to  as  '  the  charming  man,'  was 
bom  1727,  of  a  Roman  Catholic  family.  He  was  educated  at  Douay  and  at 
Paris.  His  first  work  was  the  poem  in  favour  of  the  Magdalen  Hospital ; 
his  best  was  the  '  Rise  and  Progress  of  Scandinavian  Poetry.'  A  collection 
of  his  poetical  dramas  was  published  in  1806.  Died  1812.  He  lived  m 
intimacy  with  the  most  distinguished  literary  men  of  his  times. — Impei-ial 
Dictionary  of  Universal  Biography. 


1794]  LETTKE   FEOM    LOED   OEFOED.  431 


LETTERS. 

1794. 

Miss  Beeet's  entry  for  this  year  is — '  Agnes  went  to 
Cheltenham  with  Mrs.  Lockhart.  We  were  a  month  at 
Prospect  House,  Isle  of  Thanet.' 

The  correspondence  with  Lord  Orford  continued  fre- 
quent as  ever,  when,  by  his  removal  to  London,  or  by 
their  excursions  elsewhere,  the  inmates  of  Strawberry 
HiU  and  its  little  appendage  were  separated.  The  first 
of  these  epistles  is  dated  April  16th.*  The  two  next  are 
as  foUows :  — 

April  21,  1794. 

You  are  most  kind  indeed  in  offering  to  come  to  town  for 
me,  but  you  certainly  shall  not.  I  will  not  inveigle  you  from 
Cliveden  when  the  verdure,  blossoms,  and  weather  are  in  per- 
fection. In  this  country  we  should  always  take  summer  by 
its  forelock,  tho'  it  may  claim  its  waiting,  like  the  groom  of 
the  stole,  out  of  the  regular  course.  We  may  have  no  more 
sunshine  before  our  faithfuU  October.  I  can  force  myself  to 
go  out  in  an  evening  if  I  will.  I  was  at  Mrs.  Darner's  last  night, 
and  staid  till  they  went  to  supper,  and  was  not  fatigued. 
There  were  her  parents,  the  House  of  Argyll,  the  Greatheads, 
Mrs.  Hervey,  and  the  Charming  Man — and  not  a  spoonfuU  of 
news.  To-day  I  have  seen  nobody  yet,  but  it  is  only  one 
o'clock,  and  I  have  been  airing  in  my  coach  as  far  as 
Fulham. 

I  have  found  on  my  table  a  rhapsody  in  verse  on  my  re- 
covery, so  extravagant  that,  added  to  the  post-mark  Isleworth, 
it  can  come  from  no  mortal  but  our  neighbour  whose  Cupid 
from  the  top  of  his  gazebo  was  drowned.  I  must  give  you  a 
slight  sketch :  Science  begs  Jove  to  spare  my  life ;  Jove  is  very 

•  Publislied  in  1846. 


432  LETTERS.  [1794 

willing;  but  not  being  so  omnipotent  as  Science  and  you  perhaps 
imagined,  be  calls  for  bis  bousebold  gods,  bis  Lares ;  and  wbo 
do  you  tbink  they  were?  why  Chiron  and  Esculapius,  and 
Hermes  (it  is  lucky  for  my  reputation,  as  Mr.  Courtney  talks 
of  the  fire  of  my  old  age,)  that  he  did  not  call  Mercury  !  The 
Trinity  of  Lares  herbalize  the  plains  of  Tbessal)^,  but  find  no 
plants  good  against  gout.  So,  while  such  pagan  efforts  fruitless 
prove, 

The  God  of  Mercy  pities  feeble  Jove. 

I  am  really  ashamed  to  transcribe  such  abominable  nonsense. 
The  conclusion  is  as  absurd,  but  not  so  entertaining ;  it  says,  I 

Eacli  theologio  sect  can  calmly  view, 
And,  -uncoiTupted,  relisli  Ijut  the  true,  &c. 

It  is  refreshing  to  read  Mr.  Courtney's  satire  after  such  flattery. 
Marshal  Conway  came  in  as 

My  bane  and  antidote  were  both  before  me ; 

I  showed  him  both,  and  he  -would  have  had  a  copy  of  the 
panegyric,  as  perfect  in  its  kind,  but  I  thought  it  not  fair  to 
expose  my  poet  laureat  farther.  The  Marshal  bids  me  tell 
you  that  however  proud  you  may  be  of  your  nightingales, 
they  have  as  large  a  colony  at  Park  Place.  He  brought  me 
the  complete  conquest  of  Martiuico,  with  the  capture  of  an 
hundred  merchantmen  and  other  vessels,  and  an  enormous 
quantity  of  stores. 

There  !  I  shall  wait  for  nothing  more.     I  think  I  send  you 
enough,  as  my  Advertiser  is  daily. 

Strawberry  Hill,  May  Day,  1794. 
I  will  come  out  of  town  ten  times  to  my  going  thither  once 
(as  a  tutor  at  Cambridge  said  to  his  pupils,  scolding  them  for 
leaving  their  chambers  and  studies  so  often,  and  going  out  of 
college),  if  it  brings  such  good  luck  and  good  news.  Yesterday, 
as  I  got  into  my  coach,  I  received  the  extraordinary  gazette, 
witboiit  a  mouthfull  of  success,  and  a  miscarriage  of  half  the 
victory  by  the  non-arrival  of  Greneral  Mansel,  who  at  last,  poor 
man !  I  find  came  too  soon  for  himself.  At  night,  John  had 
been  in  Twickenham,  and  heard  that  a  courier  galloped  thro' 
the  village  as  fast  as  he  could  considering  that  he  was  loaded 


1794]  LETTER   TO   MISS   AGNES   BERRY.  433. 


* 


with  a  stack  of  laurels  that  he  was  carrying  to  the  Duchess  of 
York  to  make  bonfires  at  Oatlands.  I  knew  not  for  what,  till- 
on  my  breakfast-table  just  now  I  found  y'  welcome  letter,  and 
another  from  Marshal  Conway  confirming  the  great  victory,  the 
prodigious  number  of  cannon  taken,  our  small  loss,  and  the 
capture  of  the  French  general — as  fortunate  for  him  as  Mansel 
was  unlucky,  for  the  Jacobin  commander  would  certainly  have 
been  guillotined.  As  their  attack  was  meant  to  save  the  town, 
I  conclude  Lendrecies  will  be,  as  Mrs.  Piozzi  calls  everything 
that  is  not  so,  the  exergue  of  our  victory.  As  I  have  bushels  of 
may,  tho'  no  milkmaids  as  you  are  not  at  Cliveden,  I  shall  make 
a  garland  for  myself;  and  as  I  cannot  yet  dance,  I  shall  sit  and 
hear  the  nightingale  sing  its  country  dance,  as  I  did  last  night. 

The  Abbe  Nichols  is  in  favour  with  me  for  carrying  the 
good  news  to  you.  Did  he  not  seem  quite  an  emigre,  hoping 
he  should  soon  be  restored  to  his  chanoinie  at  Paris  ?  I  shaJI 
not  carry  my  congratulations  to  the  water-side  here.  I  believe 
Lally  is  already  restored  to  more  than  he  ever  had. 

I  shall  be  glad  to  hear  what  you  have  learnt  of  Mr.  Gribbon's; 
MSS. ;  but  that  will  not  be  before  Saturday.  Tho'  the  verdure 
is  not  brilliant  from  want  of  rain,  I  do  not  think  of  returning 
sooner.  That  evening,  I  conclude,  you  will  go  to  hear  the 
Banti  —  but  perhaps  you  may  call  for  a  moment.  I  am  so  de- 
lighted with  being  here  again,  that  I  do  not  like  to  lessen  my 
term.  Adieu! 

That  of  July  31st  is  addressed  to  Miss  Agnes,  then 
on  a  visit  to  Cheltenham. 

Strawberry  Hill,  July  31,  1794. 

The  longer  I  know  you,  my  sweet  Agnes,  the  more  I  find  new 
reasons  for  loving  you,  as  I  do  most  cordially.  You  threatened 
not  to  write,  and  I  have  already  received  a  charming  letter  from 
you  ;  and  now,  as  you  never  disimprove,  I  am  confident  you  will 
let  me  hear  from  you  sometimes,  tho'  I  will  not  be  exacting,  nor 
expect  you  to  do  what  you  do  not  love,  especially  as  I  shall  hear 
accounts  of  you  from  Mary ;  for  you  cannot  help  writing  to  one 
you  have  constantly  talked  to  ever  since  you  was  born.  What 
I  shall  most  and  earnestly  wish  to  hear  is,  that  you  mend  fast 
■^-and  then  I  shall  not  regret  your  absence. 

Y'  father  and  sister  arrived  soon  after  seven  yesterday  even- 

VOIi.  I.  F  F 


434  LETTERS.  [1794 


t 


ing.  I  did  not  expect  them  so  soon,  concluding  they  would  be 
pressed  to  stay  longer  at  Park-place,  and  would  be  frail.  They 
have  found  the  alterations  to  the  house  advanced  rapidly — but 
those  details  I  shall  leave  to  Mary. 

I  am  quite  happy  with  the  favorable  account  you  received  of 
dear  grandmama.  I  have  received  no  letters  for  either  of  you 
since,  but  yours  for  Mary  to-day.  Nor  have  I  a  tittle  to  tell  you, 
but  that  I  dined  with  Lady  Cecilia  at  Hampton  on  Tuesday,  with 
Mesdames  Wray  and  Jefferies  and  the  Wheelers,  who  returned 
to  Eichmond  by  8  o'clock  in  dread  of  Lady  Bute's  footpads, 
who  have  scared  the  whole  neighbourhood.  In  the  evening 
came  a  whole  cacklehood  from  the  Palace. 

Y'  sister  is  as  much  delighted  with  Oxford  as  I  expected  she 
would  be,  struck  with  profound  respect  for  Blenheim,  as  was  fit, 
but  not  a  quarter  so  delighted  with  Kuneham  as  I  am — and  she 
forgot  to  ask  to  see  the  room  with  my  tapestry, 

I  am  glad  you  are  comfortably  lodged,  and  don't  much 
lament  your  want  of  prospect.  You  will  return  with  the  more 
satisfaction  to  Cliveden. 

Your  pussy  is  enchanting.  With  all  the  graces  of  her  kind, 
she  has  all  the  sense  of  a  dog.  She  literally  comes  when  I  call 
her,  tho'  above  stairs,  follows  me  wherever  I  go  without  being 
called,  and  meets  me  when  I  come  home.  Still  I  shall  wean 
myself  from  her,  as  it  is  time  for  me  to  do  from  everything,  if 
I  can,  but  shall  not  restore  her  till  you  are  resettled — at  least, 
not  tiU  the  workmen  are  out  of  your  house. 

I  know  nothing  from  the  Continent,  but  that  armies  retire 
before  the  infernals,  and  that  there  has  been  a  new  butchery  at 
Paris,  in  which,  amongst  more  than  40,  the  Princess  d'Hennin's 
husband  has  lost  his  head — but  I  will  say  no  more  of  those 
horrors  ;  I  wish  I  could  help  thinking  on  them  ! 

Y'  sister  will  tell  you,  with  truth,  that  I  am  quite  well,  and 
enjoy  this  immortal  summer,  tho'  we  have  lost  all  verdure  and 
a  great  many  leaves.  We  have  had  some  hours  of  rain  on 
Sunday,  but  it  made  no  impression  on  the  turf. 

My  duty  to  my  silent  humble  relation,  and  my  love  to  her 
really  good  daughter,  tho'  I  don't  insist  on  your  delivering 
either.  I  say  nothing  as  a  conclusion  from  myself,  for  I  trust 
all  my  actions  and  all  my  letters  tell  you  how  much  I  am 

Y" 
0. 


1794]  ME.    AND   MRS.    GKEATHEAD.  435 

In  September,  the  Miss  Berrys  took  up  their  residence 
at  Prospect  House,  near  Broadstairs.  Miss  Berry's  first 
letter  from  thence  to  Mrs.  Darner  alludes  to  their  meeting 
with  Mr.  and  Mrs,  Greathead*  (of  Guy's  Chff,,  Warwick- 
shire), of  whom  she  often  makes  mention  in  subsequent 
letters  and  journals,  and  whose  friendship  she  so  highly 
valued  through  hfe. 

From  Miss  Berry  to  a  Friend. 

Prospect  House,  Sept.  1,  1794. 
What  joUy  souls,  as  yeu  truly  say,,  are  the  GrreatBeads !  We 
dined  with  them  yesterday  with  sut;h  an  Irish,  vulgar,  acting 
Capt,  Ashe  I  who  we  are  to  see  act  '  Hamlet,'  at  the  Margate 
Theatre  on  Tuesday  next.  Such  singing,  such  wit,  such  laugh- 
ter ;  and  they,  good-humoured  creatures,  so  enjoying  it  I  But 
do  not  pity  me  and  suppose  that  I  did  otherwise..  When  I  am 
neither  morally  nor  physically  unwell,  as  few.  people  observe 
more,  so  nobody  can  be  more  entertained  with  this  sort  of  acci- 
dental society,  marked  with  any  character  oi,  any  kind.  It  is 
all  food  for  my  mind,  and  while  I  can  have  the  blessing  of  being 
able  to-  digest  that  food,  with  one  or  two  kiirdred  souls,  whose 
perfections  it  enables  me  the  more  truly  to  appreciate,  and  the 
more  highly  to  value,  I  trust  I  shall  never  lose  my  taste  for  it. 

The  first  letters  preserved  from  Lord  Orford  to  the 
Miss  Berrys  of  the  month  of  September  are  of  the  21st 
and  24th.. 

Sunday,  Sept.  21,  1794. 
I  begin  my  Journal  to-day,  tho'  only  the  eve  of  its  departure, 
and  tho'  I  have  nothing  new  to.  tell  you  fram  Europe  or  from 
Strawberry-hill,  but  much  from  the  circumambient  district,  for 
the  marauders  have  begun  their  courses  again.  A  young  Mr. 
Digby,  who  lodges  in  Twickenham  near  Mrs.  Duane,  was,  with 
another  gentleman,  in  a  post-chaise  robbed  at  one  o^clock  at 
noon  by  two  footpads  on  the  heath  just  beyond  Whitton.  The 
son  of  the  maltster  here  by  the  post  house,  ditto  robbed  by 

*  Mr.  Berry  appears  to  have  been  on  terms  of  intimacy  with  Mr.  Great- 
head  as  far  hack  as  1790,  when  he  writes  to  him  from  Florence. 

r  r  2 


436  LETTERS.  [1704 

ditto ; — but,  on  inquiry,  this  happened  at  Kennington  Com- 
mon, where  they  are  more  apt  to  be  hanged  than  to  rob, — 
however  I  shall  grow  uneasy  when  you  return. 

My  nieces  the  Lisles  and  Miss  Hotham  dined  here  yesterday, 
as  you  knew  they  were  to  do,  and  I  had  judged  well,  for 
the  last  saved  me  all  expence  in  conversation.  At  night  I 
went  to  Lady  Onslow's,  at  Eichmond,  and  came  back  unrobbed. 
There  I  found  the  elder,  not  Agnes's,  Darrell,  who  was  very 
civil  about  her,  but,  unlike  his  brother,  was  much  more  struck 
with  her  companion,  whom  he  took  for  her  aunt,  and  thought 
extremely  agreeable.  I  cannot  say  I  ever  was  of  his  opinion, 
was  I  ? — even  before  she  spoiled  our  meeting  at  Park  Place. 

Ten  at  night. 

Yesterday  was  most  tempestuously  windy,  but  to-day  has  been 
warm  and  fine,  and  I  trust  you  have  ha'd  a  pleasant  journey. 
Tell  me  how  you  like  your  new  habitation,  and  if  you  find  it 
comfortable ;  but  do  not  go  and  prefer  the  ocean  to  the  poor 
Thames ! 

Maugre  banditti,  I  have  been  at  Lady  Bute's  .door  this  even- 
ing, but  she  was  not  well  enough  to  see  me ;  and  I  returned  with 
my  purse  and  watch  in  my  pocket.  Since  that  I  have  been  sit- 
ting with  the  Doyleys — and  there  must  end  my  letter,  for  I  shall 
certainly  hear  nothing  to-morow  before  the  post  goes  out,  and 
only  write  now  in  husbandly  obedience,  as  I  will  again,  as  soon 
as  I  know  anything  that  will  give  body  to  a  paragraph. 

I  beg  of  you  both  to  return  revived  and  looking  as  fresh  as 
Agnes  did  from  Cheltenham,  and  then  I  shall  not  lament  my 
involuntary  widowhood,  for  I  do  not  wish,  as  Lady  Wishort  says, 
for  any  iteration  of  nuptials,  nor  to  have  an  opportunity  of  ex- 
pressing myself  like  a  tender  husband  of  whom  I  have  just 
been  reading  in  Lysons,  who  set  up  as  a  tomb  for  his  wife  with 
this  epitaph,  '  Joan  le  Feme  Thomas  de  Frowicke  gist  icy,  et  le 
dit  Thomas  pense  de  giser  aveque  luy.'  You  see  folks  were  not  so 
delicate  in  that  age  as  we  are,  tho'  to  sleep  with  the  departed 
would  have  been  even  a  more  scriptural  phrase,  and  more  in  the 
style  of  our  good  ancestors,  qui  n'entendoient  pas  raillerie  en 
tout,  as  the  French  have  done  of  late  years.  Good  night,  sans 
raillerie,  le  feme  Marie  and  le  feme  Agnes,  &c. 

HoEACE  DE  Oxford, 


1794]  SUCCESSES   OF   THE   FRENCH.  437 

Monday  morning. 
In  the  new  edition  of  the  History  of  Highwaymen,  for  Mr; 
Digby  &  Co.,  '  Eobbed  in  a  post-chaise  by  two  footpads ;'  read, 
'  Eobbed,  as  he  was  walking  alone  on  the  heath,  bytwo  highway- 
men.' As  Truth  lies  at  the  bottom  of  a  well,  the  first  who  dips 
for  her  seldom  lets  the  bucket  down  low  enough. 

Wedn.,  Sept.  24, 1794,  neax  one. 

I  have  received  y'  long  letter  from  Prospect-house  and  thank 
you  most  kindly  for  it,  but  cannot  answer  it  now,  foF  the 
Churchills  are  here  in  the  room  while  I  write ;  it  has  rained 
heavily  ever  since  breakfast,  and  they  can  neither  go  out  in  their 
chaise  which  they  had  ordered,  nor  into  the  garden;  and  just  as 
I  was  going  to  begin  my  letter,  the  newspaper  came  in,  and  he 
has  been  reading  it  aloud  to  us  paragraph  by  paragraph,  half  of 
which  are  full  of  bad  news,  of  retreats  of  our  army,  of  the  cap- 
ture of  our  Mediterranean  fleet  by  the  French,  and,  what  I 
think  as  bad  as  anything  for  Europe,  of  the  King'  of  Prussia 
having  been  forced  to  raise  the  siege  of  Warsaw.  Before  I 
could  digest  half  this,  he  came  to  a  sale  of  milch  cows — I  don't 
mean  the  King  of  Prussia,  nor  that  we  are  again  one  of  his 
milch  cows;  but  Mr.  Churchill,  who  wants  some  for  Lewisham, 
and  has  been  reading  of  them  to  his  wife,  till  I  have  not  a  clear 
idea  left,  but  about  y'  bad  post-horses,  and  y''  liking  y"^  new 
residence,  at  which  I  rejoice.  Canterbury  I  know  by  heart  It 
was  the  chief  fund  of  my  chimney-pieces  and  other  morsels. 
The  tomb  of  the  Black  Prince  I  have  no  doubt  being  of  the 
time ;  his  father's  and  mother's  figures  in  the  Abbey  are  also 
bronze  and  well  executed,  and  the  first  posterior  to  his  son's,-  as 
also  that  of  Eichard  Ilnd,  and  of  Henry  IVth,  that  you  saw  at 
Canterbury.  By  St.  Austin's  gate  I  constantly  passed  as  I  went 
to  Mr.  Barret's,  and  admired  as  you  do  so  justly. 

Horace  Churchill  dined  and  supped  with  us  yesterday.  This 
evening  we  shall  go  to  the  Doileys,  so  I  shall  not  have  a  moment 
to  myself  to  do  what  I  like  best — writing  to  you.  My  kin  leave 
me  to-morow,  and  the  Marshal,  who  has  been  in  town  to  embark 
some  more  of  his  men  for  Holland — to  make  a  better  mouthfuU 
for  the  French,  is  to  come  to  me  till  next  morning,  and  on  Friday 
I  shall  go  to  town  myself  to  receive  my  money,  so  I  know  not 
when  I  shall  be  able  to  write  before  Saturday  or  Sunday^and 


438  LETTERS.  [1794 

oh !  alas !  here  is  Mrs.  Wheeler  and  her  sister,  and  I  must  finish, 
assuring  you  I  am  perfectly  well,  as  I  hope  you  both  are. — 
Adieu ! 

In  his  letter  of  tlie  27tK,  he  adverts  to  that  constant 
theme  of  his  advancing  age — the  fear  of  being  too 
exacting — in  his  wonted  tone  of  half  melancholy,  half 
pleasantry. 

[Strawberry  Hill,  Sept.  27,  Saturday  night,  1794. 

I  am  now  alone,  having  reserved  this  evening  to  answer  your 
long  and  Agnes's  short  letters,  but  in  this  single  one  to  both, 
for  I  have  not  matter  enough  for  a  separate  maintenance. 

I  went  yesterday  evening  to  Mrs.  Damer,  and  had  a  glimpse 
of  her  new  house — literally  a  glimpse,  for  I  saw  but  one  room 
on  the  first  floor,  where  she  had  lighted  a  fire,  that  I  might 
not  mount  two  flights ;  and  as  it  was  eight  o'clock,  and  quite 
dark,  she  only  opened  a  door  or  two,  and  gave  me  a  cafs  eye 
view  into  them.  One  blemish  I  had  descried  at  first— the 
house  has  a  corner  arrival  like  her  father's.  Ah  me  !  who  do 
not  love  to  be  led  thro'  the  public !  I  did  see  the  new  bust  of 
Mrs.  Siddons,  and  a  very  mistressly  performance  it  is  indeed.] 

Apropos,  Miss  Farren  is  missing.  She  is  known  to  have  landed 
last  Sunday — not  a  word  from  her  since,  which  makes  one — 
ay,  and  two — fear  that  she  is  ill  on  the  road.  Were  it  her 
mother,  she  herself  would  have  written. 

From  Mrs.  D.  I  went  to  my  sister's,  where  I  found  Sophia, 
Lady  Englefield,  Mrs.  and  Miss  Egerton,  and  Mr.  Falkener. 
Played  cribbage  with  them,  and  sat  by  while  they  supped. 
This  is  not  only  the  whole  of  my  private  history,  but  of  the 
world's  too,  as  far  as  it  has  informed  me,  except  that  Lord 
Southampton  does  not  go  to  fetch  the  future  Princess  of  Wales, 
precedents  having  sworn  that  by  their  books,  it  is  clear  that  it 
must  be  her  chamberlain,  tho'  she  has  none  before  she  is  she ; 
and  he,  they  say,  is  to  be  Lord  Pembroke — a  very  good  choice. 
Lady  Worcester,  Lady  Weymouth,  and  Lady  Parker  are  kissing 
the  public's  hand  for  the  bedchamber,  and  the  two  first  will  pro- 
bably kiss  tout  de  bon — of  the  third's  chance  I  know  nothing. 

[Mrs.  D.  was  surprised  at  my  saying  I  should  expect  you 
after  another  week.  She  said  you  had  not  talked  of  returning 
near  so  soon.     I  did  not  mention  this  as  if  to  gainsay  your 


1794]  LETTER  TO   THE  MISS   BEBEYS.  439 

intention:  on  the  contrary,  I  hope  and  beg  you  will  stay  as, 
long  as  either  of  you  thinks  she  finds  the  least  benefit  from  it — 
and  after  that  too,  as  long  as  you  both  like  to  stay.  .  .  . 
It  is  natural  for  me  to  delight  in  your  company,  but  I  do 
not  even  wish  for  it  if  it  lays  you  under  any  restraint.  I  have 
lived  a  thousand  years  to  little  purpose,  if  I  have  not  learnt 
that  half  a  century  more  than  the  age  of  one's  friends  is  not 
an  agr6ment  de  plus."] 

Tho'  I  should  not  doctrinate  myself  with  these  wholesome 
reflections,  as  I  think  you  will  do  me  the  justice  to  own  I  am 
frequently  doing,  (tho'  perhaps  I  may  not  practise  all  I  preach 
to  myself,)  still  I  should  not  want  monitors,  who  ever  and 
again  cry 

Poor  Anacreon,  thou'rt  grown  old  ! 

I  was  diverted  a  few  days  ago  with  a  paragraph  in  the  True 
Briton,  which,  supposing  that  the  Prince  is  to  reside  at  Hampton 
Court,  said  that,  as  there  is  a  theatre  and  a  tennis  court  in  the 
Palace,  Twickenham  will  not  want  a  succession  of  company, 
even  when  the  venerable  Earl  of  Orford  shall  be  no  more, 
I  little  thought  I  was  as  attractive  as  a  theatre  or  a  tennis 
court,  or  served  in  lieu  of  them.  Pray,  Lady  Leah  and  Lady 
Eachel,  venerate  y'  Methusalem ! 

What  an  odd  creature  Mr.  Ehymer  is !  I  am  glad  he  did 
not  propose  again  that  his  DoUyhymnia  should  dine  with 
you  too. 

[I  wish  you  had  seen  Canterbury  some  years  ago,  before  they 
whitewashed  it ;  for  it  is  so  coarsely  daubed,  and  thence  the 
gloom  is  so  totally  destroyed,  and  so  few  tombs  remain  for  so 
vast  a  mass,  that  I  was  shocked  at  the  nudity  of  the  whole. 

[Sunday  night,  28. 

I  have  received  another  letter  from  dear  Mary  of  the  26"*, 
and  here  is  one  for  sweet  Agnes  inclosed.  By  her  account  of 
Broadstairs,  I  thought  you  at  the  North  Pole ;  but  if  you  are, 
the  whales  must  be  metamorphosed  into  gigs  and  Whiskies,  or 
split  into  them,  as  heathen  gods  would  have  done,  or  Eich  the 
harlequin.  You  talk  of  Margate,  but  say  nothing  of  Kingsgate, 
where  Charles  Fox's  father  scattered  buildings  of  all  sorts,  but 
in  no  style  of  architecture  that  ever  appeared  before  or  has. 


440  LETTEES.  [1794 

sincej  and  with  no  connection  with  or  to  one  another,  and  in  all 
directions ;  and  yet  the  oddity  and  number  made  that  naked 
the'  fertile  soil  smile  and  look  cheerful.]  Do  you  remember 
Grray's  bitter  lines  on  him,  and  his  vagaries  and  history  ? 

[I  wish  on  your  return,  if  in  good  weather,  you  would  contrive 
to  visit  Mr.  Barrett's,  at  Lee ;  it  is  but  four  miles  from  Canter- 
bury. You  will  see  a  child  of  Strawberry  prettier  than  the 
parent,  and  so  executed  and  so  finished !  There  is  a  delicious 
closet  too,  so  flattering  to  me !  and  a  prior's  library  so  antique, 
and  that  does  such  honour  to  Mr.  Wyat's  taste  !  Mr.  Barrett, 
I  am  sure,  would  be  happy  to  show  his  house  to  you ;  and  I 
know  if  you  tell  him  that  I  beg  it,  he  will  produce  the  portrait 
of  Anne  of  Cleves  by  Holbein,  in  the  identic  ivory  box  turned, 
like  a  Provence  rose,*  as  it  was  brought  over  for  Henry  8*.  It 
will  be  a  great  favour,  and  it  must  be  a  fine  day,  for  it  lives  in 
cotton  and  clover,  and  he  justly  dreads  exposing  it  to  any  damp. 
He  has  some  other  good  pictures,  and  the  whole  place  is  very 
pretty,  tho'  retired. 

The  Sunday's  paper  announces  a  dismal  defeat  of  Clairfait ; 
and  now,  if  true,  no  doubt  the  French  will  drive  the  Duke  of 
York  into  Holland,  and  then  into  the  sea !— ora  pro  nobis !] 

The  following  letter  from  Miss  Berry  bears  the  same 
date  as  the  preceding  one  from  Lord  Orford.  The  same 
paragraph  in  the  newspaper  respecting  the  Prince  of 
Wales  seems  to  have  equally  amused  Lord  Orford  and 
his  correspondent. 

Prospect  House,  Stmday  night,  Sept.  28,  1794. 

I  did  not  suppose  that  the  Prince  of  Wales  was  likely  to 
become  your  successor  in  anything,  till  the  newspapers  told  me 
80.  The  enclosed  paragraph,  which  we  cut  out  of  the  Times 
the  other  day,  amused  us  all  not  a  little. 

The  storm  has  at  last  ceased  here,  and  we  have  seen  one  fine 
calm  day,  which,  I  assure  you,  appears  to  great  advantage  on 
our  boundless  prospect.  We  were  at  T^aiaagate  in  the  morning, 
which  is,  of  all  the  gates  in  this  neighbourhood,  by  far  the 
prettiest,  I  think;   and  since  dinner  have  walked  to  one  of 

*  Afterwards  Sir  Saml.  Bush  Meyrick,  and  in  1858  was  at  Goodrich 
Caatle,  Herefordshire.    It  is  marvellously  fine. — Cunningham. 


1794]  LETTER   FROM   MISS   BEERY.  441 

Lord  Holland's  strange,  would-be  Grothick  buildings  at  Kings- 
gate.  We  are  so  far  both  from  the  two  metropolises  of  Margate 
and  Ramsgate,  that  having  as  yet  had  no  inducement  strong 
enough  to  take  us  out  three  miles  in  cold  dark  nights,  we  have 
spent  every  evening  at  home  and  alone,  except  last  night,  when 
we  dined  at  Broadstairs,  our  nearest  town,  with  a  Scotch  Lord 
and  L'  Balgonie,  people  who  we  never  visited  before ;  but  as 
they  belong  to  the  county  in  Scotland  to  which  we  ought  to 
have  belonged,  and  have  been  very  civil  to  us,  we  wished  to  be 
the  same.  Y ova  favourite,  U  Gralloway,  was  one  of  the  party, 
and  I  have  got  a  headache  to-day  by  dancing  Scotch  reels  with 
him  and  one  of  his  daughters.  Mr.  Parsons,  that  high  priest  of 
ennui,  is  in  this  part  of  the  world ;  and  I  meet  every  day 
hundreds  of  other  faces  that  I  know,  in  our  airings  of  a 
morning;  but  we  are  so  penitus  toto  divisos  orbe,  at  this 
North  Forelaiid,  that  they  can  none  of  them  trouble  us. 
Mrs.  Fitzherbert  is  at  Margate  driving  away  sorrow  in  a 
phaeton  and  four,  and  the  Dss.  of  Rutland  at  Ramsgate,  being 
driven  after  by  a  man  of  the  name  of  Devisme,  or  Deval,  who, 
without  knowing  her,  professes  the  most  ardent  passion  for  her, 
and  literally  follows  her  wherever  she  goes.  His  carriage  is 
always  at  the  tail  of  hers ;  when  she  stops,  he  stops,  and  when 
she  goes  on,  he  pursues.  You  may  guess  what  a  noise  a 
circumstance  of  this  sort  must  make  in  a  place  like  this,  where 
the  man,  who  seems  to .  be  not  at  all  known,  has  acquired  the 
name  of  Malvolio. 

There  was  a  report  yesterday  in  Margate  of  a  great  defeat  of 
Clairfait;  but  as  Mrs.  Damer  says  not  a  word  of  it  in  her 
letter  of  to-day,  I  trust  it  is  not  true.  Our  situation  in 
Flanders  needs  not  this,  I  fear,  to  make  it  worse  than  it  is. 
How  Holland  is  now  to  be  saved  I  do  not  see ;  and  how  we  are 
to  be  safe  when  it  is  gone,  I  as  little  see ;  and  how  and  why 
the  D.  of  York  stays  to  have  half  his  army  destroyed,  and  the 
other  half  driven  home,  I  still  less  see.  I  will  not  ask  you  to 
answer  as  many  questions  as  the  Marshall.  But  do  put  on  your 
spectacles,  and  if  you  see  anything  good  that  I  don't  see, 
candidus  imperti.  If  you  were  in  the  Isle  of  Thanet,  you 
would  never  guess  that  anybody  ever  looked  that  way,  or 
suspect  that  we  were  in  the  midst  of  a  war  such  as  Europe 
never  saw  before.     Here  everybody  is  riding  and  driving,  and 


442  LETTEKS.  [1794 

phaetoning  and  ewrricUng  away  at  such  a  rate,  as  always 
recalls  to  my  mind  the  odd  but  clever  phrase  of  your  friend, 
Greorge  Montague — '  Well,  I  am  glad  I  have  such  rich  re- 
lations.' 

We  can  have  no  letters  from  you  now  till  Tuesday,  nor  did 
I  indeed  expect  them,  as  you  mentioned  being  in  town  on 
Friday  night.  However,  I  shall  send  you  this  to-morrow,  as 
I  hope  you  will  be  wanting  to  hear  from  us. 

Monday  morning. 
And  the  finest  morning  that  ever  was  seen — a  bright  sun, 
calm  air,  and  smooth  sea ;  we  mean  to  be  out  as  much  as 
possible  to  enjoy  it.  Farewell,  and  let  us  hear  from  you  very 
soon.  Agnes  has  just  brought  this  great  humbling  letter,  which 
obliges  me  to  a  great  waste  of  paper.  She  requests  you  to 
direct  and  forward  it. 

From  Lord  Orford. 

Sept.  29,  1794,  3  o'clock. 
Codicil  to  my  letter  of  this  morning. 

Yes,  it  is  very  true — the  plot,  and  it  is  not  true,  at  least  not 
known  yet,  that  Clairfait  has  been  so  thoroughly  defeated,  tho' 
forced  to  retreat ;  and  it  is  not  true  that  Lord  Cholmondeley  is  at 
Cowes,  for  he  was  in  this  room  at  one  o'clock,  and  confirms  the 
truth  of  the  intended  assassination  of 'the  King  by  a  poisoned 
arrow  thro'  a  reed,  and  it  was  to  have  been  on  the  Terrace  at 
Windsor  yesterday  se'nnight,  but  the  arrow  was  not  ready — so 
you  see  murder  is  not  dead  with  Robespierre.  The  Duchess  of 
Grloster  has  been  here  till  this  moment,  and  my  letter  must  wait 
till  to-morrow,  for  the  post  is  gone. 

L**  Cholmondeley  came  to  acquaint  me  that  the  Prince  of 
Wales  had  sent  an  express  for  him,  and  told  him,  that  being  on 
the  brink  of  marriage,  he  should  set  him  and  Lady  Cholm.  at 
the  head  of  his  family ;  and  as  yet  had  named  nobody  else — so 
perhaps  my  report  of  L^  Pembroke  is  not  true.  The  D™  says 
L'^  Southampton  does  go  for  the  Princess — I  tell  you  what  I 
hear,  but  answer  for  nothing ;  I  have  no  more  right  to  know 
truth  than  the  rest  of  the  world,  who  do  not  care  a  straw  whether 
what  they  tell  be  truth  or  not.  L"*  Cholm.  heard  yesterday  from 
Townshend,  the  factotum  of  the  police,  that  he  himself  seized 


1794]  PLOT   TO   SHOOT  THE   KING.  443 

the  two  assassins  of  the  Old  Man  of  the  Mountain,  and  is  in 
chace  after  a  third ;  and  the  D='  had  heard  of  the  plot  too.  For 
example,  everybody  has  affirmed  for  this  last  week  that  the 
King  is  building  a  superb  palace  at  Kew,  and  has  begun  pulling 
down  houses — reduced  to  a  simple  fact,  a  couple  of  rooms  are 
erecting  there  for  Prince  Ernest. 

L'*  Cholm.  told  me  what  touches  me  much  more  I  He  once 
hired  Prospect  House,  and  says  it  is  a  single  house  and  the  very 
temple  of  the  winds,  and  that  he  once  rose  out  of  bed  thinking 
a  troop  of  them  were  coming  to  eject  him.  I  hope  they  will 
give  you  warning  without  filing  a  bill ;  and  I  am  afraid  to  men- 
tion it  lest  you  should  think  me  impatient  to  bring  you  back — 
not  in  the  least — go  any  whither,  where  you  can  be  safe,  but  do 
not  be  blown  into  the  chops  of  a  French  privateer. 

Eeport — a  mighty  newsmonger — with  whom  I  deal  lavishly 
when  you  are  absent,  but  of  whom  I  have  a  bad  opinion,  and  do 
not  delight  to  let  within  my  doors  at  other  seasons,  informs  me 
that  Mr.  Douglas,  Lady  Catherine's  husband,  is  to  be  Chancellor 
of  Ireland,  where  there  is  going  to  be  a  prodigious  remue-mi.nage, 
that  Lord  Mansfield  is  to  be  President  of  the  Council  here,  in 
the  room  of  the  new  Viceroy  L*  Fitzwilliam,  and  the  orator 
Grattan  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  to  the  latter. 

Don't  you  pity  Margaret  Nicholson  ?  She  came  before  her 
time  or  she  might  have  been  entitled  to  the  honours  of  sepulture 
with  Mirabeau,  Marat,  and  other  felons  of  this  consecrating  age. 
Poor  woman!  She  is  forgotten — but  indeed  so  are  Jacques 
Clement,  Eavaillac,  and  Damien,  and  even  the  Convention's  allj', 
Ankerstrom — apropos  Mrs.  Ankerstrom's  mother  is  not  returned 
yet — but  in  truth,  she  is  so  gentle,  humane,  and  agreeable,  that 
nobody  can  part  with  her — her  daughter  alone  is  more  amiable. 

Eleven  at  night. 

I  have  been  at  Lady  Douglas's,  where  the  Mackinsys,  Onslows, 
and  everybody  agreed  in  the  reality  of  the  plot.  The  known 
criminals  are  three  young  apprentices,  two  of  whom  are  in 
custody.  The  plan  was  to  raise  a  riot  in  the  playhouse  to  occupy 
attention,  and  during  the  confusion,  to  shoot  the  King.  A 
watchmaker,  who  was  employed  on  the  fabrication  of  the  dart, 
discovered  the  design.     I  pretend  to  no  further  intelligence  yet. 

A  story  of  very  different  complexion  is  arrived  to-day,  when 
Lord  Leicester  has  received  a  letter  from  the  post  office  (his  new 


444  LETTERS.  [1794 

bureau)  informing  him  that  two  Frenchmen  have  escaped  from 
Dieppe  and  bring  an  account  of  Talien  having  proclaimed  the 
young  King  in  Paris — not  to  be  credited  easily.  I  send  you 
accounts  from  commissions  of  Oyer — but  you  will  wait  for  those 
of  Terminer,  which  seldom  accord. 

The  Comte  d'Artoisis  certainly  with  the  Duke  of  York;  Prince 
William's  letters  say  so.  The  Comte  de  Provence  is  settled  at 
Venice,  and  receives  a  pension  from  the  senate.  The  Cardinal 
de  Bernis  is  dead.     Dixi. 

Strawberry  Hill,  Oct.  1,  1794. 

My  letters  are  continually  giving  themselves  the  lie ;  but  I 
have  warned  you,  when  I  tell  you  news,  to  wait  for  the  echo. 
This  is  a  favourite  proverb  with  me,  but  I  except  Prospect  House 
out  of  my  injunction,  for  when  the  wind  blows  there  I  beseech 
you  not  to  wait  for  the  echo,  but  to  descend  to  the  plain. 
Clairfait  has  not  been  defeated  from  anything  we  know ;  and 
whether  poor  young  Louis  XVII.  is  alive  or  not,  it  is  not  pro- 
bable that  he  has  been  restored — but  to  raise  our  Stocks.  Mr. 
Mackinsy  observed  to  me  justly,  that  it  was  very  unlikely  that 
two  French  royalists  should  escape  from  France  if  royalty  was 
reestablished. 

The  assassination  plot  here  is  universally  believed,  and  no 
doubt  had  deep  root.  Three  young  English  apprentices  were 
not  likely  to  have  had  zeal  enough  of  themselves  to  meditate 
royal  murder.  It  tells  me  that  our  Jacobin  Clubs  having  been 
checked  by  the  seizure  of  so  many  of  their  instruments,  have 
been  working  under  ground.  I  wonder  what  diaboUc  sacraments 
they  have  invented  to  bind  their  devotee,  since  the  Pandse- 
monium  has  abolished  all  religion. 

I  have  received  y'  Sunday's  dispatch,  and  begin  this  answer 
before  dinner  against  tomorrow,  lest  I  should  be  interrupted 
then.  Where  is  Lord  P.,  that  he  leaves  the  whole  coact  open 
to  Malvolio !  And  so  you  have  Mrs.  Fitzherbert !  I  suppose 
our  countesses  (I  don't  mean  Tny  two,  but),  especially  our  latest, 
are  now  thinking  on,  or  ordering  their  robes,  since  Mrs.  F.  has 
waved  her  claim  to  Ich  Dien,  tho'  the  Catholics,  they  say,  are 
going  to  be  admitted  ad  Eundem  in  Ireland.  I  see  Mr.  Berry 
frovsTQ  hither — yet  I  own  I  am  rather  for  those  who  prefer  three 
Gods  to  none ;  and  I  abhor  a  system  of  liberty  established  by 
guillotines,  and  daggers,  and  poisoned  arrows.   The  French  have 


1794]  CHANGE   IN   FASHIONABLE   HOURS.  445 

equalled  the  horrors  of  the  Inquisition  in  Peru  and  Mexico : 
Atabalipa's  bed  of  roses  was  momentary  in  comparison  of  what 
Marie  Antoinette  suffered  from  the  moment  she  was  stopped 
on. her  escape  and  carried  back  to  Versailles. 

I  went  to  Bushy  this  morning,  and  not  finding  Lady  Guilford 
returned  by  Cliveden  to  look  after  your  new  plant  shed.  It  is 
quite  finished  except  glazing,  and  the  garden  is  as  fine  as  that 
in  Milton's  '  Allegro,'  and  much  prettier,  tho'  not  so  immortal. 

The  Divine  is  come  back ;  I  shall  propitiate  her  tomorrow  by 
a  couple  of  partridges,  as  you  are  not  here  to  accept  my  roasted 
offerings. 

Lady  Bute  I  doubt  is  going.  It  will  be  very  inconvenient  to 
my  Lord  Gastlecomer,  for  her  house  you  know  was  my  resource 
in  winter  evenings.  I  have  outlived  almost  all  my  acquaintance 
of  my  o'svn  century,  or  the  remainder  are  grown  too  young  again 
ever  to  be  in  their  own  houses,  unless  they  expect  half  the  town, 
and  that  at  midnight.  I  came  into  the  world  when  there  were 
such  seasons  as  afternoons  and  evenings,  but  the  breed  is  lost ! 
and  if  any  of  them  did  exist,  they  would  be  of  no  more  use  than 
an  old  almanack.  I  believe  Hannah  More  herself  will  soon  be 
obliged  to  keep  saints'  nights  instead  of  saints'  days. 

Ten  at  night. 

Well  1  well !  well !  and  so  at  last  I  fib,  when  I  think  I  am 
most  sure  of  my  veracity  !  I  have  been  with  the  Doiley's,  who 
have  had  two  oflBcers  from  London  with  them  this  morning,  who 
say  the  plot  is  now  disbelieved  in  town,  and  that  nothing  will  be 
made  out — no,  then  I  am  sure  the  Ministers  have  acted  sillily 
in  publishing  it  before  they  were  certain  of  their  ground.  I  have 
a  mind  to  send  you  no  more  news,  for  what  can  one  believe  ? 
And  yet  what  can  I  do  ?  I  had  rather  write  what  others  invent, 
than  be  forced  to  invent  myself.  Pussy  and  I  have  no  adventures : 
now  and  then  a  little  squabble  about  biting  and  scratching,  but 
no  more  entertaining  in  a  letter  than  the  bickerings  between  any 
husband  and  wife. 

They  say  (my  best  authority)  that  the  packet  is  supposed  to 
be  taken,  as  no  mail  has  arrived  for  so  long  a  time,  and  Pichegru 
may  be  Stadtholder  for  ought  we  know.  Grood  night  I  I  am 
disgusted  with  the  falsehoods  I  have  told  you,  and  I  am  not  at  all 
in  a  humour  to  add  to  the  number — you  may  as  well  rely  on 
the  daily  papers  and  dispense  with  me  as  your  gazetteer. 


446  LETTERS.  [1794 

Thursday  morning. 

I  have  received  the  thumping  letter,  sealed  with  a  foreign 
coronet,  which  accompanies  this  for  you,  sweet  Agnes,  hut  not 
inclosed  in  it.  The  True  Briton  is  not  arrived,  but  I  have  had 
a  note  from  the  Pavilions  with  a  letter  to  be  franked,  and  as 
the  duchess  tells  me  nothing  new,  I  suppose  there  is  nothing. 

I  cannot  tell  how  y"  weather  is  on  Mount  Ararat,  but  my  little 
hill  only  hops,  which  I  conclude  in  the  Hebrew  only  means 
charming,  and  October  but  just  shows  those  marks  of  a  green 
old  age  that  become  so  beautiful  a  summer,  like  that  good  sort 
of  old  men  whose  oeconomy  begins  to  take  a  tinge  of  gold. 

The  newspaper  is  come  in,  but  tells  one  neither  yes  nor  no  on 
anything  that  signifies,  so  my  veracity  is  in  no  danger.    Adieu  ! 

The  following  letter  from  Miss  Berry  appears  to  have 
been  of  the  same  date  as  Lord  Orford's  last. 

Prospect  House,  Wednesday  morning,  Oct.  1,  1794. 
In  vain  you  may  say  '  Begone  my  cares,  I  give  you  to  the 
winds,''  we  shall  certainly  not  be  blown  away  from  you,  for  it  has 
been  the  finest  calm,  clear  weather  for  these  last  three  days  at 
the  Prospect  House,  that  can  be  conceived,  and  the  sea  is  so 
covered  with  our  vessels,  of  all  sizes,  from  seventy-fours  to  fishing- 
boats,  that  you  have  as  little  chance  of  getting  rid  of  us  by  a 
French  privateer ;  tho'  at  this  instant,  from  my  window,  I  can 
clearly  see  that  hostile  coast.  I  always  long  to  exclaim  to  it,  in 
the  words  of  Dante — 

O  Francia,  Francia,  vituperio  delle  gente  ! 

an  epithet  which  may  certainly  now  be  applied  to  it,  with  more 
justice,  than  to  the  former  peccadillos  of  poor,  little,  insignificant 
Pisa,  to  whom  the  author  addressed  it.  With  a  glass  I  can  discern 
several  high  buildings  near  the  coast,  the  situation  of  a  village 
and  a  windmill ;  and  at  Eamsgate  they  say  they  have  seen  the 
tri-coloured  flag  flying  in  a  camp  near  Calais. 

With  respect  to  our  return,  you  are  exactly  as  I  could  wish 
you — very  anxious  to  get  us  back,  but  not  at  all  displeased  at 
our  staying  a  little  longer  while  the  good  weather  lasts. 

L*  Cholmondeley,  in  spite  of  the  bad  character  he  gives  the 
Prospect  House,  inhabits  the  next  house,  within  fifty  yards  of  it. 


1794]  FEOM   MISS   BEESY   TO   LORD   ORFOED.  447 

in  just  the  same  exposed  position,  where  he  is  expected  to  return 
to-morrow  evening.  The  little  boy,  L^  Malpas,  who  has  conti- 
nued here,  is  as  fine  a  stout,  healthy  child  as  you  ever  saw,  and 
the  image  of  his  father.  That  L^  Choi,  is  to  be  put  at  the  head 
of  the  Prince's  family  is  really  news,  as  everybody  has  been 
anxiously  making  out  lists  of  his  household,  and  L*  and  1/  Choi, 
were  in  none  that  I  have  either  made  or  heard  made ;  tho'  I 
think  them  perfectly  proper  people  for  such  a  situation,  and 
only  wonder  nobody  thought  of  them  before.  We  say  at  Broad- 
stairs  that  L'^  Sutherland  is  to  go  over  with  L'^  Southampton  to 
fetch  the  P^%  in  which  case,  I  should  suppose,  she  must  be 
intended  to  continue  in  her  household.  Much  as  attendance 
on  princes  and  places  at  court  are  laughed  at  and  abused  (by 
those  who  can't  obtain  them),  so  desirable  do  I  think  any  sort 
or  shadow  of  occupation  for  women,  that  I  should  think  any 
situation,  that  did  not  require  constant  attendance,  a  very 
agreeable  thing. 

What  a  strange  business  is  this  plot  of  assassination  !  But  I 
cannot  help  thinking  it  will  be  found  never  to  have  gone  fur- 
ther than  the  mad  beads  of  these  three  or  four  poor  apprentices, 
led  astray  by  the  nonsensical  and  pernicious  doctrines  they  hear 
in  their  clubs  and  societies,  and  pushed  on  and  encouraged  by 
much  more  profligate  villains,  who  would  willingly  make  use  of 
their  feeble  arm  to  create  a  confusion,  which,  in  some  way  or 
other,  they  suppose  (and  perhaps  too  truly)  they  could  turn  to 
account. 

I  heartily  wish  the  story  f ""  Dieppe  might  prove  true,  because 
I  think  an  obligation  for  a  civil  war  to  call  off  their  troops,  is 
the  only  thing  that  can  save  us  and  Holland ;  and  besides,  if  they 
mtLst  go  on  filling  the  world  with  crimes  and  carnage,  while  they 
are  committed  among  and  upon  one  another  they  are  certainly 
doing  the  least  possible  mischief,  and  nine  times  in  ten,  I  am 
convinced,  their  punishments  will  fall  on  the  guilty,  let  them 
be  inflicted  by  and  on  whatsoever  party. 

Mr.  Douglas  has,  and  dare  say  will  bustle  well  for  himself; 
whether  he  can  ftttsfe  himself  into  the  Chancellorship  of  Ireland 
I  know  not ;  but  I  know  he  bullied  himself  into  the  Secretary- 
ship, a  method,  I  believe,  much  oftener  successful  with  Ministers 
than  used  by  those  who  deserve  to  be  so. 

Talking  of  Ireland  puts  me  in  mind  of  poor  JJ  Lynnot,  who 


448  LETTEBS.  [1794 

has  been  so  extremely  ill  that  it  seems  almost  settled  that  she 
is  to  come  to  us  for  advice  and  change  of  air.  If  she  comes, 
she  comes  alone,  in  which  case  I  shall  be  much  mistaken  if  you  do 
not  find  her  much  less  disagreeable  than  you  suppose,  or  at  least 
in  no  respect  the  trouble-fete  that  she  appeared  to  you  last  year. 

I  am  sorry  that  you  would,  and  did,  see  Mrs.  Damer's  house 
before  it  was  ready  to  be  seen,  for  fear  that  f™  seeing  nothing 
well  but  its  only  defect  (the  corner  entry),  you  should  take  one 
of  your  sudden  prepossessions,  which  you  say  yourself  (tho'  in 
all  cases  I  won't  allow  it)  totally  deprives  you  of  future  judg- 
ment. 

The  Grreatheads  are  returned  to  Margate,  and  we  are  going  to 
dine  with  them  to-morrow.  This  is  our  first  gaiety,  for,  except 
our  dinner  at  Broadstairs,  we  have  spent  every  evening  at  home 
and  alone.  But  the  rides  and  drives  here  in  fine  weather  are 
really  charming  and  almost  infinite,  for  the  country,  tho'  not 
without  trees,  is  so  perfectly  open  and  unfenced  and  unditched, 
that  one  may  steer  to  almost  any  part  of  the  Island  with  a  com- 
pass in  hand,  without  meeting  the  smallest  obstacle  to  turn  you 
half  a  yard  out  of  your  course.  The  unaccountable  colony  of 
buildings  at  Kingsgate  exactly  answers  your  description.  Altoge- 
ther they  are  an  ornament  to  an  open  country,  tho'  separately  they 
are  one  worse  than  another.  But  it  is  really  very  odd  that  any 
man  should  have  had  the  rage  of  building  so  much,  and  in  so  many 
different  styles,  without  ever  deviating  into  any  one  ever  seen 
before,  or  worthy  to  be  seen  again.  Mr.  Coutts  at  present  inha- 
bits the  large  house — the  Italian  Villa  as  it  is  called — the  front  of 
which  is  in  much  purer  taste  than  many  Italian  villas ;  but  I 
should  think  the  very  large  pediment  and  colonnade  not  project- 
ing, but  sunk  into  the  house,  must  make  it  a  bad  and  incon- 
venient dwelling.  If  the  weather  should  be  fine  when  we 
leave  this,  and  we  find  it  compatible  with  our  journeying  with 
our  own  horses,  we  will  certainly  go  and  see  Mr.  Barrett's,  in 
which  case  I  shall  beg  you  to  advertize  him  of  our  visit,  that  we 
may  not  be  taken  as  swindlers  come  to  steal  his  Anne  of  Cleves, 
or  to  see  his  house  under  false  pretences. 

And  now  farewell !  I  shall  leave  a  corner  for  my  last  words  to- 
morrow morning. 

Thursday  morning'. 

I  would  not  seal  my  letter  till  the  post  came,  in  case  it 


1794]  LORD   ORFORD   TO  MISS   BEREY.  449 

might  produce  anything  to  add ;  but  I  have  nothing  but  a  letter 
f  "■  Mrs.  D.,  just  setting  out  for  Goodwood.  Farewell,  then,  for 
the  present,  and  let  us  hear  f  ™  you  soon,  for  I  like  your  letters 
when  you  have  nothing  to  say,  almost  better  than  when  you 
have  much. 

It  is  no  small  proof  of  the  extraordinary  sensitiveness 
of  Lord  Orford,  both  to  the  welfare  and  to  the  possible 
wishes  of  Miss  Berry,  that  he  should,  on  expressions  so 
general  as  those  contained  in  this  letter  of  October  1st,  in 
favour  of  a  situation  at  court,  have  been  fired  with  alarm 
at  the  idea  that  she  wished  for  such  an  occupation  for 
herself  or  for  her  sister,  and  at  the  same  time  be  longing 
to  be  the  means  of  gratifying  any  wish  she  might  enter- 
tain. 

Saturday,  Oct.  2,  1794. 

I  receive  y'  letter  of  Wednesday  but  this  moment,  and  not 
having  a  tittle  of  news  to  tell  you,  and  receiving  at  the  same  time 
one  from  Mrs.  Damer  that  gives  an  account  of  her  sister,  who 
is  so  dear  to  me,  I  shall  defer  replying  to  yours  till  I  have 
more  to  say.  I  only  see  that  Talien  has  been  nearer  to  being 
treated  like  a  king  than  to  restoring  one,  and  that  the  Con- 
vention and  the  Jacobin  Club  are  advancing  towards  a  civil 
war,  and  much  harm  may  it  do  to  either  or  to  both ! 

I  have  been  writing  to  Mr.  Barrett,  but  cannot  help  adding 
a  word  on  a  passage  in  y"'  letter,  on  which  I  had  determined  to 
meditate  till  tomorrow  ;  but  lest  you  should  think  that  you  can 
drop  a  word  or  hint  a  wish  that  does  not  make  an  impression  on 
me,  I  must  add  a  few  lines,  tho'  I  have  scarce  time.  To  my 
extreme  astonishment  you  speak  with  approbation  of  a  place  at 
Court !  Is  it  possible  you  should  like  one  !  or  can  I  assist  such 
a  wish !  Interest  I  have  none  upon  earth  anywhere,  nor  if  I 
had,  w*  condescend  to  employ  it  for  any  one  but  for  you  or  y' 
sister.  I  have  been  rummaging  my  head,  and  can  see  no  glim- 
mering but  one :  my  telling  you  of  L*  Cholm.  perhaps  led  you 
to  think  I  might  try  thro'  him.  For  you  I  would.  Maid  of 
honour  I  can  scarce  induce  myself  to  believe  you  ^*  submit  to : 
bedchamber-woman  you  may  perhaps  mean — destined  they 
most  probably  are  by  this  time ;  but  if  you  have  such  a  wish,  it 

VOL.  I.  G  G 


450  LETTERS.  [1794 

shall  not  fail  thro'  my  neglect.  Therefore,  make  me  an  imme- 
diate answer,  and  a  direction  to  him,  if  you  wish  I  should  write 
to  him. 

From  Miss  Berry. 

Prospect  House,  Oct.  5,  1794. 

Mt  deak  Fkiend, — Your  letter,  which  I  have  just  received, 
would  make  me  laugh,  if  your  kind  affecting  attention  to  my 
every  sup-posed  wish  was  not  much  nearer  making  me  cry. 

The  sentiments  I  expressed  in  my  last,  with  respect  to  places 
at  court,  were  merely  general,  and  occurred  to  me  from  having 
heard  them  laughed  at  and  abused  by  those  to  whose  idleness 
and  insignificance  no  court  could  add.  Your  letter  first  sug- 
gested the  possibility  of  their  application  to  ourselves,  and  at 
the  same  time  a  probable  means  of  success.  But  as  for  myself, 
I  feel  to  belong  so  entirely  to  the  two  or  three  people  in  this 
world  in  and  by  whose  affection,  friendship,  and  society  I  alone 
support  a  sickly  existence,  that  any  situation  that  in  any  degree 
separated  me  from  them,  were  it  that  of  the  Princess  herself, 
instead  of  that  of  her  attendant,  would  by  me  be  shunned  as  a 
misfortune.  As  to  my  sister,  I  trust  I  shall  see  her  happily 
established  in  a  respectable  marriage,  the  best  and  most  de-  ' 
sirable  of  all  settlements  for  a  young  woman. 

I  know  you  are  aware,  and  do  me  the  justice  to  feel,  how 
little  the  native  pride  and  independence  of  my  mind  has  ever, 
in  any  circumstances,  been  swayed  by  motives  of  interest,  and 
that  from  principle,  and  not  from  any  romantic  contempt  for 
the  goods  of  this  world,  or  of  ignorant  insensibility  to  their 
advantages.  You  cannot  wonder,  therefore,  that  I  should 
sometimes  cast  an  anxious  thought  towards  the  possibility  of 
my  sister's  feeling,  in  more  advanced  life,  the  evils  of  a  narrow 
fortune,  to  the  thoughts  of  which  it  is  not  without  effort  that  I 
have  accustomed  myself.  I  am  writing  in  a  hurry  for  the  post 
of  to-day,  but  I  think  I  have  said  enough  to  convince  you  how 
exactly  my  sentiments  are  your  own  on  this  subject.  I  wish  I 
had  said  or  could  say  enough  to  satisfy  my  own  heart  with 
respect  to  you — to  your  offering  that  interest  which  I  know 
you  not  onh^  never  prostituted  to  power,  but  never  conde- 
scended to  employ,  even  for  those  who  had  every  claim  upon 
you,  except  those  of  the  heart. 


1794]      LETTER   FROM   MISS   BEERY  TO   LORD   ORFORD.        451 

While  I  retain  these,  be  assured  your  interest  will  be  a  sine- 
cure with  respect  to  my  further  demands  upon  it. 

Farewell.. 


TotheEarlofOrford. 


From,  the  Same. 


Prospect  House,  Monday,  Oct.  6,  1794. 
My  deak  Fkiend, — I  feel  not  to  have  said  half  enough  to 
you  in  my  hurried  letter  of  yesterday,  and  yet  I  know  not  in 
what  stronger  terms  to  express  your  total  misapprehension  of 
my  meaning.  Can  you  possibly  conceive  me  a  hedchamher 
woman — dawdling  away  my  time  in  waiting-rooms,  and  stuck 
up  with  people  who  might  probably  as  heartily  despise  me  as  I 
should  them, — 

Fai  from  all  jtiys  that  with  my  soul  agree — 
From  taste,  from  learning,  very  far  from  thee  I 

No,  my  dear  friend,  my  attendance  shall  be  of  a  very  different 
sort,  and  the  willing  homage  of  a  grateful  heart  to  a.  character, 
which  courts  could  never  either  captivate  or  corrupt.  I  should 
not  think  it  necessary  again  to  mention  this  subject,  because  I 
am  sure  a  moment's  thought  will  convince  you  what  must  be 
both  my  own  and  my  sister's  ideas  upon  it  in  every  light,  but 
that  I  know  how  difficult  it  sometimes  is,  to  erase  a  first  impres- 
sion from  your  mind. 

It  blew  last  night  what  the  sailors  call  a  capfull  of  wind, 
after  several  perfectly  calm  days ;  and  we  have  just  heard  the 
melancholy  tidings  that  two  small  vessels  were  wrecked  between 
this  and  Eamsgate.  These  incidents  are  so  common  on  every 
coast,  that  they  make  but  little  impression  except  upon  us 
inland  people.  And  when  do  you  turn  yourfaces  inland  again? 
I  hear  you  say — why  certainly  the  beginning  of  next  week,  or 
sooner,  if  the  weather  should  become  bad  ;  for  all  ccmfort  and 
amusement  here  depends  upon  the  weather.  A  vile  situation 
for  this  climate,  you  will  say.  I  have  made  a  sketch  of  the 
Prospect  House  for  you,  that  you  may  yourself  judge  of  the 
snag  retreat  we  have  been  inhabiting.  L*  Cholmondeley's 
house,  much  as  he  abuses  the  situation,  is  within  fifty  yards  of 
ours,  and  much  civil  padey  has  taken  place  between  us.     They 

6  6  2 


452  LETTERS.  [1794 

have  with  them  a  Mr.  Lee,  an  old  acquaintance  of  ours,  who  the 
other  day  gave  us  a  long  account  of  all  the  particular  civilities 
that  accompanied  the  Prince's  interview  with  L*  Choi.,  and  his 
desiring  him  and  L^  Choi,  to  be  at  the  head  of  the  new  house- 
hold. He  says  L*  Choi,  declined  going  to  fetch  the  P%  which 
the  Prince  wished  him  to  do,  because  during  the  time  of  his 
embassy  he  must  be  considered  as  receiving  orders  from  and 
acting  under  the  Ministry,  with  which  he  wished  to  have  nothing 
to  do,  and  mad«  a  sort  of  proviso  for  the  future  freedom  of 
his  -political  conduct  and  sentiments.  This  is  attempting  to 
thread  a  needle,  which,  I  should  think,  he  will  find  impossible. 

I  shave  not  heard  from  Mrs.  D.  since  she  got  to  Goodwood, 
therefore  your  letter  was  the  first  that  informed  me  of  the  D^''* 
continued  illness,  for  which  I  am  really  sorry  on  every  account. 

We  are  going  to-morrow  to  the  play  at  Margate  with  the 
Grreatheads,  to  see  Hamlet  acted  by  a  gentleman;  and  very 
gentleman-like  acting  I  dare  say  it  will  be,  but  I  expect  to  be 
much  amused.  Mrs.  Siddons  left  this  the  very  day  after  we 
called  upon  her,  so  that  we  were  none  the  better  for  her  neigh- 
bourhood. 

Farewell !  Your  little  scrap  yesterday  I  hardly  consider  as 
a  letter,  and  therefore  hope  to  hear  from  you  very  soon  again. 
Once  more  farewell ! 

The  correspondence  on  this  subject  would  be  incom- 
plete without  Lord  Orford's  letter  of  October  7,*  which 
has  already  been  published  in  part. 

[Strawberry  Hill,  Tuesday,  Oct.  7,  1794. 

Your  answer,  which  I  own  arrived  a  day  sooner  than  I  flattered 
myself  it  would, — I  wish  it  could  have  told  me  how  you  passed 
the  storm  of  Sunday  night ! — has  not  only  relieved  me  from  all 
anxiety  on  the  subject,  but  has  made  me  exceedingly  happy;  for 
tho'  I  mistook  you  for  a  moment,  it  has  proved  to  me  that  I  had 
judged  perfectly  rightly  of  your  excellent  and  most  uncommon 
understanding.  Astonished  I  was  no  doubt  while  I  conceived 
that  you  wished  to  be  placed  in  a  situation  so  unworthy  of  your' 
talents  and  abilities  and  knowledge,  and  powers  of  conversation. 

*  PuHislied  in  part  in  1846. 


i'794]  LOED   OKFOED   TO   MISS   BEERT.  453 

I  never  was  of  a  court  myself,  but  from  my  birth  and  the  posi- 
tion of  my  father  could  but,  for  my  first  twenty  years,  know 
much  of  the  nature  of  the  beast ;  and  from  my  various  connec- 
tions since  I  have  seldom  missed  farther  opportunities  of  keep- 
ing up  my  acquaintance  with  the  interior.  The  world  in  general 
is  not  ignorant  of  the  complexion  of  most  courts,  tho-  ambition, 
interest,  and  vanity  are  always  willing  to  leap  over  their  informa- 
tion, or  to  fancy  they  can  counteract  it ;  but  I  have  no  occasion 
to  probe  that  delusion,  nor  to  gainsay  your  random  opinion  that 
a  court  life  may  be  eligible  for  women — yes,  for  the  idle  ones 
you  specify,  pei'haps  so, — for  respectable  women,  I  thinky  much 
less  than  even  for  men.  I  do  not  mean  with  regard  to  what  is 
called  their  character,  as  if  there  were  but  one  virtue  with  which 
women  have  any  concern.  I  speak  of  their  understanding  and 
consequential  employment  of  their  time.  In  a  court  there  must 
be  much  idleness,  even  without  dissipation,  and  amongst  the 
female  constituents  much  self-importance  ill  founded,  some  am- 
bition, jealousy,  envy,  and  thence  hatred,  insincerity,  little 
intrigues  for  credit,  and — but  I  am  talking  as  if  there  were  any 
occasion  to  dissuade  you  from  what  you  despise,  and/ 1  have  only 
stated  what  occasioned  my  surprise  at  your  thinking  of  what  you 
never  did  think  at  all. 

Still,  while  I  did  suppose  that  in  any  pore  of  y  heart  there  did 
lurk  such  a  wish,  I  did  give  a  great  gulp  and  swallowed  down  all 
attempts  to  turn  y'  thoughts  aside  from  it,  and  why  ?  Yes,  and 
you  must  be  ready  to  ask  me  how  such  a  true  friend  could  give 
in  to  the  hint  without  stating  such  numerous  objections  to  a  plan 
so  unsuitable  for  you.  Oh !  for  strong  reasons  too.  In  the  first 
place,  I  was  sure  that,  without  my  almost  century  of  experience, 
your  good  sense  must  have  anticipated  all  my  arguments ;  you 
often  confute  my  desultory  logic  on  points  less  important,  as  I 
frequently  find  ;  but  the  true  cause  of  my  assenting  without  suf- 
fering a  sigh  to  escape  me,  was  because  I  was  conscious  that  I 
would  not  dissuade  you  fairly  without  a  grain  or  more  of  self 
mixing  in  the  argument :  I  would  not  trust  myself  with  myself  ; 
I  would  not  act  again  as  I  did  when  you  was  in  Italy,  and 
answered  you  as  fast  as  I  could,  lest  self  should  relapse.  Yet, 
tho'  it  did  not  last  an  hour,  what  a  combat  it  was  I  What  a 
blow  to  my  dream  of  happiness  should  you  be  attached  to  a 
court !  for  tho'  you  probably  w*  not  desert  Cliveden  entirely, 


454  ,  LETTERS.  [1V94 

how  distracted  would  y'  time  be  !  But  I  will  not  enter  into  the 
detail  of  my  thoughts;  you  know  how  many  posts  they  travel  in 
a  moment  when  my  brain  is  set  at  work,  and  how  firmly  it 
believes  all  it  imagines.  Besides  the  defalcation  of  y''  society,  I 
saw  the  host  of  your  porphyrogeniti  from  top  to  bottom  bursting 
on  my  tranquillity.  But  enough — I  conquered  all  these  dangers  ; 
and  -still  another  objection  rose.  When  I  "had  discovered  the 
only  'Channel  I  could  open  to  y''  satisfaction,  I  had  no  little 
repugnance  to  the  emissary  I  was  to  employ.*  Tho'  it  is  my 
intention  to  be  equitable  to  him,  I  should  be  extremely  sorry  to 
give  him  a  shadow  of  claim  on  me ;  and  you  know  those  who 
might  hereafter  be  glad  to  ccmclude  that  it  was  no  wonder  they 
should  be  disappointed,  when  gratitude  xm.  your  account  had 
been  my  motive.  But  my  cares  are  at  an  end,  and  tho'  I  have 
laboured  thro'  two  painful  days,  the  thorns  of  which  were 
sharpened,  not  impeded  by  the  storm,  I  am  rejoiced  at  the  blunder 
I  made,  as  it  has  procured  me  the  kindest  and  most  heart- 
dictated  and  most  heartfelt  letter  that  ever  was  written,  for 
which  I  give  you  millions  of  thanks.  Forgive  my  injurious 
surmise  ;  for  you  see  that  tho'  you  can  wound  my  affection,  you 
cannot  allay  its  eagerness  to  please  you  at  the  expense  of  my  own 
satisfaction  and  peace. 

Having  stated  with  most  precise  truth  all  I  thought  related  to 
yourself,  I  do  resume  and  repeat  all  1  have  said  both  in  this  and 
my  former  letter,  and  renew  exactly  the  same  offers  to  my  sweet 
Agnes,  if  she  has  the  least  wish  for  what  I  supposed  you  wished. 
Nay,  I  owe  still  more  to  her,  for  I  think  she  left  Italy  more 
unwillingly  than  you  did,  and  gratitude  to  either  is  the  only  cir- 
cumstance that  can  add  to  my  affection  for  either.  I  can  swallow 
my  objections  to  trying  my  nephew  as  easily  for  her  as  for 
you ;  but  having  had  two  days  and  a  half  for  thinking  the  case 
over,  I  have  no  sort  of  doubt  but  the  whole  establishment  must 
be  compleatly  settled  by  this  time,  or  that  at  most,  if  any  places 
are  not  fixed  yet,  it  must  be  from  the  strength  and  variety  of  con- 
tending interests ;  and  besides,  the  new  Princess  will  have  fewer 
of  each  class  of  attendants  than  a  queen,  and  I  shall  not  be  sur- 
prised if  there  should  already  be  a  hrouillerie  between  the  two 
Courts  about  some  or  many  of  the  nominations.  And  tho'  the 
interest  I  thought  of  trying  was  the  only  one  I  could  pitch  upon, 

*  His  nephew,  Lord  Cliolinondeley. —  Wright. 


1794]  LORD   OEFOKD   TO   MISS   BEKRY.  455 

I  do  not  OH  reflection  suppose  that  a  person  just  favoured  has 
favour  enough  already  to  recommend  others.  Hereafter  that 
may  be  better ;  and  a  still  more  feasible  method,  I  think,  would 
be  to  obtain  a  promise  against  a  vacancy,  which  at  this  great  open, 
moment  nobody  will  think  of  asking,  when  the  present  is  so 
uppermost  in  their  minds.  And  now  my  head  is  cool,  perhaps  I 
could  strike  out  more  channels,  sh*  your  sister  be  so  inclined; 
but  of  that  we  will  talk  when  we  meet.] 

Eleven  at  night. 

I  could  not  possibly,  from  different  intermissions,  get  my  letter 
finished  before  the  post  went  out.  I  shall  hope  to  hear,  on  its 
arrival  to-morrow,  that  you  have  not  been  carried  off  either  by 
Sunday's  hurricane  or  by  a  privateer. 

I  see  with  pleasure  that  the  Convention  and  the  Jacobins 
have  been  breaking,  tho'  perhaps  patched  together  again  for  the 
present.  It  will  break  out  again.  The  former  are  wofully 
imeasy.  They  complain  of  factions  everywhere,  tho'  trying  to 
conceal  their  disasters  by  boasting  of  victories ;  but  they  display 
their  wants  and  their  deficits — ^lament  the  loss  of  their  commerce 
and  manufactures,  which  themselves  have  destroyed.  They 
tremble  at  the  crowds  in  Paris,  and  wish  to  thin  them  ;  are  sick 
of  anarchy;  but  their  efforts  to  disperse  the  former,  and  to  lessen 
the  latter,  will  disperse  the  dissatisfaction  thro'  the  provinces, 
and  augment  the  latter.  It  is  plain  they  fear  not  being  able  to 
contain  the  capital  in  obedience;  and  if  they  fail  there,  who  is 
to  govern  the  armies  ?  These  grievances  will,  I  think,  produce 
a  civil  war,  or  some  kind  of  counter-revolution.  So  be  it !  Nei- 
ther will  settle  the  country  soon,  nor  is  it  to  be  wished  it  should 
be.  It  will  require  time  to  amend  Frenchmen  or  Frenchwomen, 
were  the  task  possible. 

Our  footpads  seem  dispersed.  I  believe  they  no  longer  met 
with  game ;  our  old  does  took  the  alarm,  and  kept  close  in  their 
burrows.  I  have  been  in  their  warren  at  Richmond  for  the  two 
last  evenings ;  so  they  will  have  no  claims  on  me  when  you 
return.  Grood  night !  I  reserve  a  morsel  of  my  paper  in  case 
of  having  anything  to  answer.  Methinks  my  whole  time  is  em- 
ployed in  writing  to  you,  or  in  being  frightened  about  you. 
Pray  come  back,  that  I  may  have  time  to  think  on  other 
people. 


456  LETTERS.  [1794 

Tuesday,  Oct.  14, 1794. 

I  hope  it  was  diversion  that  had  diverted  you,  for  you  was 
not  very  clear  when  you  wrote  your  last.  It  was  dated  on 
Thursday  the  9th,  and  I  received  it  this  morning,  the  14th.  I 
did  on  Saturday  expect  a  letter  to  tell  me  when  I  might  expect 
you,  and  I  did  hint  at  my  disappointment  in  the  cover  of  a 
letter  I  inclosed  for  Agnes. 

With  the  lingering  note  of  the  9th  I  received  y'  orders  for 
Mrs.  Eichardson.  I  have  desired  her  to  tell  you  that  you  will 
hear  from  me  to-morrow  morning  (by  the  coach  too);  and  this  is 
what  you  will  hear. 

I  am  rejoiced  you  have  been  at  Mr.  Barrett's ;  tho'  it  will 
have  made  Strawberry  sink  in  y'  eyes,  Lee  is  so  purely  Grothic, 
and  every  inch  of  it  so  well  finished.  I  am  still  more  glad  that 
your  visit  thither,  instead  of  hurrying  you,  has  not  made  you 
risk  Shooter's  Hill  and  Blackheath.  Well,  I  hope  on  Thursday 
all  my  alarms  will  be  at  an  end,  and  that  I  shall  neither  dread 
tempests,  nor  privateers,  nor  highwaymen.  Come  and  enjoy  your 
own  balcony  and  little  conservatory,  and  a  friend  who  hopes  to 
see  you  looking  much  better  for  y'  expedition,  and  Agnes  as 
charmingly  as  she  returned  from  Herts,  and  who  always  wishes 
to  have  you  both  pleased,  tho'  your  absence  always  fills  him  with 
fear  of  one  sort  or  other. 

I  have  been  at  Richmond  this  morning  to  inquire  after  the 
eldest  girl  of  the  poor  Valetorts,  who  has  a  scarlet  fever  of  the 
worst  kind,  and  of  whom  Dundas  had  no  hopes  on  Sunday. 
S'  Greorge  Baker  has  been  down,  and  there  are  rather  better 
symptoms.  They  have  moved  into  another  lodging ;  but  the 
poor  mother  is  in  a  piteous  way,  within  a  month  of  her  time, 
and  dreading  the  arrival  of  the  grandmother  post  on  hearing  of 
the  danger. 

Lady  A.  has  been  at  Goodwood,  and  returns  to-day.  The 
Marshal  tells  me  from  town,  that  the  D^'  is  better.  I  wish  fer- 
vently it  may  be  so,  but  I  expect  that  they  only  wrote  so  to 
prevent  the  visitation — tho'  in  vain. 

The  public's  scarlet  fever  is  bad  indeed,  from  Clairfait's 
copious  bleeding,  and  the  spreading  of  the  contagion  every- 
where ! 

Lady  Douglas  called  here  yesterday  and  desired  me  to  bring  you 
to  her  on  Saturday  evening,  which  I  hope  you  will  let  me  do. 


1794]  LORD    ORFOED   TO   MISS   BERRY.  457 

Adieu !  How  glad  I  shall  be  to  write  you  no  more  letters ! 
Humpity  comes  to  me  to-morrow :  his  second  volume,  which  I 
have  had,  tho'  not  quite  complete,  is  still  more  entertaining  than 
the  first. 

StrawlDerry  Hill,  Oct.  15,  1794. 
I  can  bear  disappointments  patiently,  when  it  is  for  your  health 
or  pleasure ;  I  consult  both,  and  do  not  allow  myself  to  reason 
against  y'  reasons.  If  you  call  the  weather  settled,  I  will  call  it 
so  too.  It  is  enough  that  you  can  amuse  yourself  where  you  are 
— your  liking  to  stay  longer  contents  me. 

Mrs.  Eichardson  is  gone  to  Audley-street  with  a  note  from 
me  to  you.  The  state  of  public  affairs  is  too  bad  and  too  volu- 
minous to  discuss.  The  True  Briton  of  Oct.  13th  is  a  day  I 
doubt  we  shall  have  cause  to  remember  as  a  date  ! 

I  shall  be  glad  to  hear  your  opinions  on  Lee,  and  am  pleased 
that  I  contributed  to  y''  seeing  it,  both  for  your  sakes  and  Mr. 
Barrett's,  to  whom  I  owe  the  greatest  gratitude  for  his  too  great 
partiality  to  me. 

When  you  see  the  note  in  Mrs.  Richardson's  hands,  you  will 
find  by  what  accident  it  happened  that  you  had  no  letter  from 
me  on  Satiirday.     I  cannot  say  more  now.     Adieu  ! 

Lord  Oxford's  letter  of  October  17th*  appears  to  be  the 
last  of  this  year  addressed  to  the  Miss  Berrys,  their  return 
to  Little  Strawberry  having  superseded  the  necessity  of 
further  correspondence. 

Oct.  17,  1794. 

I  did  not  indeed  know  the  arrangements  of  the  future  court, 
nor  had  the  least  curiosity  about  what  concerns  me  so  little,  and 
of  which  there  is  mighty  little  probability  of  my  seeing  more 
than  the  outset.  Indeed,  I  did  not  suppose  that  it  would  affect 
me  in  any  manner,  and  yet  I  am  very  glad  that  Mrs.  Fitzroy  f 
and  Mrs.  Stanhope  :j:  will  be  of  it.  They  will  be  of  credit  to  it, 
as  well  as  great  ornaments. 

[I  had  not  the  least  doubt  of  Mr.  Barrett's  showing  you  the 

*  Published  in  part  in  1846. 

f  Mrs.  Fitzroy.  Miss  Warren,  an  heiress,  the  wife  of  the  first  Lord 
Southampton. 

J  Wife  of  Ool.  Stanhope,  only  brother  to  the  late  Earl  of  Harington. 


458  LETTERS.  [1794 

greatest  attention ;  he  is  a  most  worthy  man,  and  has  a  most 
sincere  friendship  for  me,  and  I  was  sure  would  mark  it  to  any 
persons  that  I  love.  I  don't  guess  what  your  criticisms  on  his 
library  will  be ;  I  do  not  think  we  shall  agree  in  them,  for  to  me 
it  seems  the  most  perfect  thing  I  ever  saw,  and  has  the  most  the 
air  it  was  intended  to  have,  that  of  an  abbot's  library,  supposing 
it  could  have  been  so  exquisitely  finished  three  hundred  years 
ago.  My  closet  is  as  perfect  in  its  way  as  the  library,  and  it 
would  be  difficult  to  suspect  that  it  had  not  been  a  remnant 
of  the  ancient  convent  only  newly  painted  and  gilt.  My 
cabinet,  nay,  nor  house,  convey  any  conception ;  every  true  Groth 
must  perceive  that  they  are  more  the  works  of  fancy  than  of 
imitation.    ...  Y''  devoted 

Oefokd.] 

P.S. — The  little  Edgcumbe  they  hope  is  out  of  danger.  I 
called  there  last  night  as  I  went  to  Ly.  B.  Machinsy,  who  had 
sent  to  me  to  invite  you  if  you  bad  been  returned. 

The  letter  of  a  gentleman  of  the  name  of  BenweU,* 
dated  November  27th,  shows  the  interest  Miss  Berry  was 
known  to  take  in  the  classics. 

Trinity  College,  Nov.  27,  1794. 

Mr  DEAR  Madam, — I  was  very  sorry  to  hear  from  Miss 
Loveday  that  you  had  been  ill.  I  sincerely  hope  that  this  will 
find  you  better,  and  that  the  literary  business  with  which  I  am 
going  to  trouble  you,  will  not  be  an  unseasonable  intrusion.  I 
have  just  received  a  packet  from  your  friend  Canon  Bandini, 
containing  some  collations  of  Xenophon,  together  with  a  most 
obliging  letter,  in  which  he  requests  me  to  communicate  the 
contents  of  the  enclosed  paper  to  any  of  the  English  booksellers 
that  I  know.  Eecollecting  your  acquaintance  with  Edwards,  I 
have  taken  the  liberty  of  forwarding  this  paper  to  you,  in  case  you 
should  have  any  opportunity  either  of  speaking  or  writing  to  him 
on  the  subject.  That  you  may  not  have  the  trouble  of  translating 
for  Mr.  Edwards,  though  I  know  you  to  be  full  as  capable  of 

*  There  is  reason  to  suppose,  from  some  passages  in  Miss  Berry's  Journal, 
that  Mr.  BenweU  afterwards  married  the  friend  of  her  early  youth,  Miss 
Loveday. 


1794]  LETTER   PROM   MR.    BENWELL.  459 

it,  or  more  so,  than  myself,  I  will  just  set  down  the  principal 
contents,  which  are,  that  having  formerly  published  a  catalogue 
of  the  Gr.,  Latin,  and  Italian  MSS.  of  the  Medicean  Library  in 
8  volumes  folio,  he  has  within  these  four  or  five  years  published 
3  vols,  more  in  the  same  form,  containing  an  account  of  MSS. 
from  different  collections,  that  have  since  been  added  to  the 
Medicean  Library.  That  these  three  supplemental  volumes 
may  be  purchased  for  one  sequin  each  volume,  or  one  sequiu 
and  a  half  for  the  large  paper  copies.  That  he  has  also  by  him 
(or  had  when  this  paper  was  printed,  April  1793)  29  complete 
parts  of  the  first  eight  volumes,  which  may  be  purchased  for  10 
sequins  each  part,  and  that  he  has  besides  upwards  of  200  parts 
wanting  only  the  first  volume  of  each,  which  may  be  purchased, 
by  those  who  are  already  in  possession  of  the  first  volume.  In 
addition  to  these  he  has  several  copies  of  the  Annates  Juntarum 
to  dispose  of  at  the  very  reasonable  rate  of  5  pauls,  or  about 
2s.  6d.  each.  As  it  would  give  me  much  pleasure  to  render 
any  little  service  to  Mr.  Bandini,  after  his  great  civility  to  me, 
and  as  I  know  you  will  feel  the  wish  still  stronger  than  myself, 
I  trouble  you  with  the  above  particulars.  Mr.  Edwards  may 
probably  know  some  gentleman  who  would  like  to  purchase  the 
Catalogue ;  and  at  all  events  I  should  think  the  Anriales  would 
sell  very  well  in  town.  Mr.  Fletcher,  of  Oxford,  would  like  to 
have  20  copies,  and  if  Mr.  Edwards  is  willing  to  take  any 
number,  I  could  write  to  Mr.  Bandini  for  them.  I  quote  from 
the  letter  I  have  received  the  following  passage  relating  to 
yourself :  '  Nunquam  mihi  dubium  fuit,  quin  lectissima  et  lit- 
terarum  amantissima  puella  Maria  Berry  memoriam  mei  quam- 
vis  absens  firmam  animo  suo  retineret ;  perspexi  autem  nunc  id 
maxime,  postquam  tanto  locorum  intervallo  a  me  sejuncta,  re- 
cordatur  tamen  consuetudinem  nostram,  neque  hoc  tantum 
benevole  atque  amanter  facit,  verum  etiam,  quod  proprium  est 
fidelis  et  verse  amicitiae  studet  mihi  parare  amicos  ejus  generis 
homines,  quibus  ego  plurimum  delector.  Quare  ipsi  gratias 
quam  maximas  meo  nomine  pro  tam  effusa  in  me  humanitate 
et  benevolentia  reddas,  oro  et  obtestor.'  I  should  be  much 
obliged  to  you  if,  when  you  see  Mr.  Edwards,  you  would  beg 
of  him  to  enquire  among  any  English  gentlemen  he  knows 
who  collect  books,  or  among  his  correspondents  abroad,  for  the 
two  following  books  : — '  Xenophontis  Memorabilia,  4to.  Paris. 


^60  LETTERS.  [1794 

apud  Nic.  Bogardum  1541.'     'Brodsei  Annotationes  in  Xeno- 
phontem,  Basil,  apud  Nic.  Brylingerum  1559.' 

If  I  could  be  favoured  with  the  loan  of  these  books  for  a 
month,  I  should  be  very  glad. 

I  hope  Miss  Agnes  is  as  well  as  when  she  left  Cheltenham. 
Forgive,  my  dear  Madam,  the  liberty  I  take  in  troubling 
you  with  this,  and  believe  me  with  the  greatest  respect  and 
regard.  Your  obliged  Servant, 

W.  Benwell. 


1795]       LETTEK   FROM   LORD   ORFOED   TO   MISS   BEERY.       461 


LETTERS. 

1795-96. 

The  following  note  of  April  7tli  is  the  only  one  remain- 
ing addressed  to  Miss  Berry  by  Lord  Orford  at  this  time, 
when  she  was  Hving  at  Little  Strawberry  Hill :  — 

Tuesday  morning. 

I  dispatch  two  snipes  as  my  deputies  to  receive  and  welcome 
you  at  y'^  return. 

The  Princess  arrived  at  St.  James's  on  Sunday  at  three  o'clock. 
Madame  des  Ursins  was  not  arrested,  and  sent  out  of  the  kingdom 
full  dressed  with  all  her  old  diamonds  new-set ;  nor  do  I  believe 
that  Mrs.  Fitzherbert  will  forbid  the  banns,  for  she  has  taken 
Marble  Hall,  and  proposes  to  live  very  platonically  under  the 
devout  wing  of  Mrs.  Cambridge. 

Mr.  Churchill  and  Lady  Mary,  who  were  at  Lewisham,  went 
to  Greenwich,  and  saw  the  Princess  show  herself  at  a  window, 
and  bow  exceedingly  to  the  people,  as  she  has  since  done  at  St. 
James's,  till  the  Prince  shut  the  window,  and  made  excuses  of 
her  being  fatigued.  Everybody  speaks  most  favorably  of  her 
face  as  being  most  pleasing,  tl^o'  with  too  much  rouge ;  she  is 
plump,  and  by  no  means  tall.  The  marriage  is  not  till  to- 
mori:ow. 

Mrs.  Loekart  and  Mrs.  Palmer  are  to  be  with  me  this  evening. 
I  am  not  sure  of  any  other  company  but  Mr.  Palmer.  Do  you 
know  of  any  I  shall  have? 

Miss  Berry. 

This  year  brought  with  it  much  sorrow  to  those  with 
whom  Miss  Berry  was  hving  in  habitual  intercourse,  and 
it  also  gave  birth  to  happy  expectations  for  herself  which 
were  never  destined  to  be  fulfilled.  The  death  of  Field- 
Marshal  Henry  Conway,  the  father  of  Mrs.  Damer  and 


462  LETTEBS.  [1795 

the  dearly-loved  relation  and  friend  of  Lord  Orford, 
must  have  spread  for  a  while  a  deep  shade  of  melancholy 
on  the  Strawberry  Hill  society.  He  died  at  Park  Place, 
and,  according  to  Mrs.  Damer's  account  to  Miss  Berry, 
very  suddenly.  '  He  had  been  remarkably  well  and 
cheerful  at  supper '  on  the  evening  of  July  8th,  and  was 
dead  between  four  and  five  o'clock  the  following  morn- 
ing, owing,  in  a  great  measure,  as  she  says,  '  to  his  im- 
prudence in  exposing  himself  to  cold  and  damp.'  In 
announcing  his  death  to  Miss  Berry,  Mrs.  Damer  expresses 
her  solicitude  for  Lord  Orford,  asking  her  to  give  some 
account  of  him,  adding,  '  he  seemed  never  to  apprehend 
this ! '  There  was  probably  no  particular  reason  for 
apprehension  till  the  fatal  moment  came ;  and  Lord  Orford 
had  indeed  written  to  Marshal  Conway,  on  the  2nd  of 
June,  telhng  him  of  the  intended  visit  of  Queen  Charlotte, 
her  six  daughters,  the  Duchess  of  York,  and  the  Princess 
of  Orange,  and  again  on  the  7th,  giving  a  playful  account 
of  their  reception,  in  which  he  had  been  aided  by  his 
daughter  Mrs.  Damer. 

In  Miss  Berry's  spirited  vindication  of  Lord  Orford,  in 
answer  to  the  article  in  the  '  Edinburgh  Keview,'  she 
adverts  to  the  attachment  that  had  subsisted  between 
him  and  Marshal  Conway,  from  their  boyish  days  at  Eton 
to  the  death  of  the  Marshal,  as  one  of  rare  occurrence 
between  men  of  the  world,  and  as  creditable  to  both. 
Miss  Berry  avows  herself  in  this  Advertisement  to  have 
been  the  author  of  a  character  given  of  Marshal  Conway 
in  Lord  Orford's  works,  nominally  edited  by  her  father 
in  1798,  and  which  may  claim  to  be  here  repeated  as  a 
tribute  to  one  whose  death  must  at  that  time  have  caused 
so  sad  a  blank  in  the  httle  society  in  which  he  was  so 
highly  valued. 

'  To  his  public  conduct  on  many  great  occasions  the  political 
and  military  history  of  his  country  will  bear  honourable  testimoay. 
His  opinions  and  conduct  with  respect  to  America  have  already 


1795]  CHAEACTEK   OF   MARSHAL   CONWAY.  463 

received  that  sanctioa  of  applause  from  all  parties  which  the 
soundest  policy  as  well  as  the  most  perfect  probity,  often  obtain 
only  from  distant  posterity.  The  part  he  took  on  the  memorable 
repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act,  when  considered  as  the  efficient  Minister 
in  the  House  of  Commons,  is  happily  not  intrusted  to  the  indis- 
criminate relation  of  some  future  half-informed  historian,  but  is 
circumstantially  recorded  in  the  glowing,  sublime,  and  immortal 
eloquence  of  a  contemporary  (Burke's  Speech  19th  April,  1774). 
The  reputation  of  Marshal  Conway  as  a  public  man  may  be 
safely  rested  upon  such  evidence.' 

'It  is  only  those  who,  like  the  Editor,  have  had  the  oppor- 
tunity of  penetrating  into  the  most  secret  motives  of  his  (Marshal 
Conway's)  public  conduct  and  into  the  inmost  recesses  of  his 
private  life,  who  can  do  real  justice  to  the  unsullied  purity  of  his 
character — who  saw  and  knew  him  in  the  evening  of  his  days, 
retired  from  the  honourable  activity  of  a  soldier  and  of  a  states- 
man, to  the  calm  enjoyments  of  private  life ;  happy  in  the  re- 
sources of  his  own  mind,  and  in  cultivation  of  useful  science, 
in  the  bosom  of  domestic  peace — unenriched  by  pensions  or 
places,  undistinguished  by  titles  or  ribbons,  unsophisticated  by 
public  life  and  unwearied  by  retirement.' 

The  two  fragments  by  Lord  Orford  upon  the  life  and 
character  of  Marshal  Conway,  now  for  the  first  time  pub- 
lished, were  doubtless  wiitten  with  the  intention  of  serving 
as  a  monumental  inscription. 

Chabactek  of  Marshal  Conway. 

An  assemblage  of  dauntless  and  even  of  thoughtless  intrepidity 

clothed  in  mildness,  patience,  and  unaffected  temper  ; 
Of  benevolence  and  generous  charity,  founded  on  good  nature 

and  extended  beyond  considerate  economy ; 
Of  most  graceful  eloquence  sometimes  too  refining  from   his 
tenderness  of  conscience,  but  capable,  tho'  rarely,  of  being 
ruffled  by  injustice  into  pointed  spirit; 
Of  disinterestedness,  superior  to  all  temptations  of  fortune  or 
ambition,  which  he  trampled  under  foot,  when  in 
competition  with  his  honor. 
Indefatigable  in  whatever  he  undertook,  and  fonder  of  employ- 
ments that  fed  his  love  of  science  in  his  profession,  than  of 
greater  offices  that  opened  the  secrets  of  politics ; 


LETTERS.  [1795 

Of  greater  and  more  useful  knowledge  in  military  architecture 

than  perhaps  was  possessed  by  any  man  of  his  time ; 

Of  deep  insight  into  chemistry  and  natural  philosophy,  which 

he  displayed  by  useful  experiments,  and  successful 

discoveries ; 

Of  original  taste  in  architecture,  particularly  in  the  construction 

of  bridges,  and  in  ornamenting  grounds  in  a  style  equally 

unborrowed  and  admired ; 

Of  felicity  in  writing  verse,  a  talent  which  he  exercised  but  late 

in  his  life,  and  possessed  of  wit  which  appeared  only 

occasionally  and  unsought. 

All  these  endowments  formed  the  singular  and  most  amiable 

character  of  Marshal  Conway, 
And  the  whole  assemblage  was  united  to  a  soul  of  untainted 

virtue, 
And  was  venerated  to  his  last  hours  as  it  had  been  through  his 

whole  life 
By  the  esteem  of  all  who  knew,  or  had  examined  the  composition 

of  so  excellent  a  man. 
Such  a  character  was  slightly  shaded,  not  clouded,  by  trifling 

imperfections. 

He  was  subject  to  absence  of  mind,  either  natural  or  from  the 

plenitude  of  its  occupations,  as  acute  logic  led  him  to 

dispute 

BioGHAPHicAL  Sketch  op  Marshal  Conway. 

Henry  Seymour  Conway,  born  in  July  1719,  at  Beaufort  House, 
Chelsea,  was  second  son  of  S.  C.  L*  Conway  by  his  third  wife, 
Charlotte,  second  daughter  of  John  Shorter,  Esq.,  of  Bybrook, 
in  Kent,  and  youngest  sister  of  Catherine  Lady  Walpole.  Henry 
was  bred  at  Eton  School,  and  from  thence  removed  to  Geneva. 

In  1742  he  was  chosen  into  Parliament,  and  in  1744  was 
appointed  Aide-de-Camp  to  His  E.  H.  William  Duke  of  Cumber- 
land. He  was  present  in  the  actions  of  Dettingen,  Loffelt,  and 
Fontenoy,  at  the  latter  of  which  he  was  taken  prisoner ;  in  1748 
he  was  second  in  command  in  the  attempt  on  Eochfort,  when  he, 
as  before,  gave  remarkable  instances  of  his  valour,  as  he  did  of 
his  talents  as  an  author  in  a  noble  defence  of  Greneral  Mordaunt 
and  himself,  on  the  miscarriage  of  that  expedition,  as  he  had 
in  various  instances  as  an  orator  in  England  and  Ireland,  in 


1795]  MARSHAL  CONWAY.  465 

which  last  kingdom  he  had  been  Secretaiy  of  State  to  William 
fourth  Duke  of  Devonshire. 

In  the  reign  of  George  the  Third  he  continued  Grroom  of  the 
Bedchamber  to  His  Majesty,  as  he  had  been  to  George  the  Second, 
and  Colonel  of  a  regiment  till  1765,  when  he  was  dismissed  from 
both  those  preferments  for  his  constitutional  resistance  of  war, 
and  for  his  still  more  constitutional  rejection  of  all  offers  of  cor- 
ruption and  threats  from  the  Minister,  G.  Grenville.  On  the 
change  of  the  Ministry  he  was  appointed  Secretary  of  State  in 
which  post  he  was  entreated  by  Mr.  P.  to  remain,  but  resigned 
it  after  all  manner  of  persuasion  had  been  employed  to  retain 
him  in,  when  he  was  made  Lieut.-General  of  the  Ordnance,  and 
afterwards  Governor  of  Jersey,  where— &c. 

In  the  published  correspondence  of  Lord  Orford  there 
are  but  six  letters,  written  to  different  peirsons,  in  1795, 
and  none  bearing  date  nearer  the  time  of  Marshal  Con- 
way's death  than  those  addressed  to  Lady  Ossory  in 
December. 

Miss  Berry's  entry  in  her  short  diary  of  this  year 
(1795)  is — 'We  went  to  Cheltenham.  0.  H.  came  there. 
We  met  afterwards  at  Park  Place.  Came  from  Little 
Strawberry  to  settle  in  town  in  November.' 

The  correspondence  between  Lord  Orford  and  the 
Miss  Berrys  was  commenced  on  their  going  to  Chelten- 
ham, and  many  of  the  letters  of  this  year  have  been 
preserved,  though  till  now  they  have  remained  unpub- 
lished. 

Aug.  19. 
About  an  hour  after  you  was  set  out  on  Tuesday,  I  found  the 
above  paragraph  in  the  newspaper.  I  foresaw  that  Mr.  Walter  * 
would  not  lie  dormant,  when  he  was  become  so  near  a  neighbour 
to  us !  A  writer  of  a  newspaper,  I  suppose,  like  what  is  said  of 
the  Astracan  Lamb,  devours  all  the  plants  that  grow  within  his 
atmosphere.  The  '  charming  man's '  visit  to  him  t'other  day  no 
doubt  inspired  the  panegyric  on  you  two,  and  as  certainly  was 

*  Mr.  Walter,  the  editor  of  the  Times  newspaper,  tlien  living  at  the 
Villa  at  Twickenham,  next  to  Strawberry  HUl. 

VOL.  L  H  H 


466  LETTEES.  [1795 

the  ecbo  of  what  he  had  said  of  you.  In  any  great  dearth  of 
news,  shall  you  wonder  if  the  public  is  acquainted  how  finely  you 
work  hammercloths  ?  When  Mr.  Walter  had  made  a  will  for 
me,  he  might  have  been  content  to  let  my  living  ashes  rest  in 
peace.  Well,  when  he  has  exhausted  us,  I  trust  he  will  extend 
his  appetite  and  browse  on  the  House  of  Orange  and  the  Pavi- 
lions— nobler  forage  than  quiet  us.* 

When  you  return,  remember  to  make  me  show  you  a  message 
that  a  former  Swiss  footman  of  mine  delivered  to  me  in  his  broken 
English  from  Mrs.  Ellis,  which  I  had  totally  forgotten,  but  tho' 
not  a  bon  mot,  is  worth  all  your  collection,  and  which  I  found 
in  the  letters  you  have  lately  been  reading.  I  know  how 
impatient  for  it  you  will  be,  but  it  would  be  most  improper  for 
me  to  write  to  you.  Lupino  is  nothing  to  it ;  it  makes  me 
laugh  while  I  am  writing. 

Holljein  Cliamljer,  Strawl).  Hill,  Wedn.  nigM,  Aug.  19,  1795. 

I  put  myself  in  mind  of  a  scene  in  one  of  Lord  Lansdown's 
plays,  where  two  ladies  being  on  the  stage  and  one  going  off, 
the  other  says,  '  Lord,  she  is  gone !  well,  I  must  go  and  write 
to  her.'  This  was  just  my  case  yesterday  :  you  had  been  gone 
hut  a  few  hours,  when  I  thought  I  could  amuze  or  amuzle 
myself  better  by  sitting  and  thinking  of  you,  than  by  going  out 
I  did  not  care  whither;  so  I  began  this  for  the  post  to-morrow, 
tho'  I  had  not  a  word  to  say  but  Mr.  Walter's  paragraph,  as  I 
soon  found  ;  so  I  went  to  the  returned  letters,  where  I  recovered 
David's  delightful  message,  which  you  will  know  some  day  or 
other. 

Intellectual  Mr.  Bush  has  been  here  this  morning ;  as  I 
doubted  whether  Nanny's  intellects,  high  as  she  holds  them, 
were  mounted  to  an  unison  with  his,  I  ordered  Kirgate,  for 
Want  of  you,  to  accompany  him  about  the  house,  that  I  might 
have  a  faithful  account  of  his  sententious  reflexions.  He 
brought  with  him,  as  I  concluded,  another  intellectual  cock  and 
two  hens ;  but  alack  !  they  did  not  lay  one  egg  worth  sitting 
on  or  sending  to  you :  chanticleer  himself  is  ancient  and  formal ; 
the  others,  mere  barn-door  fowl. 

*  The  Prince  and  Princess  of  Orange  were  then  living  in  Hampton 
Court  Palace ;  and  the  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Gloucester  at  two  small  build- 
ings called  the  Pavilions,  in  Hampton  Ooxat  Park. 


1795]  HOME   NEWS.  467 

The  Mendips  *  are  expected  to-morrow ;  so  we  shall  be  as 
lively  as  soups,  and  removes,  and  entres  and  pools  at  cribbage 
set  to  clarionettes  can  make  us.  Moreover,  I  shall  learn  for 
your  edification  all  that  the  Corps  Diplomatique  knows  or  is 
ordered  to  disperse ;  as  from  another  quarter  I  shall  be  informed 
how  all  the  Princes  and  Princesses  in  Europe  do.  Can  I  miss 
you,  when  my  time  may  pass  as  merrily  as  if  I  were  at  the 
Diet  of  Eatisbon ! 

To-day  you  have  had  charming  weather  for  travelling  ;  not 
sultry  for  certain,  and  not  a  drop  of  rain.  The  corn  I  hope 
you  found  most  levelled  !  The  papers  talk  of  such  prodigious 
plenty,  that  one  w'*  imagine  there  were  danger  of  our  being 
devoured  by  wheat  and  barley,  and  that  the  farmers  and  Jaco- 
bins would  raise  a  clamour  on  that  score  ! 

•     Wednesday  night. 

I  have  been  with  Lady  Di,  and  voici  what  I  heard.  Nel  of 
Clarence  plays  Ophelia  to-night  at  Eichmond.  Miss  Hotham 
has  issued  cards  for  a  tea  on  Friday.  I  have  not  received  one, 
tho'  last  year  she  swore  by  me ;  but  this  has  not  noticed  me,  I 
shall  not  break  my  heart. 

There  I  I  think,  considering  how  small  and  close  my  writing 
is,  and  that  we  have  been  parted  not  quite  two  days,  this  is  a 
tolerably  long  letter — in  the  Charming's  Uncial  Letters  it  would 
fill  two  folio  sheets.  I  trust,  too,  that  it  is  as  full  of  nothing  as 
the  heart  of  Agnes  can  desire.     G-ood  night,  both ! 

Tliursday,  one  o'clock. 
I  have  detained  my  letter  till  the  newspaper  and  post  were 
arrived  :  in  the  former  is  nothing  of  consequence  ;  by  the  latter 
no  letters  for  any  of  you  —  but  I  have  received  one  myself 
which  I  will  keep  to  show  you.  It  is  to  inquire  who  put  into 
the  paper,  my  '  Settlement  on  Lord  Hertford '  ?  You  may 
guess  at  the  writer  from  the  indecency  and  folly  of  the  inquiry. 
Don't  take  notice  of  this  in  your  answer.     Adieu ! 

Strawberry  Hill,  Aug.  22,  1795. 
Tho'  I  persuaded  you  to  go  to  Cheltenham,  and  am  happy 
you  are  there,  I  little  imagined  I  should  rejoice  at  your  not 

*  Wilbore  EUis  Agar,  tlie  first  Lord  Mendip. 

H  H  2 


468  LETTERS.  [1795 

being  here ;  yet  I  do,  at  least  I  did  yesterday,  when  we  had  an 
outrageous  storm  of  thunder  that  would  have  frightened  you 
terribly :  I  thought  it  directly  over  the  blue-room,  and  it  was 
so  near  that  it  did  fall  on  Davenport's  field,  over  against  the 
Eound  Tower,  and  reduced  a  shock  of  corn  to  powder.  Lady 
Cecilia  (her  first  visit  since  her  return)  was  with  me,  and  tho' 
so  apt  to  be  frightened  out  of  her  senses  when  not  in  the  least 
alarmed,  was  not  at  all  dismayed,  for  she  was  frying  Lady 
J.,  and  had  no  leisure  to  be  terrified. 

I  have  trusted with  my  anger  at  the  paragraph  about  my 

will,  that  she  may  betray  me,  and  report  what  I  said,  that  they 
who  make  wills  for  me  would  be  much  disappointed ;  but  that  I 
should  not  have  wondered  if  people  had  concluded  that  instead 
of  his  nephew  if  I  should  have  designed  his  uncle  for  my  prin- 
cipal heir.  This  sentence  I  am  determined  shall  by  some  channel 
or  other  be  conveyed  to  those  who  are  so  impatient  for  my 
succession,  and  so  indelicate  as  to  let  me  see  it  on  all  occasions. 

Yesterday,  just  as  I  had  breakfasted  in  my  closet  where  your 
bust  is,  I  saw  the  Kingston  Fencibles  pass  by  on  the  river.  They 
were  standing  in  rows  on  a  high  platform  in  a  western  barge, 
with  colours  and  music.  They  saluted  my  castle  with  three  guns 
— unfortunately  I  had  no  cannon  mounted  on  my  battlements 
to  return  it — ^then  they  gave  Mrs.  Osbaldiston  seven,  who,  I 
suppose,  was  standing  in  her  garden  on  the  shore,  and  repaid 
the  compliment  with  seven  bowls  of  punch,  and  perhaps  had 
invited  company  for  the  spectacle,  as  she  did  when  she  imagined 
the  Queen  was  to  come  in  a  barge  to  breakfast  with  me.  I  hope 
I  shall  have  a  letter  to-morrow  to  notify  your  safe  arrival  at  the 
Fountain — here  is  a  letter  for  my  t'other  half.     Adieu  ! 

Str.,  Aug.  23,  1795. 

Tho'  I  have  already  written  twice  to  you  in  four  days,  I  must 
postscribe  a  few  more  lines  to-day  as  I  have  this  instant  received 
your  first,  which  does  not  please  me  at  all,  from  the  disagreeable 
accounts  you  give  both  of  your  own  health  and  of  Mrs.  Damer's. 
For  yours,  I  am  delighted  that  I  persuaded  you  to  go  to  Chel- 
tenham, and  that  you  are  actually  there.  I  have  vast  hopes  in 
the  waters,  and  some  in  the  change  of  air,  and  in  a  variety  of 
amusements  without  late  hours. 

How  extremely  silly  is  Lady  C.  in  venting  her  malice  so  un- 


1795]  HOME  NEWS.  469 

guardedly !  but  is  not  that  indiscretion  a  providential  antidote 
to  ill  nature?  It  would  be  useless  to  detail  to  her  all  the 
virtues,  all  the  sense,  all  the  qualifications  I  find  in  you  two ; 
her  narrow  mind  that  never  cultivated  any  seed  but  that  of 
wormwood,  would  not  be  capable  of  conceiving  what  I  think  and 
should  say  of  yoii ;  but  I  could  tell  hei-  another  reason  for  my 
loving  you  both  so  extremely :  in  neither  do  I  find  a  mixture 
of  pride  and  selfish  meanness ;  no,  nor  envy,  malice,  and  all 
uncharitableness.  Foh !  but  she  is  below  one's  anger ;  nor  can 
she  have  a  worse  tormentor  than  the  spitefull  temper  that 
inhabits  her  own  bosom.  She  and  her  daughter  are  like  Scylla 
and  Charybdis — nobody  can  pass  near  them  without  being 
barked  at. 

I  shall  long  for  Tuesday,  in  hope  of  hearing  that  you  are 
quite  recovered.  Name  your  company ;  have  not  you  the  quiet 
Murrays  and  the  undancing  Barrels  ?  is  the  august  and  serene 
Mrs.  K.  at  Cheltenham  this  year  ?  There  is  a  more  august 
and  as  serene  a  personage,  who  some  day  or  other,  I  believe, 
will  not  be  more  disposed  to  curtsie  to  either  of  you  than  the 
former  to  Agnes  last  year. 

I  must  go  to  town  on  Wednesday  to  receive  some  money — not 
for  Mr.  Walter's  nominee.  Lord  H.,  nor  for  Lord  H.'s  self-ap- 
pointed competitor.  Do  you  wonder  I  am  ofiended  at  being 
laid  out  so  often  to  my  face  ?  yet  I  will  act  as  I  always  do  in 
such  cases,  I  will  change  in  nothing  which  I  once  thought  right 
— but  hola !  there. 

P.S. — Pray  keep  the  parcel  of  letters  till  you  can  bring  them 
yourself ;  you  must  have  a  voracious  appetite  if  you  can  digest 
more  than  one  every  day. 

Strawb.,  Aug.  25,  1795. 

Here  is  your  letter,  and  luckily  (which  I  ought  not  to  say)  I 
shall  have  time  to  answer  it  incontinently,  which  I  thought 
I  should  not  have,  for  Mrs.  Doiley  was  to  bring  her  friend  Mrs. 
Sloane  to  see  my  house,  but  the  former  is  unluclcily  indisposed, 
and  I  am  at  liberty  to  follow  my  wicked  inclinations. 

Take  care  you  both  return  in  perfect  health,  and  both  illu- 
minated by  as  many  roses  as  Agnes  brought  back  last  year,  or  I 
shall  repent  of  my  self-denying  ordinance  which  sent  you  to 
Cheltenham — I  do  not  grow  at  all  reconciled  to  your  absence ; 
pis-allers  are  the  worst  allers  in  the  world,  and  when  the  coach 


470  LETTERS.  [1795 

comes  to  the  door  at  eight  o'clock,  and  is  not  to  carry  me  to 
Cliveden,  I  grow  peevish  and  almost  wish  that  Tons  Blandusiae 
were  fragilior  Vitro,  and  had  been  smashed  to  pieces  some 
years  ago  in  one  of  his  moods  when  it  flew  into  the  most 
religious  and  gracious  head  upon  earth.  No  I  don't ;  it  agreed 
with  sweet  Agnes,  and  I  trust  will  be  as  salutiferous  to  sweet 
Mary : — 

0  Bessy  Belle  and  Mary  Gray, 

1  love  ye  streen  and  am.  sure  can  never  alter, 

and  if  ye  find  benefit,  what  signifies  a  month  of  insipid  even- 
ings ? 

Of  news  I  have  not  heard  a  tittle.  Lord  Guilford's  match 
is  avowed.*  They  accept  joy  at  Bushy.  I  was  at  Lord  Mendip's 
last  night,  when  Grunning,  his  surgeon,  came  in,  and  after  ex- 
amining his  foot,  declared  it  quite  healed ;  so  I  suppose  he  will 
frisk  to  Hampshire  next  month  as  usual,  for  he  never  falls  to 
the  earth,  but,  like  feu  Antaeus,  he  springs  up  again  with  all 
his  spirits. 

On  Sunday,  as  it  was  a  most  comely  evening,  I  returned  the 
anti-divine  Cecilia's  visit,t  concluding  she  would  be  on  the  ter- 
race of  the  Palace  sidleing  towards  the  Oranges.|  I  had  guessed 
rightly.  Then  I  called  on  Mrs.  Garrick  §  and  to  my  surprise 
was  for  the  first  time  in  my  life  let  in,  tho'  uninvited.  She  met 
me  at  the  door  and  told  me  she  had  an  hundred  head  of  nieces 
with  her — and  in  truth  so  I  found ;  there  were  six  gentlewomen, 
a  husband  of  one  of  them,  and  two  boys.  An  elderly  fat  dame 
affected  at  every  word  to  call  her  Aunt.  However,  they  were 
quiet  enough,  and  did  not  cackle  much,  and  even  the  lads  were 
tame,  and  did  not  stare  at  my  limping  skeleton  as  I  expected, 
and  which  I  do  not  love  to  expose  to  Giggledom. 

I  can  coin  no  more  nothings  without  straw,  and  this  assignat 
is  not  worth  a  farthing  more  than  a  French  one,  and  those  I  see 
•with  pleasure  sink  every  day,  notwithstanding  the  Convention 

*  With  tlie  eldest  daughter  of  Mr.  Coutts  the  hanker. 

t  Lady  Cecilia  Johnston. 

J  The  Stadtholder's  family,  then  estahlished  in  Hampton  Court  Palace. 

§  The  widow  of  David  Garrick,  a  native  of  Vienna,  married  1749,  who 
continued  to  reside  at  Hampton  till  her  death  in  1822,  in  her  ninety-seventh 
year,  having  survived  her  hiishand  forty-three  years. 


1795]  COURT   OF   BEIGHTHELMSTONE,   ETC.  471 

has  bought  peace  with  so  many  kings  whom  they  had  devoted 
to  destruction.  Adieu!  I  told  you  I  shall  be  in  London  to- 
morrow, and  mayhap  I  may  not  write  to  you  again  for  I  don't 
know  how  many  minutes  to  come. 


Berkeley  Sc[uare,  Wedn.  after  dinner,  Aug.  26,  1796. 

Here  I  am,  with  no  earthly  whither  to  go  but  to  my  sister's 
at  supper-time ;  then  why  should  I  not  go  on  writing  to  you, 
which  I  like  better  than  anything  when  I  am  not  with  you,  espe- 
cially as  I  have  some  nothingly  scraps  to  send  you  ?  I  called 
on  poor  Stumpity,  and  found  him  sick  and  very  yellow — he 
goes  to  Bath  on  Friday ;  this  will  delay  his  peregrination  of  the 
rest  of  his  parishes,  for  which  I  am  sorry. 

Mrs.  Molyneux,  grandmother  of  the  present  late  Princess  of 
Wales,  is  dead ;  they  call  it  suddenly,  tho'  she  was  above  ninety 
years  of  age  before  this  impromptu  came  into  her  head. 

The  court  of  Brighthelmstone  furnishes  the  idle  of  this  town 
with  the  chief  topics  of  conversation.  Mr.  Tyrwhit,  a  favourite 
of  no  ancient  date,  is  gathered  to  his  numberless  predecessors, 
for  having  roundly  lectured  Lady  J.  on  her  want  of  reverence 
for  the  legal  Princess,  and  the  poor  injured  lady  had  no  way  to 
escape  but  by  inventing  a  swoon,  in  the  height  of  which  came 
in  the  Prince,  who,  learning  the  cause,  dismissed  Nathan. 
Miss  Vanneck  is  come  away  furious  also,  on  never  being  asked 
to  play  at  cards;  nay,  she  was  desired  for  her  aynusement  to 
bring  her  spinning-wheel  into  the  play-room,  where  I  suppose 
she  banged  and  bungled  the  instrument  like  Lady  Loverule. 
The  J.'s  do  not  go  into  the  house  in  Warwick  Street — some 
say  on  a  remonstrance  of  the  present,  others  of  the  last 
chancellor.  They  are  to  have  the  house  of  Lord  William 
Eussell,  which  was  his  grandmother  Bedford's  in  Pall  Mall — 
still  harping  on  Carleton  House.  Don't  mention  these  oui- 
dires  (for  the  truth  of  not  one  of  which  I  will  be  respon- 
sible) on  the  green  or  pantiles  of  Cheltenham,  which  I  repeat 
merely  to  divert  you,  without  caring  a  straw  about  the 
dramatis  personse.  My  next  paragraph  the  Barrels  probably 
know,  and  may  have  told  you :  it  was  printed  at  the  bottom  of 
the  playbills  at  Eichmond  last  week,  that  Mrs.  Jordan  would 
not  perform,  as  it  was  the  birthday  of  his  E.  H.  the  Duke  of 


472  LETTERS.  [1795 

Clarence — no,  to  be  sure  she  could  not,  for  the  Prince  of  Orange 
was  to  dine  with  him,  and  she  did  the  honours  at  the  head  of 
the  table — no,  the  Princesses  were  not  there. 

Well,  come,  this  shall  be  a  complete  royal  letter :  they 
say  that  honest  gentleman,  the  King  of  Prussia,  does  not 
pay  the  Margrave  his  annuity ;  Dame  Cowslip,  I  doubt,  will 
not  bring  grist  enough  to  the  theatrical  mill  to  keep  it 
going. 

How  very  foolish  is  the  tedious  wise  letter  of  the  new  King 
of  France !  What  business  had  he  to  make  promises  and 
threats  ?  The  former  will  not  restore  him  an  hour  sooner  nor 
be  believed ;  the  latter  will  be  believed,  and  will  hurt  him. 
Poor  M.  de  Sombreuil's  is  a  most  melancholy  story.  He  was  in 
church  here  at  the  instant  he  was  going  to  be  married  to  a 
young  woman  with  whom  he  was  in  love  and  in  love  with  him, 
when  the  courier  arrived  to  summon  him  for  the  expedition  to 
Bretagne :  '  Then,'  said  he,  '  I  must  go ! '  The  ceremony  was 
deferred  for  ever ! 

Miss  Hotham  is  to  have  another  tea  on  Friday,  and  has  not 
only  sent  me  a  card  for  it,  but  has  written  to  the  anti-divine  to 
beg  her  to  press  me  to  be  at  it.  I  shall  be  exceedingly  unwilling, 
and  have  not  promised,  for  I  have  heard  that  on  Monday  she 
had  Miss  Tag,  and  Miss  Eag,  and  Miss  Bobtail,  and  I  suppose 
will  have  as. many  next  time. 

Lord  Lucan  is  made  Earl  of  the  Ilk — no  wonder.  Lady 
Camden,  the  Vice-Queen,  is,  you  know.  Lady  Lucan's  niece. 

The  weather  is  as  gorgeous  as  in  the  Summer  Islands — I  hope 
you  have  your  full  share  of  it.  The  verdure  is  luxuriant,  from 
the  snow  of  the  winter  and  the  rains  of  the  summer — it  is 
pity  we  must  buy  fine  autumns  so  dear.  Methinks  when  the 
Parliament  brought  the  months  eleven  days  forwarder  it  should 
have  ordered  that  the  commencement  of  summer,  should  not 
date  till  after  the  deluges  of  St.  Swithin.  Good  night  for  the 
present ;  all  I  have  been  saying  will  keep  cold  for  two  or  three 
days. 

Strawb.,  27th. 

The  Churchills  were  not  in  town,  nor  could  I  find  a  creature 

but  old    Pompey,   and  of   him  I  soon   grew  tired,  and  came 

home  at  nine  o'clock,  and  this  morning  returned  hither.     The 

Bower  you  are  higging  on  yon  hum  brae  advances  rapidly, 


1795]  .        HOME  NEWS.  473 

but  the  new  road  across  your  field  is  not  begun  for  want 
of  hands;  they  are  all  cutting  wheat,  which,  as  nurses  say  to 
children,  cries  '  Come  eat  me  ! '  Our  dreaded  famine  is  turned 
into  exuberance,  every  road  and  lane  is  filled  by  loads  of  corn 
crossing  in  every  direction,  yet  such  a  panic  is  gone  forth 
that  every  common  is  going  to  be  ploughed  up  and  applied 
to  tillage.  I  received  a  printed  card  from  the  Duke  of 
Northumberland  to-day  to  invite  me  to  meet  him  and  the 
neighbouring  gentry  at  Isleworth  to  consider  of  breaking  up 
Hounslow-heath ;  his  Grace  disapproves,  to  be  popular  with  the 
cottagers. 

A  droll  idea  is  started  into  my  head  for  a  drawing  by  Agnes ; 
but  I  shall  not  tap  it  till  you  return,  for  tho'  I  think  it  will 
divert  us  amongst  ourselves,  yet  as  it  is  not  a  good-natured 
thought,  I  should  be  afraid  of  its  getting  into  the  printshops. 
Another  good  night !  This  is  such  a  heap  of  trumpery,  that  I 
will  wait  a  day  or  two  for  something  more  worth  sending ;  yet 
at  this  season  what  can  one  have  to  talk  of  but  weather  and 
harvests — or  of  French  horrors  ? 

28th,  eleven  at  night. 

Well,  I  have  been  at  Miss  Hotham's  in  a  bright  but  most 
chill  moonlight.  The  assemblage  was  not  so  ungain  as  I  ex- 
pected, for  tho'  there  were  some  of  the  clan  of  the  Bobtails, 
there  were  several  I  knew,  as  the  Gruilfords,  Mount  Edgcumbes, 
the  Yonges,  the  Cunninghams,  Lady  Mary  Duncan,  Lady 
Mary  Fordyce,  and  a  few  more.  I  played  with  Lady  Cecilia, 
Lady  Guilford,  and  Mr.  Sutton;  and  Mrs.  Sutton,  with  a 
thousand  civilities,  invited  me  to  Molesey  for  Tuesday  next, 
and  I  will  certainly  go,  as  they  are  of  y'  acquaintance. 

This  morning  I  received  y'  letter,  and  have  great  comfort  in 
hearing  that  the  fountain  agrees  with  you ;  how  I  shall  applaud 
myself  if  you  find  essential  benefit !  I  am  glad,  too,  that  you 
have  such  an  excellent  cicerone  as  Lysons ;  if  you  have  time 
when  at  Gloucester,  make  him  carry  you  to  the  Bishop's  Palace 
and  to  George  Selwyn's  late  house  at  Matson,  a  beautiful  situa- 
tion, and  to  Prinhnage,  on  the  hill  to  which,  in  a  cottage,  I 
purchased  for  five  shillings  a  most  venerable  and  most  ancient 
cradle  of  wood,  exactly  like  one  in  the  '  Gentleman's  Magazine,' 
that  saved  Edward  II.,  and  then  I  was  ashamed  to  bring  it  away, 


474  LETTERS.  [1795 

as  having  no  babe  to  put  into  it ;  I  should  be  more  ashamed  now 
that  I  have  two  wives  and  yet  no  progeny.     Adieu  ! 

Str.,  Sept.  1, 1795. 

I  am  resolved  to  correct  my  hand,  for  my  writing  was  grown 
so  small  and  so  close,  that  I  myself  could  scarce  read  over  my 
last  letter ;  and  tho'  your  eyes  are  fifty  years  younger,  I  believe 
you  found  difficulty  to  decypher  it.  At  present  I  have  so  little 
to  say,  that  I  had  better  make  my  alphabet  as  tall  as  Jerning- 
ham's,  tho'  I  have  not  his  happy  facility  of  making  every 
sentence  a  double  entendre.  Mercy  on  us  if  he  and  S.  were  to 
correspond  !  They  would  have  occasion,  to  use  an  expression 
of  Lord  Bacon's,  to  speak  without  Jig-leaves.  Some  say  the 
charming  will  succeed  Tommy  Tyrrwhit.*  I  wish  with  all  my 
heart  he  may.  He  will  not  offend  by  leaving  his  old  friend, 
Madame  de  Makatenant,  nor  displease  by  his  abrupt  sophisms, 
congenial  enough  to  the  climate. 

After  all  his  vast  profusions  Lord  Moira's  expeditions  are 
given  over,  and  he  is  retired  to  Donington  Castle,  carrying  with 
him  his  first  aide-de-camp,  the  Due  d'Angouleme,  son  of  Mon- 
sieur, who  is  gone  to  tap  another  attempt  on  Bretagne.  How 
those  two  rejettons  of  the  Plantagenets  and  Bourbons  will 
sympathise  on  their  vanished  grandeurs !  This  is  all  I  know 
beyond  the  next  milestone. 

Lord  Clifden  is  returned  from  Ireland,  and  has  been  three 
days  at  his  uncle's,  but  he  and  the  silent  woman  and  the  old 
bittern  are  gone  to  Eamsgate  for  two  months.  I  am  sorry,  for 
my  lord  is  very  agreeable.  The  Archbishop  of  Cashell,  is 
arrived  too,  but  the  Patriarch  of  the  Agars  is  so  much  recovered 
that  I  believe  he  will  soon  remove  to  Hampshire.  Every  ab- 
sentee makes  a  gap  now  in  my  narrow  beat ;  but  at  the  end  of 
the  month  I  trust  I  shall  miss  nobody,  nor  care  who  leaves  the 
neighbourhood. 

Did  not  I  hear  some  time  ago  that  Mr.  May  was  gone  to 
Cheltenham?  If  he  is  there,  I  hope  he  will  be  as  zealous 
about  my  wives  as  he  was  last  winter  about  me,  and  address 
some  more  irresistible  verses  to  Grod,  beseeching  Him  to  order 
Jupiter  to  restore  you  two  to  perfect  health.  Had  his  Cupid 
not  been  blown,  from  the  top  of  his  summer-house  into  the 

*  As  Groom  of  the  Bedchamber  to  the  Prince  of  Wales. 


1795]  GENERAL   O'HAEA.  475 

Thames,  perhaps  he  would  have  been  so  gallant  as  to  have  sent 
the  urchin  on  the  errand  in  an  ode,  and  directed  him  to  wait  on 
the  Virgin  Mary  and  entreat  her  to  lay  her  commands  on  her 
friend  Venus  for  that  purpose. 

I  was  last  night  at  Mrs.  Sutton's.  There  was  not  an  in- 
undation of  people,  as  I  feared,  chiefly  Hampton  courtiers  and 
its  excrescences,  Dutch  and  French.  There  was  a  little  music, 
and  Miss  Broadie  sung  and  played,  and  so  did  another,  a  man, 
and  there  was  a  large  supper,  at  which  I  left  them.  The  situation 
seems  handsome,  the  house  extremely  pretty  and  in  very  pure 
taste ;  there  is  a  lovely  little  gallery  painted  in  treillage,  rather 
prettier  than  a  paper  of  that  gender,  which  I  have  seen  some- 
where or  other,  I  forget  where.  Mrs.  Sutton's  own  landscapes, 
as  far  as  I  could  judge  by  candle  light,  seem  very  good.  Hike 
her  herself  and  her  husband  too ;  he  is  the  civilest  of  men.  I 
recollect  the  terror  I  felt  last  Christmas  when  you  was  to  return 
from  a  ball  there  at  three  o'clock  in  the  snow.  I  had  concluded 
you  was  to  ferry,  and  had  quite  forgot  the  bridge  at  Hampton 
Court ;  you  know  I  sometimes  have  such  inveterate  distractions. 

Thus  far  I  had  written  after  breakfast,  but  tho'  I  then  received 
y''  Monday's  letter  I  could  not  finish  mine,  for  I  had  promised 
Mrs.  Doiley  to  show  my  house  to  her,  Mrs.  Sloane,  and  a  dowager. 
Miss  Agar,  who  is  at  Pope's ;  and  they  being  old  women  who  do 
not  live  at  the  brink  of  fashion,  they  came  in  sunny  time,  and 
not  three  hours  after  it  was  pitch  dark,  as  fine  ladies  would  have 
done  who  hope  to  be  immortal  by  always  being  too  late  for  every 
diversion  they  may  be  supposed  to  like.  Before  the  trio  were 
gone  arrived  my  niece,  Lady  Horatia,  with  her  two  glorious 
eldest  boys ;  *  the  second,  especially,  is  a  bold  miniature  of  his 
mother,  and  consequently  beaiitiful.  They  staid  with  me  till 
dinner  time ;  Lady  Lincoln  has  lent  her  house  at  Putney,  while 
she  is  at  Tunbridge,  to  Horatia,  who  expects  Lord  Hugh  soon 
from  sea. — Now  I  will  answer  you. 

I  am  delighted  that  you  have  got  0'Hara.f  How  he  must  feel 
his  felicity  in  being  at  liberty  to  rove  about  as  much  as  he  likes  !■ 

*  George  Francis,  afterwards  Admiral  Sir  George  Seymour.  Hugh 
Henry,  afterwards  Lieut.-Col.  in  the  army,  died  1821. 

t  General  Charles  O'Hara,  who  had  just  been  freed  from  a  French  prison, 
subsequent  to  his  having  been  wounded  and  taken  prisoner  at  the  siege  of 
Toulon. 


476  LETTERS.  [1795 

Still  I  shall  not  admire  Ms  volatility  if  he  quits  you  soon.  I 
am  sorry  he  thinks  Lady  Ailesbury  so  much  changed,  yet  how 
amazing  it  would  he  if  such  a  loss  as  she  has  had  made  no  visible 
impression ;  a  husband  who,  living  and  dying,  seemed  to  have 
thought  only  of  her  ! 

The  success  of  the  water  on  you  both  charms  me,  and  tho'  I 
am  very  unked  without  you,  I  enjoin  you  not  to  think  of  coming 
away. 

Another  command  I  have  to  give  you,  and  like  most,  I  hope, 
of  my  ordinances,  not  originating  in  self;  it  is,  not  to  write  me 
such  long  letters.  I  have  always  heard  that  writing  is  preju- 
dicial in  a  course  of  waters.  Besides,  it  takes  up  an  uncon- 
scionable portion  of  your  time,  which  I  wish  to  have  constantly 
diverted.  Don't  measure  your  letters  by  mine ;  I  have  no 
other  occupation  which  I  like  a  quarter  so  well  as  conversing 
with  you.  I  wish  to  amuse  your  idle  moments,  but  not  to 
misemploy  them  ;  and  is  it  fit  that  your  youth  should  be  con- 
fined to  the  entertainment  of  your  great-grandfather  ?  Let  me 
babble,  but  don't  reply.     Adieu. 

Str.,  Sunday  niglat,  Sept.  6,  1795. 

I  sent  two  letters  to-day,  one  for  y"^  father,  the  other  for  y'' 
sister,  and  two  to  Audley-street,  but  none  from  myself,  for  I 
had  not  a  morsel  of  news  in  the  house,  and  this  letter  perhaps 
will  wait  for  a  supply;  our  region  is  quite  dry,  unless  I  were 
to  send  to  the  scandal-pump  at  Hampton  Court,  with  which 
you  like  to  deal  as  little  as  I.  In  our  village  I  suppose  I  am 
thought  grown  very,  sociable,  unless  they  suspect  the  true  cause, 
for  I  call  every  now  and  then  (at  my  vcbccunt  eight  o'clock) 
on  the  few  I  do  visit ;  last  night  a  second  time  at  the  foot  of 
the  bridge,*  where  indeed  they  are  very  zealous  about  the 
Clivedenites.  I  am  a  little  tired  of  the  clan  at  Pope's,  of  the 
formality  and  cribbage,  and  formality  again!  T'other  night 
there  was  an  Irish  miss,  who  is  thought  a  prodigy  in  music ; 
and  indeed  she  did  belabour  the  harpsichord  as  if  it  had  no 
more  feeling  than  a  kettledrum. 

I  sent  the  Udneysf  half  a  buck :  they  wanted  me  to  partake  of 

*  Mr.  Cambridge's  family. 

t  Mr.  Udney  had  been  formerly  Consul  at  Legbom.  He  bad  made  a 
large  collection  of  pictures  in  Italy,  and  at  tbis  time  inhabited  a  bouse  at 
Teddington. 


1795]  LOED   OEFORD'S   DEAKTH   OF   NEWS.  477 

it,  which  luckily  I  declined,  and  well  it  was  I  did,  for  they  had 
invited  that  surfeiting  flatterer,  Lady  E.,  and  such  a  hogshead 
of  sweet  sauce  would  have  overloaded  any  stomach  that  has  not 
a  royal  digestion.  Not  that  I  have  escaped,  for  alas !  she  is 
there  still,  which  I,  not  knowing,  went  thither  this  evening,  and 
fell  into  her  mouth.  Oh,  how  she  crammed  me  with  all  that 
the  Queen  and  Princesses  had  said  to  her  about  their  breakfast 
here,  and  how  they  every  day  recollect  something  new  that  they 
admired.  I  fear  I  did  not  offer  her  to  come  and  see  how  she 
would  like  the  house.  Mrs.  Leneve  formerly  advised  me  never 
to  begin  with  civilities  to  people  I  don't  like ;  '  for,'  said  she, 
'  you  soon  let  them  see  that,  and  then  they  are  more  offended 
than  they  would  have  been  by  coldness  at  first.'  You  will  bear 
me  witness  that  I  did  not  sniff  up  the  Countess's  incense  kiudly 
the  first  time  it  was  offered  to  me. 

Monday  night. 
The  day  has  produced  nothing  that  will  help  my  letter  a  step 
forwarder.  I  have  not  seen  a  soul  except  Lady  Horatia  and  her 
two  Cupids,  who  dined  with  me,  and  half  our  conversation  has 
rolled  on  panegyrics  of  the  weather,  which  continues  as  fine, 
and  warm,  and  summerly  as  if  all  the  snow  and  raia  in  the 
skies  had  been  let  out  to  clear  the  complexion  of  September ; 
the  sun  himself  is  as  constant  as  Lord  Derby.  Apropos,  Lady 
Betty  and  her  Cole  were  here  this  morning  to  see  the  house, 
according  to  your  order.  I  will  talk  no  more  of  the  weather  but 
to  tell  you  that  I,  who  used  to  delight  in  a  storm  of  lightning 
and  thunder,  am  grown,  since  I  saw  your  fright  at  Eichmond, 
to  dread  a  threatening  appearance  of  a  tempest,  and  watch 
whether  it  points  Cheltenhamhoy.  I  wish  I  were  always  as  clear 
about  everything  that  relates  to  you,  but  you  know  that  some- 
times my  etourderie  is  inconceivable.  So  it  was  yesterday :  the 
two  letters  that  I  imagined  came  to  me  by  the  post  were  only 
sent  to  me  from  Cliveden  for  y"^  servant  William  Croft,  with  a 
view  of  my  transmitting  them  to  Cheltenham.  You  may  tran- 
quillise  him  about  them  if  you  have  alarmed  him,  for  having 
occasion  to  send  Kirgate  to  town  yesterday,  I  delivered  them  to 
him,  to  be  left  in  Audley-street,  where  the  mystery  was  cleared 
up,  and  whence  he  brought  them  back  to-day ;  and  they  will 
depart  franked  to-morrow  under  y''  colours,  and  if  there  was 
any  sweethearting  in  the  case,  "William,  I  hope,  will  excuse  my 
occasioning  him  two  sleepless  nights. 


478  LETTERS.  [1795 

If  I  receive  no  letter  to  answer  to-morrow,  these  two  poor 
homely  pages  must  set  as  good  a  face  upon  the  matter  as  they 
can,  but  will  own  honestly  that  for  these  last  three  weeks  the 
gentleman  who  sends  them  has  not  been  at  all  the  man  he  was, 
is  pleased  with  nothing  he  does,  nor  tells  them  a  syllable  that  in 
their  humble  opinion  is  worth  y'  ladyship's  reading,  tho'  he 
pretends  our  successors  will  be  much  more  entertaining  than  we 
are,  quod  est  demonstrandum  (they  say,  Madam,  you  speak 
Latin  as  well  as  Madame  Darner,  the  great  statue-iuoman),  but 
for  our  parts  we  confess  we  should  no  more  have  thought  of 
acting  the  part  of  a  letter  than  of  pretending  to  as  much  wit  as 
Mr.  Congreve,  y"^  ladyship's  favourite  author. 

Tuesday  morning. 

Yes,  here  is  your  letter,  and  I  like  all  it  tells  me,  that  you 
have  chained  y"^  general*  to  y'  car,  tho'  you  could  not  make  him 
enter  the  prison  with  you ;  and  no  wonder  that  even  the  divine 
Mr.  Howard's  luxm-ies  of  a  dungeon  are  not  an  antidote  to  the 
diabolic  infection  of  Eobespierre's  and  Charrier's  refinements  on 
barbarity.  I  like  y'  jaunts,  and  that  they  answer  so  well,  and 
I  hope  they  will  be  as  beneficial  as  the  waters  to  both  of  you. 
I  suppose  you  will  advertise  me  when  I  am  to  change  my 
direction,  tho'  unless  the  public  is  more  prolific  of  events  than 
it  has  been  for  this  last  week,  Twickenham  is  not  likely  to  pro- 
voke me  to  write  soon.     Adieu ! 

Tuesday  evening,  Sept.  8,  1795. 

This  is  a  mere  codicil  of  business  to  my  morning's  letter.  I 
have  been  to  survey  the  works  at  Cliveden.  Imprimis  :  the  new 
road  is  not  begun.  Nobody,  they  said,  had  received  specific 
orders  about  it.  I  specified  them  to  no  purpose.  Chapman  was 
there,  and  imagined  there  was  to  be  a  double  ditch  and  rail — 
no  such  thing — a  simple  path  of  gravel  for  a  coach :  what  a  fright 
would  more  be  from  Agnes's  balcony. 

The  two  rooms  are  covered  in ;  the  scaffolding  will  be  struck 
to-night.  I  clambered  to  the  top  of  the  stairs  and  peeped  in,  tho' 
the  steps  are  not  placed  yet ;  they  will  be  pretty  chambers. 

Mr.  Berry's  rick  is  almost  finished. 

I  found  poor  Muff  bad,  not  with  his  eyes,  but  bis  back  very 
mangy.  I  have  ordered  him  to  be  entirely  clipped,  and  dipped 
at  the  powder  mills. 

*  General  O'Haia, 


1795]  REASONS   FOR  MISS   BERRY'S   RETURN.  479 

As  the  letter  to  the  gardener  only  affected  to  have  been  waf ered, 
but  came  open,  I  looked  to  see  whether  I  could  expedite  any 
orders.  I^'found  that  your  favourite  gardener  is_leaving  you. 
I  asked  wherefore ;  he  replied  the  wages  are  too  low.  Pray  • 
suspend  that  decree  if  you  wish  to  keep  him.  I  think  I  could 
accommodate  that  impediment. 

I  have  given  orders  for  a  new  gigantic  ice-house,  that  you 
may  not  want  a  profusion,  if  there  should  ever  he  such  a  feel- 
omenon  as  a  hot  summer.  - 

Strawb.,  Sept.  10, 1795. 

The  postman  at  Cheltenham  may  growl  as  much  as  he  pleases, 
or  make  as  ill-natured  glosses  as  he  has  a  mind,  on  my  writing 
to  you  almost  every  day :  as  long  as  y''  servant  fetches  the  letters 
from  the  office,  what  has  the  man  to  do  but  to  receive  them  ?  If 
Kirgate,  who  is  forced  to  put  my  letters  into  the  post  so  very  often, 
were  to  complain,  and  demand  an  increase  of  his  wages,  I  should* 
not  wonder,  tho'  since  my  press  has  stopped,  he  has  scarce 
anything  else  to  do ;  or  if  you,  the  greatest  sufferer  of  all,  were 
to  lament  being  obliged  to  read  such  heaps  of  insipid  scribbles, 
it  would  be  no  marvel ;  but  till  I  receive  some  remonstrance 
of  that  kind,  I  shall  persist  to  the  last  drop  of  the  next 
fortnight.  I  trust  I  am  still  in  a  free  country,  and  not  in  one 
where  everybody  that  is  below  me  is  much  above  me,  and  has  a 
right  to  tell  me  what  I  shall  not  do,  when  I  have  nothing  at  all 
to  do,  and  when,  as  at  this  present  writing,  no  mortal  can  take 
upon  himself  to  say  that  I  am  doing  any  thing  at  all. 

Having  thus  confuted  the  postman,  and  asserted  my  natural 
liberty  as  a  Peer  of  England  of  being  as  foolish  as  I  please,  I 
come  to  the  next  important  article  of  my  present  life,  which  is 
very  necessary  for  you  to  know,  or  you  would  be  entirely  ignorant 
of  one  trifling  event  of  my  actual  existence.  The  House  of 
North  and  hy  Douglas*  dined  here  to-day,  and  I  could  not  get  a 
soul  to  meet  them :  the  Keenes  are  at  Tunbridge ;  I  sent  to  the 
Mount  Edgcumbes,  but  they  are  gone  this  blessed  day,  he  to  the 
Mount  and  she  to  Norfolk,  while  the  Dowager  is  merrymaking 
with  Lord  Cardigan  in  Northampton.  Having  mounted  quan- 
tum in  auras  setherias  of  Eichmond  Hill,  I  tantum  in  Tartara 
tendebam,  and  invited  the  Mother  Ankerstrom  and  her  daughter- 

*  Lady  Guildford  and  family:  her  eldest  daughter  married  Sylvester 
Douglas. 


480  LETTERS.  [1795 

in-law,  and  they  also  -would  not  come ;  so  not  being  able  to 
make  a  party  for  Lady  Gruilford,  she  and  her  younger  daughters 
(the  elder  and  her  Strephon  to  love  and  a  cottage)  went  after 
tea  to  Pope's  to  visit  Mrs.  Arch-Cashel,*  who,  by  the  way,  is 
created  Lady  Somerton,  for  Irishwomen  turn  to  peeresses  as 
easily  as  the  figurantes  at  the  Opera  who  form  shepherdesses  in 
the  first  dance,  are  changed  in  the  next  to  graces  and  goddesses. 
So  being  left  alone  on  my  own  shore,  what  could  I  do  but  fling 
myself  into  the  Thames  or  write  to  you  ?  Now  you  see  and  rue 
the  consequences  of  leaving  me  by  myself  in  this  depopulated 
region !  Another  danger  is,  that  if  you  don't  return  soon,  I 
shall  be  devoured  by  venison,  and  hares,  and  partridges,  and 
pheasants  from  Houghton.  I  am  forced  to  water  all  my  neigh- 
bourhood with  game :  to  Lady  Anne  I  shall  be  supposed  to  be 
making  court  for  a  legacy,  tho'  it  is  only  gratitude  for  the  large 
,  cabinet  of  gold  and  silver  medals  which  she  insisted  on  giving 
to  me,  and  which  I  was  so  overjoyed  when  authorised  to  send 
back  to  her. 

Saturday  morning,  12tli. 

Thank  all  the  stars  in  which  I  have  any  friends,  for  bringing 
me  yours  of  Thursday  last  at  this  instant,  when  I  had  not  a  word 
to  say,  nor  could  have  made  out  the  semblance  of  a  letter,  had 
I  not  had  this  antecedent  piece  ready  cut  and  dried  in  my  writing 
box,  tho',  as  you  justly  say,  when  my  pen  gets  a  drop  of  ink  in 
its  eye,  it  cannot  help  chattering  (to  you  s'entend)  as  fast  as  Miss 
Hotham. 

If  you  have  gulped  enough  of  the  fountain — tho'  I  fear  not, 
nor  conceive  that  water  can  work  miracles  in  three  weeks — I  like 
your  journeyings  about  and  diverting  yourselves  with  sights. 
Of  Sudeley  Castle,  the  principal  point  to  tell  you  is,  that  there 
is  a  print  of  the  beautiful  chapel,  in  which  but  a  few  years  ago 
was  found  the  tomb  of  Catherine  Parr,  the  castle  then  belonging 
to  her  last  husband.  Admiral  Seymour ;  and  as  I  am  descended 
from  her  by  her  first,  I  would  you  had  been  advertized  to  say  a 
mass  for  y''  great-grandmother. 

I  do  not  wonder  that  Madam  K.  ordered  the  windows  to  be 
shut  when  the  weather  was  sultry — it  was  to  display  her  dignity, 
or  to  increase  the  volume  of  her  noisy  voice,  which  she  always 

*  Wife  of  Charles  Agar,  Arclibisliop  of  Casliel,  created  Baron  Somerton 
1795. 


1795]  LORD   OEFORD   TO   THE  MISS   BEREYS.  481 

exerts  for  the  same  reason.  I  wish  they  had  been  gentlewomen, 
and  then  they  would  not  have  always  aimed  at  being  princesses. 
I  will  say  nothing -about  y"' gardener  nor  Cliveden  now.  I 
believe  you  will  think  my  pen  more  fuddled  this  morning  than 
it  was  two  nights  ago,  for  this  part  of  my  letter  is  much  worse 
written  than  the  former — the  truth  is,  I  am  very  nervous  to- 
day, and  my  hand  shakes,  yet  I  am  otherwise  quite  well,  as 
Mrs.  Damer  will  testify,  for  I  expect  her  by  dinner  on  her 
return  from  London,  and  she  is  to  stay  with  me  till  to-morrow, 
of  which  I  am  very  glad. 

The  out-pensioner  of  Bedlam,  Gr.  H.,  whom  I  hoped  I  had 
offended  in  the  spring  by  refusing  him  a  plenary  indulgence, 
wrote  to  me  last  night  to  dine  with  him  on  Tuesday  next  with 
the  Archbishop  of  Cashel.  I  knew  this  was  to  imply,  '  my  cousin 
is  Lord- Lieutenant ' — with  all  my  heart !  Accept  I  did  not ; 
however,  as  it  showed  good  hvimour,  I  sent  a  very  civil  sorrow- 
ful fib  in  return,  and  pleaded  having  engaged  company  myself 
for  that  day.  You  know  I  never  enter  into  dinner-parties  that 
have  a  round  of  consequences.    Adieu ! 

Str.,  Tuesday,  Sept.  1.5, 1795. 
I  this  moment  receive  the  dear  double  letter  (for  I  am  always 
delighted  when  I  find   even  a  few  lines  of  my  sweet  Agnes's 
writing — and  yet  I  am  not  ungrateful  for  the  many  that  sweet 
Mary  writes,  tho'  against  my  orders ;  but  tho'  I  love  both   so 
much,  and  so  equally  together,  I  am  still  always  wishing  to 
show  a  whole  affection  to  each  separately ;  but  as  two  wholes 
are  impossible,  I  must  go   on  in  the  old  manner,  and  only 
make    a  distinction    whenever    either    of   you   lets    me    dis- 
cover an  individual  wish  that  I  can  gratify,  and  then  I  am  sure 
that  there  is   no    preference   I    show   in    complying).     Well! 
after   this   endless    parenthesis,    I   begin   in    obedience   to   y' 
commands  to  write  this  for  y"^  reception,  though  I  have  heard 
nor  done  anything  worth  repeating  since  Saturday,  when  Mrs. 
Damer  oame  to  me,  and  gave  me  the  only  very  agreeable  day 
that  I  have  passed  since  you  left  me.     Her  lameness  is  greatly 
better  than  I  expected,  and  not  to  be  perceived  unless  one  is 
apprised  of  it.     I  sfttled  with  her,  and  by  her  mother's  request, 
to  meet  you  at  Park  Place,  and  you  must  let  me  know  when 
that  is  to  be. 

I  can  now   do  no  more  than  answer  y"'  paragraphs,  tho'  I 

VOL.  I.  I  1 


482  LETTERS.  [1795 

must  jump  to  the  one  that  pleases  me  the  most,  your  finding 
yourself  so  well;  my  having  persuaded  you  to  the  journey 
infinitely  overpays  all  the  ennui  it  has  occasioned  to  myself. 
I  only  wonder  how  I  endured  so  many  summers  and  autumns 
here  before  I  knew  two  persons  in  whom  some_foUcs_Qg/ridis- 
cover  nothing  so  extraordinary  \    -l     '^     '  ' 

My  next,  and  a  great  satisfaction  too,  is  your  purchase  of  a 
horse — if  it  be  a  sure-footed  one — but  I  do  not  love  a  cheap 
horse ;  pray  let  it  try  anybody's  neck  before  yours. 

To  your  friends  at  Bushy  I  went  last  night,  but  found  no 
soul  but  the  mother  and  two  daughters — the  second  son  was  in 
the  house,  but  would  not  condescend  to  appear^ — I  suppose  I 
am  not  mauvais  ton  enough  for  him.  To  gratify  my  lady, 
who  loves  cribbage  as  well  as  Lady  A.  or  Lady  Mendip,  we 
played  four  rubbers,  to  the  joy  of  poor  Lady  Anne  as  little  as 
to  mine !     It  was  near  eleven  before  I  got  home. 

This  is  the  whole  of  my  diary,  except  fifty  frets  and  torments 
about  tickets  for  seeing  the  house ;  and  yesterday,  tho'  I  am 
forced  to  keep  a  list  of  those  I  have  given  out,  I  had  made  a 
confusion,  and  given  two  for  the  same  day :  this  I  had  dis- 
covered, as  I  hoped  in  tirhe,  and  wrote  on  Saturday  to  a  clergy- 
man at  Norwood,  one  of  Nanny's  customers,  to  change  the  day, 
but  he  had  not  returned  home,  and,  consequently,  had  not 
received  my  letter,  and  so  both  companies  arrived  within  three 
minutes  of  each  other,  and  I  was  forced  to  admit  both,  only 
substituting  Kirgate  to  conduct  one  set,  and  charging  Nanny 
to  be  as  tedious  as  she  could  with  the  other,  that  they  might 
not  jostle  in  the  gallery — 'Yes,  yes,  my  lord,  I'll  palaver  'em 
enough  in  the  blue  room' — and  with  such  a  plenary  indulgence 
to  that  perpetual  motion  her  tongue,  I  do  not  doubt  but  she 
told  them  ten  times  instead  of  three, '  that  that  on  the  staircase, 
gentlemen,  is  the  armour  of  Francis  I.' 

The  newspaper  is  not  arrived  tho'  near  one,  and  I  do  not 
know  a  syllable  of  truth  or  falsehood,  nor  whether  the  Conven- 
tion are  murdering  or  murdered.  Adieu  !  both !  and  a  thousand 
million  of  thanks,  my  sweetest  Agnes,  for  your  kind  postscript ! 
it  is  not  thrown  away  on  me !  Return  looking  as  well  as  last 
year,  and  you  know  how  happy  it  will  make  me. 

The  visit  to  Cheltenham  being  over,  Lord  Orford's  last 


1^95]  SPLENDID   WEATHER.  483 

letter  of  the  month  of  September  was  addressed  to  Miss 
Berry,  at  Mr.  Coxe's,  Quarley,  near  Andover. 

Friday  night,  Sept.  18,  1795. 

I  mean  this  shall  meet  you  at  Mr.  Coxe's  on  Sunday,  and  am 
quite  happy  that  you  have  had  and  have  such  a  posthumous 
summer  for  your  travels.  To-day  has  been  the  Phoenix  of 
days,  so  bright,  so  clear,  so  soft,  and  warm  enough  to  be  called 
hot  by  the  courtesy  of  England.  I  am  obliged  to  the  weather 
too  for  furnishing  me  with  a  beginning,  for  the  trade  of  corre- 
spondence is  low  indeed !  I  went  to  the  palace  at  Fulham  this 
morning,  and  have  been  at  Lady  Di's  and  Lady  Betty's  this 
evening,  and  could  not  bring  away  a  scrap  of  novelty,  but  that 
the  Parliament  is  to  meet  on  the  29th  of  next  month.  What 
care  you  or  I  ? 

T'other  morning  Lady  Horatia  brought  me  her  new  sister 
and  my  new  cousin  Lady  George  Seymour  *  to  see  me.  I  found 
her  much  better  than  I  expected;  her  person  I  had  heard 
commended,  never  her  face,  yet  that  I  found  extremely  well, 
■with  good  complexion  and  a  lively  and  sensible  look. 

The  best  news  I  can  tell  you  is,  that  that  public  nuisance  of 
this  district,  Davensport,  seems  growing  quite  frantic ;  he  has 
quarrelled  with  his  protector  the  Duke  of  Northumberland's 
steward,  and  has  driven  a  cart  across  his  hedge ;  and  he — not 
the  steward,  but  Devilport — has  beaten  a  poor  woman  that  he 
found  gleaning  on  his  field  unmercifully.  Such  rich  upstarts 
are  apt  to  grow  tirannoni.  In  France  he  would  have  guillotined 
her  and  her  whole  family,  for  gold  petrifies  dunghills  sooner 
than  it  does  velvets. 

The  emigrants  of  Eichmond  are  beginning  to  return.  The 
Dowager  Mount  Edgcunibe  is  arrived  at  her  son's  villa.  These 
scraps  are  all  I  can  sweep  together.  Were  you  to  be  absent 
another  fortnight,  I  should  be  reduced  to  have  recourse  to  Mrs. 
Wright  at  Hampton  Court,  to  learn  what  all  the  inhabitants  of 
the  neighbourhood  have  had  for  dinner  every  day  this  week. 

Saturday  morn. 
Oh !  thank  you,  and  so  does  my  letter,  for  it  was  quite  ex- 
hausted and  here  is  yours  of  I7th  to  set  it  going  again  !     Now 

*  Daughter  of  the  Hon.  and  Rev.  George  Hamilton. 
I  I  2 


484  LETTERS.  [1795 

I  shall  be  impatient  for  the  next  from  Mr.  Coxe's.  Yes,  I  will 
certainly  come  to  you  at  Park-place,  but  as  I  know  I  should 
take  fright  and  conclude  you  ill,  were  I  not  to  find  you  there, 
I  will  allow  for  accidental  delays,  and  will  not  be  there  myself 
till  Sunday  the  27th,  or  Monday  28th ;  if  I  hear  that  you  have 
met  with  any  remora — not  by  y''  cold  I  hope — but  how  can  it 
last  in  this  celestial  weather,  which  ought  to  operate  all  the 
miracles  in  Pope's  '  Messiah ' — ought — I  don't  say  does,  for 
tho'  I  am  certainly  lame  enough  for  a  marvellous  experiment, 
I  am  so  far  from  finding  I  can 

Leap  exulting  like  the  bounding  roe, 

that  last  night  I  was  near  tumbling  headlong  down  Lady  Di's 
steps,  as  I  got  out  of  my  coach,  but  her  footman  caught  me  in 
his  arms.  Well !  to-day  is  yesterday's  twin,  and  as  like  as  any 
two  Hobarts  or  Forbes 's.  The  cream  was  actually  turned  this 
morning  at  breakfast;  what  a  phenomenon  on  the  19th  of 
September  ! 

I  wish  every  Jacohiterian  that  would  lay  waste  the  face  of 
this  beautiful  rich  country  were  to  taste  a  few — not  a  quarter, 
which  would  be  too  many  for  one  human  being  to  wish  to 
another,  of  the  horrors  that  General  O'Hara  beheld  in  France — 
and  where  excess  of  Reformation  has  now  produced  a  system  of 
despotic  impudence  that  surpasses  even  the  triple  partition  of 
Poland.  Their  unchristened  month  of  Fructidor  will  retain 
its  denomination  in  the  memory  of  mankind  by  the  fruits  it 
has  generated  in  its  decree  of  perpetuating  two-thirds  of  the 
Convention.  We  shall  see  how  blessed  they  will  be  by  esta- 
blishing the  power  of  such  a  host  of  tyrannical  monsters ! — 
Adieu ! 

A  friendly  letter  from  Professor  Playfair*  written  at 
this  time  shows  the  estimation  in  which   he   held  the 

*  John  Playfair,  an  eminent  Scotch  mathematician,  bom  1748.  Member 
of  the  Eoyal  Society  of  Edinburgh,  1784 ;  in  1789  became  its  President ;  in 
1785  he  was  appointed  Professor  of  Mathematics  in  the  University  of  Edin- 
burgh. In  1B05  he  was  appointed  Professor  of  Natural  Philosophy.  He 
published  an  edition  of  Euclid  with  notes  and  a  supplement.  He  took  a 
strong  interest  in  geology  and  philosophy.  He  travelled  in  the  Alps  and  in 
Italy  to  study  the  geology  of  those  regions.  He  was  much  loved  and  re- 
spected. Died  1819.  A  monument  to  his  memory  is  erected  on  the  Caltoa 
Hill. 


1795]  LETTER   FROM   PROFESSOR   PLAYFAIE.  485 

society  of  the  Miss  Berrys.  How  long  tlie  acquaintance 
had  been  formed  does  not  appear,  but  the  friendship 
lasted  for  the  remainder  of  his  Ufa. 

London,  Sept.  4,  1796,  London-street,  No.  42. 

Dear  Madam, — I  cannot  leave  London  without  accounting  to 
you  for  my  not  having  revisited  Twickenham  before  you  left  it. 
The  truth  is  I  had  it  not  in  my  power,  for  I  never  have  been  at 
any  time  less  master  of  my  own  actions  than  this  summer.  The 
principal  object  of  my  visit  to  London  was  the  settling  of  the 
affairs  of  my  brother's  family,  and  this  being  a  work  in  itself 
not  very  simple,  has  afforded  to  one  who  has  no  great  aptitude 
for  business  a  very  complete  and  sometimes  even  a  laborious 
occupation.  There  is  no  advantage  or  pleasure,  however,  of 
which  it  has  deprived  me,  that  I  so  much  lament  the  loss  of,  as 
not  having  had  it  in  my  power  to  enjoy  more  of  the  elegant 
and  rational  entertainment  that  the  society  of  your  family 
affords  above  anything  I  have  ever  met  with,  or  can  hope  to 
find  in  any  other  place.  The  only  consolation  I  have  is,  that  I 
have  now  succeeded  pretty  nearly  in  the  main  object  of  my 
long  stay  in  London.  Such  is  the  true  solution  of  the  problem, 
that  I  understood  from  Mrs.  Cholmeley  you  was  so  good  as  to 
expect  from  me ;  and,  to  express  it  mathematically,  I  should  say 
that  the  phaenomenon  in  question  arose  not  from  any  weakness 
of  the  attracting  force  at  Twickenham,  nor  from  the  inertia  of 
the  body  attracted,  but  from  the  violent  and  irregular  action 
of  a  disturbing  force. 

I  am  now  going  to  retire  within  the  Arctic  circle  for  the 
winter,  and  must  request  that  from  that  frozen  region  you  will 
have  the  goodness  to  permit  me  sometimes  to  address  you  in 
a  few  lines.  It  is  so  terrible  not  to  hear  a  word  of  the  motions, 
employments,  or  even  health  of  those  in  whom  one  takes  a 
certa:in  interest,  and  I  have  so  long  experienced  this  evil  with 
respect  to  your  sister  and  you,  that  it  will  be  an  act  of  the 
greatest  charity  to  relieve  me  from  it.  I  will  not  be  very 
troublesome,  for  I  know  how  much  the  exchange  must  run  in 
my  favour,  and  I  would  not  wish  to  be  too  selfish.  From  me 
you  can  expect  to  hear  only  of  Lines  or  of  Angles,  or  perhaps 
of  those  metaphysical  speculations  that  are  almost  as  natural 
to  Scotland  as  her  heaths  and  her  snows.     Among  the  many 


486  LETTERS.  [1795 

interesting  topics  of  which  you  can  speak,  I  must  remind  you 
of  one  in  particular,  the  production  that  I  listened  to  with  so 
much  pleasure  when  I  saw  you  last,  and  in  whose  fate  I  shall 
always  have  a  deep  concern.* 

I  see  Mrs.  Cholmeley  frequently,  always  with  much  pleasure 
and  increased  esteem.  I  was  glad  to  learn  from  her  that  your 
party  at  Cheltenham  is  agreeable,  and  has  lately  received  the 
great  addition  of  General  O'Hara.  Farewell !  I  leave  this  on 
the  8th,  and,  wherever  I  am,  will  not  cease  to  remain,  with  the 
purest  esteem. 

Yours  respectfully, 

John  Playfaie. 

The  following  letters  axe  all  that  remain  of  Lord 
Orford's  correspondence  with  the  Miss  Berrys  for  the 
year  1795 — the  two  first  directed  to  Park  Place,  the  rest 
to  North  Audley  Street : — 

Friday  night,  9  o'clock,  Oct.  6,  1795. 
A  storm  is  something,  and  in  a  village  a  big  event,  and  so  I  have 
now  a  wherewithal  for  writing.  We  had  a  tremendous  tempest 
of  wind  this  morning  before  five  o'clock ;  it  did  not  wake  me 
till  the  close,  tho'  it  had  done  me  mischief.  It  has  levelled  the 
two  tall  elms  in  the  meadow  beyond  the  clump  of  walnut  trees, 
and  snapped  two  others  short  in  the  grove  near  the  terrace;  it 
ripped  off  the  tiles  from  the  corner  of  the  printing-house,  and 
Kirgate  rose  in  a  panic.  It  demolished  some  large  trees  in  the 
angle  of  the  common,  and  threw  down  one  of  the  vast  old  elms 
before  Hardinge's  door,  but  it  fortunately  fell  towards  the  river, 
or  had  crushed  Eagman's  Castle,  and  perhaps  some  of  the  in- 
habitants. At  Lord  Dysart's  it  has  felled  sixteen  trees,  which  I 
suppose  will  only  improve  the  prospect,  which  he  always  made 
keep  its  distance.     Havoc,  too,  I  hear,  is  made  in  Bushy  Park — 

*  The  production  to  which  he  alludes  was  a  play  written  by  Miss  Berry ; 
prohahly  that  entitled  '  Fashionable  Friends.'  Mrs.  Darner  says  in  a  letter 
that  she  is  glad  that  Miss  Berry  had  shown  her  play  to  Playfair,  '  but,'  adds 
she,  '  if  I  could  be  diverted  just  now  I  should,  for  you  put  me  in  mind  of  the 
Persian,  in  I  know  not  what  tales,  always  looking  for  something  or  some- 
body not  to  be  found,  and  you  axe  looking  for  one  that  does  not  admire  your 
play,  on  whom  you  mean  to  pin  your  faith,  and  then,  I  suppose,  bum  your 
books, — not  exactly  the  case  with  authors  in.  general.' 


1795]  VIOLENT   HUEKICANE.  •    487 

other  distant  mails  are  not  yet  arrived.   This  hurricane,  I  hope, 
did  not  extend  to  any  of  our  fleets !  " 

My  fillip  of'  gout  is  nearly  gone,  as  I  expected,  nor  have  I 
stirred  from  the  chimney-corner  these  three  days.  Your  father, 
sister,  and  Miss  Dilkes  came  and  sat  with  me  yesterday  even- 
ing :  the  two  last  are  gone  to-night  to  the  dancing  Barrels  and 
to  Miss  Flora  Eaphael. 

I  am  impatient  to  hear  the  result  of  Lord  Malmesbury's 
review,  and  not  a  little  for  an  authentic  confirmation  of  Clair- 
fait's  and  Wurmser's  victories,  which  tho'  everybody  believes,  do 
not  yet  seem  substantiated. 

I  will  keep  this  unsealed  till  one  o'clock  to-morrow,  in  case  I 
should  have  any  casualties  to  add  to  the  Twickenham  Daily 
Post.  Mr.  Walter,  our  neighbour,  I  suppose,  will  be  prolix  on 
them  in  the  Times.     G-ood  night ! 

Satuiday. 

Grood  morrow !  One  of  the  bricklayers,  who  is  at  work  on 
our  new  icehouse,  says  there  has  been  a  great  slaughter  of 
chimneys  in  London,  which  I  conclude  will  raise  the  price  of 
smoke,  like  everything  else ;  and  that  two  houses  have  been 
blown  down,  but  as  truth  does  not  know  where,  it  was  probably 
her  toadeater,  Mrs.  Theysay,  who  told  her  so. 

Pray  tell  Mr.  Hoper,  who  will  be  with  you  to-morrow,  that  I 
thank  him  for  his  letter,  and  am  not  sorry  that  Thelusson 
has  withdrawn.  Lord  Malmsbury,  I  hope,  is  no  banker,  and 
does  not  propose  to  buy  the  most  beautiful  villa  in  England  to 
make  money  of  it. 

Lady  Betty  has  just  been  here  to  visit  my  goutling,  and  says 
Mr.  Pitt  has  written  to  the  Post  OiiSce  to  confirm  the  Austrian 

victories I  know  not  to  what  amount,  nor  can  tell  but  what  I 

am  told — nor  shall  save  the  post  if  I  write  a  word  more. 

Wedn.,  Novr.  4tli,  1795. 
You  commanded  me,  mighty  princess,  to  write  to  you,  and 
said  I  write  best  when  I  '  have  nothing  to  say ' — no  flattery 
to  the  moments  when  I  have  anything  to  relate.  However, 
were  the  case  so,  this  letter  would  be  perfection !  Lord 
Eochester,  indeed,  thought  non-entity  so  fruitful  a  subject  that 
he  wrote  an  ode  on  Nothing  (though  he  generally  chose  more 
productive  themes),   and   I  think   called   Nothing  the   elder 


488  LETTERS.  [1795 

brother  of  Shade,  which  I  apprehend  was  false  genealogy,  for 
tho'  they  might  be  twins,  I  should  suppose  Master  Light 
appeared  before  Master  Shade,  and  that  the  pre-Adamite 
Nothing  was  only  a  false  conception.  I  therefore,  who  am  a 
rigid  genealogist,  shall  attempt  to  deduce  no  progeny  from  a 
miscarriage ;  though  I  could  point  out  a  suitable  match  for  that 
non-apparent  heir.  Nothing,  in  my  own  Princess  Royal  who 
never  was  born. 

Thursday,  5. 
You !—  you  are  no  more  a  judge  of  what  makes  a  good  letter 
than  Dame  Piozzi,  who  writes  bad  English  when  she  ought  to 
be  exactly  accurate,  but  mistakes  vulgarisms  for  synonymous 
to  elegancies.  Hear  the  oracle  Lear — not  in  Ireland's  spu- 
rious transcript^ 

Nothing  can  come  of  Nothing — speak  again. 

So  I  will,  when  I  really  have  anything  to  say.  At  present, 
not  finding  the  inspirer  Nothing  very  procreative,  I  shall  only 
tell  you  that  I  have  a  little  gout  in  my  right  foot,  and  though 
I  had  ordered  the  coach  for  Cliveden  last  night,  I  could  not  go, 
nor  shall  to  Lady  Betty's  to-night ;  though  I  am  easier  to-day, 
and  think  it  will  not  be  a  fit,  but  I  shall  propose  to  my  Agnes 
and  Co.  to  come  to  me.  She  has  been  here,  and  will  come,  and 
sends  you  this  inclosed.     Adieu ! 

Straw.  Hill,  Nov.  22,  1795. 

I  have  heard  Nothing,  know  Nothing.  These  two  negatives 
not  having,  according  to  the  proverb,  gotten  my  pen  with  child 
of  anything,  will  assuredly  not  engender  an  entertaining  letter, 
and  I  only  write  a  line  as  you  desired,  but  did  hope  it  would 
be  in  answer  to  another  from  you,  telling  me  how  poor  Horace 
Churchill  is. 

The  night  you  left  me,  I  went  to  Cambridge's  to  advance  my 
SOL  for  the  potatoes  for  the  poor  here.  He  told  me  a  curious 
circumstance,  that  the  great  elm  which  fell  into  the  Thames  at 
Marble  Hill  in  the  late  hurricane  killed  several  fishes.  It  is 
new  for  gudgeons  to  be  knocked  on  the  head  by  a  tree  in  their 
own  element ;  if  a  dolphin  got  into  the  boughs,  or  a  boar  into 
the  current,  a  la  bonne  heure  I 

As  Mr.  C.  was  peroring  to  me,  I  did  not  hear  his  boy,  who 


1795]  FEOM   THE   EARL   OF   ORFOED.  489 

entered  at  nine  to  tell  me  my  coach  was  come,  so  I  trespassed 
half  an  hour  on  the  prayers.  I  did  npt  ■  stay  till  one  in  the 
morning,  as  with  you  at  Teddington.  I  think  I  should  have 
found  out  the  length  of  the  time ;  indeed,  I  did  now  wonder 
that  nine  o'clock  came  so  slowly,  and  did  ring  the  bell.  How- 
ever, old  Cherrytree  was  very  good-humoured  and  gracious 
about  my  having  entrenched  on  the  canonical  hour. 

As  my  own  stock  of  Nothing  is  so  unproductive,  I  will,  while 
expecting  Marchand,  who  is  to  call  to  see  my  Jupiter,  tran- 
scribe the  wonderful  Sanscrit  paragraph  which  you  found  t'  other 
morning  in  Murphy's  '  Portugal,'  and  which  you  will  like  to 
possess : — 

'  From  whose  splendid  virtues,  the  great  men,  who  delight  to 
sport  in  the  atoms  which  float  in  the  beams  of  light  issuing 
from  the  beauty  of  the  leaf  of  the  sleepy  Ketahee  of  the  diadem 
of  the  goddess  Saraskatee,  went  to  adorn  the  females  of  the 
eight  points.' 

Such  are  the  treasures  of  Eastern  literature  which  we  are  so 
proud  of  importing,  and  which  will  tend  to  improve  us  about  as 
much  as  the  Infantheof  and  Outfantheof  of  our  Saxon  ances- 
tors !  or  as  the  ferociser,  sansculotiser,  pantheoniser,  &c.,  of 
French  neologisme !     Adieu ! 

Weil.,  Nov.  23,  '95. 

I  thank  you  much  for  your  note,  tho'  it  gives  me  so  unsatis- 
factory an  account  of  you ;  yet  I  own  I  should  have  been  alarmed, 
if  I  had  not  seen  your  own  hand.  Still,  as  you  have  had  a  little 
sleep,  I  will  command  myself,  and  will  hope  for  better  news  to- 
morrow. I  am  even  resolved  not  to  see  you  till  Saturday,  to 
leave  you  to  recover  entirely  by  repose;  if  I  come  to  you 
to-morrow,  as  I  am  much  inclined  to  do,  I  might  draw  you  too 
soon  out  of  y'  room,  or  disturb  you  by  my  anxiety.  Therefore 
I  wave  my  own  uneasiness  to  weigh  what  is  best  for  you.  Nay, 
if  you  are  not  quite  well  again,  I  promise  you  not  to  be  more 
frightened,  even  if  Agnes  writes  instead  of  you,  arid  can  tell  me 
with  truth  that  you  are  better.  I  will  say  no  more  now,  not 
to  provoke  you  to  write  yourself. 

Straw.,  Nov.  24,  1795. 

By  not  receiving  a  word  from  you  yesterday,  I  own  I  was  a 
little  afraid  that  you  was  out  of  order  again ;  and  now  I  find 
that  I  guessed  too  justly !     Would   I  knew  how  or  what  to 

VOL.  I.  K  K. 


)0  LETTERS  [1795 

vise  you !  Alas !  I  can  only  be  meanly  personal,  and  say  to 
yself,  '  At  least  she  does  not  suffer  by  my  persuading  her  to 
ij  in  the  country,  I  did  not  attempt  it; '  but  is  that  a  com- 
rt  ?     Do  I  feel  your  pain  the  less  for  not  having  contributed 

it  ?  Gone  I  trust  it  is  by  this  time,  and  that  hope  I  can 
ijoy;  'but  such  consolations  are  of  short  duration.'  You  are 
)th  so  delicate,  that  to-morrow,  perhaps,  I  may  hear  that 
gnes  is  ill !  • 

I  do  not  like  the  Churchills  being  still  in  the  country ;  it  does 
)t  look  as  if  Horace  were  in  a  good  way. 

My  own  story  will  be  very  brief.  Being  a  very  fine  evening, 
did  go  last  night  to  Lady  Juliana  and  delivered  your  excuse, 
here  was  one  large  bouncing  woman  that  I  wish  you  had  seen  : 
le  was  all  in  the  reigning  white,  but  with  an  ample  stream  of 
[ood-coloured  ribband  flowing  from  her  chin  to  what  would 
ave  been  her  knees,  had  they  not  spread.     .     .     . 

There  I  heard  of  the  conquest  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope. 
always  direct  myself  to  believe  in  good  omens,  and  never  in 
id ;  so  this  is  of  the  propitious  side.  It  wiU  keep  up  the 
redit  of  our  navy  a  little,  which  has  been  sadly  hurricaned, 
ad  we  shall  have  many  trinkets  to  go  to  market  with  at  the 
eace ;  yet  I  had  rather  we  had  taken  one  seaport  in  France 
lan  all  the  Capes  and  Corsicas  in  the  ocean. 

My  former  old  gardener,  who  lives  near  the  church  and  is 
iiperannuated,  t'other  day,  in  a  feverish  delirium,  flung  himself 
ut  of  a  window  thirteen  feet  from  the  ground,  and  yet  was  but 
ttle  bruised. 

Kirgate  shall  certainly  make  the  cases  you  want,  because  you 
esire  it ;  but  how  ridiculous  for  me  to  be  ordering  still  more 
reat-coats  for  my  own  letters  !  I  shall  say,  like  St.  John,  '  the 
^orld  will  not  hold  them  all.'  However,  you  shall  wait  a  little 
ar  the  next  liberator  (to  talk  in  my  exchequer  style)  till 
Qrgate  can  get  better  parchment  in  town.  I  do  think  of 
;oing  thither  on  Saturday  myself  for  a  couple  of  days,  as  I  have 
lusiness  with  Mr.  Blake,  but  shall  return  hither  on  Monday 
or  a  few  more  days  to  pay  my  bills,  and  settle  my  potatoes 
pith  George  Cambridge,  who  will  not  be  at  Twickenham  till 
kmday  next. 

Mr.  Coxe  comes  to  me  to-morrow,  to  read  some  more  chapters 
if  my  father's  life  to  me.     I   am  exceedingly   pleased   at  its 


1795]  MISS   berry's   DELICATE   HEALTH.  491 

being  undertaken  by  so  very  able  a  hand ;  but  I  shall  wish  it 
not  to  be  published  till  I  am  gone.  As  there  will  not  be  a 
sentence  of  my  writing  in  it,  tho'  I  have  given  him  some  in- 
formation, I  should  be  sorry  to  have  a  tittle  imputed  to  my 
partiality,  tho'  I  have  religiously  told  him  nothing  but  truth. 
Even  when  he  consulted  me  on  his  memoii-s  of  my  uncle,  I 
said  to  him,  '  Tho'  I  a^iknowledge  that  I  had  the  strongest  reason 
lor  having  great  prejudices  to  my  uncle,  I  will  not  suffer  those 
prejudices  to  influence  me  in  what  I  shall  say  to  you  of  him ;' 
and,  indeed,  I  believe  you  will  not  find  in  Mr.  Coxe's  account 
of  that  man  one  hint  of  the  injuries  he  did  me,  of  which  I  have 
told  you,  nor  of  his  base  ingratitude  to  his  brother  in  regard  to 
the  descendants  of  the  latter :  but  keep  all  this  part  of  my 
letter  to  yourself  at  present. 

I  am  impatient  for  to-morrow's  letter,  to  confirm  y  re- 
covery.   Adieu ! 

Thursday,  half  after  noon,  Nov.  27,  '95. 
My  Sweetest, — Mr.  Coxe,  whom  I  could  not  dismiss,  has 
staid  reading  to  me  till  this  instant,  till  I  can  scarce  save  the 
post.  Thank  God  for  a  little  better  account  of  dearest  Mary ; 
yet  it  is  not  near  good  enough.  Still,  as  you  say  she  must  be 
kept  quiet,  I  will  suppress  my  impatience,  and  will  not  see  her 
till  Saturday  evening.  Yet  I  shall  long  to  receive  a  more  com- 
fortable letter  to-morrow  morning.  I  dare  not  stay  to  write  a 
syllable  more.     Adieu,  adieu  ! 

Strawb.,  Dec.  1,  1795. 

I  am  rejoiced  that  you  are  free  from  pain.  However,  I  do 
beg  you  will,  at  least  to  oblige  me,  once  more  consvilt  Sir  Greorge 
Baker,  and  learn  his  opinion,  whether  there  is  no  regimen  to 
which  he  could  advise  you.  I,  who  am  so  ignorant  in  physical 
cases,  shall  indubitably  not  be  prescribing  for  you.  I  hope  the 
reasonableness  of  what  I  say  will  make  impression  on  you. 

Though  so  wet,  yesterday  was  quite  warm.  To-day  is  soft 
as  possible. 

I  found  my  poor  old  gardener  dead.  I  can  have  nothing  else 
to  tell  in  so  short  a  space  of  time. 

Dec.  3, 1795. 

The  note  y''  father  has  brought  gives  me  great  comfort  by 
telling  me  y'  pain  is  gone.      Still,  I  must  repeatedly  implore 


492  LETTERS.  [1795 

you  to  talk  to  Sir  George  Baker.  Your  headaches  return  so 
very  frequently,  and  yet  you  do  nothing  that  even  pretends  to 
guard  against  relapses,  or  even  to  mitigate  them. 
■  The  weather  is  so  soft  and  mild,  that  while  it  lasts  so  I  must 
stay  here  a  few  days  longer.  However,  I  shall  probably  be  in 
town  on  Monday  or  Tuesday  next. 

I  have  heard  nothing,  but  the  Prince  is  to  dine  this  week  at 
Lady  Dancinda  Darrell's,  who,  I  suppose,  is  again  to  be  dis- 
appointed.    Adieu ! 

Sunday,  Deo.  6,  1795. 
It  will  be  impossible  for  me  to  be  in  town  before  Tuesday, 
and  I  must  want  the  sight  of  you  for  a  day  longer.  I  shall 
certainly  come  on  Tuesday,  for  I  have  various  threats  of  the 
gout.  I  suppose  you  will  think  I  have  staid  too  long  in  the 
country,  and  caught  cold,  which  is  far  from  being  the  case. 
The  weather  has  been  soft  as  in  the  beginning  of  autumn, 
and  I  have  not  been  out  of  these  two  rooms  since  Wednesday 
morning  last.  Can  I,  old  and  broken,  and  full  of  cracks  as 
I  am,  expect  that  pain  will  not  enter  into  some  of  them  ? 
Yes ;  entirely  free  I  never  am  ;  and  as  I  hate  to  trouble  others 
with  complaints  of  natural  infirmities,  and  perceive  how  sensibly 
I  decay,  I  like  to  be  much  alone,  and  care  not  how  few  I  see, 
except  the  very,  very  few  that  I  really  love.  I  am  expecting 
Mr.  Blake  on  business,  and  therefore  will  say  no  more  now. 
Adieu  till  Tuesday  ! 


END    OF    THE    FIRST    VOLUME, 


LONnOM" 

PRINCED     BT     SPOTTI3W00DE     AITD     CO 

NEW-STEEET  SQUAEK 


--- VOLUME II ---



MISS   BERRY'S 


JOUENALS    AND    COKBESPONDENCE, 


VOL.  II. 


LOlfDOW 

PEIIfTBD     BY    SPOTTISWOODE    AICD     CO. 
ItEW-STBBET    SQITAEB 


Longman  8cC° 


EXTRACTS 


JOURNALS    AND    CORRESPONDENCE 


OF 


MISS    BERRY 


FROM    THE    YEAR     1783    TO     1852. 


EDITED    BT 


LADY   THERESA    LEWIS. 


IN    THREE    VOLUMES. 

VOL.  n. 


LONDON : 
LONGMANS,    GREEN,    AND     CO. 

1865. 


MICRUi   .       .J  BY 


. 


, 
•st-jx.  V  •  •'_...,> 

DATE    AUb  zs  ^  ib)89 


52>b 


JOURNAL 


CORRESPONDENCE   OF   MISS  BERRY. 


1796. 

Miss  BERRY  stated  in  her  entry  for  this  year  that 
General  O'Hara  had  met  them  at  Cheltenham,  and  after- 
wards at  Park  Place.  He  was  no  new  acquaintance  to 
Miss  Berry,  for  so  early  as  the  year  1784  he  is  mentioned 
in  her  journal  as  having  accompanied  their  party  in  their 
expedition  to  the  Falls  of  Terni. 

General  O'Hara  was  highly  esteemed  by  those  with 
whom  Miss  Berry  lived  in  greatest  intimacy.  He  is 
often  mentioned  with  praise  and  interest  in  Lord  Orford's 
letters.  He  was  a  cherished  friend  of  Marshal  Conway 
and  Lady  Ailesbury,  and  was  on  terms  of  almost  brotherly 
affection  with  their  daughter  Mrs.  Darner.  He  was  for 
some  years  Governor  of  Gibraltar,  and  the  following 
character  of  him,  which  appeared  in  the  novel  of  '  Cyril 
Thornton,'  may  throw  some  light  on  his  claims  to  the 
warm  admiration  of  his  friends,  and  to  that  enthusiastic 
love,  which  he  inspired  in  vain,  and  never  really  lost : — 

'  It  is  impossible  for  me  to  recur  to  the  period  of  my  sojourn 
in  Gibraltar,  and  yet  to  say  nothing  of  the  governor,  General 
O'Hara.  His  appearance,  indeed,  was  of  that  striking  cast, 
which,  once  seen,  is  not  easily  forgotten.  General  O'Hara  was 

VOL.  II.  B 


'2  LETTERS.  [1796 

the  most  perfect  specimen  I  ever  saw,  of  the  soldier  and  courtier 
of  the  last  age,  and  in  his  youth  had  fought  with  Granby  and 
Ligonier.  .  .  .  Notwithstanding  the  strictness  of  the  discipline 
which  he  scrupulously  enforced  in  the  garrison  which  he  com- 
manded, no  officer  could  be  more  universally  popular  than 
General  O'Hara.  ...  In  his  own  house,  and,  above  all,  at  his 
own  table,  he  delighted  to  cast  off  all  distinction  of  rank,  and 
to  associate  on  terms  of  perfect  equality  with  even  the  humblest 
of  his  guests.  The  honours  of  the  table  were  done  by  his  staff, 
and  the  General  was  in  nothing  distinguished  from  those  around 
him,  except  by  being  undoubtedly  the  gayest  and  most  agreeable 
person  in  the  company.  .  .  .  Before  we  quitted  Gibraltar  he 
died.  There  was  no  hypocrisy  in  the  heavy  looks  of  the  soldiers, 
as  they  followed  his  remains  to  their  last  earthly  tenement.' — 
Vide  Cyril  Thornton,  vol.  ii.  pp.  159,  J  60,  161,  163. 

How  far  General  O'Hara  was  really  worthy  of  the 
ardent  admiration  with  which  Miss  Berry  viewed  his 
general  character  and  his  powers  of  mind,  it  is  needless 
to  enquire.  She  loved  him  with  that  warm  and  generous 
enthusiasm  that  invests  its  object  with  every  human 
quality  deemed  necessary  to  perfection,  and  to  the  latest 
years  of  her  life  she  firmly  believed  that  her  union  with 
him  would  have  given  increased  elevation  to  her  own 
character,  would  have  called  forth  the  best  feelings  of  her 
heart,  and  secured  her  happiness  in  this  world.  At  Chel- 
tenham she  became  aware  of  the  more  tender  and  serious 
nature  of  his  sentiments  towards  her,  and  an  engagement 
of  marriage,  formed  during  the  subsequent  visit  to  Park 
Place,  was  the  result  of  their  mutual  attachment.  How 
Lord  Orfordbore  the  intelligence  of  this  projected  change 
in  the  life  of  one  of  his  '  beloved  wives,'  does  not  appear 
by  any  of  his  letters ;  but  it  certainly  was  matter  of 
considerable  anxiety  to  both  General  O'Hara  and  Miss 
Berry  that  the  communication  should  be  so  made  as  to 
avoid  giving  pain  to  her  devoted  old  friend.  The  letters 
which  close  the  correspondence  with  Lord  Orford  of  this 
year  are  full  of  solicitude  for  her  health,  and  show  that 


1796]  GENERAL   O'HARA.  3 

his  interest  in  her  welfare  was  unabated.  General  O'Hara 
quitted  England  for  Gibraltar  in  the  month  of  November. 
He  proposed  an  immediate  marriage,  in  order  that  Miss 
Berry  might  accompany  him,  but  she  conceived  it  her 
duty  to  decline  this  offer  out  of  consideration  for  others. 
'  In  submitting  to  this  absence,'  she  wrote,  '  I  think  I  am 
doing  right.  I  am  sure  I  am  consulting  the  peace  and 
happiness  of  those  about  me,  and  not  my  own'  Perhaps 
she  mistook  her  line  of  duty ;  perhaps  she  brought  upon 
herself  greater  evils  than  those  she  meant  to  avert ;  but 
who  will  not  admire  the  self-sacrificing  spirit  in  which 
her  decision  was  made  ?  They  never  met  again,  and  a 
shade  of  tender  regret  was  cast  upon  her  long  life  that 
was  never  effaced.  Forty-eight  years  after  the  engage- 
ment was  broken,  and  correspondence  terminated,  Miss 
Berry  reopened  the  packet  of  letters  that  had  passed  at 
this  time,  and  ere  she  closed  it  again,  attached  to  it  the 
following  touching  little  record  of  the  disappointed  hopes 
and  blighted  affection  that  deepened  the  natural  vein  of 
sadness  in  her  character  : — 

( This  parcel  of  letters  relate  to  the  six  happiest  months  of 
my  long  and  insignificant  existence,  although  these  six  months 
were  accompanied  by  fatiguing  and  unavoidable  UD certainty, 
and  by  the  absence  of  every  thing  that  could  constitute  present 
enjoyment.  But  I  looked  forward  to  a  future  existence  which 
I  felt,  for  the  first  time,  would  have  called  out  all  the  powers  of 
my  mind  and  all  the  warmest  feelings  of  my  heart,  and  should 
have  been  supported  by  one  who  but  for  the  cruel  absence  which 
separated  us,  would  never  have  for  a  moment  doubted  that  we 
should  have  materially  contributed  to  each  other's  happiness. 
These  prospects  served  even  to  pass  cheerfully  a  long  winter  of 
delays  and  uncertainty,  by  keeping  my  mind  firmly  riveted  on 
their  accomplishment.  A  concatenation  of  unfortunate  circum- 
stances— the  political  state  of  Europe  making  absence  a  neces- 
sity, and  even  frequent  communication  impossible,  letters  lost 
and  delayed,  all  certainty  of  meeting  more  difficult,  questions  un- 
answered, doubts  unsatisfied.  All  these  circumstances  combined 

B  2 


4  LETTERS.  [1796 

in  the  most  unlucky  manner  crushed  the  fair  fabric  of  my  hap- 
piness, not  at  one  fell  shock,  but  by  the  slow  mining  misery  of 
loss  of  confidence,  of  unmerited  complaints,  of  finding  by  de- 
grees misunderstandings,  and  the  firm  rock  of  mutual  confidence 
crumbling  under  my  feet,  while  my  bosom  for  long  could  not 
banish  a  hope  that  all  might  yet  be  set  right.  And  so  it  would, 
had  we  ever  met  for  twenty-four  hours.  But  he  remained  at 
his  government  at  Gibraltar  till  his  death,  in  1802.  And  I, 
forty-two  years  afterwards,  on  opening  these  papers  which  had 
been  sealed  up  ever  since,  receive  the  conviction  that  some 
feelings  in  some  minds  are  indelible.' — M.  B.,  Oct.  1844. 

Miss  Berry's  view  of  the  blessings  of  married  life  is 
so  beautifully  portrayed  in  her  '  Life  of  Lady  Eachel 
Eussell,'  that  it  cannot  be  read  without  feeling  how 
capable  she  was  of  appreciating  the  value  of  that  happi- 
ness which  it  was  her  misfortune  to  have  missed : — 

'  It  was  thus,  surely,  that  intellectual  beings  of  different  sexes 
were  intended  by  their  Great  Creator  to  go  through  the  world 
together; — thus  united,  not  only  in  hand  and  heart,  but  in 
principles,  in  intellect,  in  views,  and  in  disposition — each  pur- 
suing one  common  and  noble  end,  their  own  improvement,  and 
the  happiness  of  those  around  them,  by  the  different  means 
appropriate  to  their  sex  and  situation ; — mutually  correcting, 
sustaining  and  strengthening  each  other;  undegraded  by  all 
practices  of  tyranny  on  the  one  part,  and  of  deceit  on  the  other ; 
each  finding  a  candid  but  severe  judge  in  the  understanding, 
and  a  warm  and  partial  advocate  in  the  heart  of  their  com- 
panion ;  secure  of  a  refuge  from  the  vexations,  the  follies,  the 
misunderstandings  and  the  evils  of  the  world,  in  the  arms  of 
each  other,  and  in  the  inestimable  enjoyments  of  unlimited 
confidence  and  unrestrained  intimacy.'  * 

It  was  at  the  end  of  April  1796  that  the  engagement 
with  General  O'Hara  was  finally  broken  off.  The  fol- 
lowing extract  from  a  letter  of  Miss  Berry's  to  Lord 
Orford  evidently  alludes  to  her  recent  distress  : — 

*  Life  of  Lady  Rachel  Russell,  prefixed  to  her  Letters. 


1796]      PUBLIC   BECEPTIOX   OF   THE   PRINCESS    OF   WALES.      5 

,  May  19,  1796. 

But  let  me  assure  you  (though  I  trust  you  know  me  too  well 
to  doubt  it),  that  whether  in  or  out  of  spirits,  happy  or  other- 
wise, every  new  occurrence  of  my  life  only  seems  to  give  me 
fresh  instances  of  your  consoling  friendship,  to  increase  my 
confidence  in  it,  and  to  convince  me  that  I  may  flatter  myself 
with  having  inspired  one  sentiment  at  least  as  lasting  as  it  is 
rare.  Farewell. 

From  Lord  Orford. 

May  30,  1796.    3  o'clock. 

A  million  of  thanks  for  yr  letter,  though  with  my  poor 
scrawling  hand  I  don't  think  I  can  have  time  to  answer  a 
quarter  of  it  before  the  post  departs.  I  have  had  people  till 
this  instant,  and  Kirgate  is  not  at  home,  and  I  have  been  forced 
to  get  Sir  Charles  to  write  letters  to  Norfolk,  where  there  is 
started  up  an  opposition  to  Coke  and  Wodehouse,  whom  I  must 
support. 

My  first  object  is  to  beg  you  to  stay  as  long  as  it  does  you 
all  good ;  yet  to-day  is  most  unfavourable. 

I  want  no  book  but  *  first  volume  of  the  Thames. 

The  scene  at  the  Opera  on  Saturday  was  much  stronger  than 
even  the  papers  represented.  The  Princess  at  first  retired, 
but  the  Duke  of  Leeds  persuaded  her  to  stand  up  and  curtsie. 
She  did,  and  then  all  the  house  rose,  and  then  every  woman 
as  well  as  man,  in  every  part,  clapped  incessantly,  and  re- 
peated it,  and  it  was  well  two  other  persons  were  not  there,  as 
insults  were  loudly  declared  to  be  intended,  and  on  their  not 
appearing,  *  (rod  save  the  King '  was  called  for,  and  sung  with  the 
same  view.  Their  Majesties  were  not  there,  or  a  third  person 
might  have  heard  something  unpleasant,  as  the  town  has  got  a 
notion  of  too  much  favouring  Lady  J.  at  least. 

My  fingers  are  too  bad  to  suffer  my  writing  more,  and  I  am 
sure  you  will  forgive  yr  0. 

From  Professor  Play  fair  to  Miss  Berry. 

Edinb.,  May  8, 1796. 
DEAR  MADAM, — When  I  took  the  liberty  of  asking  permission 

*  The  name  is  much  blotted,  but  was  probably  Farringdon,  the  author  of 
'  Britannia  Depicta.' 


6  LETTERS.  [1796 

to  write  to  you  I  said  I  would  not  be  troublesome  by  the  fre- 
quency of  my  letters,  and  I  have  indeed  kept  my  word  with 
disgraceful  punctuality. 

The  whole  business  of  this  letter,  I  fear,  will  be  nothing  else 
but  to  make  apologies  and  to  ask  questions.  How  does  Lord 
Orford  ?  His  mind  has  so  entirely  resisted  the  approaches  of 
old  age,  that  I  would  fain  hope  his  body  will  still  hold  out  for 
a  long  time,  tho'  it  has  not,  it  must  be  acknowledged,  made  so 
vigorous  a  resistance  as  the  intellectual  part.  The  literary  world 
would  wish  to  prolong  the  possession  of  one  of  its  brightest 
ornaments,  more  especially  at  a  season  like  this  when  it  has 
suffered  so  many  losses  and  is  threatened  with  such  unknown 
calamities. 

Let  me  entreat  your  patience  while  I  propose  one  question 
more.  In  what  state  is  the  MS.  you  did  me  the  honour  to  show 
me  at  Twickenham  ?*  Is  it  perished,  or  have  you  executed  the 
plan  that  you  proposed  about  submitting  it  to  Lord  0.  ?  The 
more  I  think  of  it,  and  consider  its  superority  in  every  point  to 
anything  that  has  appeared  for  many  years,  and  of  the  dialogue, 
in  particular,  to  anything  that  has  perhaps  ever  appeared  with 
us,  the  more  I  am  convinced  that  it  would  have  the  most  brilliant 
success.  But  I  am  doubtful  how  it  will  be  brought  forward  if 
the  author  is  resolved,  at  all  events,  to  remain  unknown. 

In  return  for  all  the  valuable  information  that  I  am  thus 
requesting  you  to  communicate,  I  wish  I  had  anything  that  I 
could  offer  in  exchange.  The  literary  and  philosophical  world, 
at  least  such  parts  as  I  hear  of,  afford  but  little  that  is  interest- 
ing. I  waited  with  much  impatience  for  the  *  Life  and  Miscel- 
laneous Works  of  Gibbon,'  and  if  I  have  not  been  quite  so 
much  delighted  as  I  supposed,  I  have  yet  been  highly  gratified 
by  becoming  more  intimately  acquainted  with  the  person  and 
character  of  a  great  man  whom  I  had  before  only  admired 
at  an  immense  distance.  Lord  Sheffield  has  not  been  very 
discriminating  in  the  selection  of  some  of  the  pieces  he  has 
given  to  the  public,  and  I  wonder  that  his  lordship  should 
have  preferred  the  character  of  an  exact  editor  to  that  of  a 
delicate  friend.  After  all,  he  has  suppressed,  I  fear,  some 
valuable  details  concerning  the  progress  of  Gibbon's  religious 
opinions,  which,  I  think,  should  on  no  account  have  been  done. 

*  This  must  refer  to  Miss  Berry's  play  of  'Fashionable  Friends,' 


1796]  LETTER   FROM   PROFESSOR   PLAYFAIR. 

This,  however,  is  but  conjecture,  and,  on  the  whole,  I  feel  much 
gratitude,  both  to  the  author  and  the  editor.  I  have  lately  seen 
a  posthumous  work  of  Condorcet's ;  it  is  a  very  curious  book, 
full  of  false  views  and  unsound  principles,  mingled  with  truth 
and  philosophy  in  a  manner  extremely  ingenious  and  artful. 
But  I  must  leave  it  for  another  letter,  as  this  is  grown  most 
insufferably  long. 

I  fancy  to  myself  Miss  Agnes,  this  time,  one  of  the  greatest 
metaphysicians  of  the  age,  and  familiar  with  every  argument  of 
Locke,  Berkley,  Leibnitz,  and  Hume.  At  least  she  was  setting 
about  the  study  with  so  much  industry  when  I  saw  her  last,  that, 
knowing  her  abilities  for  the  acquisition  of  that  or  any  other 
branch  of  science  as  well  as  I  do,  I  cannot  doubt  of  her  having 
made  such  proficiency.  She  at  least  has  not  the  excuse  that 
your  favourite  poet  has  so  beautifully  applied  to  himself  in  the 
case  of  another  science, 

Gelidus  obstiterit  circum  praecordia  sanguis; 

and,  therefore,  if  she  has  not  extended  her  researches  as  far  as 
I  suppose,  I  will  ascribe  it  solely  to  the  avocations  of  a  fashion- 
able winter  spent  in  the  gay  circles  of  London,  which,  to  say 
the  truth,  it  must  be  very  difficult  to  unite  with  the  abstract 
speculations  of  metaphysics.  Be  that  as  it  will,  I  shall  have 
the  honour  of  writing  her  a  long  letter  of  metaphysics  very 
soon. 

If  I  dared  to  ask  you  another  question,  it  would  be  what  you 
are  yourself  just  now  busied  with — what  studies  of  Greek  verse 
are  to  be  37our  amusements  in  the  summer  ?  Are  you  to  be  at 
Twickenham  all  the  summer,  or  what  are  your  other  arrange- 
ments ?  .  .  .  . 

I  must  now  make  an  end,  for  you  will  begin  to  think  that 
I  can  no  more  measure  time  in  writing  than  in  not  writing, 
and  the  former  to  one's  correspondents  may  prove  the  most 
incommodious  error  of  the  two.  I  must,  therefore,  only  ;i<l<l 
that  I  have  committed  this  great  packet,  with  the  'Life  of  Mr. 
Smith,'  which  accompanies  it,  to  the  care  of  young  Dundas. 
who  has  undertaken  to  convey  them  to  you  in  safety.  The 
Life  is  a  present  from  the  author,  who  had  once  the  pleasure  to 
converse  with  you  for  a  very  short  time  indeed,  but  long  enough 
to  convince  him  thut  few  people  are  so  well  entitled  as  your« •!;' 


8  LETTERS.  [1796 

to  a  present  of  the  kind  that  he  now  sends  you.  Permit  me 
only  to  add  that,  with  the  utmost  sincerity  of  esteem  and  friend- 
ship, 

I  am,  dear  Madam, 

Your  obedient  and  humble  servant, 

JOHN  PLAYFAIR. 


From  Lord  Orford. 

Berkeley  Square,  June  2,  1796. 

I  hope  the  post  will  bring  this  to  you  before  you  set  out  to- 
morrow, which  I  do  not  write  so  much  to  answer  your  letter, 
as  to  remind  you  that  you  must  return  to-morrow  if  you  mean 
to  go  to  the  exhibition  on  Sunday  with  Mr.  Farringdon,  who 
lives  at  No.  35,  in  Charlotte  Street,  Rathbone  Place.  I  speak 
very  disinterestedly,  for  I  am  sure  I  shall  not  be  able  to  accom- 
pany you,  as  my  legs  are  not  yet  well. 

I  am  glad  all  yr  improvements  have  succeeded  so  well ;  I 
wish  I  may  ever  see  them ! 

I  did  not  suppose  you  cd  send  me  my  commissions  on  Monday, 
it  was  so  tempestuous  that  nobody  who  had  not  a  rage  for  going 
abroad  at  the  very  moment  she  had  proposed  to  do  anything, 
could  have  taken  it  for  a  day  suited  for  a  jaunt  into  the  country, 
much  less  was  it  one  for  yr  crossing  my  lawn.  Apropos,  the 
'  Thames '  is  not  in  numbers,  but  in  a  volume  half-bound,  I 
think. 

The  crisis  ripens,  the  universal  applause  was  repeated  on 
Tuesday  at  the  Opera,  but  nothing  offensive  heard.  I  think 
her  appearance  was  well  advised;  her  absence  would  havefallen 
on  her  husband  and  been  imputed  to  him ;  to  suppose  that 
she  sought  popularity  would  have  offended  nobody  but  him, 
which  at  this  moment  could  not  have  made  the  case  worse.  He 
is  said  to  be  gone  to  the  Grange  for  a  month. — Oh !  I  must 
interrupt  myself,  I  have  this  moment  had  such  infinite  pleasure ! 
my  dearest  Duchess  of  Richmond  *  has  this  moment  been  here  ! 
and  oh !  she  looks  so  much  better  than  when  I  saw  her  in  the 
summer.  She  has  recovered  much  of  her  sweet  countenance, 
her  spirits  are  returned,  and  her  manner  is  like  itself — in  short, 

*  The  Duchess  of  Richmond  died  in  the  following  November.  She  was 
the  daughter  of  Bruce,  Earl  of  Ailesbury. 


1796]  MISS  BERRY'S  MENTAL  DISTRESS.  9 

my  joy  has  made  me  shed  tears !  But  I  will  resume  my  letter, 
or  I  shall  not  save  the  post. 

and  is  not  to  be  at  the  birthday.  Lady  J removed 

three  days  ago  to  her  daughter's  new  house,  and,  as  her  new 
child  is  dead,  will  probably  move  farther,  for  her  present  posi- 
tion is  not  tenable.  Lady  Harriet  is  gone  to  Nuneham  for 
a  long  season,  on  pretence  of  St.  Antony's  fire — but  I  must 
finish. 

The  Dutch  fleet  has  been  found  at  the  Canaries,  nine  ships, 
but  in  a  most  deplorable  condition,  and  the  sailors  all  ill.  Adieu 
till  to-morrow. 

Berk.  Sq.,  June  25,  1796. 

How  grieved  I  am  at  the  bad  account  you  still  give  of  your- 
self, and  that  real  summer  does  not  mend  you !  My  hand  is 
better,  tho'  you  see  with  what  difficulty  I  yet  write, yet  I  would 
positively  scratch  out  a  few  words  to  convince  you  I  can,  and 
to  tell  you  Hewetson  has  assured  me  I  may  go  with  perfect 
security  to  Str.  on  Thursday  next,  and  even  stay  there  for 
some  days ;  but  I  shall  see  you  on  Monday. 

I  have  been  tempted  to  make  Kirgate  frank  this,  as  his 
hand  is  so  very  like  to  mine ;  but  I  would  not  venture  any 
miscarriage,  when  a  note  to  you  and  a  letter  to  Agnes  were 
concerned.  This  attempt  says  more  than  all  I  would  say  if  I 
had  my  old  pen  from  the  wing  of  Hercules,  my  ancient  goosely 
stationer. 

The  following  extract  of  a  letter  written  by  Miss  Berry 
to  an  intimate  friend  at  this  time  shows  how  much  her 
nerves  and  health  had  suffered  from  mental  distress,  and 
how  vigorously  she  resolved  to  combat  the  effects  of  her 
depression : — 

London,  June,  1796. 

You  cannot  have  desired  more  to  hear  from  me  than  I  to 
write  to  you,  but  for  above  a  week  I  was  really  incapacitated 
by  illness,  and  although  the  extreme  irritation  on  my  nerves 
has  been  quieted  by  five  days  of  perfect  retirement  in  the 
country,  such  has  been,  and  is,  the  depression  on  my  spirits 
that  I  have  found  it  absolutely  necessary  to  avoid  everything 
likely  to  agitate  them.  But  do  not  suppose  this  long  period 


10  .  LETTERS.  [1796 

of  mental  and  bodily  suffering  has  been  lost  upon  me.  I  have 
'  communed  much  with  myself  in  my  own  chamber  ; '  I  have 
reflected,  and  seriously  reflected,  that,  however  little  I  have 
hitherto  enjoyed,  and  much  I  have  suffered  in  life  from  the 
circumstances  in  which  I  have  been  placed  being  quite  inap- 
propriated  to  my  situation,  still,  that  a  being  endowed  by 
nature  with  a  sound  understanding,  possessing  a  cultivated 
mind  and  a  warmly  affectionate  heart,  cannot  be  intended  for 
unhappiness,  nay,  can  never  be  permanently  unhappy  but  from 
its  own  fault,  and  that  with  a  conscience  as  clear  as  mine,  it 
will  indeed  be  my  own  fault,  if  I  do  not  make  my  future  life 
less  uncomfortable  than  my  past.  All  this  I  have  felt  under 
the  severe  tho'  perhaps  salutary  pressure  of  a  recent  and  cruel 
disappointment. 

• 

In  the  months  of  July  and  August  Miss  Berry  accom- 
panied Mrs.  Darner,  first  to  Bognor,  and  afterwards  to 
Goodwood.* 

From  Lord  Orford. 

Straw. -hill,  July  25,  1796. 

I  have  not  writ  to  you  till  to-day  that  I  was  sure  I  was 
well  enough ;  for  two  days  I  was  in  a  strange  way,  yet  said 
nothing  of  it.  On  Friday  I  came  down  to  breakfast,  and  then 
attempting  to  dictate  my  catalogue  for  Princess  Elizabeth, 
Kirgate  perceived  that  I  neither  articulated,  nor  used  right 
words,  and  advised  me  to  leave  off.  I  did,  and  sent  for  the 
apothecary,  who  found  my  pulse  low  and  quick,  and  would 
have  had  me  take  aether,  but  I  would  take  nothing  without 
Hewetson.  Your  father  and  sister  were  with  me  looking  over 
prints  in  the  evening,  but  thought  I  was  very  low,  tho'  I  com- 
plained of  nothing  ;  but  at  one  I  waked  with  a  great  palpitation, 
I  was  forced  to  call  up  my  servants,  and  really  thought  I  was 
going;  but  about  three  I  felt  sleepy,  and  did  not  wake  till 
seven  o'clock,  since  when  I  have  been  perfectly  well, — such  a 
strange  constitution  I  have ! 

Lysoris  and  Mr.  Farringdon  dined  with  me  yesterday,  but  I 

*  Seat  of  the  Duke  of  Richmond. 


i:96]        LORD  ORFORD'S  SERIOUS  INDISPOSITION.  11 

did  not  go  down  to  dinner.  They  went  in  the  evening  to  see 
Agnes's  bower,  and  then  came  at  night  with  her  and  her 
father  hither. 

I  am  glad  you  find  your  rocks  are  groves  not  quarries,  and, 
consequently,  that  you  will  saunter,  and  not  be  snapped  up  by 
a  privateer.  I  wish  you  could  have  given  me  a  better  account 
of  rny  dearest  Duchess  ;  tell  me  when  you  see  her  again  exactly 
how  you  find  her. 

I  have  made  more  blots  than  words j  but  they  make  so  con- 
siderable a  part  of  my  letter,  that  I  could  not  spare  them,  tho' 
they  contribute  nothing  to  the  story.  Both  my  hands  and  my 
head  are  much  worn  out,  and  as  I  cannot  write  with  my  pulse, 
I  will  set  you  no  longer  to  deciphering. — Adieu ! 

Strawb.-hill,  July  2G,  '96. 

I  received  yr  letter  from  Bognor  this  morning,  and  am 
mighty  glad  your  rocks  are  not  of  a  temper  to  receive  vessels 
with  open  arms.  It  would  not  be  pleasant  to  have  one's 
betrothed  turned  into  the  Fiancee  du  Roi  du  Gallia.  Our 
Tritons  are  humane  and  polite  enough  to  have  all  manner  of 
attentions  for  women ;  but  the  French,  if  they  get  to  Kome, 
will  be  brutal  even  to  the  Virgin  Mary. 

You  see  I  am  piquing  myself  upon  writing  legibly,  and  not 
making  a  thousand  blots  ;  consequently,  the  Lord  knows  when 
I  shall  have  finished  my  letter;  besides,  my  pen  limps,  and 
forgets  its  spelling.  I  shall  go  to  town  to-morrow  for  a  couple 
of  days,  but  am  not  likely  to  see  a  soul  but  people  on  business. 
I  sat  with  Agnes  this  evening,  she  is  delighted  with  your  writing 
to  her  so  daily.  Before  I  went  to  her,  Lady  Cecilia  and  Mrs. 
Johnstone  came  and  drank  tea  with  me,  and  to  thank  me  for 
venison  and  orange  flowers.  They  told  me  it  is  feared  the 
French  will  forbid  the  bans  with  the  Duke  of  Wurtemburg  *  by 
seizing  his  dominions,  and  that  Lady  A.  Cumberland  is  ap- 
pointed Lady  to  the  younger  Princesses.  I  answer  for  nothing 
from  Hampton  gazettes,  nor  know  anything  more  substantial. 

The  living  of  Crostwick, — which  the  madam  who  calls  herself 
Mrs.  Aufrere,  and  I  would  call  Mrs.  Auferre,  would  have 
candied  off  from  me,  is  not  vacant,  and  if  it  were,  and  in  my 

'  His  marriage  with  the  Princess  Royal  of  England. 


12  LETTERS.  [1796 

gift,  I  should  have  wished  it  a  thousand, — is  a  miserable  pittance 
of  not  thirty  pounds  a  year ;  so  you  will  not  name  it,  unless  it 
will  please  my  sweetest  to  hear  she  was  the  first  in  my 
thoughts. 

Wednesday  evening. 

I  came  as  I  have  told  you  I  intended,  but  I  have  not  heard 
a  syllable  new,  or  seen  an  acquaintance,  but  the  Churchills 
and  Horace,  and  they  were  going  with  the  children  to  Astley's ; 
fortunately  Mrs.  Chatterpost  had  intended  to  bring  her  husband 
to  dine  with  me  to-morrow,  which  my  coming  prevented.  I 
suppose  she  thought  I  should  be  melancholy  not  to  know 
everything  in  the  world  that  is  not  worth  knowing. 

I  find  that  my  memory  fails  in  a  very  novel  manner.  I 
moult  many  of  my  letters  ;  my  words  look  like  Hebrew  without 
points.  I  do  not  recover  my  walking  at  all.  In  short,  I  ad- 
vance to  what  I  have  foretold,  that  I  should  have  nothing  but 
my  inside  left,  and  then  I  shall  be  but  an  odd  figure. 

Having  nothing  better  to  talk  of  than  my  ruins,  I  shall  not 
make  my  despatches  tedious ;  it  will  be  trouble  enough  merely 
to  read  them.  Adieu. 

Strawberryhill,  July  29, 1796. 

It  is  almost  ridiculous  for  me  to  attempt  to  write  with  my 
own  hand ;  my  fingers  are  so  maimed  they  stumble  at  every 
long  word ;  my  attention  dozes,  and  I  have  no  more  imagination 
left  than  if  I  were  forcing  myself  to  write  a  new  novel  in  five 
volumes.  In  short,  my  decay  is  so  sensible  to  me,  that  I  will 
not  deceive  myself,  nor  expect  any  further  recovery — no  change 
will  turn  quite  round ;  I  must  only  take  care  not  to  let  it 
expose  me. 

Agnes  will  give  you  Lady  Charlotte's  intelligence  from 
Brighthelm.  Our  villages  furnish  us  with  nothing  but  a  recon- 
ciliation which  I  conclude  will  not  be  much  longer-lived  than 
the  Royal  one — it  is  between  Hardinge  and  his  wife :  the 
separation  failed  for  want  of  a  wherewithal  for  a  separate 
maintenance. 

Mr.  Joseph  Banks  has  carried  Lysonsto  Kew  with  drawings  of 
all  his  discoveries  at  Woodchester.  They  made  great  impres- 


1736]     LOKD  ORFORD'S  SYMPATHY  WITH  HIS  FRIENDS.        13 

sion,  and  he  is  to  send  patterns  of  the  mosaics  for  the  Queen 
and  Princesses  to  work. 

Tuesday,  Aug.  2. 

The  post  is  going  out,  and  none  is  come  in,  which  is  a  great 
disappointment ;  and  besides,  writing  in  a  hurry,  my  hand  shakes, 
and  I  am  forced  to  call  for  Kirgate.  I  hoped  to  hear  of  all  at 
Goodwood,  and  flattered  myself  that  I  should  have  better 
accounts  both  of  you  and  my  dear  Duchess — now  I  am  in  perfect 
ignorance  of  everything.  Your  sister  goes  to  music  at  Udney's 
this  evening.  I  shall  be  jealous  if  she  has  had  a  letter  when  I 
have  not,  and  yet  I  wish  she  may  have  had,  that  I  may  be  sure 
no  disorder  or  accident  prevented  your  writing  to  me  as  you  had 
promised.  I  will  keep  my  letter  a  few  minutes  longer,  thq'  it 
will  be  barely  in  time. 

Strawb.-hill,  Aug.  5, 1796. 

As  I  am  not  much  in  your  debt  for  letters,  I  shall  not  com- 
plain that  I  have  nothing  to  send  you  in  return.  I  do  this 
moment  receive  one  from  Goodwood,  which  I  am  not  surprised 
at  your  not  admiring.  The  park  at  Halnaker  is  pretty,  but  the 
old  part  of  the  house  was,  even  in  my  eyes,  deplorable,  and 
scarce  preferable  even  to  the  vile  modern  part. 

I  am  grieved  that  you  can  give  me  no  better  an  account  of 
my  dearest  Duchess ;  still,  tho'  slow  (and  slow  indeed  it  is  to 
me  who  have  it  so  very  much  at  heart),  I  am  confident  she  will 
recover,  tho'  I  may  not  be  so  happy  as  to  see  it. 

Yes,  I  will  certainly  encourage  any  plan  that  may  be  of 
service  to  yr  sister.  I  am  not  indifferent  to  the  very  few 
persons  on  whose  affection  I  depend. 

I  do  not  know  a  tittle  that  is  worth  calling  for  Kirgate  to « 
write  for  me,  and  as  the  day  is  very  fine,  I  am  going  to  be 
carried  down  to  sit  in  the  garden.     My  pen,  you  see,  can  walk 
a  little  better — that  is  all  I  can  boast  of.     Yr  bathing,  I  hope, 
will  be  more  prosperous.     Adieu ! 

Strawberry-hill,  Aug.  9,  1796. 

I  have  just  received  such  a  long  letter  from  you  of  the  6th 
that  if  I  attempted  to  answer  it  with  my  own  hand  I  should  be 


14  LETTERS.  [1796 

two  days  engraving  it.  Besides,  tho'  I  like  to  hear  so  much 
from  you,  I  am  very  averse  to  your  writing  much,  especially 
when  you  are  bathing,  which  I  am  delighted  to  hear  is  of  service 
to  you.  I  like  your  drawing  too,  tho'  not  just  now,  as  it  adds 
to  your  being  sedentary.  I  have  another  strong  reason  against 
your  writing  more  than  short  notes  to  me ;  it  would  curtail  your 
frequent  letters  to  poor  dear  Agnes,  which  make  her  so  very 
happy. 

I  will  reply  as  briefly  as  I  can  to  some  other  points  of  your 
letter.  I  am  grieved  that  my  dear  Duchess  has  any  additional 
pains. 

When  I  saw  Halnaker  House  there  was  a  new  red-brick 
apartment  that  had  been  run  up  by  the  last  Earl  of  Derby  that 
possessed  it,  but  I  suppose  the  D.  of  E.  has  pulled  it  down. 

I  am  glad  you  have  no  worse  new  neighbours  than  the 
Pepys's,  tho',  as  you  and  your  companion  are  both  so  erudite, 
I  shall  not  wonder  if  he  brings  some  of  his  clan  to  educate 
under  your  eyes. 

You  may  be  assured  that  Lady  I.  does  not  go  to  Brighton, 
nor  any  of  the  connection,  or  disconnection.  Mrs.  Lisle  is 
commissioned  to  search  for  a  villa  for  her  mistress,  which  she 
has  not  yet  found.  The  Countess  drives  about  in  a  plain  coach 
without  arms.  The  Pss.  told  the  P.  she  could  not  let  Mrs.  P. 
wait  any  more,  but  might  keep  her  salary ;  he  replied  that  was 
impossible ;  and  it  is  said  Miss  Colman,  the  late  Maid  of  Honour, 
is  to  succeed  as  Bedchamber- Woman.  The  bon-mot  in  the 
'Times  '  was  certainly  not  mine,  but  perhaps  was  borrowed  from 
a  very  ancient  one :  when  Lord  Cowper  got  himself  made  a 
titular  prince  of  the  empire,  he  wrote  to  England  to  know  what 
place  he  was  to  take ;  I  said  I  could  tell  him  exactly — between 
Prince  Boothby  and  Count  Ellis. 

I  have  little  faith  in  an  invasion  at  present ;  the  unparalleled 
spirit,  activity,  and  cleverness  of  our  seamen  will  not  tempt  the 
French  sailors  much  to  embark  ;  they  may  attempt  to  run  in  a 
few  vessels  here  and  there  into  open  coasts  of  the  three  king- 
doms, and  they  do  give  out  that  they  will  try  one  more  campaign 
against  us,  corps  a  corps. 

Have  you  heard  of  single-speech  Hamilton's  mad  will  ?  He 
bequeathed  the  landed  estate  to  Lord  Egremont,  and  ten  thou- 
sand pounds  to 'the  young  Lady  Spencer,  and  then  said  he  was 


1796]  DISPERSION   OF   LORD   ORFORD'S   FRIENDS.  15 

very  sorry  that  both  land  and  money  had  been  entailed  by  his 
father,  and  that  he  only  made  the  bequest  to  show  his  kind  dis- 
position towards  them. 

The  Duchess  of  Devonshire  has  been  in  great  danger  of  losing 
her  sight,  by  catching  cold  very  indiscreetly.  They  have  saved 
her  eyes  by  almost  strangling  her  with  a  handkerchief,  and 
forcing  all  the  blood  up  into  her  head,  and  then  bleeding  her 
with  leeches.  This  is  all  I  have  to  tell  you  but  a  few  words  on 
myself.  I  take  the  air  every  morning  in  my  coach,  and  sit  an 
hour  out  upon  the  lawn,  and  crawl  a  little  about  between  two 
servants,  and  do  think  I  have  gained  a  grain  of  strength  ;  nay, 
last  night  I  took  courage  and  was  carried  up  into  Lady  Mendip's 
room,  and  even  played  two  rubbers  at  cribbage.  I  found  nobody 
there  but  the  tribe  of  Agar  (for  I  had  informed  myself)  and  Mr. 
Williams,  and  the  General  and  Lady  Cecilia.  Most  of  the  neigh- 
bourhood is  dispersed;  the  House  of  Orange  (which  is  nothing 
to  me)  are  gone  to  Nuneham,  Oxford,  and  Blenheim  ;  the  Mur- 
rays  to  make  a  visit  somewhere  for  a  fortnight ;  the  Mackinzys 
to  Brighton ;  and  the  Darrells  to  Cheltenham,  as  usual.  Lady 
Mount  brought  Madame  de  Cambis  here  t'other  morning ;  the 
young  Mounts  are  upon  their  mountain.  Dixi. 

The  letters  of  August  16th  and  24th,  already  pub- 
lished, complete  those  addressed  to  the  Miss  Berrys 
during  this  journey.  The  next  which  has  been  pre- 
served is  in  December,  without  date  of  day,  written  in 
Kirgate's  hand,  and  addressed  to  Miss  Berry  at  Cliveden 
(Little  Strawberry  Hill). 

Berkeley  Square,  Wednesday  morning,  Dec.  1796. 

Tho'  I  thank  you  for  letting  me  hear  so  often,  your  last 
night's  letter  by'the  penny  post  was  most  uncomfortable.  You 
had  not  grown  better,  as  I  hoped  and  expected.  The  weather  is 
grown  so  much  softer  to-day  that  I  trust  you  will  recover  faster, 
but  pray  take  notice  and  remember  that  you  are  too  delicate  to 
run  any  risks.  My  horses  shall  certainly  be  wirh  you  on  Friday 
night.  I  have  seen  nobody  yet  to-day.  Last  night  I  had  Mrs. 
D.  and  my  sister,  and  Gr.  Nicol,  and  Cosway,  whose  glibity  was 


16  LETTERS.  [1796 

very  entertaining.  He  told  us  that  the  late  Duke  of  Orleans 
had  told  him  that  his  object  was  to  make  his  son,  the  Duke  de 
Chartres,  king ;  and  he  said  that  Monsieur  de  Vergennes,  the 
day  after  signing  the  commercial  treaty  with  us,  had  said  to 
him  (still  to  him,  Cosway)  that  he  (Vergennes)  must  have  been 
drunk  when  he  signed  a  treaty  so  favourable  to  England — such 
blabs  were  the  French  ! 

My  kin  have  at  last  had  a  letter  from  their  son,  George 
Churchill,  in  Jamaica,  who  is  perfectly  well,  and  who  even  does 
not  mention  having  been  otherwise,  whence  they  conclude  some 
previous  letter  must  have  miscarried.  Adieu,  unless  I  hear 
anything  before  the  post  goes  out. 

This  last,  dated  December  15th,  and  already  published, 
closes  the  correspondence  with  Miss  Berry.  It  begins  : — 

[I  had  no  account  of  you  at  all  yesterday  but  in  Mrs.  Darner's 
letter ;  nor  have  I  had  any  before  post  to-day  as  you  promised 
me  in  hers.  I  had  indeed  a  humorous  letter  from  a  puss  *  that 
is,  about  your  house  which  is  more  comfortable,  as  I  think  she 
would  not  have  written  cheerfully  if  you  had  not  been  in  a 
good  way.  I  would  answer  it,  but  I  am  grown  a  dull  old 
Tabby,  and  have  no  '  quips,  and  cranks,  and  wanton  wiles '  left] 

An  extract  of  a  letter  from  Miss  Berry  to  an  intimate 
friend,  shows  the  state  of  her  mind  at  the  close  of  this 
sad  year. 

Dec.  1796. 

You  will,  I  know,  wish  me  to  say  something  of  myself.  It 
shall  be  little,  for  who  can  talk  of  suffering  to  you,  or  dwell 
upon  disappointments  when  they  think  of  yours?  After  a 
twelvemonth  passed  in  the  most  painful,  agitating,  and  un- 
avoidable suspense,  I  find  myself  not  only  totally  disappointed 
in  a  plan  of  happiness,  founded  on  the  most  moderate  desires, 
and  pursued  by  the  most  rational  means,  but  obliged  to  change 

*  This  was  written  by  Miss  Seton  in  the  name  of  a  kitten  at  Little 
Strawberry  Hill,  with  whose  gambols  Lord  Orford  had  been  much  amused. 

M.B. 


1796]    MISS  BERRY'S  DEFENCE  OF  GENERAL  O'HARA.       17 

my  opinion  of  one  of  the  characters  in  the  world  of  which  I 
had  ever  thought  the  highest,  and  in  whose  honour,  truth,  and 
affection  I  had  ever  had  the  most  entire  confidence  and  the 
sincerest  satisfaction  long  before  I  considered  him  in  any  other 
light  than  that  of  a  friend.  I  shall  not  dwell  on  the  effect 
which  you  will  easily  guess  all  this  must  have  had  on  a  heart 
as  warm  and  as  little  generally  confiding  as  mine,  but  a  heart 
which  when  once  it  trusts,  trusts  so  implicitly.  My  consola- 
tions have  been  in  the  increased  and  touching  affection  of  my 
sister,  the  kind,  rational,  and  unremitting  attentions  of  Mrs. 
Darner,  and  the  reflection  that  there  is  no  part  of  my  conduct 
that  I  could  for  a  moment  have  wished  otherwise.  These 
have  succeeded  in  restoring  me  to  the  power  of  employing 
myself  and  my  spirits  to  near  their  usual  level. 

It  appears  that  some  of  Miss  Berry's  friends  sought  to 
alleviate  her  distress,  and  lessen  her  regrets  at  the  unfor- 
tunate termination  of  her  engagement,  by  endeavouring 
to  blame  and  depreciate  the  object  of  her  affections ;  but, 
with  her,  disappointment  did  not  find  comfort  in  resent- 
ment, and  she  generously  defended  from  censure  or  de- 
traction the  conduct  and  character  of  one  who  had  been 
to  her  the  cause  of  bitter  suffering. 

Extract  of  a  letter  to  a  friend  : — 

....  Mrs.  L.,  you  say,  *  observes  that  my  affections  have 
been  more  deeply  engaged  than  I  was  aware  of,'  and  Mrs.  D. 
'  has  repeatedly  intimated  the  same  '  to  you.  Needed  you  any 
intimation  that  my  affections  must  have  been  deeply  engaged 
before  I  resolved,  or  even  thought  of  marrying  ?  Had  I  ever 
chosen  to  think  of  making  what  is  called  a  prudent  marriage, 
did  you  suppose,  that  I,  in  common  with  all  my  sex,  might  not 
have  done  it?  Or  could  you  suppose  this  a  prudent  mar- 
riage? Did  my  silence  on  this  subject  deceive  you?  and  did 
you  really  believe  me  capable  of  the  platitude  of  talking  in 
raptures,  or  enlarging  on  the  character  and  perfections  of  the 
man  whom  I  considered  as  my  husband  ?  Now  that  he  no 
longer  stands  in  that  position,  it  is  not  my  having  reason  to 
complain  of  him  that  shall  prevent  my  doing  him  justice.  I 
know  not  where  you  have  taken  your  reports  of  his  character 
VOL.  II.  C 


18  LETTEKS.  [179G 

but  I  know  that  a  character  '  universally  highly  thought  of,' 
is  the  last  I  should  choose  for  any  intimate  connection,  for 
(except  in  early  youth)  nothing  but  mediocrity  can  possibly 
attain  it.  I  have  heard  0.  H.  called  too  exigeant  and  wor- 
retting  by  idle  officers  under  his  command,  and  too  bold  by 
the  ministerial  people  here,  after  the  failure  at  Toulon;  but 
in  my  life  I  never  heard  an  allegation  against  either  his 
heart  or  his  understanding,  and  if  I  had,  I  should  not  have 
believed  it,  because  in  a  long  acquaintance  I  have  myself  known 
and  seen  repeated  proofs  of  the  excellence  of  both.  Instead 
of  not  knowing  '  any  real  virtues  he  possesses,'  until  this  un- 
fortunate affair,  in  which  I  am  still  convinced  his  head  and 
not  his  heart  is  to  blame,  I  know  nobody  whose  character 
united  so  many  manly  virtues.  It  was  this,  joined  to  a  know- 
ledge of  his  conduct  in  all  the  relations  of  life  in  which  he 
then  stood,  that  entitled  him  to  the  '  approbation  and  love 
of  such  a  heart '  as  mine,  and  I  felt  and  know  he  decidedly 
*  suited  me  as  a  friend,'  because  to  an  excellent  understanding, 
great  natural  quickness,  and  much  knowledge  of  the  world,  he 
joined  an  affectionate  tenderness  of  heart  which  had  always  in- 
spired me  with  a  degree  of  confidence  and  intimacy,  you  have 
often  heard  me  say  I  hardly  ever  felt  with  any  other  per- 
son. ...  I  still  believe  that  had  this  separation  never  taken 
place,  I  should  never  have  had  to  complain  of  him,  nor  he  to 
doubt  me. 


1797]  DEATH   OF   LORD   ORFORD.  19 


1797. 

'  I  GO  to  Lady  Spencer's  at  St.  Albans,  and  to  Brooke 
Hall  to  meet  Mrs.  D.  and  Mr.  Whitbread.  Lord  Orford 
dies.  See  much  of  the  Starembergs.'* 

The  principal  event  of  the  year  was  the  death  of  Lord 
Orford;  and  the  account  of  his  declining  health  and 
reason  is  thus  given  by  Miss  Berryf  : — 

Very  soon  after  the  date  of  this  letter  (Dec.  15),  the  gout, 
the  attacks  of  which  were  every  day  becoming  more  frequent 
and  longer,  made  those  with  whom  Lord  Orford  had  been 
living  at  Strawberry  Hill  very  anxious  that  he  should  return  to 
Berkeley  Square,  to  be  nearer  assistance  in  case  of  any  sudden 
seizure.  As  his  correspondents,  soon  after  his  removal,  were 
likewise  established  in  London,  no  more  letters  passed  between 
them.  When  not  immediately  suffering  from  pain,  his  mind 
was  tranquil  and  cheerful.  He  was  still  capable  of  being 
amused,  and  of  taking  some  part  in  conversation ;  but  during 
the  last  weeks  of  his  life,  when  fever  was  superadded  to  his  other 
ills,  his  mind  became  subject  to  the  cruel  hallucination  of  sup- 
posing himself  neglected  and  abandoned  by  the  only  persons  to 
whom  his  memory  clung,  and  whom  he  always  desired  to  see. 
In  vain  they  recalled  to  his  recollection  how  recently  they  had 
left  him,  and  how  short  had  been  their  absence ;  it  satisfied 
him  for  the  moment,  but  the  same  idea  recurred  as  soon  as  he 
had  lost  sight  of  them.  At  last  nature,  sinking  under  the 
exhaustion  of  weakness,  obliterated  all  ideas  but  those  of  mere 
existence,  which  ended  without  a  struggle,  on  the  2nd  of  March, 
1797.— M.  B. 

*  Austrian  Ambassador  for  some  years  in  England. 

t  Vide  the  note  accompanying  that  portion  of  Lord  Orford's  Correspon- 
dence which  was  first  published  in  the  year  1840. 

c  2 


20      WAS   LORD   ORFORD   A   LOVER   OF  MISS   BERRY?        [1797 

A  sad  picture  of  that  decay  of  body  and  extinction  of 
mind  which  forestalled  the  cessation  of  life  itself,  and 
diminished  the  pang  of  final  separation ;  but  it  must 
always  have  been  a  touching  and  gratifying  recollection, 
for  those  to  whom  Lord  Orford  looked  for  the  happiness 
of  his  latter  years,  that,  whilst  his  feverish  fears  pointed 
to  their  absence  as  his  greatest  ill,  they  were  ever  at  hand 
to  soothe  his  apprehensions  by  their  presence,  and  to 
smooth  the  pillow  of  their  dying  friend. 

It  has  been  often  a  matter  of  speculation  whether  Lord 
Orford's  great  attachment  to  Miss  Berry  had  ever  led  to 
any  explicit  declaration  of  a  wish  to  obtain  her  consent  to 
their  union  in  marriage.  Notwithstanding  the  frequent 
professions  of  equal  attachment  to  both  sisters,  it  is  easy  to 
see  throughout  the  correspondence  that  Miss  Berry  herself 
was  his  first  object.  The  dread  of  being  thought  ridicu- 
lous by  playing  the  part  of  a  more  than  septuagenarian 
lover,  no  doubt  acted  as  a  constant  check  upon  the 
indulgence  of  such  hopes  as  he  might  have  reasonably 
entertained  as  a  younger  man ;  and  so  entirely  dependent 
was  he  on  the  society  of  Miss  Berry  and  her  sister  for 
what  remained  to  him  of  pleasure  in  life,  that  even  if 
impelled  by  the  wish  to  secure  to  himself  the  absolute 
right  to  her  companionship  and  attentions  as  a  wife,  he 
probably  feared  to  lose  her  friendship  by  proffering  the 
hand  she  might  not  accept ;  yet,  it  was  admitted  by  those 
best  entitled  to  know,  that  at  one  time  Miss  Berry  was 
conscious  that  the  choice  was  within  her  power ;  but  she 
clung  to  his  friendship  too  warmly  and  too  sincerely,  not 
to  sedulously  guard  him  from  the  expression  of  any  feel- 
ing she  could  not  fully  return.  She  accepted  his  friendly 
affection  without  reserve.  He  was  spared  the  mortifica- 
tion of  ever  learning  from  her  lips  that  more  he  could 
never  expect.  The  letter  of  the  15th  December  was, 
according  to  Miss  Berry's  account,  the  last  received  by 
her,  or  her  sister,  from  Lord  Orford.  It  was  the  close 


1797]  .  LORD   ORFORD'S   WILL.  21 

of  that  tender  and  voluminous  correspondence,  which, 
during  the  space  of  nine  years,  evinced  a  warmth  of  heart, 
a  never-failing  playfulness  of  thought,  and  refinement  of 
wit,  not  only  well  worthy  of  the  fame  of  the  '  Prince  of 
Letter  Writers,'  but  leaving  on  the  mind  of  the  reader  a 
still  stronger  impression  of  the  genial  affection  and  consi- 
derate kindness  which  marked  the  declining  years  of  Lord 
Orford,  and  saved  him  from  the  chilling  influence  of  in- 
creasing age,  painful  infirmities,  and  domestic  loneli- 
ness. 

By  Lord  Orford's  will,*  Little  Strawberry  Hill  was  left 
to  the  Miss  Berrys,  and  in  a  codicil,  a  box,  marked  0, 
containing  MSS.,  was  left  to  Mr.  Berry  and  his  daughters, 
with  directions  that  Mr.  Berry  should  undertake  the  care 
of  a  new  edition  of  his  works,  with  the  addition  of  all  the 
papers  contained  in  that  box.  Miss  Berry  acknowledges, 
in  a  letter  addressed  to  a  friend  at  this  time,  that  in  mak- 
ing her  father  his  editor  and  Mrs.  Darner  his  executrix, 
'  Lord  Orford  caused  his  papers  being  secured  to  her  eye 
and  mine,  and  made  me  his  editor  without  the  necessary 
publicity  attached  to  the  name.'  Miss  Berry  describes 
herself  in  the  same  letter  as  labouring  with  incessant  per- 
severance for  nearly  a  twelvemonth ;  as  neglecting  all  her 
own  pursuits ;  never  looking  in  a  book  but  that  was  con- 
ducive in  some  degree  to  the  work  she  had  in  hand ; 
reading  and  rereading  with  perfect  integrity  of  intention, 
both  with  respect  to  the  author  and  the  public ;  and  she 
adds  that  she  is  making  all  that  part  of  the  publication 
which  depends  on  her  selection  as  worthy  of  it  as  possible. 
It  may  be  fairly  presumed  from  this  account  that  on 
Miss  Berry  devolved  the  chief  labours  of  the  editorial 


*  Will  of  Horatio  Wallpole,  Lord  Orford,  proved  1797.  Messuage  and 
outhouses,  late  in  the  occupation  of  Mrs.  C.  Olive,  left  to  Mary  and  Agnes, 
daughters  of  Robert  Berry  of  North  Audley  Street. 

In  second  codicil : — Box  marked  O,  containing  Manuscripts,  left  to  Robert, 
Mary,  and  Agnes  Berry — to  be  divided  f  share  and  share  alike.' 


22  MISS  BERRY'S  MEMORANDA.  [1797 

duties  bequeathed  to  her  father.  The  edition  published 
with  the  name  of  Mr.  Berry  was  given  to  the  public  in 
•the  year  1790. 

The  following  memorandum  was  written  at  a  time  of 
great  depression  as  to  the  prospects  of  her  own  country,  but 
with  Miss  Berry's  usual  wish  to  bear  some  part  in  pro- 
moting the  welfare,  or  extending  the  knowledge  of  her 
fellow-creatures ;  it  was  probably  the  germ  of  that  excellent 
work  '  A  Comparative  View  of  Social  Life  in  England  and 
France,'  which  appeared  many  years  afterwards,  and  was 
the  fruit  no  less  of  study  than  of  personal  experience  and 
personal  observation. 

May  7,  1797. 

I  am  resolved  for  the  future  to  make  memoranda  of  the 
remarkable  circumstances  and  characters  that  pass  either  im- 
mediately under  my  own  eyes  and  knowledge,  or  that  I  can 
learn  from  such  undoubted  authority,  and  such  accurate  ob- 
servers, as  may  satisfy  even  the  steady  search  and  unquenchable 
desire  of  truth  which  has  ever  existed  in  my  mind.  It  is  my 
unfortunate  lot  to  pass  the  most  reasonable  years  of  human 
life — I  mean  from  thirty  upwards — in  times  of  universal  fer- 
mentation ;  when  the  minds  of  men  all  over  Europe  are  under- 
going some  great  change,  and  when  some  new  system  of  social 
order  is  struggling  into  existence  opposed  by  all  the  obstinate 
rancour  of  prejudice,  and  encouraged  by  all  the  heedless  enthu- 
siasm of  novelty. 

My  own  country  tottering  on  its  basis,  with  every  means  of 
self-correction  and  principle  of  renovation  within  itself,  in  little 
more  than  a  hundred  years  after  its  complete  establishment, 
seems  to  the  thoughtful  mind  but  a  new  assurance  of  the  im- 
possibility of  permanence  to  any  institution  of  man.  In  such 
times  and  such  circumstances,  my  sex  and  situation  condemning 
me  to  perfect  insignificance,  and  precluding  all  possibility  of 
my  ever  taking  an  active  part,  and  then,  like  others,  being 
misled  and  blinded  by  the  part  I  have  taken,  perhaps  I  am  but 
the  more  fit  to  record  what  I  see.  A  very  small  fraction  of  the 
great  and  awful  scene  may  fall  under  my  cognizance ;  but  how- 


1735]  PARODY   OX   ADDISOX'S   'TRAVELS.'  23 

ever  minute  the  features  that  I  may  attempt  to  seize,  they  will 
neither  be  uninteresting  nor  useless  to  those  inspired  with  the 
same  accurate  love  of  truth  and  candid  investigation  of  human 
nature  with  myself. 


Letters  of  H.  Walpole  not  yet  published. 

A  certain  number  of  Lord  Orford's  unpublished  works 
have  remained  till  now  amongst  Miss  Berry's  papers. 
The  interest  attached  to  all  that  fell  from  his  pen  has 
much  increased,  as  fresh  publications  and  new  editions  of 
his  letters  have  made  his  readers  better  acquainted  with 
his  peculiar  vein  of  thought  and  humour.  They  are 
now  therefore  given  to  the  public ;  and  the  close  of  the 
year  in  which  Lord  Orford  died  seems  the  fittest  place  to 
which  to  assign  these  last  gatherings  of  his  miscellaneous 
productions. 

To  Mr.  Gray. 

From  Cambridge,  1735. 
In  the  Style  of  Addison's  Travels. 

DEAR  SIB, — I  believe  you  saw  in  the  newspapers  that  I  was 
going  to  make  the  tour  of  Italy ;  I  shall  therefore  give  you 
some  account  of  the  places  I  have  seen,  which  are  not  to  be 
found  in  Mr.  Addison,  whose  method  I  shall  follow.  On  9th  of 
Octr,  1735,  we  set  out  from  Lodone1  (the  Lugdunum  of  the  An- 
cients),  the  capital  city  of  Lombardy,  in  a  chariot-and-four. 
About  1 1  o'clock,  we  arrived  at  a  place  the  Italians  call  Tem- 
pialbulo.2  Virgil  seems  to  have  prophesied  of  this  town  when  2  White- 
he  says — 

Amisit  venem  vetua  Albula  nomen. 

By  Time  the  founder's  great  design  was  crost, 

And  Albula  its  genuine  title  lost. 

5  Statue  of 

Here  are  no  remains  of  Roman  antiquity,  but  a  statue  of  Marc  K-  w»Uiam 
Aurelius,3  which  the  Lombards  call  Guglielmo  Terzo,  one  of  cutter's"6" 
their  kings,  and  some  learned  men,4  St.  George  and  the  Dragon,  jjf^rrav' 
It  is  an  equestrian  statue,  and  almost  equal  to  that  of  Charle-  p-  26. 
magne,  at  the  Great  Cross,5  at  Lodone.     The  church  is  an  old  K.  Charles 

at  Charing 
Cross. 


24 


LETTERS   OF   H.    WALPOLE. 


[1735 


Gothic  building,  and  reckoned  the  most  ancient  in  Italy.     Here 
was  some  time  ago  an  altar-piece  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  in  which 
1  Dr.  \\bite  the  painter  having  quarrelled  with  the  Abbot1  of  this  church, 
B^bop1  of     represented  him  like  Judas,  with  this  epigram : — 

Peter- 
borough. Fallens,  hac  qui  te  pingi  sub  imagine  credis, 

Non  similis  Judas  est  tibi — pcenituit. 

Think  not,  vain  man,  thou  here  art  represented, 
Thou  art  not  like  to  Judas — he  repented. 

From  thence  we  made  the  best  of  our  way  to  a  town,  which  in 
English  we  should  call  Stony- Stratford,  and  corresponds  with 
the  description  which  Virgil  has  given  of  it — 

— vivo  praeter  vebor  Ostia  Saxo 
Stratfordi,  Megarosque  sinus,  Tapsumque  jacentem. 

Those  that  follow  are  little  dirty  towns,  that  seem  to  have  been 
built  only  to  be  '  knocked ' 2  on  the  bead,  like 


2  Expres- 
sion ot  Ad- 
dison  on 
this  line. 

3  Bow. 


*  Epping. 


Antitheum,  Glaucumque,  Medontaque,  Thersilochumque. 

The  next  town  of  note  is  Arc,3  so  called  from  its  being  built 
in  the  shape  of  a  bow — ab  Eoo  curvatur  in  Arcum.  From  Arc 
we  travelled  thro'  a  very  pleasant  country  to  Epino,4  whose 
forest  is  celebrated  by  Virgil  in  these  lines : — 

Sylva  Epini  late  dumis,  atque  ilice  nigra 
Horrida,  quam  densi  complerant  undique  sentes ; 
Kara  per  occultos  ducebat  semita  calles. 

Epinum's  woods  with  shrubs  and  gloomy  oak 

Horrid,  and  all  with  brambles  thick  o'ergrown, 

Thro'  which  few  narrow  paths  obscurely  led. — Mr.  Trap. 

We  were  here  shown,  at  a  distance,  the  thickets  rendered  so 
5  Gregory,  famous  by  the  robberies  of  Grregorio.5  Here  I  was  met  by  a  very 
highway-  distant  and  troublesome  relation.  My  namesake  hints  at  such 
man.  See  an  one  m  those  lines  of  his — 

Ad.  Trav., 

Accurrit  quidam  notus  mihi  nomine  tantum, 
Arreptaque  manu,  Quid  agis,  Cosinissime,  rerum  ? — HOT. 

There  step'd  up  one  to  me  I  hardly  knew, 

Embrac'd  me,  and  cried,  Cousin,  how  d'ye  do. — Mr.  Creech. 

eflockerei.    We  lay  that  night  at  Oggerell,6  which  is  famous  for  nothing 
but  being  Horace's  Oppidulo,  quod  versu  dicere  non  est. 


1735]  PARODY   OX   ADDISON'S   '  TRAVELS.'  25 

In  our  way  to  Parvulun,1  we  saw  a  great  castle,2  belonging  l  Little- 
to  the  Counts  of  Suffolcia  ;  it  is  a  vast  pile  of  building,  but  quite 


in  the  old  taste.  Parvulun  is  a  small  village,  but  formerly  inn,  the 
remarkable  for  several  miracles  3  said  to  be  performed  there  by  £ari  Of 
a  Welsh  saint,  who,  like  Jupiter,  was  suckled  by  a  goat,  whence  Suffolk- 

3  \Vinstan- 

they    think    it    Porrum   et   Cepe   nefas   violare.  —  Juv.      The  ]ey's  Won- 
wonders  of  Parvulun  are  in  great  repute  all  over  Lombardy.  ^icksln 
We  had  very  bad  ways  from  hence  to  Pont  Ossoria,4  where  are  Mechanics. 
the  ruins  of  a  bridge  that  gives  name  to  the  town.    The  account 
they  gave  of  it  is  as  follows  :  —  St.  Bona  being  desirous  to  pass 
over  the  river,  met  with  a  man  who  offered  to  carry  her  over  ; 
he  took  her  up  in  his  arms,  and  under  pretence  of  doing  her 
service,  was  going  to  ravish  her  ;  but  she  praying  to  the  Virgin 
Mary  for  help,  the  wretch  fell  into  the  stream  and  was  drowned, 
and  immediately  this  bridge  rose  out  of  the  water  for  her  to  go 
over.     She  was  so  touched  by  this  signal  deliverance,  that  she 
would  not  leave  the  place,  but  continued  there  till  her  death  in 
exercises  of  devotion,  and  was  buried  in  a  little  chapel  at  the 
foot  of  the  bridge,  with  her  story  at  length  and  this  epitaph  — 

Hac  sita  sunt  fossa  Bonae  venerabilis  ossa  !  5  *  Epitaph 

of  Venera- 

From  Pont  Ossoria  we  travelled  by  land  to  Nuovo  Foro  6  (the  6  ^e^mear. 

Novum  Forum  of  lockius),  where  are  held  the  greatest  races  in  ket. 

all  Italy.     We  were  shown  in  the  treasury  of  the  Benedictines' 

Convent,  an  ancient  gold  cup  which  cost  an  hundred  guineas 

(a  great  sum  in  those  days),  and  given,  as  the  friar  told  us  that 

attended  us,  by  a  certain  German  Prince,  he  did  not  very  well 

know  who,  but  he  believed  his  name  was  one  King  George.7  7  see  p.  78. 

The  inhabitants  are  wonderfully  fond  of  horses,  and  to  this  day 

tell  you  most  surprising  stories  of  one  Looby,  a  Boltognian.     I 

saw  a  book  dedicated  to  the  head  of  that  family,  intituled  '  A 

Discourse  on  the  Magnanimity  of  Bucephalus,  and  of  the  Duke 

of  Boltogne's  Horse  Looby.'  8  J^  JJ  Pol30- 

I  staid  here  three  days,  and  in  my  way  to  Pavia  9  stopped  at  ton. 
the  Palace  of  Delfini,10  which  is  built  on  the  top  of  a  large  °b^™~ 
barren  mountain,  and  at  a  distance  looks  like  the  Ark  resting  ™  LordGo- 
on  Mount  Ararat.     This  mountain  is  called  Gog,  and  opposite  hous^on 
to  one  called  Magog.     They  are  very  dangerous  precipices,  and  Gogmagog 
occasioned  the  famous  verse-  —  u  «incj(jjt 

in  Scylla 

Incidit  in  Gogum  qui  vult  vitare  Magogon.11  qui  vult 

vitare 
Charibd.n.' 


26  LETTERS   OF   H.    WALPOLE.  [1735 

I  need  not  repeat  the  history  of  Grog  and  Magog,  it  being  known 
to  every  child,  and  to  be  found  at  large  in  most  books  of 
travels. 

Pavia  and  its  University  are  described  by  Mr.  Addison,  so  I 
shall  only  mention  a  circumstance  which  I  wonder  escaped  that 
learned  gentleman.  It  is  the  name  of  the  town,  which  is  derived 
from  the  badness  of  the  streets :  Pavia  a  non  pavendo,  as 
Lucus  a  non  lucendo. 

Till  next  post,  adieu  ! 

Yours  ever, 

HORATITJS  ITALICUS. 


To  the  Hon.  Henry  (afterwards  Marshal)  Conway. 

London,  October  81,  1741. 

MY  DEAREST  HARRY, — You  have  made  me  infinitely  happy, 
but  infinitely  impatient  for  Monday  se'nnight.  I  have  wished  for 
you  more  particularly  this  week,  and  wanted  you  all  at  Sir 
Thomas  Eobinson's*  and  the  birthday.  You  have  already  had 
accounts,  I  suppose,  of  the  former  from  Lady  Caroline  and  Mr. 
Selwyn,  but  I  will  say  my  bit  about  it  too ;  I  told  Lady  Caroline 
I  would ;  besides,  I  made  a  list  of  most  of  the  people,  and  will 
tell  you  some  of  the  company,  which  was  all  extremely  good ; 
there  were  none  but  people  of  the  first  fashion,  except  Mr.  Kent, 
Mr.  Gibber,  Mr.  Irving,  and  the  Parsons'  family,  and  you  know 
all  these  have  an  alloy.  Kent  came  as  governess  to  Lady 
Charlotte  Boyle,f  Gibber  and  Irving  have  long  had  their  freedom 
given  them  of  this  end  of  the  town,  and  the  Parsons's  J  took  out 

*  In  Horace  Walpole's  letter  to  Sir  Horace  Mann,  dated  October  22, 1741, 
he  says : — '  The  whole  town  is  to  be  to-morrow  night  at  Sir  Thomas 
Robinson's  ball,  which  he  gives  to  a  little  girl  of  the  Duke  of  Richmond's. 
There  are  already  two  hundred  invited,  from  Miss  in  bib  and  apron  to  my 
Lord  Chancellor  (Hardwicke)  in  bib  and  mace.'  Lord  Dover  adds  a  note 
to  explain  that  Sir  Thomas  Robinson  was  not  the  diplomatist,  afterwards 
Lord  Grantham,  but  Sir  Thomas  Robinson  of  Rokeby  Park  in  Yorkshire, 
commonly  called  '  long  Sir  Thomas.'1 

t  Lady  Charlotte  Boyle,  second  daughter  of  Richard,  third  Earl  of 
Burlington,  married  William,  Marquis  of  Hartingdon. 

\  The  family  of  Alderman  Parsons,  a  Jacobite  brewer,  who  lived  much 
in  France,  and  had  been  taken  notice  of  by  the  King. 


1735]          ACCOUNT   OF   A   PARTY   AT  MR.  ROBINSON'S.  27 

theirs  at  Paris.  There  were  an  hundred  and  ninety-seven 
people,  yet  no  confusion ;  he  had  taken  off  all  the  doors  of  his 
house,  and,  in  short,  distributed  everybody  quite  to  their  well- 
being.  The  dancers  were  the  two  Lady  Lenox's*  (Lady  Emily 
queen  of  the  ball,  and  appeared  in  great  majesty  from  behind  a 
vast  bouquet),  Lady  Lucy  Manners,  Lady  Ancram,  f  Lady  Lucy 
Clinton,  Ladies  Harriot  and  Anne  Wentworth,  Sophia  and 
Charlotte  Farm  or,  and  Camilla  Bennet ;  Miss  Pelham  (Lord  ! 
how  ugly  she  is  !) ;  Misses  Walpole,  Leneve,  Churchill,  Parsons, 
Maccartny,  Pultney,  Mary  Townshend,  Newton,  and  Brown. 
The  men,  Lord  John  Sackville,  Lord  Ancram,  Holderness, 
Ashburnham,  Howard,  Hartington,  and  Castlehaven ;  Mr.  Cole- 
brook,  Poulett,  Churchill,  two  Townshends,  Parsons,  Vernon, 
Carteret,  Colonel  Maguire,  and  a  Sir  William  Boothby.  For 
the  rest  of  the  company  you  shall  see  the  list  when  you  come 
to  town.  Lord  and  Lady  Euston  and  Lady  Caroline  did  not 
dance.  A  supper  for  the  lady  dancers  was  served  at  twelve, 
their  partners  and  waiting  tables  with  other  supper  stood 
behind.  Oh !  I  danced  country  dances,  I  had  forgot  myself. 
The  ball  ended  at  four. 

Now  for  the  birthday.  There  were  loads  of  men,  not  many 
ladies,  nor  much  finery.  Lord  Fitzwilliams  and  myself  were 
the  only  two  very  fine ;  I  was  in  a  great  taking  about  my 
clothes,  they  came  from  Paris,  and  did  not  arrive  till  nine 
o'clock  of  the  birthday  morning.  I  was  obliged  to  send  one  of 
the  King's  messengers  for  them  and  Lord  Holderness's  suit  to 
Dover.  There  were  nineteen  suits  came  with  them.  Do  you 
know  I  was  in  such  a  fright  lest  they  should  get  into  the  news, 
and  took  up  the  Craftsman  with  fear  and  trembling.  There 
was  the  greatest  crowd  at  the  ball  I  ever  saw.  Lady  Euston 
danced  country  dances  with  the  Duke.  My  aunt  Horace  had 
adapted  her  gown  to  her  complexion,  and  chose  a  silk  all  broke 
out  in  pink  blotches.  The  Duke  of  Kingston,  Lord  Middlesex, 
and  Lady  Albemarle,  are  dreadfully  altered.  You  can't  think 
what  an  alteration  towards  old  I  find  among  my  acquaintance. 

Harry,  you  must  come  and  be  in  love  with  Lady  Sophia 

*  Lady  Caroline  and  Lady  Emily  Lennox ;  the  former  married,  1744, 
to  Henry  Fox,  first  Lord  Holland;  the  latter  married,  1746,  to  James, 
twentieth  Earl  of  Kildare. 

f  Lady  Ancram,  daughter  of  Robert,  third  Earl  of  Holderneas. 


28  LETTERS    OF   H.    WALPOLE.  [1741 

Farmer ;  all  the  world  is  or  should  be.  But  I  had  cried  her 
up  so  much  before  she  appeared  that  she  does  not  answer 
everybody's  expectation.  No  more  will  the  Opera  to-night,  for 
Amorevoli  is  ill  and  does  not  sing;  his  part  is  to  be  read. 
They  had  certainly  much  better  have  staid  till  Tuesday;  but 
for  fear  of  disappointing  people,  I  fear  they  will  disappoint 
them.  I  am  not  to  be  there,  for  Dodd  has  got  a  fever  with  the 
heat  of  the  ball  last  night,  so  I  shall  not  leave  him.  Indeed, 
my  dear  Harry,  I  will  not  scold  you  about  the  Opera,  but  I 
should  have  been  glad,  I  own,  that  you  were  not  in  the  direc- 
tion. I  doubt  much  of  the  success ;  and  even  should  it  succeed, 
gentlemen' — and  they  very  young  gentlemen — are  mighty  apt 
not  to  understand  economy  and  management.  Do  get  out  of 
it,  if  possible. 

Good  night !  I  have  nothing  more  to  tell  you  now,  but  I  shall 
have  a  quantity  to  say  to  you.  My  loves  to  all  your  family. 

Yours  ever, 

H.  W. 

To  the  Same. 

Strawberry  Hill,  Thursday,  Sept.  2. 

Not  being  in  town,  there  may  be  several  more  new  produc- 
tions, as  the  Grubbcea  frutex  blossoms  every  day,  but  I  send  you 
all  I  had  gathered  for  myself  while  I  was  there.  I  found  the 
pamphlet  much  in  vogue,  and  indeed  it  is  written  smartly.  My 
Lady  Townshend  sends  all  her  messages  on  the  backs  of  these 
political  cards,  the  only  good  one  of  which,  the  two  heads 
facing  one  another,  is  her  son  Greorge's.  Charles  met  D'Abreu 
t'other  day,  and  told  him  he  intended  to  make  a  great  many 
good  speeches  next  winter.  '  The  first,'  said  he,  '  shall  be  to 
address  the  King,  not  to  send  for  any  more  foreign  troops,  but 
to  send  for  some  foreign  Ministers.' 

Mr.  Fox  had  a  very  bad  sore  throat,  but  never  was  in  any 
danger.  You  have  heard,  I  suppose,  what  an  abominable  will 
Lord  Fitzwilliams  left ;  did  not  mention  his  wife  or  younger 
children  in  it,  but  leaves  all  to  his  eldest  son,  tho'  she  is  one  of 
the  most  deserving  women  in  the  world,  and  the  younger  son 
and  five  daughters  will  have  but  2,5001.  a-piece ! 

My  Lord  Chesterfield  is  relapsed :  he  sent  Lord  Bath  word 
lately  that  he  was  grown  very  lean  and  very  deaf;  the  other 


1764]  TO   HON.    H.    CONWAY.  29 

replied,  that  he  could  lend  him  some  fat,  and  should  be  very 
glad  at  any  time  to  lend  him  an  ear. 

I  shall  go  to  London  on  Monday,  and  if  I  find  anything  else 
new,  I  will  pack  it  up  with  a  flower  picture  for  Lady  Ailesbury, 
which  I  shall  leave  in  Warwick  Street,  with  orders  to  be  sent 
to  you.  Adieu  ! 

Yours  ever,  H.  W. 


To  the  Same. 
Strawberry  Hill,  Monday  night,  July  2, 1764. 

If  my  Lady  Ailesbury*  does  not  think  the  little  'bull'  as 
handsome  as  Jupiter  himself,  I  shall  resent  it.  He  is  accom- 
panied by  seven  bantams  for  the  Infantas,  f 

As  Lord  Frederick  and  Lord  John  are  gone  to  you  this 
evening,  I  can  tell  you  no  politics  but  what  they  know.  The 
Bedfords  are  certainly  jealous  of  some  negotiation  being  on 
foot  between  Lord  Bute  and  Pitt,  but  I  cannot  find  that  it  is 
with  any  reason,  tho'  I  do  not  desire  to  have  them  undeceived. 

Lord  Bath  has  been  dying,  but  is  out  of  danger,  and,  what  I 
like  more,  Legge  mends  again.  Your  brother  has  sent  me  the 
Duke  and  Duchess  of  Berwick,  and  what  upon  earth  to  do 
with  them  I  don't  know.  They  have  the  grace  to  call  them- 
selves Lirias  here,  yet  they  do  not  go  to  Court,  and  say  they 
are  only  come  to  see  their  relations.  He  looks  like  a  cook,  but 
does  not  seem  to  have  parts  enough  for  one.  He  had  never 
heard  that  his  great-grandmother  married  Mr.  Godfrey  ;  he  told 
me  to-day  that  she  called  herself  Churchill,  but  that  her  family 
name  was  Marlborough.  The  Duchess  of  Lina,  who  is  sister 
of  the  Due  of  Alva,J  is  a  rational  civil  being,  not  at  all  hand- 
some, but  easy  and  genteel.  They  have  more  debts  than  duke- 
doms, tho'  he  is  Duke  of  Veraguea,  too,  and  have  crowded  all 
their  rich  blood  into  la  rue  de  Suffolk  Street. 

They  talk  of  a  match  between  Lord  Middlesex  and  Lady 

*  Lady  Ailesbury,  daughter  of  John  Duke  of  Argyll,  widow  of  Charles 
Earl  of  Ailesbury  and  Bruce. 
f  Daughters  of  Lady  Ailesbury. 
j  Anne  Seymour  Conway,  afterwards  Mr?.  Darner. 


30  LETTERS   OF   H.   WALPOLE.  [1736 

Jane  Stuart  :*  in  the  meantime,  Mr.  Ellis  is  dying  for  her,  and 
Lord  Holland's  young  Macartney  f  very  desirous  of  living  by 
her. 

The  fashionable  diversion  in  town  is  a  conjuror.  We  had 
him  last  night  at  my  Lady  Harrington's.  His  tricks  are  ten 
times  more  dexterous  than  Sandwich's. 

There  was  last  night  at  Guerchy's  J  a  daughter  of  Lord 
Dillon,  §  just  corne  out  of  a  convent,  who  is  to  be  the  future 
Duchess  of  Norfolk.  She  has  a  fine  person,  and  not  at  all  a 
disagreeable  face. 

The  Mecklenburgh  Countess  was  there  too,  ten  times  more 
dirty,  frowzy,  extravagant  and  mad  than  ever.  Prince  William 
has  said,  '  This  is  the  worst  sample  we  have  had  yet.'  I  begin 
to  think  he  will  not  command  the  army. 

My  Lord  Townshend  and  Charles  had  quarrelled  lately.  My 
Lady  made  a  reconciling  dinner  for  them,  and  all  was  made  up. 
As  soon  as  they  parted,  George  wrote  the  most  abusive  letter  in 
the  world  to  Charles,  and  they  are  rather  ill  together  again. 
Adieu ! 

Yours  ever,  J.  W. 


To  the  Dowager  Duchess  cPAiguillon. 

Strawberry  Hill,  Nov.  3d,  1766. 

One  cannot  repine,  Madam,  at  some  portion  of  illness,  when 
it  procures  one  such  marks  of  goodness  as  I  have  experienced, 
especially  from  your  Grace  ;  indeed,  it  grew  a  little  too  serious, 
and  I  began  to  think  that  I  should  not  live  to  pay  my  debts  of 
gratitude.  My  Lady  Hervey,  with  all  her  kindness  to  me  and 
her  partiality,  her  just  partiality,  to  France,  is  however  in  the 
wrong  to  attribute  any  part  of  my  illness  to  my  manner  of  living 
at  Paris.  I  came  from  thence  perfectly  well;  and,  to  say  the 
truth,  I  ascribe  much  more  to  the  damp  air  of  England  than  to 
any  course  of  life.  Yet  I  will  not  say  too  much  against  my 

*  Eldest  daughter  of  tlie  Minister,  Earl  of  Bute. 
f  Sir  George  (afterwards  Lord  Macartney)  who  married  her. 
£  Comte  de  Guerchy,  Ambassador  from  France. 

§  The  Duke  of  Norfolk  married  secondly,  in  1771,  Miss  FitzRoy  Scuda- 
rnore  of  Holme  Lacy,  county  Hereford. 


1766]  TO   THE   DUCHESS   D'AIGUILLON.  31 

own  country,  that  I  may  not  destroy  any  little  merit  I  may  have 
in  returning  to  Paris  this  winter.  I  neither  deserve  nor  expect 
any  sacrifice,  but  am  ready  to  sacrifice  anything  both  to  your 
Grace  and  Madame  du  Deffand,  who  have  both  shown  me  so 
many  marks  of  kindness  and  protection. 

Mr.  Hume  has,  I  own,  surprised  me,  Madam,  by  suffering  his 
squabble  with  Kousseau  to  be  published.  He  went  to  Scotland 
determined  against  it.  All  his  friends  gave  him  the  same  ad- 
vice ;  but  I  see  some  philosophers  can  no  more  keep  their  reso- 
lution than  other  philosophers  can  keep  their  temper.  If  he 
has  been  overpersuaded  from  Paris,  I  suspect  that  the  advice 
was  not  so  much  given  him  for  his  sake,  as  to  gratify  some 
spleen  against  Eousseau ;  and  that  his  counsellors  had  a  mind 
to  figure  in  the  quarrel ;  for  men  of  letters  delight  in  these 
silly  altercations,  tho'  they  affect  to  condemn  them.  It  spreads 
their  names,  and  they  are  often  known  by  their  disputes,  when 
they  cannot  make  themselves  talked  of  for  their  talents.  For 
my  own  part,  I  little  expected  to  see  my  letter  in  print,  as  your 
Grace  tells  me  it  is,  for  I  have  not  yet  seen  the  book.  I  have 
neither  been  asked  nor  given  any  consent  to  my  letter  being 
published.  I  do  not  take  it  ill  of  Mr.  Hume,  as  I  left  him  at 
liberty  to  show  it  to  whom  he  pleased  ;  I  am,  however,  sorry  it 
is  printed :  not  that  I  am  ashamed  of  any  sentiment  in  it,  es- 
pecially since  your  Grace  does  me  the  honour  of  approving  it ; 
but  I  think  all  literary  controversies  ridiculous,  impertinent,  and 
contemptible.  The  world  justly  despises  them,  especially  from 
the  arrogance  which  modern  authors  assume.  I  don't  know 
who  the  publishers  are,  nor  care  ;  I  only  hope  that  nobody  will 
think  that  I  have  any  connection  with  them.  Nor  have  I ;  tho'  I 
have  played  the  fool  in  print,  I  have  not  so  much  of  the  author 
as  to  think  myself  of  consequence  enough  to  trouble  the  world 
with  my  letters  and  quarrels.  Authors  by  profession  may,  at 
least  they  generally  do,  give  themselves  such  airs  of  dignity ; 
but  they  do  not  become  me.  However,  madam,  I  only  laugh  at 
all  this,  for  I  am  no  philosopher,  and  therefore  am  not  angry. 

I  am  told  it  is  asserted  that  I  have  owned  that  the  letter  to 
Eousseau  was  not  mine ;  I  wish  it  was  not,  for  then  it  would 
have  been  better.  I  told  your  Grace,  I  believe,  what  I  told  to 
many  more,  that  some  grammatical  faults  in  it  had  been  cor- 
rected for  me,  for  I  certainly  do  not  pretend  to  write  French 


32  LETTERS   OP   H.    WALPOLE.  [1766 

well ;  and  it  ought  to  be  remarked,  too,  that  the  letter  was  not 
written  in  the  name  of  a  Frenchman.  I  must  have  been  vain 
indeed  if  I  had  flattered  myself  that  I  could  write  French  well 
enough  to  be  mistaken  for  a  Frenchman.  The  book  too,  I 
hear,  says  that  the  real  author  ought  to  discover  himself.  I 
was  the  real  author,  and  never  denied  it.  But  is  not  it 
amusing,  madam,  to  hear  an  anonymous  author  calling  on 
somebody,  he  does  not  know  whom,  to  name  himself  ?  And  are 
not  such  authors  very  respectable  ?  I  shall  not  imitate  him,  nor 
ask  to  hear  the  publisher's  name :  I  do  not  believe  I  should  be 
much  the  wiser  for  knowing  it. 

I  am  told,  too,  that  my  letter  to  Eousseau  is  censured  in  this 
book.  It  is  very  mortifying  to  me,  to  be  sure,  that,  when  so 
many  persons  of  taste  had  been  pleased  with  that  letter,  it 
should  be  condemned  by  higher  authority;  but  it  is  not 
uncommon  for  men  of  taste  and  men  of  letters  to  be  of 
a  totally  different  opinion.  Nor  am  I  surprized  that  a  trifle, 
designed  as  a  jest,  and  certainly  never  intended  to  be  made 
public,  should  be  anathematized  by  their  holinesses  the  philo- 
sophers and  the  enemies  of  Eousseau.  It  looked  like  candour 
to  blame  me,  when  so  real  an  injury  was  meditated  against  him 
as  the  publication  of  his  absurd  letter  to  Mr.  Hume.  Philo- 
sophy is  so  tender  and  so  scrupulous  ! 

I  beg  your  Grace's  pardon  for  troubling  you  so  long.  You 
find  I  am  so  much  of  an  author,  that  I  contradict  myself,  and 
think  this  very  foolish  controversy  important  enough  to  employ 
two  pages.  Indeed  it  is  not ;  and  if  I  were  not  alone  in  the 
country,  I  should  not  have  thought  it  worth  two  lines.  Such  a 
real  genius  as  Eousseau  cannot  appear,  but  he  causes  all  the 
insignificant  scribblers  in  Europe  to  overwhelm  the  public  with 
their  opinions  of  him  and  his  writings.  But  he  may  comfort 
himself ;  his  works  will  be  admired  when  the  compilers  of  dic- 
tionaries and  mercuries  will  be  as  much  forgotten  as  your 
Grace's 

Most  obedient,  humble  servant, 

HORACE  WALPOLE. 


1767]    HIS   ACCOUNT  OP  CHARLES   TOWNSHEND's   SPEECH.     33 

In  a  letter  from  Horace  Walpole  to  Sir  Horace  Mann, 
dated  May  12th,  1767,  the  following  passage  occurs  : — 

[Nothing  was  ever  so  vexatious  !  I  had  just  written  you  a 
long  letter  of  three  sides,  and  laid  it  upon  the  hearth  to  dry, 
while  I  stepped  into  the  next  room  to  fetch  some  sealing  wax. 
A  coal  has  fallen  on  it,  and  I  find  it  all  in  flames.  I  have  not 
time  to  write  half  of  it  again.  I  will  just  run  over  the  heads,  if 
I  can  remember  them. 

My  chief  article  was  a  wonderful  speech  made  by  Charles 
Townshend  last  Friday,  apropos  to  nothing,  and  yet  about 
everything — about  ministers,  past,  present,  and  to  come — him- 
self in  particular,  whom  I  think  rather  past  than  to  come.  It 
was  all  wit  and  folly,  satire  and  indiscretion.  He  was  half- 
drunk  when  he  made  it,  and  yet  that  did  but  serve  to  raise  the 
idea  of  his  abilities.] 

The  following  account  of  Charles  Townshend's*  speech, 
dated  May  8th,  1767,  is  probably  the  'chief  article'  of 
the  burnt  letter  to  which  he  alludes.  Horace  Walpole 
sometimes  preserved  copies  of  his  letters,  but  in  this  case 
it  seems  more  probable,  though  dated  the  8th,  it  was  a 
memorandum  from  recollection  of  the  letter  he  had  in- 
tended sending  to  Sir  Horace  Mann. 

May  8th,  1767. 

Charles  Townshend  had  come  to  the  House  with  a  black  silk 
hanging  over  his  wounded  eye,  which  in  the  warmth  of  debate 
he  turned  aside,  and  discovered  two  very  small  slips  of  sticking- 
plaister  over  and  below  his  eye,  not  amounting  to  more  than 
scratches.  In  the  beginning  of  the  day  he  made  a  fine  speech, 
in  which  he  said  he  hoped  his  behaviour  in  the  conduct  of  the 
transaction  with  the  East  India  Company  had  wiped  out  the 
levities  and  imperfections  of  his  former  life ;  and  he  magnified 
his  own  firmness  in  having  borne  and  overborne  much  reproach 
and  contradiction,  which  he  insinuated  to  have  received  from 
Lord  Chatham,  whom  he  had  not  seen  during  the  winter.  At 

*  Honourable  C.  Townshend,    second  son   of  Charles  third  Viscount 
Townshend,  made  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  in  1766 ;  died  Sept.  1767. 
VOL.  II.  D 


34  LETTERS   OF  H.   WALPOLE.  [1767 

four  o'clock  he  left  the  House,  tho'  the  management  of  the  day 
depended  on  him  ;    and  taking  one  or  two  members  with  him, 
he  went  to  dinner.     His  presence  growing  absolutely  necessary, 
Mr.  Conway  sent  for  him.      He  returned  about  eight,  as  Mr. 
G-renville  was   speaking ;    after   whom  Townshend   rose,  half 
drunk,  and  made  the  most  extravagantly  fine  speech  that  ever 
was  heard.      It  lasted  an  hour,  with  torrents  of  wit,  ridicule, 
vanity,  lies,  and  beautiful   language.      Not  a  word  was  pre- 
meditated,  yet  every  sentence  teemed  with  various  allusions 
and  metaphors,  and  every  period  was  complete,  correct,  and 
harmonious.      His  variety  of  tones  and  gesticulation  surpassed 
the  best  actor  in  comedy,  yet  the  faltering  of  his  pronunciation 
from  liquor,  and  the  buffonery  of  his  humour  and  mimicry, 
would  not  have  been  suffered  in  high  comedy.     Nothing  had 
given  occasion  to  his  speech,  and  there  was  no  occasion  on 
which  it  would  not  have  been  as  proper,  or,  to  say  truth,  as  im- 
proper ;  for  if  anything  could  exceed  his  parts,  it  was  his  indis- 
cretion.    He  meant  to  please  everybody  and  exalt  himself ;  but 
lest  he  should  not  enough  distinguish  the  latter,  he  took  care  to 
overturn  all  he  had  done  to  effect  the  former.      The  whole  of 
his  speech  was  diverting  to  every  man  that  hated  any  set  of 
men ;  it  was  impertinent  and  offensive  to  all  it  described  or 
seemed  to  compliment ;  and  was  most  painful  to  those  who  had 
any  love  for  him.      The  purport  seemed  to  be  an  intention  of 
recommending  Kockingham's  party  for  ministers,  with  himself 
at  the  head  of  them ;  complimenting  but  sneering  at  Grenville, 
and  slightly  noticing   Conway.      But  lest  the  great  families 
whom  he  adopted  should  assume  too  much,  he  ridiculed  the 
incompetence  of  birth  and  high  blood,  cried  up  the  sole  advan- 
tage of  abilities  and  experience,  and  informed  those  he  pro- 
tected that  rank  was  not  talents,  and  that  they  must  wait  till 
ripened,  and  not  come  to  government  as  if  forced  in  a  hotbed. 
The  most  injurious  part  fell  on  the  Crown,  he  stating  the  mis- 
chiefs of  the  late  so  frequent  changes,  calling  for  restitution  of 
the  first  post  in  administration  to  the  House  of  Commons,  and 
treating  the  actual  ministry  as  no  longer  existent.      Govern- 
ment, he  said,  must  not  continue  to  be  what  he  himself  was 
always  called,  a  weather-cock. 

Nobody  but  he  could  have  made  that  speech ;  and  nobody 
but  he  would  have  made  it,  if  they  could.  It  was  at  once  a 
proof  that  his  abilities  were  superior  to  those  of  all  men,  and 


1767]    HIS  ACCOUNT  OP  CHARLES  TOWNSHEND's  SPEECH.     35 

his  judgment  below  that  of  any  man.  It  showed  him  capable 
of  being,  and  unfit  to  be,  first  minister.  Yet  tho'  it  was  rather 
the  tittle-tattle  of  a  coffee-house,  and  the  flower  of  table  elo- 
quence, still  was  it  the  confusion  of  affected  and  laboured 
oratory.  Nature  in  him  made  sport  with  rules  and  meditation  ; 
and  half  a  bottle  of  champagne,  poured  on  genuine  genius,  had 
kindled  this  wonderful  blaze. 

The  House  was  in  a  roar  of  rapture,  and  some  clapped  their 
hands  with  ecstacy,  like  audience  in  a  theatre.  Nor  was  it  the 
least  striking  circumstance  of  this  speech,  that,  laying  his  hand 
on  his  heart,  he  called  God  to  witness  that  he  had  not  been 
made  privy  to  the  business  of  the  day.  Fourteen  of  the  minis- 
terial managers,  who  then  were  actually  sitting  round  him, 
had  concerted  with  him  the  motion  at  Townsh end's  own  house 
that  very  morning,  and  were  thunderstruck  at  his  madness  and 
effrontery  ;  and  when  Conway,  the  moment  he  concluded,  asked 
him  how  he  could  utter  such  a  falsehood,  he  thought  it  the  most 
favourable  way  of  recommending  the  business  to  the  House. 

In  this  speech,  he  beat  Lord  Chatham  in  language,  Burke  in 
metaphors,  Grenville  in  presumption,  Rigby  in  impudence, 
himself  in  folly,  and  everybody  in  good-humour ;  for  he  pleased 
while  he  provoked  at  random ;  was  malicious  to  nobody,  cheerful 
to  all ;  and  if  his  speech  was  received  with  delight,  it  was  only 
remembered  with  pity. 

The  letter  addressed  to  the  Duchesse  de  Choiseul  ap- 
pears to  have  been  written  in  December  1770,  when 
Horace  Walpole  writes  thus  to  Sir  H.  Mann  : — '  The  Due 
de  Choiseul  is  fallen.  Abishag  (Madame  du  Barry)  has 
strangled  an  administration  that  had  lasted  fourteen 
years.  I  am  sincerely  grieved  for  the  Duchesse  de  Choi- 
seul, the  most  perfect  being  I  know  of  her  sex.' 

To  the  Duchess  of  Choiseul. 

Pendant  que  la  France  entiere  vous  marquoit  ses  regrets, 
madame,  je  n'osois  pas  vous  importuner  des  miens.  Mais  le 
triomphe  de  la  vertu  doit-il  se  borner  a  un  seul  pais?  La 
reconnoissance  et  la  plus  parfaite  estime  ne  trouveront-elles 

D2 


36  LETTERS   OF   H.   WALPOLE.  [1784 

pas  un  moment  a  se  faire  entendre  ?  Oui,  chere  grandmaman, 
je  perds  le  respect,  qui  vous  est  du  a  tant  d'egards,  pour  epan- 
cher  mon  cceur  avec  plus  de  liberte  et  de  tendresse.  Je  me 
rejouis  avec  vous,  car  de  quoi  vous  plaindre  ?  Avez-vous  ete 
ambitieuse,  avare,  insolente  ?  Sont-ce  des  creatures  qui  vous 
regrettent,  ou  des  malheureux  ?  Monsieur  le  Due  de  Choiseul 
est-il  condamne  de  sa  patrie  et  de  vous,  ou  approuve  et 
comble  de  louanges  ?  Est-il  plus  doux  de  deviner  ce  que  la 
posterite  dira  de  nous,  ou  de  1'entendre  de  la  bouche  de  sa 
patrie  et  de  toute  1'Europe  ?  Oh  !  vraiment  je  benis  le  ciel  de 
m'avoir  donne  un  pere  et  un  grand-pere  dont  la  gloire  ne  fait 
qu'accroitre  tous  les  jours,  et  a  qui  il  ne  manquoit  que  la  dis- 
grace pour  fixer  1'immortalite.  Oui,  oui,  belle  maman,  il  faut 
vous  center  ce  qu'on  dit  de  papa  Choiseul ;  et  cela  ne  vient  pas 
d'une  voix  suspecte.  My  Lord  Chatham  a  dit  en  plein  parlement, 
que  depuis  feu  M.  le  Cardinal  de  Eichelieu  la  France  n'avoit 
point  possede  un  aussi  grand  ministre  que  M.  le  Due  de  Choiseul, 
et  qu'il  avoit  emporte  les  regrets  de  tous  les  ordres  de  1'etat.  Voila 
comme  parlent  les  veritables  grands  hommes,  qui  s'y  entendent. 
Notre  peuple,  qui  ne  connoit  M.  de  Choiseul  que  par  la  peur 
qu'il  leur  avoit  faite,  a  une  maniere  de  louer  toute  differente,  et 
se  felicite  de  sa  chute.  Ce  n'est  pas  un  eloge  a  mepriser. 

Votre  fermete  et  la  noblesse  de  votre  ame,  madame,  m'as- 
surent  que  parmi  tant  de  sujets  de  gloire,  vous  n'oublierez  pas 
entierement  un  homme  que  vous  avez  comble  de  bontes,  et  qui 
vous  est  attache  par  la  reconnoissance  et  par  1'admiration  de 
toutes  vos  belles  qualites.  Permettez-moi  de  conserver  le  doux 
titre  de  votre  petit-fils,  et  laissez-moi  m'enorgueillir,  comme  si 
j'etois  grand  prince,  sans  merite  des  vertus  de  mes  ancetres.  Ma 
foi,  je  ne  les  troquerois  pas  centre  un  Cardinal  de  Eichelieu, 
trop  flatte  si  s'ose  me  signer, 

Madame, 
Votre  tr&s-affectionne  et  tres-fidele  serviteur, 

HORACE  WALPOLE  de  Choiseul. 


My  Answer  to  the  Rev.  Wm.  Mason. 

[Berkeley  Square,  Feb.  2,  1784. 

I  thank  you  for  your  condolence  on  the  death  of  my  brother, 
and  on  the  considerable  diminution  of  my  own  fortune,  tho' 


1784]  TO   THE   REV.  WM.  MASON.  37 

neither  are  events  to  which  I  am  not  perfectly  reconciled.  My 
brother  was  seventy-seven,  had  enjoyed  perfect  health  and 
senses  to  that  age,  did  not  even  begin  to  break  till  last  August, 
suffered  no  pain,  saw  death  advance  gradually  tho'  fast  with 
the  coolest  tranquillity,  did  not  even  wish  to  live  longer,  and 
died  both  with  indifference  and  without  affectation :  is  that  a 
termination  to  lament  ? 

I  do  lose  fourteen  hundred  a  year  by  his  death ;  but  had  I 
reason  to  expect  to  keep  it  so  long  ?  I  had  twice  been  offered 
the  reversion  for  my  own  life,  and  positively  refused  to  accept 
it,  because  I  would  receive  no  obligation  that  might  entangle 
my  honour  and  my  gratitude,  and  set  them  at  variance.  I 
never  did  ask  or  receive  a  personal  favour  from  my  most  inti- 
mate friends  when  in  power,  tho'  they  were  too  upright  to  have 
laid  me  under  the  same  difficulties,  and  have  always  acted  an 
honest  uniform  part :  but  tho'  I  love  expense,  I  was  content 
with  a  fortune  far  above  any  merit  I  can  pretend  to,  and  knew 
I  should  be  content  were  it  much  lessened.  As  it  would  be 
contemptible  to  regret  the  diminution  at  sixty-six,  there  is  no 
merit  in  being  quite  easy  under  the  loss.  But  you  do  me 
honour  I  do  not  deserve,  in  complimenting  me  on  not  loving 
money.  I  have  always  loved  what  money  would  purchase,  which 
is  much  the  same  thing ;  and  the  whole  of  my  philosophy  con- 
sists in  reconciling  myself  to  buying  fewer  baubles  for  a  year  or 
two  that  I  may  live,  and  when  the  old  child's  baby-house  is 
quite  full  of  playthings. 

I  am  surprised  that  you  expected  me  to  take  notice  of  Lord 
Harcourt's  turning  courtier.  It  did  not  astonish  me  in  the 
least,  as  I  have  known  for  near  two  years  that  such  an  event 
was  by  no  means  improbable,  and  did  myself  try  to  contribute 
to  it,  when  I  thought  it  not  at  all  irreconcileable  with  his  former 
conduct:  nor  do  I  wonder  at  your  announcing  in  effect  the 
same  of  yourself.  Were  I  surprised,  I  should  contradict  one  of 
*my  own  maxims,  which  I  have  scarce  or  never  known  to  fail, 
and  which  is,  that  men  are  always  most  angry  with  those  with 
whom  they  quarrel  last,  which  generally  produces  reconciliations 
between  those  whose  hatreds  agree  in  eodem  tertio.  But,  in 
truth,  I  concern  myself  with  no  man's  politics  but  my  own ; 
first,  because  I  have  no  more  right  to  dictate  to  others,  than  I 
will  allow  anybody  to  dictate  to  me ;  and  secondly,  because  I 


38  LETTERS   OF  H.   WALPOLE.  [1784 

can  see  into  no  heart  but  my  own,  nor  know  its  real  motives  of 
action.  My  own  point  has  been  to  be  consistent,  ever  since  I 
first  thought  on  politics,  which  was  five-and-forty  years  ago ; 
and  I  feel  a  satisfaction  in  having  been  so  steady,  because  it 
seems  to  me,  if  I  do  not  deceive  or  flatter  myself,  that  it  is  a 
proof  that  I  have  acted  on  principle,  and  not  from  disappoint- 
ment, resentment,  passion,  interest,  or  fickleness. 

It  made  me  smile>  indeed,  when  I  heard  that  Lord  Harcourt, 
on  his  change,  had  given  away  his  ring  of  Brutus  to  Lady 
Jersey's  little  boy ;  because  I  do  not  see  how  anything  that  has 
happened  within  this  twelvemonth  has  affected  the  character  of 
Brutus,  who  died  seventeen  hundred  years  before  the  coalition 
was  thought  on.  I  am  glad,  however,  that  if  I  change,  I  may 
keep  my  Caligula  without  committing  treason. 

Your  distinction  of  the  Crown's  friends  is,  I  own,  too 
theologic  a  refinement  for  my  simple  understanding,  who  never 
conceived  a  confusion  of  two  natures  in  one  person,  yet  still 
remaining  separate.  Nor  in  human  affairs  should  I  comprehend 
why  a  pope's  disgracing  himself  as  a  gentleman  by  the  means 
of  duplicity,  should  make  one  fall  in  love  with  his  tiara.  Do 
you  think  I  should  accept  for  sound  reasoning,  if  you  were 
capable  of  telling  me  that,  tho'  you  vowed  in  a  sermon  that  you 
would  never  be  a  bishop,  yet  your  gown  being  distinct  from 
you,  you  could  see  no  reason  why  your  gown  might  not  be 
turned  into  lawn  sleeves  ? 

What  miracles  the  new  set  of  men  that  are  to  arise  are  to 
achieve,  I  neither  know  nor  care ;  I  shall  be  out  of  the  question 
before  that  blessed  millennium  arrives ;  unless  they  are  already 
come,  as  perhaps  they  are — and  for  that,  too,  I  cannot  have  long 
to  care ;  tho'  I  firmly  believe  that  your  new  set  will  only  effect 
what  has  often  been  tried  before,  and  what  you  say  ought  to  be 
tried,  i.  e.,  to  prove  themselves  the  Crown's  friends ;  an  act  of 
loyalty  which  I  dare  to  say  the  wearer  will  be  the  first  to 
pardon. 

You  see,  by  my  using  the  same  liberality  of  correspondence,  I 
approve  of  yours.  I  am  above  disguising  my  sentiments,  and 
am  too  low  for  any  man  to  disguise  his  to  me.  Mine,  indeed, 
having  no  variety  in  them,  must  be  less  entertaining ;  and  there- 
fore, unless  I  take  a  freak  of  hobbling  to  court,  you  can  have 
no  curiosity  to  hear  them.  Nor  should  I  have  mentioned  them 


1784]      EXPLANATION  OF   LETTER  TO   EEV.  WM.  MASON.         39 

now,  but  that  I  thought  it  respectful  to  you  and  candid,  when 
you  communicated  yr  new  sentiments  to  me,  to  tell  you  that 
mine  remain  unaltered. 

I  cannot  conceive  why  you  think  that  I  shall  not  like  your 
tragedy:  am  I  apt  to  dislike  your  writings?  Tho'  I  am  too 
sincere  to  flatter  you  when  I  think  you  unequal  to  yourself,  I 
did  reckon  that  I  was  one  who  had  taste  enough  to  be  sensible 
to  the  utmost  of  the  beauties  of  yr  capital  works  ;  and  tragedy 
is  certainly  not  a  walk  in  which  I  can  believe  you  will  miss 
your  way — you  have  trodden  more  difficult  paths  with  the 
happiest  facility.  I  shall  be  glad  to  see  your  piece,  when  you 
will  indulge  me  with  it,  and  am 

Yours  ever, 

HOKACE  WALPOLE.] 

Explanation  of  Mr.  Tf.'s  Letter  to  Mr.  M.* 

Mr.  Mason,  Gr.  S.  Earl  of  Harcourt,  and  Mr.  H.  Walpole 
were  intimate  friends,  and  agreed  in  condemning  the  K.'8  mea- 
sures. But  at  the  end  of  the  year  1783,  when  Mr.  Ch.  Fox  pro- 
duced his  famous  E.  India  bill,  Mr.  Mason  and  Ld  Harcourt, 
without  even  the  slightest  hint  to  Mr.  Walpole,  changed  sides 
totally,  and  tho'  Mr.  W.  dined  with  the  Earl  in  private  but  the 
very  day  before  Ld  H.  voted  against  that  bill,  he  did  not  drop 
a  syllable  of  his  intention,  nor  of  his  design  of  going  to  court, 
which  he  had  not  done  for  some  years ;  yet  he  had  acquainted 
Mr.  Mason,  or  rather,  I  believe,  had  been  persuaded  by  him 
secretly  to  take  those  steps ;  and  when  they  were  taken,  Mr. 
Mason  wrote  an  authoritative  letter  to  Mr.  Walpole  approving 
that  conduct,  and  presumptuously  flatteriDg  himself,  even  without 
giving  any  reason  for  their  total  tergiversation,  that  he  should 
influence  Mr.  Walpole  to  take  the  same  part.  Mr.  W.  thought  it 
became  him  to  treat  such  treacherous  and  impertinent  behaviour 
as  it  deserved,  and  to  let  Mr.  M.  see  that,  with  all  his  admira- 
tion of  Mr.  Mason's  satiric  abilities  in  poetry,  Mr.  W.  neither 
feared  his  anger,  nor  w4  suffer  him  to  govern  his  principles. 
Mr.  W.'s  answer  received  none ;  and  tho'  Mr.  M.  continued  to 

*  In  Mr.  Cunningham's  edition  of  H.  Walpole's  letters,  the  explanation  to 
the  foregoing  letter  is  taken  from  a  book  called  '  Walpoliana ; '  that  which  is 
here  given  is  taken  from  a  MS.  in  Walpole's  own  handwriting.  __ 


40  LETTERS   OF   H.    WALPOLE.  [1794 

visit  him  for  a  year  or  two,  a  total  coolness  ensued,  and  all 
correspondence  by  letters  ceased. 

Lady  Harcourt,  who  during  Ld  Eockingham's  short  adminis- 
tration had  overwhelmed  Mr.  W.  with  letters,  two  or  three  in  a 
day,  to  get  her  lord  a  place,  which  he  had  tried  in  vain,  was 
made  lady  of  the  bedchamber ;  and  she  and  her  lord  became 
a  proverb,  even  to  courtiers,  of  the  most  servile  attachment  to 
their  Majesties,  tho'  both  had  forsworn  St.  James's  on  the 
King's  and  Queen's  neglect  of  them  on  the  unfortunate  death 
of  the  Earl's  father ;  and  his  lordship,  besides  wearing  a  ring 
of  Brutus  with  the  daggers  and  ides  of  March,  had  given  away 
the  portraits  of  King  and  Queen,  their  presents  to  the  late  Earl. 

Mr.  Mason  had  preached  a  sermon  at  York  against  the  Arch- 
bishop, in  which  he  declared  he  never  wd  be  a  bishop,  and  was 
going  to  print  it,  but  had  been  dissuaded  by  Mr.  Walpole  from 
making  such  a  rash  vow  in  print.  Mr.  Mason  hated  Lord 
Kockingham  and  Mr.  Fox. 

The  K.  had  approved  of  and  encouraged  the  D.  of  Portland 
and  Mr.  Fox  on  their  India  bill,  and  then  commanded  even  the 
lords  of  his  own  bedchamber  to  vote  against  it. 

Mr.  W.  has  a  very  fine  antique  bust  in  bronze  of  Caligula. 

The  Opposition  had  for  many  years  complained  of  that  knot 
of  devotees  to  the  court,  who  affected  to  call  themselves 
the  King's  friends ;  and  nobody  had  been  more  determined 
against  them  than  Ld  Harcourt  and  Mason. 

Mr.  Pitt,  when  in  opposition,  had  supported  Mason's  and 
Wyvill's  project  of  altering  the  representation  of  Parl.,  and 
Mason,  no  doubt,  expected  wd  promote  it  when  become  minister ; 
but  he  disappointed  him :  and  Mr.  Pitt,  on  the  contrary,  gave 
a  capital  blow  to  the  House  of  Commons  by  maintaining  him- 
self by  the  prerogative  against  a  majority  of  that  House,  which 
proved  that  Mr.  W.  had  foreseen  rightly  of  the  new  set  of  men. 

Mason's  capital  work  indisputably  was  the  Heroic  Epistle  to 
Sr  William  Chambers. 

Unknown  to  whom  addressed. 

May  27,  1794. 

DEAR  SR, — An  idea  has  arisen  in  my  thoughts,  on  which  I 
have  a  great  desire  to  consult  you,  not  minutely,  but  in  general, 
and  this  for  two  reasons :  the  first,  because  I  have  not  extended 


1794]  FLAX   FOR   INSPIRING   PATRIOTISM.  41 

or  weighed  the  idea  sufficiently  myself;  and  the  second,  because 
the  season  is  not  yet  arrived  to  carry  the  design  (supposing  it 
should  be  proper  and  practicable)  into  execution. 

My  wish  is,  that  all  who  live  under  our  present  unprece- 
dentedly  happy  constitution,  composed  of  King,  Lords,  and 
Commons,  should  be  grounded  from  their  earliest  youth  in  such 
a  firm  attachment  to  that  matchless  system,  in  such  undivided 
ardour  of  patriotism  for  that  trinitarian  but  one  composition, 
that  no  monarchic  or  republican  doctrines,  no  factious  or  inte- 
rested views,  no  attachment  to  political  leaders  or  dictators,  may 
ever  be  able  to  detach  them  from  the  great  principles  of  the 
constitution. 

It  is  undesirable  that  we  have  no  system  of  education  at  all 
calculated  for  impressing  such  essential  patriotism.  Parents 
content  themselves  with  breeding  up  their  children  in  their  own 
principles  ;  that  is,  of  talking  before  their  children  with  a  bias 
towards  Whig  or  Tory  principles ;  and  the  masters  or  tutors 
appointed  are  probably  chosen,  if  principles  enter  into  the  con- 
sideration, for  being  supposed  of  the  same  party  as  the  parent. 
If  the  tutor  or  master  be  a  clergyman,  he  will  doubtless  instill 
into  his  pupil  a  due  respect  for  the  Church,  which,  tho'  incor- 
porated by  law  into  the  general  system,  is  not  a  specific  part  of 
our  tripartite  constitution,  tho'  admitted  into  it,  and  which  I 
would  preserve  there  for  (perhaps  a  singular)  reason.  I  mean, 
looking  on  the  complex  body  of  higher  and  lower  clergy  as  a 
pin  that  tends  to  support  that  third  part  of  the  constitution,  the 
Crown,  which  might  be  too  much  weakened  if  deprived  of  that 
buttress,  should  a  contest  arise  between  the  Crown  and  the  two 
other  branches  of  the  legislature,  who,  possessing  the  whole 
landed  property  of  the  kingdom,  might  be  an  overmatch  for  the 
third  power ;  and  since  the  union  of  the  three  has  produced  and 
preserved  our  unexampled  system,  and  raised  this  country  to 
such  a  summit  of  glory  and  wealth,  with  perfect  freedom,  it 
would  be  madness  to  shake  an  edifice  so  cemented,  in  order  to 
try  speculative  experiments  and  reforms  which  might  endanger, 
but  could  not  augment,  our  general  felicity.  The  happiness  of 
the  whole  is  not  to  be  risked  to  humour  a  few  visionaries. 

After  this  short  introduction,  I  will  sketch  my  novel  idea. 

I  would  have  an  exposition  of  our  triformed  constitution 
drawn  up,  showing  how,  in  its  contexture  and  consequences, 


42  LETTERS   OP  H.   WALPOLE. 

it  is  preferable  to  all  systems  of  government  yet  invented.  (I 
do  not  detail  more  on  this  head  here),  but  when  stated  in  the 
strongest  and  clearest  manner,  and  then  reduced  to  a  corollary 
of  implicit  faith,  I  would  have  all  schools,  seminaries,  colleges, 
universities,  obliged  to  inculcate  this  creed  into  all  the  youth 
committed  to  their  care,  and  a  plan  of  education  a  little  more 
necessary  to  a  Briton  than  Greek  and  Latin,  tho'  I  do  not  desire 
to  exclude  or  interfere  with  the  instruction  into  those  languages 
— far  from  it.  If  a  code  of  constitutional  doctrine  could  be 
formed,  I  would  have  it  subdivided.  I  would  have  an  accidence 
of  short  aphorisms  or  axioms  extracted  for  young  beginners ; 
larger  grammars  for  the  adults,  and  these  only  taught  in  short 
lessons  on  holidays,  and  without  punishments  annexed,  that  the 
learners  might  have  no  disagreeable  sensations  annexed  to  what 
I  wish  to  have  them  love — the  constitution.  Lectures  in  the 
manner  of  sermons  might  be  delivered  once  a  week  to  the  dis- 
ciples of  all  ages,  and  the  love  of  our  country  and  its  beautiful 
constitution  inculcated  by  every  art  possible. 

You,  my  dear  Sr,  would  be  infinitely  more  able  than  I  am  to 
dilate  these  rude  hints  into  a  valuable  and  practicable  system. 
My  object  is  to  raise  a  spirit  of  enthusiasm  for  our  constitution 
into  our  young  and  future  countrymen  ;  and  as  my  plan  would 
attach  them  to  each  branch  of  the  legislature,  not  one  of  the 
three  can,  or  at  least  ought  to  be  averse  from  adopting  it  by  law, 
if  it  were  better  digested,  and  a  patriotic  code  formed,  which  it 
would  be  the  interest  of  all  the  three  powers  to  sanction.  All 
opposition  that  should  tend  to  annihilate  any  one  of  the  three 
powers  would  be  baffled,  if  the  bigotry  of  the  nation  to  the  esta- 
blished constitution  were  predominant. 


Unknown  to  whom  addressed. 

I  am  not  at  all  sorry,  Sr,  for  the  little  misunderstanding  that 
has  happened,  both  as  it  has  procured  me  a  most  obliging  letter 
from  you,  and  as  it  gives  me  an  opportunity  of  explaining  my 
expressions  by  Mr.  Bedford,  which  I  hope  you  will  give  me 
leave  to  do,  yet  as  briefly  as  I  can,  for  your  time,  S%  is  precious, 
tho'  mine  is  not. 

If  I  had  the  pleasure  of  being  better  known  to  you,  you  would 
not  have  been  surprised  at  my  message.  Being  a  very  subor- 


TO  AN  UNKNOWN  CORRESPONDENT.  43 

dinate  officer  of  the  Exchequer,  I  have  always  known  it 
was  my  duty  to  receive  the  commands  of  my  superiors  the 
Lords  of  the  Treasury  with  respect  and  obedience,  and  to  give 
them  any  information  that  they  please  to  demand  within  my 
small  province.  I  once  received  a  parallel  order  from  Mr. 
Eobinson,  as  Mr.  Bedford  can  tell  you,  and  behaved  with  the 
like  deference.  Allow  me  to  add,  that  Mr.  Bedford  will  always 
be  ready,  Sr,  to  comply  with  yr  commands,  either  with  regard  to 
any  information  he  can  give  you  or  in  other  particulars. 

It  is  very  true,  Sr,  that  at  first  I  did  imagine  that  there  might 
be  a  farther  view  in  your  inquiry ;  but  I  was  not  less  ready  to 
obey  it.  When  the  Commissioners  of  Accounts  sent  for  Mr. 
Bedford,  I  gave  him  the  most  positive  orders  to  lay  before  them 
the  most  minute  details  of  my  office,  and  to  answer  circumstan- 
tially their  every  question,  as  I  would  resign  my  place  to-morrow 
rather  than  hold  it  by  any  subterfuge  or  disguise.  I  owe  every 
thing  I  have  to,  the  Crown  and  the  public,  and  certainly  by  no 
merit  in  myself.  I  should  deserve  to  lose  all  were  I  capable  of 
any  deceit.  When  there  has  been  any  question  on  patent  places, 
I  have  thought  it  most  respectful  to  await  the  determination  of 
the  legislature  in  silence:  and  therefore  resolved  neither  to 
make  interest  to  save  myself  from  what  should  be  thought 
necessary  for  the  public ;  nor,  as  I  have  great  contempt  for 
ostentation,  not  to  affect  to  be  willing  to  give  up  my  right,  as  I 
do  not  believe  that  any  man  really  desires  to  have  his  fortune 
lessened ;  tho'  I  flatter  myself  that  nobody  is  less  disposed  to 
prefer  his  private  interest  to  that  of  the  public. 

These  sentiments,  Sr,  led  me  into  the  mistake  which  you  have 
been  pleased  so  obligingly  to  clear,  for  which  I  beg  you  to  receive 
my  sincere  thanks.  May  I,  Sr,  entreat  you  likewise  to  offer  like 
respectful  thanks  to  Lord  Shelburne  ?  I  am  very  sensible  of 
his  lordship's  kind  attention,  to  which  my  insignificance  has  no 
pretensions ;  and,  therefore,  my  gratitude  can  but  be  the  greater. 
I  would  thank  his  lordship  myself,  but  he  can  have  no  time  to 
throw  away  on  complimentary  letters;  and  I  have  taken  up 
but  too  much  of  yours.  I  have  the  honour  to  be  with  great 
regard,  Sr, 

Yr  most  obedient  and  most  obliged  humble  Ser*, 

HOK.  WALPOLE. 


44  LETTEKS   OF   H.   WALPOLE. 

As  there  are  still  a  few  persons  (tho'  truly  very  few)  who  are 
so  idle  and  weak  as  to  bewilder  themselves  in  the  Chattertonian 
Controversy,*  and  who  would  rob  the  poor  lad  of  the  honour  of 
having  imposed  on  them  by  his  forgeries ;  and  who  having  mis- 
carried in  reestablishing  his  credit,  still  vow  vengeance  on  one 
who  has  aided  to  dissipate  the  delusion ;  it  would  perhaps  be 
cruel  to  destroy  their  harmless,  tho'  silly,  pastime,  which  hurts 
nobody ;  and  vain  to  attempt  to  set  a  man  right  who,  by  invent- 
ing falsehoods  to  justify  his  mistake,  shows  he  is  conscious  of 
being  in  the  wrong.  I,  tho'  invited  to  resume  the  trifling  con- 
test, am  less  called  upon  than  most  men  to  enter  the  lists, 
especially  against  masked  antagonists,  as,  having  once  told  my 
whole  story  simply,  with  unimpeached  veracity,  and  to  general 
satisfaction,  I  declared  I  would  not  waste  a  word  more  on  the 
subject,  of  which  everyone  but  two  or  three  old  and  early  con- 
verts, is  heartily  weary ;  for  whatever  pity  accompanies  a  detected 
impostor,  this  is  not  an  age  in  which  his  ashes  raise  new  prose- 
lytes. When  Tom  Paine  is  hanged,  his  disciples  will  not  be 
numerous. 

If  I  violate  my  own  resolution,  it  is  not  to  revive  the  contro- 
versy but  to  leave  a  memorial  behind  me,  that  shall  baffle  the 
future  aspersions  that  I  am  persuaded  are  prepared  and  meant 
to  substantiate  the  exploded  charge  of  ill-usage  of  Chatterton, 
as  soon  as  I  shall  be  no  more.  My  adversaries  keep  back  and 
dare  not  publish  my  letter  of  kind  advice  to  that  unhappy  lad, 
tho'  no  doubt  they  are  possessed  of  it,  as  well  as  of  my  first 
letter  to  him,  which  they  have  printed  to  show  that  at  the  first 
moment  I  was  imposed  upon  by  him.  Why  are  they  not  as 
industrious  to  authenticate  the  other  ?  No,  it  would  do  honour 
to  my  sensibility,  and  their  object  has  been  to  represent  me  as 
harsh,  cruel,  and  in'solent  to  him,  which  that  I  ever  was,  they 
must  suppress  my  kind  letter,  and  forge  one  in  a  contrary  style, 
to  make  believed — and  if  such  letter  is  produced,  Eowley  will 
have  written  it  as  much  as  I  did. 

I  will  now  trace  the  steps  by  which  this  scarce-gasping  contest 
has  been  attempted  to  be  set  again  upon  its  legs,  for  while  a 

*  See  Letters  and  Papers  relating  to  Chatterton,  pp.  205  to  239  (vol.  iv. 
4to.  edition  of  Lord  Orford's  Works),  amongst  which  this  Memorial  is  not 
included. 


THE  CHATTERTON  CONTROVERSY.          45 

spark  of  life  remains,  there  is  no  case  so  desperate  for  which 
some  physician  or  other  will  not  be  found  to  prescribe. 

Chatterton  was  too  young  and  had  too  much  parts  to  have 
attained  that  summit  of  antiquarian  excellence,  the  dull  accu- 
racy of  dates,  and  consequently  his  forgeries  were  ill-adapted 
to  the  barbarous  style  and  narrow  discoveries  of  the  dark 
ages  for  which  he  pretended  to  model  his  compositions.  He 
attributed  beautiful  imagery  to  monks  who  had  no  imagina- 
tion, and  antedated  arts  by  whole  centuries,  in  which  ingenious 
discoveries  would  have  been  imputed  to  magic  sooner  than  to 
genius.  But  as  in  all  ages  there  are  men  of  monkish  blindness, 
Chatterton  was  believed  when  he  coined  the  most  palpable 
improbabilities,  and  a  real  genius  of  the  seventeenth  century 
persuaded  his  converts  that  his  works  had  been  the  productions 
of  the  barbarous  fourteenth  in  which  they  would  have  been  un- 
intelligible. A  black  from  the  coast  of  Gruinea  would  as  soon 
have  understood  his  African  eclogue  because  it  has  the  names  of 
some  African  rivers,  as  the  good  folks  of  Bristol  would  have 
comprehended  the  phraseology  of  Olla,  tho'  sprinkled  with  some 
English  words  now  obsolete.  Had  the  imaginary  Eowley  existed 
and  written  for  the  stage,  he  would  probably  have  penned  Mys- 
teries, not  Dramas  on  the  Greek  model,  of  which  he  could  never 
have  heard  ;  but  Chatterton  had  never,  I  suppose,  heard  of  the 
Mysteries,  or  he  would  have  lent  some  translation  of  them  to 
Eowley — to  the  complete  satisfaction  of  our  antiquaries,  who 
must  internally  be  a  little  shocked  at  a  classic,  and  consequently 
a  heathen  tragedy,  issuing  from  the  gloom  of  a  convent  at 
Bristol.  Credulity's  darling  apothegm  is  Credo  quia  impossi- 
bile  est,  and  its  faith  increases  in  proportion  as  it  is  confuted ;  for 
faith  ceases  to  be  faith,  and  becomes  conviction  when  it  rests 
upon  demonstration.  Faith  dwells  in  the  clouds,  demonstration 
on  a  rock. 


An  article  which  appeared  in  the  '  Sun '  in  October 
1797,  elicited  a  letter  of  contradiction  from  the  nephew 
and  heir  of  Sir  Horace  Mann,  and  which  also  explains 
Lord  Orford's  repossession  of  his  own  letters  addressed 
for  so  many  years  to  his  friend  at  Florence. 


46  H.  WALPOLE'S  MISCELLANEOUS  PIECES.          [1797 

In  the  SUN  of  2d  October,  1797. 

The  late  Lord  Orford  had  designed  to  publish  his  corre- 
spondence with  the  late  Sir  Horace  Mann,  and  for  this  purpose 
ordered  most  of  his  letters  to  be  transcribed,  making  such  omis- 
sions as  he  thought  proper.  The  originals  were  then  returned 
to  the  present  Sir  Horace  Mann,  who  will  not  permit  the  letters 
to  be  printed,  alleging  that  having  the  originals  in  his  possession 
the  copyright  is  vested  in  himself.  With  this  hiatus,  how- 
ever, the  works  of  Lord  Orford  are  likely  to  make  five  volumes 
in  quarto. 

In  the  SUN  of  4th  October,  1797. 

SIR, — I  must  positively  contradict  a  paragraph  in  your  paper 
in  which  there  is  not  the  slightest  foundation  of  truth.  A  cor- 
respondence for  many  years  subsisted  between  Lord  Orford  and 
Sir  Horace  Mann.  Whenever  I  returned  from  frequent  visits 
into  Italy,  I  brought  with  me  by  Lord  Orford's  express  com- 
mands all  the  letters  he  had  written  to  my  uncle  to  the  period 
of  my  return.  They  were  sealed  up  in  a  packet  and  delivered 
by  me  into  Lord  Orford's  own  hands,  who  gave  an  injunction  that 
no  copy  should  previously  be  taken  of  any  one  of  them.  I  can- 
not therefore  have  it  in  my  power  to  withhold  the  publication, 
or  have  the  least  idea  of  any  copyright  being  vested  in  me,  as 
is  maliciously  represented,  for  the  originals  never  were  returned 
to  me,  nor  can  I  have  the  smallest  claim  to  them.  They  are 
by  Lord  Orford's  will  submitted  to  the  disposal  of  the  most 
honorable  and  intelligent  persons,  whose  understanding  will 
point  out  to  them  what  are  proper  for  publication. 

I  am,  Sir,  your  obedient  Servant, 

HORACE  MANN. 

Egerton  Farm,  Maidstone,  Oct.  3, 1797. 
To  the  Editor  of  the  '  Sun.* 


DETACHED  THOUGHTS. 

It  is  said  that  Congreve  had  too  much  wit  in  his  comedies. 
It  is  a  pity  that  no  comic  author  has  had  the  same  fault. 

A  Gothic  cathedral  strikes  one  like  the  enthusiasm  of  poetry ; 
St.  Paul's,  like  the  good  sense  of  prose. 

I  would  never  dispute  about  anything  but  at  law,  for  there 


DETACHED   THOUGHTS.  47 

one  has  as  much  chance  as  another  of  getting  the  better  without 
reason. 

*  Liars  are  like  the  old  writs  of  kings  that  were  signed  Teste 
Meipso,  for  they  have  no  witnesses  but  themselves. 

*  It  is  wrong  to  dispute,  as  one  may  set  out  in  the  wrong, 
and  then  one  is  sure  to  remain  so,  for  one  not  only  grows  heated, 
but  partial  to  one's  own  arguments,  and  then  one  remains  in  the 
wrong. 

*  By  the  throngs  at  places  in  England   where  waters  are 
drunk,  a  foreigner  would  conclude  that  this  is  the  most  un- 
healthy country  in  Europe  ;  but  it  is  a  proof  of  the  reverse,  for 
nine  in  ten  go  thither  from  health  and  spirits,  and  to  dance  and 
game  and  be  diverted,  for  one  who  goes  from  illness. 

A  dead  language  is  the  only  one  that  lives  long,  and  is  unlike 
the  dead,  for  by  being  dead,  it  avoids  corruption. 

*  Indiscreet  persons,  who  say  all  they  think  and  tell  all  they 
know,  put  others  on  their  guard  not  to  trust  to  them. 

In  former  ages  men  were  afraid  of  nothing  but  cowardice. 
Even  riches,  which  now  make  men  fond  of  life  and  consequently 
timid,  then  made  men  brave,  for  everybody  was  forced  to 
defend  his  own  property,  or  the  stronger  would  have  invaded  it. 

*  Most  writers  on  Government  make  a  great  mistake  when 
they  suppose  that  laws  were  made  for  the  benefit  of  society. 
More  laws  have  been  made  for  the  interest  of  individuals  than 
for  the  good  of  the  community.   When  an  individual  has  power 
of  making  laws,  he  makes  them  for  himself  and  against  others. 

Of  all  the  Virtues  Gratitude  has  the  shortest  memory. 

*  Otway  perhaps  took  the  names  of  Castalio  and  Polidore  in 
his  '  Orphan '  from  Castor  and  Pollux. 

There  are  playthings  for  all  ages:  the  plaything  of  old 
people  is  to  talk  of  the  playthings  of  their  youth. 

Man  is  an  aurivorous  animal. 

History  is  a  romance  that  is  believed;  romance,  a  history 
that  is  not  believed. 

Montaigne  pleased  because  he  wrote  what  he  thought — other 
authors  think  what  they  shall  write. 

This  world  is  a  comedy  to  those  who  think,  a  tragedy  to  those 
who  feel. 

*  The  asterisks  indicate  those  '  thoughts '  that  have  not  been  published 
before. 


48  H.  WALPOLE'S  MISCELLANEOUS  PIECES. 

Our  Passions  and  our  Understandings  agree  so  ill,  that  they 
resemble  a  Frenchman  of  quality  and  his  wife,  who  tho'  they 
live  in  the  same  house  together,  have  separate  apartments, 
separate  beds,  go  different  ways,  are  seldom  together,  but  are 
very  civil  to  each  other  before  company ;  and  then  the  Passions, 
like  the  lady,  affect  to  have  great  deference  for  their  husband  the 
Understanding. 

*  The  Eeformation  in  England  was  so  short  of  what  it  ought 
to  have  been,  that  in  reality  it  was  only  a  re-formation. 

*  The  line  in  Horace,  Quo  teneam  vultus,  &c.,  might,  if  cor- 
rected in  the  stoppage,  be  applied  to  people  who  frequently 
change  their  principles  ;  thus — 

Quo  teneam  vultus  mutantem  Protea  ? — nodo— by  a  halter. 

It  is  idle  to  attempt  to  talk  a  young  woman  in  love  out  of 
her  passion.  Love  does  not  lie  in  the  ear. 

Whoever  expects  pity  by  complaining  to  his  physician  is  as 
foolish  as  they  who  having  lost  their  money  at  cards  complain 
of  their  ill-luck  to  their  companions  the  winners.  If  none 
were  ill  or  unfortunate,  how  would  physicians  and  gamesters 
get  money? 

Beauty  after  five  and  thirty  is  like  a  forfeited  peerage,  the 
title  of  which  is  given  by  the  courtesy  of  the  well-bred  to  those 
who  have  no  legal  claim  to  it. 

Albano's  boy-angels  and  Cupids  are  all  so  alike,  that  they 
seem  to  have  been  the  children  of  the  Flemish  Countess  who 
was  said  to  be  delivered  of  365  at  a  birth. 

*  A  good  character  is  the  only  wealth  a  man  can  keep  up 
which  will  be  his  after  his  death. 

Persons  extremely  reserved  are  like  old  enamelled  watches, 
which  had  painted  covers  that  hindered  your  seeing  what  o'clock 
it  was. 

Many  new  pieces  please  on  first  reading,  if  they  have  more 
novelty  than  merit.  The  second  time  they  do  not  please,  for 
surprise  has  no  second  part. 

An  author  without  originality  is  like  a  courtier  who  is  always 
dressed  in  the  fashion ;  nobody  minds  the  colour  or  make  of  his 
coat ;  if  it  is  ill-made,  it  is  criticised ;  if  not,  what  can  be  said 
on  it  ?  hundreds  are  dressed  as  well.  Booksellers  and  salesmen 
lay  up  the  book  or  the  coat  the  moment  the  fashion  of  it  is  past, 
till  they  can  sell  either  into  the  country. 


DETACHED   THOUGHTS.  49 

*  Some  faces  change  so  little  that  they  look  as  if  they  had 
been  made  once  for  all. 

If  a  man's  eyes,  ears,  or  memory  decay,  he  ought  to  con- 
clude that  his  understanding  decays  also,  for  the  weaker  it  grows, 
the  less  likely  is  he  to  perceive  it. 

*  Motto  for  Captain  Coram,  who  instituted  the  Foundling 
Hospital : 

Corain  quem  quaeritis,  adsum. 

*  In  the  Bas  Empire,  the  Komans  had  two  parties,  the  Blue 
and  the  Green.     Those  colours  would  be  very  convenient  in  all 
times  when  men  change  sides  so  often.     No  two  colours  are  so 
easily  confounded.     A  man  of  the  blue  party  going  over  to  the 
green  might  pretend  he  had  always  been  of  a  bluish  green. 

*  It  is  probable  that  the  eyes  of  no  two  persons  see  objects 
alike.     Each  object  may  appear  larger  or  smaller,  or  darker  or 
lighter,  or  of  a  different  hue  to  one  man  from  what  it  does  to 
another.     This  may  be  one  of  the  causes  why  some  see  more  or 
less  beauty  in  a  woman  than  others  do;  and  why  some  see 
resemblances  between  two  faces,  that  to  another  do  not  seem  to 
resemble. 

Envy  deserves  pity  more  than  anger,  for  it  hurts  nobody  so 
much  as  itself.  It  is  a  distemper  rather  than  a  vice,  for  nobody 
would  feel  envy  if  he  could  help  it.  Whoever  envies  another, 
secretly  allows  that  person's  superiority. 

*  An  epic  poem  is  a  mixture  of  history  without  truth  and  of 
romance  without  imagination. 

*  Old  persons,  who  are  too  juvenile  for  their  age,  give  no  proof 
so  strong  of  their  loss  of  memory  as  by  not  remembering  that 
they  are  nearer  to  their  second  childhood  than  to  their  first. 

When  flatterers  compliment  kings  for  virtues  that  are  the 
very  reverse  of  their  characters,  they  remind  me  of  the  story  of 
a  little  boy  who  was  apt  to  tell  people  of  any  remarkable  defect 
in  their  persons.  One  day  a  gentleman  who  had  an  extraordi- 
narily large  nose  being  to  dine  with  the  boy's  parents,  his 
mother  charged  him  not  to  say  anything  of  the  gentleman's 
large  nose.  When  he  arrived,  the  child  stared  at  him,  and  then 
turning  to  his  mother  said,  *  Mamma,  what  a  pretty  little  nose 
that  gentleman  has  ! ' 

*  A  woman  in  a  riding  habit  is  something  between  a  man 
and  a  portmanteau. 

VOL.  II.  E 


50  H.  WALPOLE'S  MISCELLANEOUS  PIECES. 

Experience  becomes  prescience. 

Nothing  is  more  vain  than  for  a  woman  to  deny  her  age,  for 
she  cannot  deceive  the  only  person  who  cares  about  it — herself. 
If  a  man  dislikes  a  woman  because  he  thinks  her  of  the  age  she 
is,  he  will  only  dislike  her  the  more  for  being  told  that  she  is 
younger  than  she  seems  to  be,  and  consequently  looks  older  than 
she  ought  to  do.  The  Anno  Domini  of  her  face  will  weigh 
more  than  that  of  her  register. 

Censorious  old  women  betray  three  things :  one,  that  they 
have  been  galant ;  the  next,  that  they  can  be  so  no  longer ;  and 
the  third,  that  they  are  always  wishing  they  could  be. 

*  An  old  woman  who  pretends  to  be  religious  and  yet  propa- 
gates scandal  is  the  reverse  of  charity,  which  covers  a  multitude 
of  sins :    She  uncovers  all  she  knows,  or  suspects,  or  invents. 

No  woman  ever  invented  a  new  religion  :  yet  no  new  religion 
would  ever  have  spread  but  for  women.  Cool  heads  invent 
systems,  warm  heads  embrace  them. 

*  The  advantage  of  truth  over  falsehood  is,  that  the  former 
can  never  be  detected. 

Posterity  always  degenerates  till  it  becomes  our  ancestors. 

It  is  unfortunate  to  have  no  master  but  our  own  errors.  If 
we  profit  ever  so  much  under  them,  the  unjust  public  always 
recollect  the  master,  more  than  they  take  notice  of  the  improve- 
ment of  the  scholar. 

*  The  heart  of  man  would  not  bear  to  be  examined  in  a 
microscope. 

Men  are  capable,  often,  of  greater  things  than  they  perform. 
They  are  sent  into  the  world  with  bills  of  credit,  on  which  they 
seldom  draw  to  the  full  extent. 

*  It  is  possible  that  the  pyramids  of  Egypt  may  last  so  long 
that  they  may  come  to  be  supposed  to  be  the  tombs  of  some 
kings  who  are  not  yet  born. 

Motto  for  Congreve's  '  Old  Batchelor  ' : — 

Nolito  front!  credere,  nupsit  heri. — Mart. 


Epic  Poetry  is  the  art  of  being  tiresome  in  verse ;  of  excluding 
half  the  passions,  and  most  of  the  ingredients  that  constitute 
amusement.  It  is  an  Index  Expurgatorius  for  wit ;  a  monopoly 
of  gaping,  and  utter  prohibition  of  laughter.  Nobody  may  joke 
in  an  epic  poem  except  a  god,  and  that  only  upon  some  occasion 


THOUGHTS   ON   GOVERNMENT.  51 

that  is  not  dignus  vindice.  A  hero  may  now  and  then  attempt 
a  sarcasm,  but  then  it  must  be  a  very  clumsy  one.  An  Epic 
Poem  must  be  a  tragedy  that  does  not  make  you  melancholy. 
You  must  not  be  concerned  for  any  person  slain  in  it,  except 
for  a  young  man  or  two,  who  is  introduced  only  to  be  killed. 
The  action  must  be  one :  you  must  be  as  long  as  possible  before 
you  bring  it  about ;  and  whenever  the  catastrophe  is  inevitable, 
you  must  digress  to  something  that  will  make  the  reader  forget 
how  near  you  are  to  the  conclusion.  Above  all  things  you  must 
allow  that  an  Epic  Poem  is  the  most  sublime  work  that  can  be 
achieved ;  you  must  own  that  there  are  not  above  five  or  six 
good  epic  poems  in  the  world,  and  you  must  totally  forget  that 
the  men  who  wrote  them  might,  in  half  the  time  wasted  on 
such  senseless  productions,  have  produced  works  in  other  kinds 
ten  times  more  worthy  of  immortality.  An  Epic  Poem  is  like 
the  Tower  of  Babel,  which  answered  no  end,  and  with  the 
stones  and  labour  bestowed  on  which  might  have  been  built 
many  excellent  fabrics. 

THOUGHTS  ON  GOVERNMENT. 

The  world  is  divided  into  men  of  sense  and  fools,  but  un- 
equally. Strength  is  pretty  near  imparted  alike  to  all ;  but  the 
majority,  having  little  sense,  would  make  an  improper  use  of 
their  strength.  Self-love  being  equal  in  all,  a  man  of  sense 
would  turn  his  strength  to  advantage.  I  do  not  know  whether 
it  was  a  strong  fool,  or  strong  man  of  sense,  that  first  employed 
his  sense  to  render  others  subject  to  him :  probably  the  latter. 
But  all  men  have  sense  enough  to  see  the  inconvenience  of 
being  subject  to  brutal  force.  Men  of  sense,  who  had  not 
strength  enough  to  resist  the  force  of  a  combination  of  fools,  or 
the  artifices  of  sense  endued  with  force,  invented  laws  and  govern- 
ment. For  such  was  certainly  the  origin  of  both,  and  not  that 
silly  idea  of  patriarchal  authority.  It  could  strike  the  common 
sense  of  nobody,  that,  because  a  man  was  fit  to  govern  his  own 
children,  he  was  therefore  fit  to  govern  a  whole  people.  No  man 
is  fit  for  it,  because  no  man  can  do  it  alone.  He  must  have 
ministers,  deputies,  substitutes ;  and  if  they  abuse  their  power, 
all  his  fitness  will  not  enable  him  to  correct  their  errors  or 
crimes.  If  he  punishes  or  removes  them,  he  is  equally  liable  to 
be  mistaken  in  his  choice  of  their  successors. 

E  2 


52  H.  WALPOLE'S  MISCELLANEOUS  PIECES. 

Government  being  once  established,  and  accompanied  with 
power,  made  a  new  division  of  mankind  into  knaves  and  fools ; 
in  which  the  latter  were  always  reduced  to  be  imposed  on  and 
governed  by  the  former ;  till  ambition  and  self-love  invented 
Hereditary  Power;  and  ever  since  that  time,  more  fools  have 
enjoyed  royalty  than  wise  men ;  because  artful  men  had  laid 
the  foundations  of  hereditary  power  on  such  solid  ground,  that 
subsequent  artful  men  could  not  remove  them  ;  and  the  number 
of  fools  born  being  greater  than  that  of  wise  men,  there  are  far 
more  foolish  kings  than  wise. 

If  we  believe  that  Government  had  not  this  origin,  but  was 
designed  for  the  benefit  of  mankind,  as  most  say  they  suppose, 
its  present  existence  would  be  more  abhorrent  from  its  institu- 
tion than  the  hypothesis  above.  It  cannot  be  for  the  interest  of 
a  community  that  its  chief  magistrate  should  be  maintained  in 
an  opulence  and  splendour  that  impoverishes  the  greater  part  of 
his  subjects.  It  is  not  for  their  good  that  he  should  have  power 
to  put  to  death,  imprison  or  banish  them,  at  his  will.  It  is  not 
for  their  advantage  that  his  ministers,  officers,  substitutes,  should 
have  like  power  delegated  to  them.  It  is  not  for  their  advan- 
tage that  he  should  have  an  imaginary  honour  and  dignity,  in 
support  of  which  he  should  employ  his  subjects  in  war ;  that  he 
should  have  power  to  expose  them  in  battle  to  revenge  his  per- 
sonal quarrels,  or  indulge  his  ambition.  All  these  and  a  thou- 
sand more  are  absurd  prerogatives,  and  not  only  not  for  the 
benefit  of  the  community,  but  to  their  great  detriment.  Pre- 
rogatives affected  to  the  Crown,  and  for  the  sole  advantage  of 
the  wearer  of  it,  and  prejudicial  to  its  subjects,  are  contradic- 
tions totally  repugnant  to  the  idea  of  a  good  government,  and 
ipso  facto  annihilate  it.  An  army  greater  than  is  necessary  to 
defend  the  country  from  invasion  and  oppression  by  a  foreign 
enemy,  is  destructive  of  the  good  of  that  country ;  not  only  as 
it  may  invade  its  liberty,  but  as  it  employs  too  many  men  who 
might  be  more  usefully  employed. 

Such  is  the  nature  of  man,  that  a  king  had  rather  reign  over 
vast  solitudes  than  over  a  small  free  nation.  Conquest  is  the 
blackest  crime  against  society,  because  no  man  has  a  right  to 
force  any  number  of  men  to  be  his  subjects :  I  mean  by  con- 
quest, the  ambition  of  acquiring  dominions  to  which  a  king 
has  no  right.  It  is  a  crime  both  to  the  invaded,  and  to  those 


PLAN   FOR   ENCOURAGING   PAINTING.  53 

whom  he  leads  to  invasion.     And  every  man  that  falls  in  the 
quarrel  is  murd'ered  by  the  king. 

A  king  that  violates  the  laws  of  his  country,  and  is  expelled 
or  dethroned  by  his  subjects,  is  not  less  guilty  if  he  attempts  to 
recover  his  crown  by  force.  All  nations  have  a  right  to  prescribe 
the  terms  on  which  they  choose  to  be  governed  ;  and  if  the  king 
has  sworn  to  conform  to  those  laws,  and  does  not  keep  his  oath, 
he  is  a  criminal  in  the  highest  sense  of  the  word. 

Any  endeavour  of  extending  his  power  beyond  the  laws  of 
which  he  is  king,  is  a  violation  of  those  laws,  and  he  deserves 
to  be  punished.  To  support  him  in  his  attempts  is  treason 
against  the  community. 

No  nation  can  make  laws  for  posterity  without  posterity 
having  equal  right  to  repeal  them.  No  man  can  be  born  with 
a  right  to  oppress  others.  No  man  is  of  a  nature  superior 
to  other  men.  He  is  as  fallible  as  they.  A  crown  gives  no 
superior  virtue  or  wisdom  ;  but  it  demands  more  of  both ; 
because  a  king,  who  is  only  a  chief  magistrate,  ought  to  have 
virtue  and  wisdom  not  only  to  govern  but  to  set  an  example  to 
his  people.  His  vices  are  more  detrimental  than  those  of  a 
private  man ;  and  a  vicious  king  weakens  the  laws,  which  are 
made  to  discountenance  as  well  as  to  punish  vice.  An  ambitious, 
an  avaricious,  or  a  prodigal  king  encourages  those  vices  in  his 
ministers  and  in  his  people  by  his  example  ;  and  if  he  punishes 
those  vices  in  others  which  he  practises  himself,  he  is  unjust.  He 
is  bound  not  only  to  be  virtuous  himself,  but  to  choose  virtuous 
men  for  his  ministers  and  servants ;  for  as  he  cannot  himself 
execute  all  the  duties  of  his  magistracy,  he  is  responsible  for 
those  to  whom  he  delegates  his  power.  The  most  virtuous  king 
is  obliged  to  take  care  that  he  tolerates  no  vicious  persons  about 
him,  and,  if  he  is  really  virtuous,  he  will  tolerate  none.  A  vir- 
tuous king  may  have  a  hypocritic,  but  never  will  have  a  profligate 
court.  He  is  a  judge  of  men's  outward  professions,  if  not  of 
their  hearts.  The  appearances  of  virtue  will  have  some  effects ; 
those  of  profligacy  can  have  none. 


PLAN    FOR    ENCOURAGING    PAINTING. 

It  is  a  common  complaint  that  in  England  there  is  little 
or  no  encouragement  for  historic  painting;  and  it  is  almost 
as  common  an  answer,  that  as  historic  pictures  are  seldom 


54  H.  WALPOLE'S  MISCELLANEOUS  PIECES.          [1735 

admitted  into  churches,  and  as  our  churches  have  each  but  one 
altar,  there  are  few  public  places  fitted  to  receive  large  pieces. 
The  first  objection  might  be  removed  in  some  degree  by  the 
following  plan  ;  and  the  second  is  not  only  not  true,  but  proper 
spaces  will  be  pointed  out  by  the  same  plan. 

Many  funds  for  historic  paintings  might  be  pointed  out  with 
small  inconvenience  to  the  contributors.  Suppose  every  Arch- 
bishop of  Canterbury  was  obliged  to  pay  3001.  within  three 
years  after  his  promotion  to  the  see,  or  rather  one  hundred  each 
year,  for  only  the  three  first  years,  which  at  his  grace's  option 
should  either  go  to  a  fund  for  furnishing  historic  pictures  on 
scriptural  or  historic  English  subjects,  or  should  pay  for  one 
picture  on  such  a  subject,  which  picture  should  be  placed  in 
the  palace  at  Lambeth,  and  always  remain  there. 

The  Archbishop  of  York  should  in  the  same  space  of  three 
years  pay  2001.  in  like  manner  for  the  archiepiscopal  palace  in 
Yorkshire. 

The  Bishops  of  London,  Durham,  and  Winchester,  2501. 
for  the  ornament  of  their  palaces.  Ely  and  Worcester,  2001. 
Other  bishops  less  in  proportion  to  their  incomes. 

Thence  their  palaces,  naked  as  they  are,  and  stripped  on 
every  death,  would  still  have  some  decoration,  and  the  arts 
would  spread  into  the  counties. 

Every  bishop  should  pay  the  sum  allotted,  if  he  remain  three 
years  before  translated.  And  if  translated,  after  three  years, 
be  should  pay  again,  being  translated  to  a  better  see. 

The  Lord  Chancellor  should  in  like  manner  pay  3001.  if 
continued  in  office  three  years,  or  1001.  for  each  that  he  did 
remain.  The  picture  paid  for  by  him,  or  by  a  fund  from  the 
following  years,  should  represent  some  English  historic  subject, 
some  memorable  sera  of  the  Constitution,  or  some  remarkable 
trial  or  cause ;  and  the  picture  should  be  hung  in  the  Court  of 
Kequests,  in  the  Painted  or  Princes  Chambers. 

The  Chief  Justices,  being  for  life,  should  pay  3001. ;  the 
Chief  Baron  and  Master  of  the  Eolls,  2001.  each ;  the  Attorney 
and  Solicitor  Generals,  2001.  each,  if  remaining  in  place  three 
years,  or  in  proportion.  The  pictures  on  the  subjects  and  for 
the  like  positions. 

The  Speakers  of  the  Houses,  2001.  each,  if  three  years  in 
office;  the  subjects  like  the  former,  or  on  any  memorable 
debates. 


1785]  PLAN    FOR   ENCOURAGING    PAINTING.  55 

The  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury,  being  of  very  uncertain 
tenure,  should  only  pay  IOOL  a  year,  according  to  his  duration, 
and  never  after  three  years. 

The  First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty  to  contribute  in  the  same 
manner. 

The  pictures  furnished  by  the  Treasurers,  to  adorn  the  Trea- 
sury, and  when  that  full,  the  House  in  Downing  Street.  The 
subjects,  English  historic. 

The  Admirals,  naval  engagements,  &c.,  for  the  Admiralty. 

The  two  Secretaries  of  State,  and  other  great  officers  might 
be  taxed  in  proportion,  and  the  Palaces  of  St.  James's  or  Ken- 
sington be  adorned  by  their  contributions. 

No  contributor  should  be  allowed  to  give  his  own  portrait  in 
lieu  of  an  historic  picture. 

Perhaps  it  would  be  better  to  have  all  the  contributions  go  to 
a  separate  fund  for  each  class,  and  be  laid  out  whenever  a  proper 
subject  was  fixed  on,  and  a  price  agreed  on  of  300L,  400/.,  or 
5001.  according  to  the  size  of  the  picture,  and  merit  and  price 
of  the  painter. 

A  standing  committee  to  fix  on  the  subjects,  and  regulate  the 
prices  and  dimensions.  The  costume  of  every  age  in  every 
picture  to  be  strictly  observed. 

The  City  of  London  might  find  some  similar  methods  for 
decorating  the  Mansion  House  and  Company  Halls. 

Feb.  9, 1785. 

THOUGHTS  ON  THE  REIGN  OF  GEOKGE  III. 

Few  reigns  in  our  annals  have  been  distinguished  by  so  many 
changes  of  administration  as  that  of  George  III.  James  I.  very 
frequently  in  the  latter  part  of  his  time  displaced  Ministers, 
particularly  his  High  Treasurers ;  but  they  never  were  his  Prime 
Ministers :  they  were  promoted  or  removed  by  the  caprices  of 
his  rash  and  presumptuous  young  favourite,  the  Duke  of  Buck- 
ingham. King  William,  as  wise  as  James  and  George  were 
foolish,  was  forced  to  change  his  administrations  by  the  factious 
struggles  of  the  Whigs  and  Tories,  the  latter  of  whom  were  his 
enemies,  and  the  former  unsteady  friends.  George,  aiming  at  no- 
thing but  personal  power,  and  sacrificing  the  dignity  of  his  crown, 
the  interest  of  his  kingdoms,  and  frequently  his  own  peace  to 


56  H.  WALPOLE'S  MISCELLANEOUS  PIECES. 

accomplish  that  sole  object,  could  bear  no  Minister  who  would 
not  be  a  tool,  and  removed  every  man,  when  he  could,  who  was 
fit  to  be  his  servant.  He  commenced  his  reign  by  disgusting 
Mr.  Pitt,  who  had  raised  Great  Britain  to  a  height  of  glory  it 
had  never  before  attained,  and  who,  tho'  far  more  ostentatious 
than  solid,  had  endeared  himself  to  the  nation  by  fortunate 
rashness,  and,  which  was  of  still  more  importance,  had  struck 
terror  into  all  our  enemies.  This  great  man  was  driven  away 
to  make  room  for  a  wretch  who,  with  as  much  vanity  as  Mr. 
Pitt,  and  resembling  him  in  no  one  essential,  and  whom  the 
King  himself  had  grown  to  hate,  before  he  raised  him  to  the 
head  of  the  administration,  sweeping  away  in  the  same  breath 
that  ridiculous  and  impotent  veteran,  the  Duke  of  Newcastle, 
who  had  had  the  address  to  engross  much  power  during  the 
administration  of  Sir  K.  Walpole,  who  did  not  love  him, 
and  knew  himself  betrayed  by  him,  and  who  associated 
himself  with  Mr.  Pitt,  during  the  plenitude  of  the  latter's 
power.  Lord  Bute's  pusillanimity  anticipated  his  incapacity, 
and  he  fled  from  his  post  before  he  had  time  to  show 
how  totally  he  was  unfit  for  it.  A  momentary  triumvirate  of 
Lord  Egremont,  Lord  Halifax,  and  Mr.  George  Grenville 
stepped  into  the  vacancy,  because  no  system  was  ready,  and 
because  the  King  had  a  predilection  for  nobody.  These  men, 
mistaking  chance  for  abilities  in  themselves,  neither  ingratiated 
themselves  with  the  King,  nor  would  condescend  to  pay  court 
to  the  self-dethroned  favourite,  who,  from  habitude,  retained 
more  of  the  royal  confidence  than  any  other  man,  and  who  had 
hoped  to  find  substitutes  who  might  at  once  stand  between  him 
and  the  danger  of  responsibility,  and  who  would  submit  to  be 
actuated  by  his  influence.  Finding  himself  disappointed,  he 
had  the  folly  to  fly  to  the  man  whose  power  he  had  usurped, 
Lord  Chatham,  who  would  not  have  been  implacable  if  the 
King  had  not  already  conceived  the  idea  of  employing  no  man 
who  would  not  stoop  to  be  a  cypher.  The  mutual  intrac- 
tability of  His  Majesty  and  Lord  Chatham  vested  the  sole  power 
in  Mr.  Grrenville,  who  had  many  ingredients  that  fitted  him 
for  the  place  of  Minister,  but  wanted  as  many  to  make  him  a 
Great  Minister,  and  more  that  would  suit  the  temper,  views,  and 
insincerity  of  the  King.  Grenville  was  firm,  intrepid,  daring ; 
he  was  also  immeasurably  obstinate,  avaricious  for  himself,  and 


THOUGHTS  ON  THE  KE1GX  OF  GEORGE  III.      57 

triflingly  penurious  for  the  revenue.  He  was  tedious,  un- 
gracious, implacable ;  and  not  content  with  seeking  every 
opportunity  of  being  revenged  on  the  nominal  favourite,  he 
refused  the  King  inconsiderable  sums  for  his  amusement,  and 
teased  him  for  unreasonable  grants  to  himself.  Is  it  necessary 
to  say  that  want  of  judgment  crowned  all  his  bad  qualities  ? 
At  the  moment  that  he  had  raised  a  convulsion  in  America  by 
his  offensive  Stamp  Act,  his  hatred  to  the  favourite  induced  him 
to  join  in  a  public  insult  to  the  King's  mother.  Such  conduct 
had  its  natural  consequence.  Grenville  was  disgraced,  and  Lord 
Chatham  being  betrayed  by  his  friend,  Lord  Temple,  who  had 
chosen  that  conjuncture  to  be  reconciled  to  his  brother  Gren- 
ville, again  refused  the  administration,  which  the  King,  from 
having  no  choice  left,  was  forced  to  put  into  the  hands  of  Lord 
Rockingham,  who,  disdaining  to  be  the  lieutenant  of  the  nominal 
favourite,  and  proscribing  the  King's  secret  tools,  who  in  reality 
had  the  confidence  which  the  favourite  only  seemed  to  possess, 
the  new  administration  was  suffered  to  remain  but  a  single  year, 
and  Lord  Chatham  was  once  more  called  to  power,  and  accepted 
it,  tho'  with  scarce  an  adherent  left. 

Never  was  a  greater  fall !  That  wild  intoxication  which, 
seconded  by  fortune,  had  been  so  happily  applied  to  military 
Quixotism,  was  by  no  means  adapted  to  the  sobriety  of  peaceful 
councils.  Whether  the  insanity  remained,  when  the  fire  of 
adventure  had  subsided,  or  whether,  conscious  of  his  own  defects, 
he  preferred  the  imputation  of  disordered  intellects  to  the  con- 
fession of  incapacity,  Lord  Chatham  had  scarce  resumed  his  power 
before  he  totally  suspended  the  exercise  of  it,  and,  which  indeed 
was  rather  an  evidence  of  delirium,  he  retained  his  superin- 
tendence, tho'  he  obstinately  refused  to  officiate. 

The  nation  had  for  some  years  beheld,  or  thought  it  descried, 
a  real  Minister  behind  the  curtain,  who  interposed  his  credit 
without  holding  an  office.  Here  was  the  reverse — a  Minister  in 
whose  name  all  business  was  transacted,  but  who  would  exercise 
no  part  of  his  function. 

From  so  strange  a  position  arose  the  authority  of  the  Duke 
of  Grafton.  He  had  been  delegated  by  Lord  Chatham,  who 
sullenly  saw  him  grow  Minister  from  the  exigence  of  the  mo- 
ment, and  who  still  would  neither  be  consulted  by  him  nor 
forgave  him  for  acting  without  his  orders. 


58  H.  WALPOLE'S  MISCELLANEOUS  PIECES. 

Grrafton  proved  a  Minister  after  the  King's  own  heart.  No 
merit,  no  talents  had  recommended  him ;  he  was  indolent ;  his 
Lad  temper  created  no  adherents ;  his  pride  was  unsocial,  and 
he  was  content  to  be  prompted  by  the  secret  Junto.  His 
behaviour,  his  negligence,  and  the  variations  in  his  ill-humour, 
occasioned  such  universal  discontent,  that  even  the  prerogative 
majority  in  the  House  of  Commons  was  shaken,  and,  subservient 
as  the  Minister  was,  the  King's  influence  grew  into  as  great 
danger  as  if  his  Minister  had  been  formidable  to  himself.  It 
is  probable  that  the  Junto  instilled  a  panic  into  the  Duke  him- 
self, tho'  they  were  by  no  means  satisfied  that  they  were  provided 
with  an  adequate  successor.  Lord  North,  the  Duke's  second, 
was  tried,  and  more  than  repaired  the  breach. 

With  as  much  indolence  as  Graft-on,  North  had  infinitely 
more  parts,  an  excellent  temper,  an  amiable  private  character, 
most  conciliating  sociability,  never-failing  wit,  and  a  steady  reso- 
lution of  pliancy  to  all  his  Majesty's  prejudices.  This  inveterate 
submission,  most  commonly  in  contradiction  to  his  own  judgment, 
proved  his  ruin.  Acquiescence  in  all  the  worst  measures  of  the 
American  War,  and  negligence  in  the  execution  of  them  all, 
awakened  even  the  prostitute  majority  in  the  House  of  Commons. 
The  royal  perseverance  in  that  odious  and  impolitic  war,  and 
Lord  North's  compliance  with  his  master's  infatuation,  cost  the 
one  America,  and  the  other  his  post  of  Prime  Minister. 

If  Lord  Shelburne  could  have  waited  to  undermine  Lord 
Eockingham,  or  to  wait  for  his  death,  which  was  imminent,  he 
might  have  reduced  the  King  to  the  necessity  of  submitting  to 
the  spirit  of  the  Constitution ;  but  Shelburne  was  impatient  to 
be  Minister,  and  liked  to  become  so  by  treachery  rather  than 
by  patience.  He  broke  the  party  to  pieces,  by  transacting  a 
settlement  with  the  King  rather  than  with  his  allies,  and  by 
that  means  succeeded  Lord  Eockingham,  who  died  in  two 
months.  But,  having  undermined  his  own  ground,  Shelburne 
had  no  strength  but  what  the  King  should  please  to  impart  to 
him  ;  nor  did  that  weight  suffice  against  his  own  folly  and  false- 
hood, which,  by  the  beginning  of  next  year,  overset  him.  The 
King's  anguish  was  inexpressible,  not  at  losing  Shelburne,  whom 
he  both  hated  and  despised,  but  at  being  forced  to  accept  an 
administration  of  honest,  able  men,  whom  he  could  not  bend  to 
his  own  purposes.  He  offered  the  Treasury  to  the  boy  Pitt,  who 


THOUGHTS  ON  THE  REIGN  OF  GEORGE  III.      59 

in  the  compass  of  five  days  twice  accepted  it  and  twice  had  not 
courage  to  undertake  it, — a  want  of  spirit  that  it  cost  him  nine 
months  to  surmount. 

The  Duke  of  Portland,  enforced  by  the  matchless  abilities  of 
Mr.  Fox,  became  Minister,  and  commenced  a  system  that  pro- 
mised reparation  to  many  of  the  evils  inflicted  on  this  country 
by  the  fatal  measures  of  the  reign.  But  Mr.  Fox  daring  to 
attack  that  detestable  incorporation  of  harpies,  the  East  India 
Company,  and  its  servants,  or  rather  its  masters,  the  King  per- 
ceived that  the  worst  enemies  of  this  country  were  now  presented 
to  him  as  most  useful  allies,  and  therefore,  adopting  their  fears 
and  vengeance,  and  borrowing  their  plunder  in  aid  of  his  own 
exhausted  treasury,  he  at  once  dismissed  his  new  Ministers,  and 
threw  himself  into  the  hands  of  Lord  Temple,  almost  as  young 
and  inexperienced  as  Pitt,  but,  fortunately  for  the  latter,  a 
greater  coward.  Lord  Temple  fled  the  very  moment  that  he 
had  lent  himself  to  the  removal  of  the  Ministers,  and  Pitt,  whose 
presumption  had  sighed  for  nine  months  over  his  last  faint- 
heartedness, catched  at  a  third  offer  of  power,  and  determined 
to  varnish  over  his  timidity  by  excess  of  insolence  and  abuse 
of  those  who  had  had  more  spirit  than  himself,  and  a  much 
greater  degree  of  spirit,  for  they  knew  they  could  not  trust  the 
King,  and  Pitt  was  sure  of  his  support  as  long  as  he  was  sub- 
servient. 

That  ground  he  secured  by  open  prostitution  of  his  former 
professions,  declaring  himself  the  Minister  of  the  Crown.  On 
that  foundation  he  stands  at  present,  and  finds  it  a  pedestal 
which  his  extreme  ignorance  has  not  as  yet  been  able  to  over- 
turn, tho'  defeated,  forced  to  abandon,  or  to  correct,  every 
measure  he  has  hitherto  attempted. 

He  must  continue  to  support  and  extend  prerogative,  or  he 
will  be  sacrificed  by  the  King.  If  his  abilities  prove  equal  to 
the  task  of  enlarging  the  power  of  the  Crown,  he  will  have  the 
glory  of  being  an  able  Minister  at  the  most  premature  age,  but 
instead  of  being  remembered,  like  his  father,  for  glorious  services, 
he  will  be  contrasted  with  him,  and  paralleled  with  Cardinal 
Richelieu. 

From  this  slight  view  or  sketch,  it  is  obvious  that  every 
disgrace  and  misfortune  that  has  fallen  on  the  King  has  pro- 
ceeded from  only  those  Ministers  whom  he  himself  approved. 


60  H.  WALPOLE'S  MISCELLANEOUS  PIECES.          [1779 

By  removing  Lord  Chatham,  Lord  Bute  was  enabled  to  strike 
up  the  shameful  Peace  of  Paris,  which  saved  France  and  enabled 
her  to  support  the  Americans.  By  the  compliance  of  Lord 
North,  war  was  made  on  America.  By  the  courtly  treachery  of 
•Lord  Shelburne,  the  American  Royalists  were  abandoned ;  and 
by  Pitt's  ambition,  Mr.  Fox's  India  Bill  was  prevented,  which 
France  regarded  as  the  most  fatal  blow  she  could  receive.  By 
Mr.  Pitt's  dread  of  a  Reform  of  Parliament  in  Ireland,  his  eleven 
propositions  were  conceived,  which  are  likely  to  divest  the  King 
of  his  sovereignty  over  Ireland,  almost  as  much  as  he  has  lost 
it  over  America. 

Upon  the  whole,  both  the  Crown  and  Great  Britain  have  lost 
their  dearest  interests  by  the  King's  ambition  of  extending  his 
prerogative.  He  has  sunk  to  be  a  little  Prince  in  Europe ;  and 
the  loss  of  dominions  and  credit  will  be  ill  compensated  to  his 
successors  by  any  domestic  jewels  he  may  ravish  from  the  Con- 
stitution. When  Louis  XL,  the  most  detested  of  the  French 
monarchs,  placed  the  Crown  hors  de  page,  he  at  the  same  time 
extended  the  bounds  of  his  empire ;  and  if  he  was  an  odious 
tyrant,  was  at  least  not  a  contemptible  politician. 

June  14;  1785.  

I  have  extreme  contempt  for  an  anonymous  writer,  who 
betrays  consciousness  of  guilt  by  concealing  himself,  and  who 
has  been  so  foolish  as  to  take  ridiculous  pains  to  verify  what  I 
never  denied,  and  so  mean  as  to  ascertain  my  handwriting  and 
disguise  his  own.  He  shows  a  willingness  to  stab  in  the  dark, 
but  luckily  possesses  no  sharper  a  weapon  than  a  broom-stick, 
with  which  he  has  clumsily  knocked  himself  down,  to  my  great 
diversion. 


LIFE  OF  RENE  OF  ANJOU, 

KING   OF  NAPLES. 

Feb.  1,  1779. 

The  courage  that  would  constitute  a  hero  may,  if  unaccom- 
panied by  proper  symbols,  form  only  a  philosopher,  in  the  eye 
of  common  acceptation.  Ambition,  love  of  glory,  activity,  per- 
severance, recommend  the  former.  Contempt  of  danger,  indif- 
ference to  fame,  resignation  to  misfortune,  indicate  as  firm  a 


1779]  LIFE   OF   REXE   OF   AXJOU.  61 

soul ;  but  courting,  soliciting  no  applause,  are  seldom  honoured 
with  the  suffrages  of  the  multitude.  When  boundless  humanity, 
or  even  success,  crown  the  temperate  hero,  he  attains  the  more 
amiable  titles  of  philosopher  and  father  of  his  country,  but 
is  rarely  placed  amongst  the  favourites  of  noisy  celebrity. 
Marcus  Aurelius  is  scarce  known  as  an  intrepid  general,  for  he 
fought  to  protect  his  country,  not  to  aggrandize  himself.  Henry 
the  Fourth  of  France,  as  brave  as  the  first  Caesar,  is  more  adored 
as  a  man  than  as  a  victor,  for  he  sheathed  the  sword  the  moment 
he  had  conquered  in  a  just  cause. 

Eene  of  Anjou,  of  whom  history  has  recorded  no  symptom  of 
want  of  courage,  and  on  whom  his  subjects  conferred  the  most 
desirable  of  all  appellations,  the  Good,  from  the  dawn  to  the 
conclusion  of  a  long  reign;  having  lost  splendid  crowns,  and 
retaining  only  a  province,  with  which  he  had  the  wisdom  to  be 
contented,  has  been  distinguished  by  no  panegyrics,  and  is  rather 
considered  as  a  pusillanimous  prince,  who  submitted  to  reverses, 
and  who,  without  struggling  against  impossibilities,  preferred 
his  ease,  his  pleasures,  his  amusements,  and  (it  should  be  re- 
membered) the  happiness  of  his  remaining  subjects,  to  the 
tormenting  efforts  of  disappointed  and  unsatisfied  ambition. 
He  lost  crowns,  he  lost  his  son,  he  saw  his  daughter  dethroned, — 
but  he  never  lost  his  temper.  His  people,  his  wives,  his  mis- 
tresses, his  natural  children,  his  muse,  his  pencil,  nay,  the 
institution  of  festivals,  and  the  laws  of  heraldry,  consoled  him 
for  the  more  painful  duties  of  royalty  that  were  torn  from  him, 
but  not  till  he  had  bravely  defended  them ;  and  unlike  hun- 
dreds of  trifling  monarchs,  he  sank  not  into  an  inglorious  prince 
till  he  had  deserved  to  be  a  puissant  and  illustrious  one.  That 
mind  is  noble,  which,  like  Scipios',  can  sport  with  pebbles  on  the 
shore  after  demolishing  Carthage,  or  that,  like  Kene's,  can  adjust 
the  ceremonial  of  tournaments  after  losing  battles  and  sceptres. 
Never  to  forget  the  pomp  of  triumph  nor  the  sting  of  defeat,  is 
the  symptom  of  pride,  or  of  obstinacy,  or  of  conscious  shame. 
The  true  hero  is  satisfied  with  having  served  his  country ;  the 
true  philosopher  with  having  done  his  duty.  Their  minds  are 
then  at  leisure  to  be  private  men :  'and  to  be  able  to  trifle  is  to 
prove  that  they  are  sincere. 


62  H.    WALPOLE'S   MISCELLANEOUS    PIECES. 

Letter  to  Mr.  H.  S.  Wood/all. 

gIEj — Strolling  by  chance  lately  into  a  public  house,  the 
landlord  showed  me  the  following  lines,  with  which  he  was 
much  transported,  and  wished  to  get  them  set  to  music.  They 
were  written  by  an  apprentice  who  frequents  his  house,  and 
whom  mine  host  extolled  above  Churchill  and  Falstaff,  the 
latter  of  whom  he  takes  for  a  poet.  As  there  is  something  very 
original  in  this  little  piece — at  least  genuine  strokes  of  nature 
— I  thought  it  might  not  be  unacceptable  to  many  of  your 
readers. 

Yours,  J.  Gr. 

THE  JOYS  OF  SPKING. 
A  new  song. 

Returned  is  the  spring, 
And  the  nightingales  sing : 

My  Phillis  and  I 

To  the  country  will  hie, 
Where  we'll  revel  and  love, 
Like  the  blackbird  and  dove. 
Nature  calls  us  abroad, 
And  on  one  side  the  road, 

At  the  Saracen's  head 
In  a  snug  little  arbour  a  napkin  is  spread. 

Charming  scenes ! 

Peas  and  beans ! 

Union  of  hearts, 

And  gooseberry  tarts ! 

On  cool  tankard  and  cyder  and  cream  we  regale, 
And  mix  kisses  and  squeezes  with  cakes  and  ale : 
Till  with  Bacchus  and  Cupid  at  length  overcome, 
We  trudge  home  and  all  night  sleep  as  sound  as  a  drum. 

In  joys  like  these  O !  let  me  live, 
Which  rural  life  alone  can  give. 
Nor  ambition  nor  riches  intrigue  us  : 
The  Golden  Age 
Contents  the  sage : 
His  highest  view 
But  reaches  to 
His  Phillis,  a  haycock,  and  negus. 


1758]  DRYDEN   AND    POPE.  63 

In  Wright's  original '  Theory  of  the  Universe,'  are  the  follow- 
ing lines,  quoted  by  accident  from  Dryden  and  Pope  : — 

Had  we  still  paid  that  homage  to  a  name, 

Which  only  God  and  Nature  justly  claim  ; 

The  western  seas  had  been  our  utmost  bound, 

Where  poets  still  might  dream  the  sun  was  drown'd  ; 

And  all  the  stars  that  shine  in  southern  skies 

Had  been  admired  by  none  but  savage  eyes. — Dryden. 

He  who  through  vast  immensity  can  pierce, 

See  worlds  on  worlds  compose  one  universe, 

Observe  how  system  into  system  runs, 

What  other  planets  and  what  other  suns, 

What  varied  Being  peoples  every  star, 

May  tell  why  Heaven  made  all  things  as  they  are. — Pope. 

The  comparison  of  these  lines  shows  that  Dryden  was  a  poet 
by  nature,  Pope  by  art.  Dryden  might  have  said  in  prose 
what  he  has  said  in  rhyme,  and  yet  there  would  have  been 
harmony  in  his  numbers.  In  the  five  first  lines  of  Pope  there 
is  fine  poetry,  but  no  mortal  could  have  spoken  so  in  prose. 
The  sixth  line  is  mere  prose,  with  no  harmony  at  all.  Dryden's 
thoughts,  tho'  expressed  in  common  words,  fell  into  music. 
Pope  was  forced  to  use  transposition  and  less  common  words 
to  prevent  his  thoughts  from  appearing  in  prose. 


Letter  and  Verses  to  the  Honourable  H.  Conway. 

February,  1758. 

I  am  this  minute  arrived,  and  going  to  dine  at  Brand's.  I 
will  come  to  you  afterwards,  before  I  go  to  North  House.  In 
the  meantime  I  send  you  a  most  hasty  performance,  literally 
conceived  and  executed  between  Hammersmith  and  Hyde  Park 
Corner.  The  Lord  knows  if  it  is  not  sad  stuff.  I  wish  for  the 
sake  of  the  subject  it  were  better! 

When  Fontenoy's  impurpled  plain 
Shall  vanish  from  th'  historic  page, 

Thy  youthful  valour  shall  in  vain 

Have  taught  the  Gaul  to  shun  thy  rage. 


H.  TTALPOLE'S  MISCELLANEOUS  PIECES. 

When  hostile  squadrons  round  thee  stood 
On  Laffelt's  unsuccessful  field, 

Thy  captive  sabre,  drench'd  in  blood, 
The  Taunting  victor's  triumph  seaTd. 

Forgot  be  these!  Let  Scotland,  too, 
Culloden  from  her  annals  tear, 

Lest  Envy  and  her  factious  crew 

nhmiH  sigh  to  meet  thy  laurels  there. 

When  each  fair  deed  is  thus  defac'd, 
A  thousand  virtues,  too,  disgiuVd, 

Thy  grateful  country* s  voice  shall  haste 
To  censure  worth  30  little  priz'd. 

Thou,  patient,  hear  the  thunder  roll, 
Pity  the  blind  you  cannot  hate ; 

Nor,  blest  with  Aristides"  soul, 
Repine  at  Aristides*  fate. 


The  following  passageT  with  its  accompanying  verses, 
are  afl  in  Lord  OrforxTs  handwriting,  though  not  signed 
l>v  him  :  — 

•f 

Lord  BoKngbroke  wrote  these  lines  of  Maynard,  at  his  house 
of  La  Source  in  France  :  — 

La»  d'espeia-  et  de  me  pbrindre 


and  rnnipLnnmj, 
Of  longs  tbat  ragn  or  sboold  be  reignia^, 
Without  m  wiA  I  wsrit  demih  hoB— 
And,  as  Fm  afc^  wit  &oai  a  fear. 

Ofreid  Wood,  and  trahor  in  Ins  bent, 
Bat  fenr'd  by  infra*  to  the  wiaer  part, 
Indian^U  be  rfrift*  be  principle*,  thai  bum 
To  ap  tbe  laws  be  could  not  overturn. 
Bat  Natne  planting  coward  in  bis  sooi, 
To  XortomT*  bands  be  traste  the  pouoo'd  bowl; 
Content  hum  EnghnTs  fidl  to  coont  MBgnan^ 
Wbetber  a  Branmrie  or  s  Stnrt  ie%M. 


70    ^TL^-TH^H:    Z*1I_  r '"• 


To  all  the  readers  of  Horace  Walpole's  letters  the 
name  of  Thomas  Kirwate  is  most  familiar.  He  was  often 
the  humble  instrument  of  communication,  between  his 
employer  and  his  numerous  correspondents,  and  gave  to 
the  world  the  fruits  of  the  well-known  Strawberry  Hill 
Press  ;  but  whether  from  carelessness,  or  from  an  inade- 
quate idea  of  his  necessities,  it  seems  to  be  a  melancholy 
feet  that  he  was  not  sufficiently  provided  for  by  wOl; 
and  the  '  Printer's  Farewell  '  carries  with  it  a  touching 
reproof  that  thirty  years'  service  was  not  better  remem- 
bered. He  died  in  1820. 


THE  PRINTER'S  FAREWELL  TO  STRAWBERRY 

Adieu!  re  giores  and  Gothic  txnr  is, 
Whew  I  ••••••£  My  yoBMral  boon, 

Alas!  InBdiBTaia*: 
SMB  he  who  coold  BIT  age  protect, 

Fix  left  BM  to  eomhon  ! 


For  thirty  Teara  at 

To  Mat  •Bckaif}*  reward  at  feat, 

Hat  added  to  aj  !••; 
To  <pdt  the  quiet  scenes  of  fife, 

Farewell  f  my  pnDtxnf-howe.  CnvwcD  ! 
Where  I  BO  man  shall  eahvhr  dvefl, 
WiAia  BIT  peacefid  door: 

Enjoj  BIT  fixnd  and  ap  anr  tea  ; 
Ah!  BO;  those  days  are  o'er. 

OB  Aee,  BW  feflow-lab  «r  dear, 
XT  Pms,  f  drop  the  alert  tear 


T.  K. 


For  than,  like  me,  bj  aaw  art  won, 
Like  BM,  too,  tho«  art  kftakkEB, 


VOL.  IL 


66  MISCELLANEOUS   LETTEES.  [1798 


MISCELLANEOUS  LETTEES. 

1798. 

ENTEY. 

'  MES.  D.  and  Lady  Ailesbury  settle  at  Strawberry  Hill. 
Become  acquainted  with  Mrs.  Howe.'  * 

In  the  month  of  January  Miss  Berry  received  a  letter 
from  their  friend  Mr.  Brand. j*  After  announcing  his 
marriage  to  Miss  Deborah  Wharton,  daughter  of  Dr.  W., 
of  Old  Park,  Durham,  he  adds  : — 

Lady  Ossory,  to  alleviate  my  confinement  in  a  very  bad  cold, 
has  treated  me  with  Lord  Orford's  letters  to  her,  tho'  in  a  very 
mutilated  transcript,  and  desired  my  opinion  about  their  publi- 
cation. I  advised  that  they  should  be  kept  in  the  family  as 
an  invaluable  treasure  rather  than  be  published  in  this  manner, 
but  thought  many  of  them  so  well  written  and  so  interesting  at 
the  present  moment  (some  from  Paris  especially),  that  I  could 
not  help  wishing  to  see  them  printed  in  Mr.  Berry's  collection. 
I  was  glad  to  find  afterwards  that  Lord  Ossory  and  most  of  her 
friends  were  against  publishing  the  collection  as  it  stood.  I 
am  to  dine  there  on  Wednesday  and  to  bring  you  a  message 
when  I  come  to  town.  The  message,  I  guess,  may  be  the  offer 
of  some  of  the  letters.  Can  I  be  of  any  service  in  this  business 

*  The  Honourable  Caroline  Howe,  married  John  Howe  of  Branslop,  Bucks; 
died  June  1814,  in  her  ninety-third  year.  She  possessed  an  extraordinary 
force  of  mind,  clearness  of  understanding,  and  remarkable  powers  of  thought 
and  combination.  She  retained  these  faculties  unimpaired  to  the  great  age 
of  eighty-five,  by  exercising  them  daily,  both  in  the  practice  of  mathematics 
and  in  reading  the  two  dead  languages,  of  which  late  in  life  she  had  made 
herself  mistress.  To  these  acquirements  must  be  added  warm  and  lively 
feelings  joined  to  a  perfect  knowledge  of  the  world,  and  of  the  society  of 
which  she  had  always  been  a  distinguished  member. — M.S. 

t  Vide  Journal  of  1784. 


1798]  LETTER  FROM  SIR  U.  PRICE.  67 

by  giving  any  preparatory  hint  ?  Is  there  any  particular  period 
of  his  correspondence  you  would  like  to  have  ?  any  chasm  to 
fill  up? 

Miss  Berry  commences  her  reply  by  wishing  that 
'  printer '  and  '  proof  sheets '  had  left  her  that  day  a  little 
more  time  to  express  her  feelings  on  the  approaching 
event. 

Thank  you  much  (she  continues)  for  your  information  con- 
cerning Lady  Ossory.  When  you  come  to  town  I  shall  make 
you  laugh  at  her  ever  intending  to  publish  anything  after  her 
declarations  on  the  subject.  Be  the  bearer  of  any  message  from 
her  to  us,  and  receive  any  letters  she  gives  you  for  us.  But  we 
have  none  to  ask  for,  and  none  to  want,  and  no  chasm  to  fill. 
Our  volume  will  already,  I  find,  be  such  a  thumper,  that  unless 
I  subtract  some  from  those  already  in  hand  I  can  add  none. 

Two  thick  volumes  of  these  letters  have  since  been 
given  to  the  public,  by  Mr.  Vernon  Smith,*  and  have 
recently  been  incorporated,  under  the  editorship  of  Mr. 
P.  Cunningham,  into  a  new  edition  of  Horace  Walpole's 
Letters. 


Miss  Berry  omitted,  in  her  little  entry  for  this  year,  a 
visit  to  Malvern,  to  which  the  following  letter  alludes 
from  Sir  Uvedale  Price  ;  f  a  letter  truly  characteristic  of 
the  great  lover  of  the  picturesque  : — 

Foxley,  August  29,  1798. 

It  is  impossible  to  say  how  much  I  have  been  vexed  and 
disappointed.  I  had  got  off  my  engagement  for  Monday  though 

*  Now  Lord  Lyveden. 

t  Sir  Uvedale  Price,  of  Foxley,  co.  Herefordshire,  was  the  author  of  the 
'  Translation  from  the  Greek  of  the  Account  of  Pausanias  of  the  Statues, 
Pictures,  and  Temples  of  Greece,'  published  1780,  'Essay  on  the  Pic- 
turesque,' 1794,  and  of  other  minor  works;  also  of  a  'Dialogue  on  the 
Distinct  Character  of  the  Picturesque  and  the  Beautiful,'  in  answer  to  the 
objections  of  Mr.  Payne  Knight,  published  1801.  Sir  Uvedale  was  born  in 
1747 ;  married  to  Caroline,  fourth  daughter  of  George,  first  Earl  of  Tyr- 
connel,  created  Bart.  1828,  died  1829. 

ri 


68  MISCELLANEOUS   LETTEES.  [1798 

with  some  difficulty,  as  there  was  a  haunch  of  venison  that 
would  not  hear  of  being  kept.  I  had  ordered  my  horses  to  be 
ready,  and  myself  to  be  called  before  daybreak  on  Sunday,  all 
which  was  most  punctually  performed ;  the  morning  was  such 
as  there  is  no  speaking  of  but  in  poetry — 

Piu  bell'  aurora,  piu  lieto  di 
Dal'  sen'  del'  onde  mai  non  usci. 

But  I  rose  very  unlike  the  morning,  with  a  violent  headache 
and  shiverings — in  short,  quite  unable  to  go.  So  after  looking 
wishfully  at  the  Malvern  Hills,  which  are  on  view  from  my 
window,  I  at  last  shut  out  the  day  and  did  not  exercise  the 
Christian  virtues  of  patience  and  resignation.  I  hope  my 
recording  angel  (I  conclude  there  is  more  than  one  to  the 
planet,  or  he  has  no  sinecure)  did  not  set  down  all  my  fretting 
and  pining,  but  considered  how  severe  the  trial  was.  I  never 
promised  myself  so  much  pleasure  in  any  expedition ;  I  had 
planned  a  ride  across  a  tract  of  country  I  had  never  been 
through,  parts  of  which  I  know  must  be  full  of  beauties  from 
the  general  view  of  it  from  the  Malverns,  for  it  is  a  country 
full  of  small  knolls  and  swellings  covered  with  wood,  and  in 
the  sheltered  parts  between  them  there  are  a  number  of  fine 
hop  yards,  and  this  is  just  the  beginning  of  hop -pulling;  then, 
to  crown  all,  at  the  end  of  this  pleasant  ride  I  was  to  find  you 
at  Malvern.  I  was  particularly  glad  to  hear  that  you  were  to 
be  at  Malvern  village,  and  not  at  the  wells,  for  I  have  such  a 
horror  for  that  staring  red  house  and  staring  view  from  it,  that 
nothing  less  than  the  pleasure  of  your  society  would  tempt  me 
to  stay  there.  Now,  on  the  other  hand,  I  am  delighted  with  the 
view  from  the  inn,  for  the  rich  tower  of  the  church  rises  finely 
above  the  horizon,  and  most  happily  breaks  the  extensive  dis- 
tance, which  is  thrown  off  and  enriched  by  the  battlements  of 
the  body  of  the  church  ;  and  though  the  face  of  Worcestershire 
is  not  by  any  means  so  varied  as  our  side  of  the  hills,  yet  when 
viewed  from  Malvern,  it  has  the  material  advantage  of  receiving 
the  full  effect  of  the  evening  lights.  I  am  very  apt  to  consider, 
wherever  I  happen  to  be,  what  would  be  the  best  situation  for  a 
house  in  respect  to  the  view  from  it,  and  I  found  no  spot  in  Mal- 
vern, where  all  the  objects  were  so  happily  combined  as  the  inn. 
Not  only  the  church,  but  the  old  archway,  the  parsonage  covered 


1798]  MISS   BERRY   TO   MR.   GREATHEAD.  69 

with  jasmin,  the  churchyard,  the  path  through  it,  the  cottage  at 
the  end,  form  a  very  lucky  composition  of  foreground  and  dis- 
tances. All  this,  and  many  parts  about  Malvern,  I  was  very 
desirous  of  seeing  with  you,  for  I  have  never  had  the  pleasure 
of  being  with  you  amidst  any  striking  scenery,  though  we  have 
talked  upon  the  subject.  I  had  hoped  for  one  of  those  days 
that  are  passed  with  delight  and  always  recollected  with  pleasure, 
but  it  seems  to  have  been  ecrit  la  haut  that  we  should  not 
meet  this  time.  I  remember  having  received  a  letter  from  a 
devout  old  German,  who  was  chef  de  cuisine  to  Lord  Barrington, 
in  which  he  told  me  that  he  was  very  happy  to  have  been  the 
instrument,  under  Providence,  of  procuring  me  a  good  cook.  I 
beg  you  will  present  my  best  compliments  to  Mr.  Berry  and 
your  sister. 

I  am,  dear  Madam, 
Most  sincerely  and  faithfully  yours, 

U.  PRICE. 
General  Fitzpatrick  desires  his  best  compliments. 

Some  extracts  of  Miss  Berry's  correspondence  with 
different  friends,  and  some  reflections  on  the  different 
books  she  had  been  reading,  close  the  remains  of  this 
year. 

To  Mr.  Greathead. 

Little  Strawberry  Hill,  August  2, 1798. 

The  torments  of  an  evil  conscience  I  can  bear  no  longer,  and 
therefore  write  to  you  I  must.  If  I  hated  writing  ten  times 
more  than  I  do,  I  am  sure  fifty  letters  would  have  been  less 
pain  and  trouble  to  me  than  what  I  have  felt  for  never  having 
written  to  you  at  all,  whenever  you  came  into  my  thoughts, 
which  has  been  much  oftener  than  I  wished,  I  assure  you.  This 
time  twelvemonth  I  fully  thought  and  hoped  that,  instead  of 
now  corresponding  by  letters,  we  should  have  been  together  at 
Pyrnant.  Lady  Tancred's  accounts  were  by  no  means  inviting, 
tho'  I  made  due  allowance  for  a  traveller  whose  peregrinations 
for  several  years  before  had  been  confined  to  the  road  between 
London  and  Ramsgate — never,  I  think,  exceeded  a  trip  to  Paris 
in  the  halcyon  days  of  French  despotism.  Most  thoroughly  do 
I  begin  to  feel  the  want  of  that  shake  out  of  English  ways, 


70  MISCELLANEOUS   LETTERS.  [1798 

English  whims,  and  English  prejudices,  which  nothing  but 
leaving  England  gives  one.  After  a  residence  of  four  or  five 
years  we  all  begin  to  forget  the  existence  of  the  continent  of 
Europe,  till  we  touch  it  again  with  our  feet.  The  whole  world 
to  me,  that  is  to  say  the  whole  circle  of  my  ideas,  begins  to  be 
confined  between  N.  Audley-street  and  Twickenham.  I  know 
no  great  men  but  Pitt  and  Fox,  no  king  and  queen  but  George 
and  Charlotte,  no  towns  but  London.  All  the  other  cities,  and 
courts,  and  great  men  of  the  world  may  be  very  good  sort  of 
places  and  of  people,  for  aught  we  know  or  care ;  except  they 
are  coming  to  invade  us,  we  think  no  more  of  them  than  of  the 
inhabitants  of  another  planet.  We  should  like,  indeed,  just  to 
know  what  is  become  of  Buonaparte,  because  we  are  afraid  of 
our  settlements  in  India,  and  because  we  are  all  great  news- 
mongers and  politicians,  tho'  more  ignorant,  more  incapable  of 
any  general  view  upon  those  subjects,  than  any  other  people 
with  whom  I  ever  conversed  (the  French  of  ten  years  ago  only 
excepted).  Well,  that  I  may  not  quite  grow  to  the  spot  on 
which  you  left  me  last  August,  I  am  going  to  begin  my  travels 
on  Tuesday  next.  My  sister,  as  she  could  not  go  to  Pyrnant, 
was  obliged  to  go  to  Cheltenham,  from  whence  my  father  and  I 

are  going  to  fetch  her  home. 

#***»** 

I  am  anxious  to  hear  if  Bertie  has  yet  met  with  Matilda 
Pottingen,  and  if  he  writes  odes  upon  her  in  the  style  of 
Ruggiero.  I  know  Lysons  sent  you  the  Anti-Jacobin,  and,  in 
spite  of  its  title,  I  am  sure  you  would  be  diverted  with  the 
excellent  laughable  criticism  upon  German  plays — such,  I  mean, 
as  we  ignoramus's  see  them  through  the  medium  of  bad  trans- 
lations. Lysons  I  have  heard  of  at  Cheltenham,  and  likewise 
of  Mrs.  Siddons,  who  has  been  acting  there.  I  improved  my 
acquaintance  with  her  last  winter,  and  I  need  not  tell  you  how 
much  she  gains  by  being  known.  She  read  *  Hamlet '  to  us  one 
evening,  in  N.  Audley-street,  which  was  to  me  a  great  treat. 

To  Bertie  Greathead,  Esq.,  at  Gottingen. 

To  the  Honourable  Mrs.  Darner. 

Cheltenham,  August,  1798. 

This  place  and  everything  about  it  recalls,  in  the  most  lively 
manner,  scenes  and  recollections  to  my  mind,  which,  tho'  me]  an- 


1798]  FEOM   MISS   BEERY.  71 

choly,  I  cannot  call  unpleasing.  They  are,  thank  Heaven  !  un- 
embittered  by  reproach,  and  undisgraced  by  folly.  My  imagi- 
nation seems  to  pass  over  everything  that  has  happened  since, 
and  to  bring  me  back  to  the  calm  but  lively  enjoyment  of  a 
society  in  which  I  delighted. 

To  the  Same. 

Brandsby,  Oct.  1798. 

I  have  not  said  a  word  to  you  of  our  glorious  victory,*  but 
you  do  not  suspect  me  of  not  feeling  it.  Do  you  participate  in 
some  other  less  agreeable  feelings  which  to  me  accompany  this 
and  every  other  success  in  that  quarter  ?  When  I  think  (that 
under  other  circumstances)  we  might  have  been  so  much  nearer 
the  scene  of  action,  and  among  the  first  to  receive  and  con- 
gratulate the  gallant  conquerors !  How  much  more  appropriate 
to  our  minds,  interesting  to  our  feelings,  and  gratifying  to  our 
vanity,  in  spite  of  all  the  privations  with  which  such  a  situation 
might  seem  to  have  been  accompanied,  than  anything  we  are  or 
have  been  doing. 

Brandsby,  Oct.  1798. 

I  rejoice  to  hear  you  say  that  all  you  have  felt  on  our  late 
glorious  victories,  convinces  you  that  active  scenes  are  no  less 
gratifying  than  ever  to  your  mind,  and  that  they  have  roused 
that  latent  spark  of  heroism  which  I  know,  and  which  you  know 
yourself,  exists  in  your  composition.  I  have  sometimes  feared 
lest  the  narrow  circle  to  which  you  have  confined  yourself,  and 
the  sort  of  life  which  circumstances  have  combined  to  make 
you  lead,  for  these  last  four  or  five  years,  should  contract,  not 
your  sentiments  or  ideas,  but  your  powers  of  acting  in  and  en- 
joying more  animating,  active,  and  interesting  passages  of  life, 
into  which  it  would  be  your  ambition,  as  it  would  be  mine,  to 
carry  a  mind  as  philosophic  and  sedate,  as  ever  we  enjoyed 
in  our  own  gardens.  For  my  part,  I  think  the  magnitude  of 
objects  would  render  easy  all  the  difficulties,  sufferings,  and 
exertions  for  their  attainment,  and  even  considerably  soften  the 

*  The  battle  of  the  Nile  was  fought  August  1,  1798.  The  despatch  an- 
nouncing the  victory  was  dated  August  3,  and  it  appeared  in  the  London 
Gazette  Oct.  2.  A  length  of  time  between  the  event  and  its  announcement, 
that  seems  somewhat  strange  to  those  who  have  lived  since  the  invention  of 
steam  navigation  and  electric  telegraphs. 


72  MISCELLANEOUS   LETTERS.  [1798 

disappointment  of  a  failure.     The  magnis  tamen  exddit  ausis 
must,  I  think,  have  been  a  great  comfort  even  to  poor  Phaeton. 

To  the  Same. 

Brand-iby,  Oct.  1798. 

Do  you  know  that  I  have  been  working  as  hard  at  Greek  for 
this  week  past  as  you  could  possibly  desire  ?  The  parson  who  I 
mentioned  in  my  last,  stayed  till  yesterday.  He  is  a  very  good 
scholar,  and  has  been  much  in  the  habit  of  teaching.  He  cor- 
rected a  piece  of  Isocrates  which  I  had  done  by  myself,  and  then 
read  on  with  me  in  the  same  oration,  and  whilst  he  was  here  I 
translated  above  two  pages  more,  writing  them  down,  I  mean, 
and  all  the  verbs  and  their  parts  in  the  opposite  page,  in  our 
own  way,  you  know.  This  young  man's  pertinacity  about  the 
use  of  accents  would  have  provoked  you ;  it  diverted  me,  who 
was  too  weak  and  too  ignorant  an  opponent  to  attempt  their 
defence.  I  find  that  about  six  months'  regular  tho'  moderate 
study  would  really  make  me  a  sufficient  Grecian  for  my  purpose, 
that  of  mere  enjoyment,  and  that  six  months  I  am  determined 
(as  much  as  I  can  determine  anything)  shall  be  next  winter,  if 
I  can  possibly  find  an  assistant. 

Extract  of  a  Letter  from  Miss  Berry  to  a  Friend. 

Little  Strawberry,  Tuesday,  Nov.  19, 1798. 

.  .  .  .  I  have  been  as  busy  as  a  bee  in  my  garden  and 
greenhouse,  to  which  I  always  return  with  new  pleasure  and 
satisfaction,  convinced  that  when  once  one  likes  and  enters  into 
it,  it  is  one  of  the  very  best  sources  of  interest  and  amusement ; 
there  is  nothing  that  so  agreeably  fatigues  the  body  and  rests 

the  mind As  soon  as  I  have  got  my  work  under 

a  little  in  the  garden,  I  mean  to  set  seriously  into  Greek,  and 
to  finish  Wraxall  and  many  other  books  I  have  in  my  eye ;  by- 
the-bye,  don't  let  me  forget  to  advise  you  to  read  the  *  Natural 
Son,'  or  *  Lovers'  Vows  ; '  it  is  the  entire  and  literal  translation 
of  the  play  which  is  now  acting  with  such  success  at  Covent 
Garden,*  but  not  as  it  is  acted ;  you  can  get  it  at  Todd's,  where 
I  did,  to  read  in  the  chaise.  I  think  it  quite  charming,  and  it 

*  '  Lovers'  Vows.'  Play  in  five  Acts,  translated  and  adapted  to  the  En- 
glish stage  by  Mr.  Richard  Cumberland,  from  the  German  of  Kotzebue. 


1798]  FEOM  MISS   BERRY.  73 

affected  me  much,  tho'  not  of  the  black  and  dreadful  school  of 
Schiller.  You  must  allow  for  German  manners  and  for  the  (at 
all  times)  sad  disguise  of  a  translation.  I  find  people  of  taste 
in  general  disapprove  of  it  as  acted,  tho'  they  own  it  affecting. 
This  I  can  readily  believe  to  be  just,  for  I  should  conceive  it 
very  difficult  to  adjust  to  an  English  audience.  We  all  re- 
gretted its  not  being  acted  while  we  were  in  town.  Another 
book  which  I  purchased  at  Todd's  and  read  in  my  chaise  was 
the  '  Essay  on  Population '  *  which  Mr.  Wrangham  left  with  you. 
It  is  uncommonly  clearly  thought  and  written,  and  contains 
much  curious  and  uncontrovertible  reasoning  on  the  subject  in 
question. 

Extract  from  a  Letter  to  the  Same. 

Little  Strawberry,  Tuesday,  Nov.  27, 1798. 

I  think,  by  way  of  filling  up  my  cover,  I  shall  send  you  a 
letter  of  Edwards',  written  in  answer  to  some  inquiries  I  had 
made  about  the  event  of  his  friend  Johnstone's  trial.  You  will 
see  how  rationally  and  liberally  Edwards  owns  Government  here 
to  have  been  in  the  right,  and  you  will  see  that  Attorney- 
Generals  are  not  always  so  much  in  the  wrong  as  you  are 
inclined  to  think  them.  As  to  poor  Tone's  f  case,  I  think  judge, 

*  Thos.  Robt.  Malthus,  born  1766 ;  published  in  1798  his  '  Essay  on 
Population.'  A  few  years  later  he  was  appointed  Professor  of  Political 
Economy  at  the  East  India  Company's  College  at  Heyleybury,  a  post  which 
he  retained  till  his  death,  in  1834.  He  was  the  author  of  several  works  on 
political  economy,  and  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Political  Economy 
Club,  and  the  Statistical  Society. — Imperial  Dictionary  of  Universal  Bio- 
yraphy. 

•f  Theobald  Wolfe  Tone,  born  at  Dublin  in  about  1763,  called  to  the  bar 
1789,  became  a  political  writer,  and,  though  himself  a  Protestant,  was  the 
founder  of  a  club  called  the  '  United  Irishmen.'  He  was  finally  taken  pri- 
soner in  the  act  of  returning  with  the  French  invading  squadron,  in  which 
he  had  accepted  a  commission.  He  was  brought  to  Dublin  and  tried  by  a 
court-martial :  he  prayed  the  Court  to  sentence  him  to  be  shot.  This 
request  was  denied  him,  and  he  was  ordered  to  be  executed,  but  the  night 
preceding  that  of  his  intended  execution  he  contrived  to  inflict  a  dangerous 
wound  on  his  own  throat.  The  next  morning  Mr.  Curran  applied  to  the 
Court  of  King's  Bench  for  a  writ  of  Habeas  Corpus  to  bring  up  the  body 
of  Mr.  Tone  upon  the  ground  '  that  courts-martial  had  no  jurisdiction  upon 
subjects  not  in  the  service  of  His  Majesty  during  the  sitting  of  the  Court 
of  King's  Bench.'  The  Chief  Justice,  Lord  Kilwarden,  ordered  a  writ  to 
be  made  out  immediately,  but  Mr.  Tone  was  not  in  a  condition  to  be  moved. 


74  MISCELLANEOUS  LETTERS.  [1798 

jury  and  accusers,  and  friends,  all  seem  to  be  equally  Irish  mad, 
and  nobody  to  have  common  sense  but  the  poor  unhappy 
prisoner,  who,  I  heartily  hope,  will  never  live  to  be  tormented 
with  a  new  trial. 

Little  Strawberry,  Tuesday,  Dec.  14,  798. 

.  .  .  During  my  illness  I  have  finished  the  2nd  vol.  of  Wrax- 
all  which  I  had  just  begun  at  Brandsby,  and  which  I  like  better 
and  better  the  farther  I  go.  I  have  consulted,  too,  one  of  his 
authorities  for  many  things  in  the  age  of  Henry  the  Third, 
Montaigne's  Essays,  a  very  curious  and  an  astonishing  book, 
considering  the  times  in  which  it  was  written,  and  which  one 
never  consults  without  entertainment.  I  have  reread,  too,  Con- 
dorcet's  book,*  and  compared  his  ideas  and  arguments  on  the 
subject  of  population  with  those  of  the  Essay  we  have  been 
reading,  and  certainly  the  Essay  has  not  only  the  best  of  the 
argument  (upon  these  points)  in  a  philosophical  light,  but  is 
absolute  conviction  on  the  subject  of  the  different  ratios  in 
which  population,  and  the  means  of  subsisting  that  population, 
increase.  .  .  . 

That  Miss  Berry  should  have  read  with  interest  such  a 
work  as  Malthus's  essay  on  the  '  Principle  of  Population,' 
that  it  should  have  confirmed  her  own  unassisted  ideas 
on  such  a  subject,  and  that  she  should  have  felt  that  she 
coincided  with  the  reasoning  of  such  an  author,  is  no 
small  proof  that  her  mind  was  considerably  in  advance, 
not  only  of  other  women,  but  of  the  majority  of  the  men 
of  that  day. 

I  cannot  but  feel  flattered  at  finding  my  own  unassisted  ideas 
upon  subjects  of  philosophical  politics  and  national  economy 
confirmed  by  those  of  some  of  the  most  enlightened  authors.  A 
pleasure  of  this  sort  I  have  lately  received  in  reading  Malthus's 
Essay  on  the  Principle  of  Population,— his  ideas  on  the  rela- 
tive greatness  of  two  countries,  the  one  deriving  its  wealth 

The  execution  was  suspended,  and  on  the  19th  he  died  in  prison  from  the 
effects  of  his  self-inflicted  wound. — Annual  Register. 

*  Mr.  Malthus  refers  to  M.  Condorcet's  '  Esquisse  d'un  Tableau  Historique 
des  Progres  de  1'Esprit  Humain '  in  his  l  Essay  on  the  Principle  of  Popu- 
lation.' 


1798]  MALTHUS   OX   POPULATION.  75 

principally  from  trade  and  manufactures,  and  the  other  from 
agriculture — upon  the  high  price  of  labour  materially  checking 
our  foreign  dealings — his  assumption  that  high  duties  and  pro- 
hibitions on  foreign  produce  and  foreign  commodities  is  neither 
more  nor  less  than  giving  a  bounty  to  our  own  manufactures, 
and  thereby  depressing  and  turning  away  attention  and  capital 
from  agriculture. 

All  these  ideas  I  have  long  entertained,  in  all  his  reasonings 
on  them  I  perfectly  coincide  with  him ;  and,  if  I  may  be 
allowed  to  go  on  a  little  farther  by  myself,  not  without  hopes 
of  finding  these  further  ideas  also  confirmed,  in  future,  by  some 
better  head  than  my  own,  possessed  of  more  data,  and  having 
that  practical  acquaintance  with  details  of  which  I  must  neces- 
sarily be  ignorant ;  I  would  say,  then,  that  I  can  see  no  pos- 
sible objection  (in  theory  at  least)  to  a  country,  under  the 
peculiar  circumstances  that  ours  happens  to  be,  receiving  all 
the  produce  and  all  the  manufactures  of  all  the  countries  in 
Europe  without  any  particular  restriction  or  higher  duties  on 
the  one  than  on  the  other.  We  are  allowed  on  all  hands  to 
have  risen  to  a  perfection  of  machinery  in  our  own  manufac- 
tures hitherto  unrivalled,  and  which  allows  us,  in  spite  of  the 
present  high  price  of  labour  and  of  provisions,  to  undersell 
others  in  the  foreign  markets. 

Our  manufactures,  in  time  of  peace,  certainly  employ  as  many 
hands  and  as  much  of  the  capital  (as  the  economists  call  it)  of 
the  country,  not  to  say  more  than  can  be  properly  spared  from 
agriculture  and  its  improvements  necessary  to  the  welfare  of  the 
state. 

Under  these  circumstances,  what  possible  harm  could  accrue 
to  us  from  receiving,  for  instance  (and  it  is  certainly  the 
strongest  instance  that  can  be  cited),  the  wines  and  silks  of 
France  at  the  same  regular  and  moderate  duties  at  which  we 
should  receive  the  produce  of  what  are  now  called  the  most 
favoured  nations  ? 

Can  anybody  suppose,  while  we  continue  to  possess  superior 
habits  of  industry  and  commercial  confidence,  that  we  need 
dread  a  competition  with  France,  while  we  have  hardware  of  all 
sorts,  collars  and  muslins,  articles  of  much  more  general  and 
necessary  use  than  wine  and  silks,  to  bring  to  their  market,  and 
those  of  every  other  quarter  of  the  world  ? 


76  MISCELLANEOUS   LETTERS.  [1798 

Our  allowing  an  open  and  fair  competition,  which  surely 
we  could  have  no  reason  to  dread,  would,  in  the  first  place, 
remove  that  odium  under  which  we  too  surely  lay  with  all 
Europe  for  a  spirit  of  mercantile  tyranny  and  monopoly ;  and, 
at  all  events,  it  would  gently  let  us  down  to  our  own  level  (a 
very  high  one  it  must  always  be)  in  the  scale  of  commercial 
nations — it  would  weaken  the  blow  that  our  fictitious  and 
unnatural  commercial  wealth  will  unavoidably  receive,  and 
enable  us  to  bear  it  without  any  violent  convulsion  either  of 
public  prosperity  or  of  private  happiness,  by  turning  more  of 
the  capital  of  the  State  to  the  support  and  increase  of  the  agri- 
cultural system — the  only  solid  basis  of  commercial  prosperity. 

But  on  this  subject,  as  on  many  others,  a  few  simple,  funda- 
mental, immutable  principles  are  so  involved  in  the  complex 
systems  which  are  built  upon  them,  that  by  the  generality  of 
mankind — nay,  even  by  the  reasoning  part  of  mankind — they  are 
utterly  forgotten,  and  by  few  indeed  received  to  suffice  really. 

Thus  all  possible  systems  of  political  economy,  and  of  com- 
mercial or  agricultural  success,  and  of  national  prosperity,  must 
all  necessarily  be  founded  on  a  few  simple  principles,  which,  like 
the  truths  on  which  rest  the  first  principles  both  of  reasoning 
and  of  mathematics,  will,  at  first  sight,  appear  so  self-evident 
as  to  make  demonstration  superfluous ;  while  the  farther  we 
advance,  the  more  we  perceive  how  often  they  require  to  be 
impressed  on  our  minds ;  and  that  error  can  only  be  avoided  by 
frequently  rallying  our  wandering  thoughts  to  the  standard  of 
their  immutability. 

These  principles  in  political  economy  may  be  thus  stated  : — 

1st.  That  man  cannot  live  without  food ;  consequently,  that 
no  greater  number  of  people  can  possibly  be  made  to  exist  than 
there  is  the  means  of  maintaining ;  or,  in  other  words,  that  no 
power  can  make  the  population  exceed  the  means  of  sub- 
sistence. 

2nd.  That  man  will  feed  himself  before  his  neighbour  ;  con- 
sequently, that  the  nation  which  gets  from  others  the  means  of 
subsistence,  instead  of  having  wherewithal  within  itself,  will  be 
the  first  to  starve ;  or,  in  other  words,  that  the  nation  which 
habitually  imports  instead  of  exporting  corn  will  be  subject  to 
severe  scarcities. 

3rd.  That  in  plenty,  what  remains  to  man  at  the  end  of  the 


1798]  TO   MRS.  CHOLMELEY.  77 

year,  after  he  has  fed  himself,  is  the  only  possible  fund  he  can 
have,  either  for  raising  a  greater  quantity  of  food  next  year,  or 
for  keeping  himself  idle  and  making  others  work  for  him ;  or, 
in  other  words,  that  the  surplus  produce  of  agriculture  and  of 
labour  is  the  only  possible  fund  and  support  for  commercial 
prosperity. 

By  the  test  of  these  few  simple  principles,  all  systems  what- 
soever, to  whom  related  or  by  whom  begot,  must  be  tried ;  and 
no  apparent  contradictions  to  them  in  the  circumstances,  past 
or  present,  of  any  of  the  States  of  Europe,  can  diminish  one 
jot  from  their  immutability. 

Extract  from  a  letter  to  Mrs.  Cholmeley. 

Little  Strawb.,  Tuesday,  Dec.  11, 1798. 

...  On  the  evening  of  Friday  we  went  to  the  play  at  Covent 
Garden.  Saw  '  Lovers'  Vows,'  and  a  new  farce  called  *  The 
Jew  and  the  Doctor,'  *  which  has  more  real  laughable  fun  in  it, 
more  plot,  and  certainly  more  good  writing,  than  any  comedy  I 
have  seen  or  heard  of  for  this  age :  as  a  farce,  it  certainly  is 
quite  admirable,  and,  I  dare  say,  will  always  maintain  its  place 
upon  the  stage.  It  is  said  to  be  the  first  production  of  young 
Dibdin,  son  to  the  man  who  writes  the  songs  and  exhibits 
some  sort  of  an  entertainment  to  the  public  under  the  name 
of  the  Sans-Souci.  '  Lovers'  Vows  '  disappointed  me.  The  ne- 
cessary curtailments  which  have  been  made  from  the  German 
'  Natural  Son,'  to  avoid  des  longueurs,  and  to  suit  it  in  some 
degree  to  our  manners  upon  the  stage,  destroy  the  effect  of 
many  situations  and  sentiments,  by  having  in  a  great  degree 
taken  away  their  efficient,  or  at  least  sufficient  cause,  and  con- 
sequently making  them  appear  awkward  or  misplaced,  or  more 
or  less  than  enough  to  the  minds  of  the  spectators :  in  short, 
a  good  play  must  ever  be  a  whole  from  which  it  is  quite  im- 
possible to  take  out  a  bit  here  and  put  in  a  bit  there  without 
disfiguring  and  degrading  the  original,  even  when  that  original 
would  not  succeed  in  representation,  as  is  certainly  the  case 

*  'The  Jew  and  the  Doctor'  was  first  performed  at  the  Maidstone 
Theatre,  and  afterwards  at  Covent  Garden.  Mr.  Dibdin  says,  '  though  not 
produced  in  that  order  it  was  hia  first? — Vide  advertisement  to  'Jew  and 
Doctor/  in  Mrs.  Inclibald'a  Collection  of  Farces. 


78  MISCELLANEOUS   LETTEES.  [1798 

with  the  '  Natural  Son,'  as  I  read  it,  closely  translated  from  the 
original.  .  .  . 

Roscoe*  has  just  sent  us  a  poem  of  his  translation  from  an 
Italian  poet  whose  very  name  was  unknown  to  my  very  shallow 
Italian  erudition,  f  It  is  called  '  The  Nurse,'  from  *  La  Babia ' 
of  Luigi  Tansillo.  I  have  read  it  over,  tho'  not  yet  with  suffi- 
cient attention ;  but  I  am  disappointed  in  it,  because  I  expect 
nothing  but  what  is  excellent  from  his  pen.J  The  subject, 
which  is  reprobating  hired  nurses  and  exhorting  all  women  to 
suckle  their  own  children,  does  not  do  in  English  verse,  tho'  the 
Ariosto-like  familiarity  and  simplicity  of  the  original,  makes  it 
pretty  in  the  inimitable  beauty  of  the  Italian  language.  The 
subject,  too,  never  to  the  eye  of  reason  and  nature  can  admit 
of  an  argument,  and  therefore  is  a  repetition  of  the  same  idea. 
I  mean,  that  it  never  can  admit  of  anything  but  a  physical 
argument  from  some  peculiar  defect  or  infirmity  of  the  mother, 
which  does  not  and  cannot  do  in  poetry.  The  poem  is  pub- 
lished, beautifully  printed,  with  the  Italian  on  the  opposite 
page ;  it  is  not  long,  and  you  can  no  doubt  get  it  at  York. 

*  William  Roscoe,  born  at  Liverpool,  1753.  His  father  kept  a  public- 
house,  and  also  carried  on  the  business  of  a  market-gardener.  In  1774 
William  Roscoe  became  an  attorney  of  the  Court  of  King's  Bench ;  in  1784 
he  was  elected  Member  of  the  Manchester  Literary  and  Philosophical 
Society.  He  first  appeared  as  an  author  in  1796 ;  he  wrote  the  '  Life  of 
Lorenzo  de'  Medici,'  '  Life  of  Leo  X.,'  &c.  &c.  In  1816  he  was  elected 
M.P.  for  Liverpool.  The  Royal  Institution  of  Liverpool  owes  its  origin  to 
him.  Died  in  1831,  in  his  seventy-ninth  year. 

t  Tansillo,  an  Italian  poet  of  no  great  merit.  '  La  Babia,'  published  1767 ; 
Roscoe's  translation,  published  1798. —  Watts' 's  Dictionary. 

|  '  Mr.  Roscoe  is  happy  in  an  opportunity  of  paying  his  respects  to  the 
Miss  Berrys,  and  requesting  their  acceptance  of  a  copy  of  "  The  Nurse," 
translated  from  the  Italian  of  Luigi  Tansillo.  He  is  well  aware  how  much 
his  translation  will  suffer  in  the  estimation  of  persons  so  fully  acquainted 
with  the  Italian  language  by  a  comparison  with  the  original,  which  pos- 
sesses a  degree  of  simplicity  wholly  unattainable — at  least  by  the  present 
translator :  besides  which,  they  will  perceive  numerous  omissions  and 
variations,  the  reasons  of  some  of  which  will  be  sufficiently  obvious.  It 
would  afford  Mr.  R.  great  pleasure  if  he  could  fatter  himself  that  this  trifling 
production  could  afford  Miss  Berrys  any  amusement ;  and  should  any  error 
or  impropriety  occur  to  them  on  its  perusal,  he  shall  esteem*  himself  highly 
obliged  by  their  noticing  it  to  him  whenever  their  leisure  will  permit.  Mr.  R. 
incloses  another  copy,  which  he  requests  Miss  Berrys  will  take  the  trouble 
of  sending  to  the  Hon.  Mrs.  Darner,  with  his  best  respects. 
'  Birchfield,  Dec.  3,  1798.' 


1798]  TO  MRS.  CHOLMELEY.  79 

To  the  Same. 

Little  Strawb.,  Monday,  Dec.  24,  1798. 

.  .  .  You  will  see  in  to-day's  paper  the  confirmation  of  the 
capture  of  Minorca,*  which  I  fancy  is  really  of  very  consider- 
able importance  towards  maintaining  our  present  superiority  in 
the  Mediterranean.  Mrs.  Charles  Stuart  may  now,  instead  of 
*  tearing  her  hair  for  her  general's  departure,'  go  to  him  at 
Minorca,  of  which  he  is  made  governor.  .  .  .  The  Union  with 
Ireland  may  most  truly  be  called  the  Irish  Union,  for  it  seems 
likely  totally  to  disunite  the  two  countries.  Wrong  heads, 
either  individually  or  nationally,  are,  to  be  sure,  the  d — 1  to  deal 
with !  The  Union  with  Scotland  (from  which  she  has  to  date 
the  most  rapid  improvement  and  prosperity  which  ever  took 
place  in  a  country)  was  opposed  with  hardly  less  violence  by 
the  pride  and  prejudices  of  the  Scotch ;  but  the  Scotchman  will 
always  ultimately  submit  both  his  pride  and  his  prejudices  to 
his  interest,  and  has  the  sense  to  see  what  that  interest  is  ;  which 
latter  sense  I  can  by  no  means  allow  to  the  Irish,  after  their 
seriously  planning  to  set  themselves  up,  in  the  present  state  of 
Europe,  as  an  independent  republic  under  the  protection  of 
the  French  !  You  will  think  me  growing  ministerial:  nothing 
less,  I  can  assure  you.  We  have  behaved  like  brutes  and  like 
fools  to  Ireland ;  but  now  they  are  behaving  like  brutes  and 
fools  to  themselves ;  for  I  feel  convinced  that  a  union  with  this 
country  would  be  the  making  of  Ireland,  tho'  I  by  no  means 
think  it  likely  to  be  a  great  advantage  to  England  :  the  balance 
must  always  be  in  favour  of  the  poorer  country  admitted  to 
participate  in  all  the  commerce  and  commercial  undertakings 
of  the  richer  one.  I  am  told  there  is  in  Somerville's  '  Queen 
Anne  '  a  very  curious  and  detailed  account  of  all  the  opposition 
made  to,  and  all  the  arguments  pro  and  con  the  Union  with 
Scotland.  I  have  not  yet  come  to  it.  What  signifies  if  the 
idle  Irish  lords  should  all  come  over  and  live  here  ? — their  estates 

*  In  the  { Gazette  '  of  Dec.  24th  is  the  despatch  addressed  to  the  Right 
Hon.  Henry  Dundas,  and  signed  '  Chas.  Stuart,'  giving  an  account  of  this 
event,  beginning — '  I  have  the  honour  to  acquaint  you  that  His  Majesty's 
forces  are  in  possession  of  the  Island  of  Minorca,  without  having  sustained 
the  loss  of  a  single  man.' — Annual  Register. 


80  MISCELLANEOUS   LETTEES.  [1798 

would  very  soon  be  bought  by  great  linen-weavers  and  other 
manufacturers,  as  all  the  little  Scotch  lairds'  estates  have  been 
bought  by  people  having  made  commercial  fortunes,  and  able 
and  willing  to  lay  out  a  great  deal  of  money  in  ameliorating  and 
cultivating  to  the  utmost  their  purchases.  My  Irish  specu- 
lations are  luckily  interrupted  by  dinner.  Farewell ! 


'  Tristram  Shandy,'  while  it  diverts,  always  reminds  me  of  a 
Dutch  portrait,  in  which  we  admire  the  accurate  representation 
of  all  the  little  disgusting  blemishes — the  warts,  moles,  and 
hairs — of  the  human  form.  Even  when  he  affects  us,  it  is  by  a 
minute  detail  of  little  circumstances  which  all  lead  to  the  weak- 
nesses, and  are  often  connected  with  the  ridicules,  that  belong  to 
our  nature;  while  Eousseau,  on  the  contrary,  like  the  great 
masters  of  the  Italian  school  of  painting,  gives  grace  and  dignity 
to  every  character  he  brings  forward — choosing  to  represent 
scenes  and  situations  when  every  ennobling  faculty  of  our 
mind  is  brought  into  action,  and  the  greatest  expression  of 
passion  and  character  is  produced  without  even  losing  sight  of 
decent  grace,  or  presenting  anything  disgusting  to  the  imagi- 
nation. 

The  one  degrades  worth,  by  a  thousand  little  mean  circum- 
stances that  destroy  the  respect  which  it  ought  to  inspire ;  while 
the  other  consoles  frail  human  nature  with  the  idea  that  even 
great  failings  are  redeemable  by  virtuous  exertion. 

When  I  read  *  Paradise  Lost,'  I  am  no  more  able  to  conceive 
the  powers  of  imagination  and  genius  exerted  by  Milton  in  the 
composition  of  that  poem,  than  I  am  able  to  conceive  the  in- 
tellect of  Sir  Isaac  Newton  in  the  demonstration  of  the  pheno- 
mena of  the  universe.  Both  seem  to  me  beings  more  exalted 
above  myself,  in  the  scale  of  intellectual  perfection,  than  I  am 
above  the  brute  creation.  Both  serve,  more  than  any  other 
contemplation  of  nature,  to  raise  and  purify  my  ideas  of  its 
great  Author — of  that  Being  who  has  powers  to  delegate  such 
powers !  such  emanations  of  something  so  purely  spiritual !  so 
clearly  detached  from  all  corporal  properties  and  all  animal 
analogies ! 

With  gratitude,  too,  I  bow  before  the  Origin  of  all  good  for 


1798]  MILTON'S  'PARADISE  LOST.'  81 

having  placed  me  in  that  order  of  understandings,  not  disgraced 
by  the  unconsciousness  of  such  perfections,  but  who,  looking 
up  to  them  at  an  incalculable  distance,  with  pride  and  reve- 
rence, as  to  the  brightest  ornaments  of  the  nature  to  which  I 
belong,  am  yet  capable  of  being  enlightened  by  the  philosophy 
of  the  one,  and  enraptured  by  the  poetry  of  the  other. 

Mr.  Knight  surprised  me  much  the  other  day  by  his  sentiments 
of  Milton's  poetry:  I  mean,  of  Milton's  poetry  in  his  'Paradise 
Lost.'  That  even  the  finest  parts  of  that  poem,  while  he  ad- 
mired them,  should  rather  oppress  and  sink  him,  than  exalt  to 
that  sort  of  enthusiasm  and  rapture,  the  true  end  and  aim  of  all 
really  fine  poetry,  I  cannot  understand  in  a  man  of  his  admir- 
able taste  and  classical  acquirements.  The  perfect  taste,  the 
delicacy,  the  divine  purity  of  all  the  descriptions  of  Paradise,  of 
Adam  and  Eve — of  their  happiness,  their  loves,  &c.  &c., — he 
thinks  cold  and  unanimating,  and  admires  most  the  descriptions 
of  Satan,  and  the  diabolic  part  of  the  poem. 

Here,  again,  I  much  wonder  at  and  differ  from  him.  No- 
thing indeed  can  be  more  impressive,  more  dignified,  grander, 
or  more  consistent,  than  the  character  and  conduct  of  Satan  and 
his  compeers  throughout ;  but  I  must  ever  think  such  a  character, 
and  the  conduct  and  descriptions  incident  to  it,  less  original, 
less  infinitely  difficult,  as  to  the  effect  produced  by  them,  than 
the  exquisite  pictures  of  the  undisturbed  happiness  of  Para- 
dise and  its  inhabitants  before  their  fallen  state.  To  represent 
scenes  which  interest,  of  uninterrupted  happiness,  without  events, 
without  distress,  without  incident  of  any  kind,  and,  above  all, 
to  represent  love — the  enjoyments  of  happy,  gratified,  human 
love — without  grossness,  without  satiety,  and  with  a  purity 
both  of  thought  and  of  expression,  for  which  he  could  have 
neither  prototype  nor  example,  seems  to  me  one  of  the  greatest 
possible  efforts  of  the  magic  powers  of  true  poetry,  which  may 
indeed  be  said,  in  the  instance  of  Milton,  to  have  formed  a 
creation  of  its  own. 


VOL.  II.  G 


82  EXTKACTS   FROM   MISS   BERRY'S   LETTERS.  [1799 


EXTEACTS  FKOM  LETTEES. 
1799. 

'  STRAWBERRY  let,  at  the  [no  name  given]  at  Twickenham. 
We  go  to  Cheltenham  to  meet  the  Douglas'  and  Lady 
Spencer.  Mrs.  D.  came  to  meet  us  at  Malvern.' 

It  is  in  the  extracts  of  Miss  Berry's  letters  to  her 
friend  Mrs.  Cholmeley  that  we  best  trace  her  occupations 
and  thoughts  during  this  year. 

Jan.  3, 1799. 

Thus  late  with  angel  grace  along  the  plain 
Illustrious  Devon  led  Britannia's  train ; 
And  whilst,  by  frigid  fashion  unreprest, 
She  to  chaste  transports  open'd  all  her  breast, 
Joy'd  her  lov'd  babe  its  playful  hands  to  twine 
Round  her  fair  neck,  or  midst  her  locks  divine  j 
And  from  the  fount,  with  every  grace  imbued, 
Drank  heavenly  nectar,  not  terrestrial  food. 
So  Venus  once,  in  fragrant  bowers  above, 
Clasp'd  to  her  rosy  breast  immortal  Love, 
Transfus'd  soft  passion  through  his  tingling  frame, 
The  nerve  of  rapture,  and  the  heart  of  flame. 
Yet  not  with  wanton  hopes  and  fond  desires 
Her  infant's  veins  the  British  matron  fires  ; 
But  prompts  the  aim  to  crown  by  future  worth 
The  proud  pre-eminence  of  noble  birth. 


FINIS. 


Here  are  the  concluding  lines  of  Eoscoe's  poem*  which  I 
promised  you.  Your  opinion  of  him  as  a  poet  may  be  perfectly 
true,  for  I  have  never  yet  had  time  to  read  his  translations  of 
Lorenzo,  and  know  nothing  of  his  verses  except  some  little 
insignificant  trifles;  but  I  can  never  agree  to  your  idea  of 
'  prettyness '  suiting  the  Italian  language  better  than  English  or 

*  '  The  Nurse,'  a  poem,  alluded  to  in  the  letter  dated  Dec.  11,  1798. 


1799]         ITALIAN  LANGUAGE — UNION   WITH   IRELAND.  83 

French.  I  have  ever  thought  that  the  only  thing  to  which  the 
Italian  language  has  been  hitherto  quite  unapt  is  prettiness, 
sentiment,  id  genus  omne,  in  which  the  French,  by  its  continued 
application  to  them,  so  perfectly  succeeds.  The  Italian  language, 
I  am  persuaded,  is  capable  of  becoming  anything ;  but  hitherto 
I  think  you  will  find  it  to  have  been  the  language  of  passion, 
not  of  sentiment.  .  .  . 

I  rejoice  that  you  have  such  agreeable  accounts  from  your 
boy.  You,  I  trust,  will  experience  the  truth  of  what  I  have 
ever  thought — the  infinite  use,  advantage,  and  service  a  mother 
can  be  to  a  son ;  advantages  and  services  which,  if  not  neglected 
on  the  one  side,.  I  believe  are  rarely  if  ever  forgotten  or  ill 
repaid  on  the  other. 

Little  Strawb.,  Saturday,  Jan.  12, 1799. 

.  .  Somerville's  *  Anne '  *  is,  I  think,  more  dry  than  his 
*  William,'  but  clear,  distinct,  impartial,  and  wonderfully  in- 
forming ;  his  chapters  upon  the  Union  with  Scotland  are  par- 
ticularly so,  and  the  topics  and  events  of  the  present  day  make 
them  doubly  interesting.  From  the  almost  rebellious  state  of 
Scotland  at  the  time,  from  their  ridiculous  ideas  of  an  indepen- 
dent kingdom,  and  their  general  aversion  and  opposition  to  the 
plan,  of  none  of  which  circumstances  I  had  before  at  all  a  just 
idea,  I  assure  you  I  begin  to  think  that,  volens  nolens,  we  must 
have  a  Union  with  Ireland.  If  their  potatoe  heads  rebel  with, 
they  most  certainly  will  rebel  without  it,  the  moment  a  great 
military  force  leaves  the  country ;  and  I  really  fancy  the  attempt 
at  least  of  a  Union  is  all  we  have  for  it  to  save  them  from  the 
merciless  fangs  of  France. 

The  news  from  Naples  is  melancholy  beyond  expression,  and 
too  plainly  shows  that  the  immortal  victory  of  Nelson  will  only 
tend  to  a  still  greater  and  fruitless  destruction  of  the  human 
race  in  that  devoted  country ;  while  our  ignorant  ministers  and 
their  pert  adherents  (ignorant,  I  mean,  of  foreign  affairs),  instead 
of  sticking  to  their  ships  and  their  sailors,  are  talking  of  being 
the  deliverers  and  arbitrators  of  Europe  ! !  .  .  . 

*  l History  of  Great  Britain  during  the  Reign,  of  Queen  Anne;  with  a 
Dissertation  concerning  the  Danger  of  the  Protestant  Succession.'  By  Thos. 
Somerville,  D.D.,  F.R.S.,  Edinburgh,  Minister  of  Jedburgh.  Published 
1798. —  Watts' s  Dictionary. 

G'2 


84  EXTRACTS   FROM    MISS   BERRY'S    LETTERS.  [1799 

N.  Audley  Street,  Tuesday,  Jan.  22,  1799. 

.  .  .  I  have  ever  sought  in  friendship  persons  I  con- 
sidered as  my  superiors  in  mental  endowments;  indeed,  such 
superiority  must  ever  be  the  first  real  inducement  and  only  real 
foundation  for  an  intimate  union  to  a  thinking  mind.  If  I 
afterwards  found  an  inferiority  in  some  points,  I  looked  for  and 
recognised  a  superiority  in  others.  My  very  seeking  their  inti- 
macy at  all,  necessarily  supposed  these  circumstances,  this 
balanced  equality ;  but,  certainly,  the  more  superior  I  found 
them  in  judgment,  in  feelings,  in  opinions,  in  taste,  the  more  I 
sought,  cultivated,  and  congratulated  myself  on  the  conviction ; 
the  more  I  took  and  the  less  I  gave,  the  more  I  should  have 
considered  the  balance  in  my  favour.  .  .  .. 

N.  Audley  Street,  Sunday,  Feb.  3, 1799. 

.  .  .  .  I  hope  you  have  read  the  Irish  debates  on  the 
Union.  I  think  you  will  have  found  in  them  much  abuse,  little 
eloquence,  and  absolutely  no  argument.  I  fancy  they  think 
they  hold  the  charter  of  their  constitution  and  independence 
by  a  bull;  for,  would  you  believe  it,  the  first  official  accounts 
misstated  the  majority  of  the  House  of  Lords  for  the  minority, 
and  the  mistake  went  all  over  London.  I  myself  was  shown  a 
letter  by  Mathew  (Col.  Mathew),  which,  from  its  handwriting, 
and  the  office  manner  in  which  it  was  drawn  up,  I  am  sure 
must  have  come  from  a  clerk  of  the  Parliament,  in  which  this 
mistake  in  computation  was  regularly  stated  ! !  Mr.  Pitt's  speech 
on  opening  the  business  in  the  Parl*  here,  I  really  think  very 
good ;  tho',  in  my  opinion,  some  of  the  strongest  arguments  in 
favour  of  a  Union  he  hardly  touches  upon;  whether  from 
thinking  the  cause  too  good  to  want  them,  or  what  other  reason, 
I  cannot  pretend  to  say.  Sheridan's  answer  I  thought  miserable, 
I  mean  in  point  of  argument,  and  in  his  first  speech  he  had 
got  himself  fairly  into  a  dilemma,  when  he  first  urged  the 
independence  of  the  Irish  Parl.,  and  then  its  incompetency. 
The  famous  Irish  pamphlet  in  favor  of  the  Union,  called  Cease 
your  Funning,  which  after  much  trouble  I  got  to  read,  dis- 
appointed me ;  it  is  sharp  and  well-kept-up  irony  from  beginning 
to  end,  on  a  pamphlet  on  the  other  side,  by  the  Ld  Lieut.'s  secre- 
tary;* but  it  is  not  very  entertaining,  and  not  at  all  instructive. 

*  An  official  pamphlet  by  Mr.  Cooke,  the  Irish  Under  Secretary  of  State, 


1799]  WILBERFORCE'S  '  PRACTICAL  VIEW.'  85 

If  our  ministry  open  and  discuss  their  plan  of  Union  here,  if 
that  plan  is  a  liberal  one,  and  if  they  do  not  now  cram  it  down 
the  people's  throats,  but  leave  it  to  be  considered  and  taken  up 
at  some  more  propitious  moment,  I  should  suppose  they  would 
do  wisely,  and  therefore  I  doubt  they  will  not  do  it. 

Here  is  a  long  batch  of  politics  for  me.  I  might  turn  to  your 
other  favorite  subject,  religion ;  for,  in  compliance  with  your 
request  and  my  own  wishes,  I  have  been  and  am  reading  with 
much  attention  Mr.  Wilberforce's  book,  and  likewise  strictures 
on  it,  in  a  series  of  letters  by  Mr.  Belsham,*  a  man  who  has,  I 
am  told,  wrote  several  good  historical  tracts.  When  I  have  done, 
I  will  tell  you  sincerely  the  impression  they  make  upon  me :  I 
can  assure  you  it  is  a  very  deep  one.  My  mind,  always  over 
serious,  grows  every  day  more  so  as  I  approach  that  middle  age 
of  life,  when  the  prospect  of  rational  beings  begins  to  close  in 
upon  them,  and  the  visionary  distance  fades  from  their  strength- 
ened or  weakened  sight. 

I  have  not  sealed  with  black  wax  to  you,  because  I  think  it 
always  alarming  at  a  distance ;  but  I  am  in  mourning  for  my 
uncle  (Furguson's)  only  daughter,  who  has  just  died  of  a  con- 
sumption at  the  age  of  15,  with  the  courage  of  a  hero  and  the 
resignation  of  a  saint. 

N.  Audley  Street,  Tuesday  Feb.  19,  1799. 

.  .  .  .  Your  *  Practical  Education '  f  is  a  title  I  have  long 
set  down  in  my  pocket-book  as  of  a  work  to  read,  which  I  most 
certainly  shall  at  my  first  leisure  minutes.  They,  I  fear,  will  not 
be  many,  for  I  am  going  to  go  on  with  my  Greek,  under  a  mas- 
ter recommended  to  me  by  Charles  Burney,  an  English  master. 
Therefore,  you  will  no  longer  have  reason  to  be  (comically)  angry 
at  my  supposed  obstinacy  about  the  pronunciation  of  Greek.  I 
intend  to  have  him  but  once  a  week,  that,  allowing  for  my  too 
frequent  interruptions  from  bad  health  and  necessary  idleness,  I 
may  yet  be  able  to  work  a  good  deal  by  myself,  without  which 

entitled  '  Arguments  for  and  against  the  Union  considered.'  It  was  widely 
circulated,  and  discussion  of  the  subject  encouraged. — Edinburgh  Heineic, 
April  1859. 

*  Thomas  Belsham,  author  of  '  A  Review  of  Mr.  Wilberforce's  Practical 
View  of  the  Prevailing  Religious  Systems  of  Professed  Christians,'  pub- 
lished 1798,  and  of  a  variety  of  other  works. —  Watts' s  Dictionary. 

t  By  Miss  Edge  worth,  published  1798. 


86  EXTRACTS   FROM   MISS   BERRY'S   LETTERS.  [1799 

little  can  be  done  with  all  the  masters  in  the  world.     This  will 
confine  my  reading  (after  I  have  finished  what  I  am  at  present 
about)   principally  to  what  I  call  reading  up  to  the  day :  I 
mean  pamphlets  and  things  of  the  moment,  which  one  is  left  in 
the  basket  without.     Poor  Jerningham  has  just  published  a 
little  thing,  which  he  calls  'a  dramatic  whim.'*     It  is  not  posi- 
tively bad  in  its  way,  but  it  is  a  way  that  you  would  not  like.   It 
is  a  scene  and  a  frolic  of  Charles  2nd  and  some  of  his  most  dis- 
tinguished  courtiers  at  Peckham,  where  (it  seems)  he  had  a 
country-house.     However,  bad  or  good,  I  rejoice  that  a  book- 
seller has  given  him  40L  for  it,  without  his  name  to  it  (which, 
indeed,  might  have  done  more  harm  than  good).     The  poor  soul 
is  just  now  in  a  distress  for  which  one  must  pity  him,  tho'  it  is 
in  fact  the  luckiest  thing  that  could  possibly  have  happened  to 
him.     .     .     .   Mr.  Sotheby  f  sent  me  his  e  Battle  of  the  Nile.'  £ 
The  subject  must  ever  inspire,  however  recounted,  a  degree  of 
enthusiasm  very  favourable  to  the  recounter.    There  seems  to 
be  a  number  of  good  lines  in  his  poem,  but  the  conduct  of  it  is 
not  to  me  clear ;  and  the  same  want  of  clearness,  I  think,  applies 
to  some  of  his  verses. 


N.  Audley  Street,  Tuesday,  March  5,  1799. 

.  .  .  On  Saturday  Mrs.  Darner  and  ourselves  dined  with 
your  mother  and  brother;  and  yesterday  we  went  with  him,  at 
his  own  request,  to  the  Great  Orleans  Pictures  which  are  exhibited 
at  the  Lyceum,  in  the  Strand.  It  was  my  second  visit.  Among 
them  is  the  Sebastian  del  Piombo  (a  Eesurrection  of  Lazarus ),§ 
of  whose  excellence,  if  you  remember, 

He  talked  so  much  and  long  about  it, 
That  e'en  believers  'gan  to  doubt  it. 

But  he  could  not  say  too  much — I  give  him  credit  for  all  his 

*  '  Peckham  Frolic,  or  Nell  Gwynn/  comedy  in  three  acts. 

f  William  Sotheby,  born  1757 ;  entered  the  army,  in  the  10th  Dra- 
goons, when  engaged  in  protecting  part  of  the  Scottish  coasts  from  the 
incursions  of  Paul  Jones.  In  1798  he  published  his  translation  of  ( Oberon.' 
He  also  translated  the  Georgics  of  Virgil,  and  the  Iliad  and  the  Odyssey 
of  Homer.  He  was  also  the  author  of  '  Saul  Constance  of  Castile,'  &c. 
Died  1833. — Imperial  Dictionary  of  Universal  Biography. 

I  Published  in  1799. 

§  Now  in  the  National  Gallery. 


1799]      GREAT   ORLEANS   PICTURES SOTHEBY'S   'NILE.'         87 

admiration ;  it  is  one  of  the  f me  pictures  in  the  world — excelling 
in  grouping,  composition,  drawing,  intellect,  clearness,  expres- 
sion, and  all  that  constitutes  the  perfections  of  the  higher  order 
of  painting.  Mrs.  Darner,  he,  and  I  stood  before  it  for  above 
half  an  hour  yesterday  thoroughly  enjoying  it.  I  am  heartily 
sorry  that  you  do  not  see  these  pictures,  for  they  are  by  far  the 
finest — indeed,  the  only  real  display  of  the  excellency  of  the 
Italian  schools  of  painting  that  I  ever  remember  in  this  country. 
And  then  one  sees  them  so  comfortably,  for  there  are  fewer 
people  go  to  the  Lyceum  than  even  to  Pall  Mall,  for  the  pic- 
tures are  all  of  a  sort  less  understood  and  less  tasted  here :  and 
besides,  they  are  without  frames ;  and  besides,  the  Lyceum  is 
out  of  the  way ;  and  besides,  it  is  not  near  Dyde's  and  Scribe's, 
nor  Butler's,  nor  any  of  the  great  haberdashers  for  the  women, 
nor  Bond  St.  nor  St.  James'«St.  for  the  men.  .  .  . 

.  .  .  I  am  well  acquainted  with  Warton's  criticism  on  Pope  ; 
and  tho'  it  is  certainly  open  to  all  you  say  of  its  wandering 
manner,  it  is  as  certainly  never  unentertaining,  and,  in  my 
opinion,  contains  more  candid  and  liberal  criticism  upon  what- 
ever may  be  the  object  under  consideration,  more  enthusiasm 
about  genius,  and  ten  thousand  times  more  real  taste  than  in 
all  the  critical  writings  of  the  morose  and  bigoted  Johnson. 
Whatever  recommends  Lucretius  to  your  notice,  recommends  a 
source  of  exquisite  pleasure  to  your  poetic  mind :  his  meta- 
physics are  naught,  but  his  poetry  is  divine.  Virgil  shrinks  into 
prettiness  whenever  compared  with  him :  but  remember  he  is 
supposed  to  have  died  the  day  Virgil  was  born ;  therefore  he  is 
less  polished,  less  uniformly  harmonious. 

I  have  got  your  critique  upon  Mr.  Sotheby's  'Nile,'  which 
I  dare  say  I  shall  read  with  pleasure ;  but  how  can  you  (except 
indeed  for  a  lesson  to  your  boy) — you,  who  can  so  translate  Gray 
and  may  read  Lucretius,  and  have  little  time,  condescend  so  to 
criticise  a  minor  poet  ?  .  .  . 

Tuesday  morning,  March  12, 1799. 

.  .  .  I  am  quite  impatient  to  read  the  song  of  the  Nile, 
and  shall  certainly  get  it  to-day  when  I  am  out ;  for,  having 
resolved  to  buy,  I  would  not  borrow  it.  I  don't  know  how  my 
'  transports '  may  be  vis-a-vis  des  votres,  but  I  believe  few 
people  (with  a  head  as  prosaic  as  mine)  read  and  regard  poetry 
more  in  its  true  intent,  as  one  of  the  chief  consolations  and 


88  EXTRACTS   FROM   MISS   BERRY'S   LETTERS.  [1799 

ornaments  of  human  life.  I  always  read  to  be  pleased  and 
interested,  to  forget  myself  as  long  as  possible  in  the  charming 
regions  of  imagination,  or  to  rejoice  in  feeling  its  mighty  powers 
giving  irresistible  energy  to  the  cause  of  truth  and  virtue.  .  .  . 
.  .  .  Do  you  remember  my  speaking  to  you  in  high  terms 
of  a  series  of  plays  upon  the  passions  of  the  human  mind,  which 
had  been  sent  to  me  last  winter  by  the  author  ?  *  I  talked  to 
everybody  else  in  the  same  terms  of  them  at  the  time,  anxiously 
enquiring  for  the  author;  but  nobody  knew  them,  nobody  cared 
for  them,  nobody  would  listen  to  me ;  and  at  last  I  unwillingly 
held  my  tongue,  for  fear  it  should  be  supposed  that  I  thought 
highly  of  them  only  because  they  had  been  sent  to  me.  This 
winter  the  first  question  upon  everybody's  lips  is,  '  Have  you 
read  the  series  of  plays  ?  '  Everybody  talks  in  the  raptures  (I 
always  thought  they  deserved)  of  the  tragedies  and  of  the  intro- 
duction as  of  a  new  and  admirable  piece  of  criticism.  Sir  Gr. 
Beaumontjf  who  was  with  us  yesterday  morning,  says  he  never 
expected  to  see  such  tragedies  in  his  days;  andC.  Fox,  to  whom 
he  had  sent  them,  is  in  such  raptures  with  them,  that  he  has 
written  a  critique  of  5  pages  upon  the  subject  to  Sir  George.  I 
mention  these  two  as  persons  of  whose  taste  I,  and  I  believe  you 
too,  have  a  very  decided  opinion.  I  own  my  little  amour-propre 
is  mortified  that,  having  been  honoured  with  a  copy  of  the  work, 
my  humble  tribute  of  unfeigned  admiration  and  undictated 
praise  had  not  reached  the  author  before  it  is  drowned  in  the 
general  voice.  But,  whoever  that  author  is,  they  still  persist  in 

*  Joanna  Baillie,  daughter  of  Rev.  James  Baillie  and  his  wife  Dorothea 
Hunter,  born  at  the  manse  at  Bothwell,  near  Glasgow.  She  was  niece  of 
the  great  anatomists  William  and  John  Hunter,  and  sister  of  Dr.  Baillie. 
In  1798  she  published  her  first  volume  of  plays ;  in  1836  she  published 
three  more  volumes  of  dramas ;  and  at  different  times  several  other  pieces 
of  poetry,  many  exceedingly  graceful.  Died  at  Hampstead  1851,  in  her 
89th  year. — Imperial  Dictionary  of  Universal  Biography. 

t  Sir  George  H.  Beaumont,  Bart.,  born  in  1753.  His  name  now  stands  for 
the  type  of  convention  in  landscape-painting.  Married,  in  1784,  the  daugh- 
ter of  Chief-Justice  Willis.  He  was  greatly  admired  as  an  actor  in  private 
theatricals;  he  was  a  professed  painter,  as  well  as  professed  critic.  Had  he 
been  poor,  he  might  have  made  a  second-rate  artist.  It  was  principally 
owing  to  Sir  George  Beaumont's  exertions,  and  to  his  promise  of  leaving 
his  own  collection  of  pictures  to  the  nation,  that  the  erection  of  a  National 
Gallery  is  due.  Lord  Dover,  Lord  Aberdeen,  and  Lord  Farnborough  were 
his  first  principal  supporters  in  this  laudable  design. — Imperial  Dictionary 
of  Universal  Biography. 


1799]  THEATRICALS.  89 

preserving  a  strict  incognito,  for  which  I  honour  their  honest 
pride,  which  scorns  to  be  indebted  to  any  name  for  the  success 
of  such  a  work,  and,  with  the  patient  sense  of  real  merit,  has 
quietly  waited  a  whole  twelvemonth  for  the  impression  it  has  at 
last  made  on  an  obdurate  public.  I  fancy  one  of  them  will  be 
acted — the  least  good  one,  in  my  opinion — but  there  are  two  fine 
characters  for  Kemble  and  Mrs.  Siddons.*  She  (Mrs.  Siddons) 
who  was  one  of  a  little  party  we  had  last  night,  spoke  of  them 
with  a  surprise  and  delight  that  did  honour  to  her  taste.  She 
(by  the  bye)  was  at  her  very  best  last  night ;  had  put  off  the 
Catherine,  or  rather  not  put  it  on  since  her  return  from  Bath, 
and  sang  to  us  after  supper,  and  was  agreeable.  .  .  . 

N.  Audley  Street,  Tuesday,  March  19,  1799. 

.  .  .  I  am  glad  to  hear  of  you  at  York,  and  glad  to  hear  of 
you  at  the  play.  *  The  Jew  and  the  Doctor,'  I  felt,  must  please 
you :  it  has  true  comic  humour,  a  sufficient  degree  of  intrigue 
(which,  if  not  new,  is  well  put  together),  and  is  infinitely  better 
written  than  any  modern  comedy  that  I  have  seen.  A  comedy 
in  five  acts  appeared  last  week  at  Covent  Garden  by  the  same 
author,  which  prepossesses  one  in  its  favour,  but  I  have  neither 
seen  nor  heard  any  account  of  it.  Apropos  to  plays,  be  sure 
you  read  the  vol.  I  mentioned  to  you  in  my  last.  There  is  now 
such  a  rage  for  them  here  among  all,  the  few,  people  who  think 
on  these  subjects,  that  they  even  admire  the  comedy  excessively. 
Here,  I  own,  my  admiration  stops;  not  that  there  are  not  many 
strokes  both  of  nature  and  character  in  it ;  the  intrigue  a  com- 
mon one,  and,  I  think,  none  of  the  characters  very  interesting. 
All  this  talking  and  thinking  about  plays  brings  my  own  long- 
forgotten  into  my  head,  which  it  had  better  not,  for  it  always 
gives  me  an  itching  to  do  something  with  it,  and  it  had  pro- 
bably better  be  left  untouched  to  my  executors.  .  .  . 

You,  who  know  the  activity  of  my  mind,  will  be  pleased  to  hear 
that  I  have  got  a  man  to  pursue  Greek  with  me,  recommended 

*  Sarah  Siddons,  born  1755.  Her  father,  Roger  Kemble,  was  manager 
of  a  provincial  theatre.  From  an  early  age  she  was  accustomed  to  figure  on 
the  stage  as  one  of  her  father's  troup.  In  1773  she  was  married  to  Mr. 
Siddons.  She  made  her  first  appearance  at  Drury  Lane  in  1775,  in  the 
character  of  Portia.  She  bade  farewell  to  the  stage  in  1812;  her  last 
appearance  was  in  the  character  of  Lady  Randolph,  in  1818.  She .  died 
1831. — Imperial  Dictionary  of  Universal  Biography. 


90  EXTKACTS   FROM   MISS   BEEEY'S   LETTERS.  [1799 

by  Dr.  Chas.  Burney.  He  is  an  Englishman,  so  that  I  shall  soon 
lose  my  foreign  accent ;  and  he  has  been  all  his  life  employed  in 
teaching,  so  that  one  might  expect  his  method  to  be  good.  But, 
alas !  what  a  difference  I  find  between  his  learning  and  that  of 
my  Greek  Petrachi !  The  one  I  feel  and  see  is  only  a  scholar 
more  advanced  than  myself  in  the  same  study,  and  unused  and 
incapable  of  taking  any  deep  views  upon  the  subject:  the 
other  had  fathomed  every  depth  of  the  language  in  which  he 
first  began  to  speak  ;  and  if  ever  he  failed  in  explanation,  it  was 
only  where  the  accuracy  of  his  ideas  went  beyond  my  powers 
of  perception.  However,  this  man  or  any  other  is  better  than 
none,  and  will  prevent,  at  least,  my  having  the  mortification  of 
thinking  that  I  have  thrown  away  many  months'  time  and  some 
painful  attention,  to  be  left  on  the  threshold  of  knowing,  what 
in  truth  everything  both  in  science  and  taste  refers  to,  and  is 
deduced  from. 

N.  Audley  Street,  Thursday,  March  21, 1799. 

...  I  am  delighted  you  like  *  Basil,'  with  whom  and  with  his 
admirable  friend  I  am  in  love.  Nothing  to  me  can  be  more 
affecting  than  the  end  of  that  play.  The  great  guns  of  taste, 
I  find,  all  prefer  the  other,  except  Mr.  Fox :  I  am  satisfied  while 
convenio  cum  eminentissimo  Carpegno.  The  second  tragedy 
you  will,  I  think,  find  very  affecting  too  ;  it  is  going  to  be  acted. 
The  author,  applied  to  by  the  means  of  Cadell,  still  refuses  to 
come  forward  even  to  receive  emolument ;  says  the  piece  is  before 
the  public,  that  the  Theatre  may  do  what  they  please  with  it, 
only  desires  the  simplicity  of  the  plot  may  not  be  infringed 
upon.  Neither  fame  nor  a  thousand  pounds  therefore  have 
much  effect  upon  this  said  author's  mind,  whoever  he  or  she 
may  be.  I  say  she,  because  and  only  because  no  man  could  or 
would  draw  such  noble,  such  dignified  representations  of  the 
female  mind  as  the  Countess  Albini*  and  Jane  de  Mountfort.f 
They  often  make  us  clever,  captivating,  heroic,  but  never  ration- 
ally superior.  ...  I  have  just  received  a  work  in  2  vols.  from 
H.  More,  called  '  Strictures  on  the  Modern  System  of  Female 
Education :'  J  when  I  have  read  it,  you  shall  hear  of  it. 

*  Character  in  '  Basil.' 

t  Character  in  l  De  Montfort,'  by  Miss  J.  Baillie. 

t  Hannah  More,  born  in  1746,  a  popular  writer  on  moral  and  religious 


1799]  HANNAH   MORE.  91 

Thursday,  March  28,  1799. 

.  .  .  H.  More's  book  will,  I  should  think,  to  you  supply 
everything  that  you  want  in  Miss  E.'s  *  Practical  Education ;' 
for  this  should  properly  be  called,  Strictures  upon  the  Educa- 
tion of  Young  Ladies  as  far  as  it  relates  to  religion  and  morality. 
There  are  many  excellent  details  in  it,  much  good  sense,  and  an 
infinity  of  wit,  for  which  last  indeed  I  think  all  H.  More's  prose 
is  quite  remarkable;  but  there  is  in  her  writings,  as  in  Mr. 
"Wilberforce's,  a  principle  radically  false,  which  in  my  opinion 
vitiates  every  system  built  upon  it,  and  saps  the  very  founda- 
tions of  morality — nay,  the  very  throne  of  God  ! .  .  .  .  The 
world  in  general  has  nothing  to  do  with  one's  faith :  mine  is 
perfectly  satisfactory  to  myself.  Without  disputing  about  or  up- 
holding our  several  doctrines  while  we '  now  see  darkly  as  through 
a  glass,'  let  us  both  endeavour  to  continue  acting  our  parts 
well,  and  we  shall  meet  hereafter  in  some  place  where  we  shall 
both  understand  the  subject  much  better,  and  where  such  a 
disquisition  will  not  be  attended  with  that  human  leaven  of 
error  and  acrimony  which  they  are  too  apt  to  be  here.  .  .  .  My 
Greek,  about  which  I  am  really  anxious,  takes  me  up  some  time, 
and  I  have  often,  for  ourselves  and  others,  what  many  women 
would  call  business.  At  present  I  have  to  talk  and  think  a 
good  deal,  and  never  very  agreeably,  about  a  trusteeship  of  my 
father's  to  his  uncle's  great  property  in  Scotland — an  affair-in 
which  we  are  in  no  respect  involved 

Tuesday,  April  2, 1799. 

.  .  In  the  many  hours  I  have  spent  alone  this  last 
week,  I  have  been  able,  though  by  very  little  bits  at  a  time,  to 
go  entirely  through  Hannah  More,  and  Mrs.  Woolstonecroft* 
immediately  after  her.  It  is  amazing,  or  rather  it  is  not  amazing, 

themes,  and  of  some  dramas.  Her  father  was  in  humble  circumstances.  She 
had  four  sisters ;  and,  whilst  still  in  their  youth,  they  found  themselves  at 
the  head  of  a  flourishing  school.  Hannah  wrote  verse  very  early,  and 
was  the  author  of  '  Coalebs  in  Search  of  a  Wife,'  and  of  many  works  of 
a  very  serious  character,  and  severe  strictures  on  what  she  termed  the 
fashionable  world.  She  was  of  a  most  active  and  benevolent  character. 
She  died  1833. — Imperial  Dictionary  of  Universal  liiot/raphy. 

*  Mary  Woolstonecroft,  born  1759,  died  1797 :  authoress  of  'Thoughts  on 
the  Education  of  Daughters ;'  married  to  William  Godwin,  who  published, 
after  her  death,  many  of  her  unpublished  works,  1798. —  Watts's  Dictionary. 


92  EXTRACTS   FROM   MISS   BERRY'S   LETTERS.  [1799 

but  impossible,  they  should  do  otherwise  than  agree  on  all  the 
great  points  of  female  education.  H.  More  will,  I  dare  say,  be 
very  angry  when  she  hears  this,  though  I  would  lay  a  wager 
that  she  never  read  the  book. 

.  .  .  Indeed,  I  have  been  most  literally  alone ;  for  Mrs. 
Darner  went  on  Friday  and  only  returned  yesterday  from 
Brocket  Hall,  where  she  assisted  in  acting  a  play  with  Lady 
Melbourne's  sons.  It  was  'Ways  and  Means,'  a  three-act 
thing  of  Colman's.  I  never  saw  it.  Her  part  was  only  Lady 
Dunders,  a  mere  fat  aid  woman  who  has  only  a  few  words  to 
say.  But  she  put  them  all  in  the  way  of  doing  better  than  they 
otherwise  would.  .  .  . 

N.  Audley  Street,  Friday,  May  17,  1799, 

.  .  .  I  was  much  entertained  by  some  letters  which  Price 
showed  me  from  Sr  Gr.  Beaumont,  Fox,  and  Knight,*  containing 
criticisms  on  the  series  of  plays  which  he  (Price)  had  set  them 
all  reading.  They  were  excellent,  the  ideas  of  three  very 
superior  understandings  and  tastes,  all  struck  with  different 
beauties  and  blemishes,  and  reasoning  upon  them  according  to 
the  varied  medium  of  mind  through  which  they  saw. 

N.  Audley  Street,  Thursday,  May  23,  1799. 

.  .  .  I  fear  there  is  no  hope  for  you  about  the  criticisms 
on  the  plays :  the  letters  were  all,  de  tons  c6tes,  addressed  to 
Price  ;  they  were  only  pieces  of  letters  upon  other  subjects,  but 
he  knows  their  value,  keeps  them  in  cotton,  and  went  out  of 
town  for  good  on  Monday  last.  .  .  I  began  Homer's  Iliad 
on  Wednesday  last,  to  my  no  small  delight,  and  felt  no  particular 
difficulty  in  the  comprehension  of  the  first  doz.  lines.  .  .  . 

Cheltenham,  Monday,  Aug.  5,  1799. 

.  .  .  I  am  in  no  sort  of  hurry  to  leave  this  place,  where  I 
enjoy  a  quiet  in  the  morning  which  I  seldom  or  never  attain  at 

*  Richard  Payne  Knight,  Esq.,  of  Downton  Castle,  Herefordshire ;  "bom 
1750;  well  known  for  bis  great  classical  attainments,  his  love  of  art 
ancient  and  modern,  and  as  a  collector  on  a  large  scale.  His  collection, 
valued  at  30,(XXW.,  he  bequeathed  to  the  British  Museum.  He  was  a  writer 
on  classical  subjects, — '  An  Analytical  Essay  on  the  Greek  Alphabet/  &c. 
&c. ;  and  in  1805  he  published  his  '  Analytical  Enquiry  into  the  Principles 
of  Taste.'  Died  1824. 


1799]  COMPANY  AT   CHELTENHAM.  93 

home,  and  the  rest  of  the  day  lead  a  life  as  comfortably  unlike 
a  public  place  as  can  be  well  imagined.  The  Douglas's,  17 
Spencer,*  and  ourselves  always  meet  at  the  well  of  a  morng,  and 
generally  pass  some  part  of  the  even8  together,  either  walk- 
ing or  at  the  play  (where  we  have  had  Kemble,)  or  sometimes, 
but  very  seldom,  at  the  rooms,  where,  as  we  have  hitherto 
none  of  us  known  anybody,  we  have  had  little  temptation  to  go; 
but  there  are  new  arrivals  every  day,  and  some  agreeable, 
conversable  males  will  at  last  occur,  I  hope,  which  we  much  want 
in  our  society,  altho'  never  did  I  see  so  many  men  in  a  place  of 
this  sort,  but  all  of  them  unknown  both  to  ourselves  and  those 
we  know  here.  Did  I  tell  you  that  Ly  Spencer  (the  Dow.  I 
mean)  had  sought  our  acquaintance  with  empressement,  and  that 
I  have  become  a  great  favorite  with  her  and  her  granddaughter,! 
who  is  a  charming,  natural,  unaffected  girl  of  sixteen,  with  a 
warm  heart  and  good  understanding  ?  She  will  never,  I  think, 
be  handsome  to  compare  with  her  mother,  but  has  much  of  her 
captivating  manner.  She  has  taken  to  me  (of  whom  she  says 
she  has  heard  so  much  beforehand)  with  all  the  overflowing 
warmth  of  an  affectionate  heart  at  sixteen.  .  .  . 

Letter  from  the  Dow.  Lady  Spencer  to  M'iss  Berry. 

Nuneham,{  Aug.  21,  1799. 

You  are  very  good,  my  dear  Miss  Berry,  to  give  me  the  proof 
you  have  done  that  I  am  not  yet  forgot.  I  should  have  been 

*  Margaret  Georgiana,  eldest  daughter  of  Stephen  Poynts,  Esq.,  of 
Medgeham,  Co.  Berks ;  married,  1755,  to  John,  first  Earl  of  Spencer.  Lord 
Spencer  died  in  1783. 

t  Lady  Georgiana  Cavendish,  daughter  of  the  Duke  of  Devonshire,  wife 
of  the  late  Earl  of  Carlisle,  and  mother  of  the  present :  died  1858.  The 
interest  with  which  this  lady  inspired  Miss  Berry,  more  than  double  her  age, 
soon  ripened  into  a  friendship  that  terminated  only  with  Miss  Berry's 
exiLstence.  If  it  may  be  permitted  here  to  offer  a  tribute  of  respectful 
admiration  to  the  memory  of  one  whose  virtues  were  exercised  so  strictly 
within  the  pale  of  private  and  domestic  life,  it  would  be  to  remark  how 
truly  her  opening  character  had  been  discerned,  how  well  through  life  she 
kept  the  fair  promise  of  her  youth,  and  how  in  her  declining  years  she 
reaped  the  rich  reward  of  more  than  ordinary  devotion  from  those  around 
her,  and  to  the  last  remained  the  centre  of  affection  and  duty  to  a  circle  of 
numerous  descendants. 

|  The  seat  of  George  Simon,  second  Earl  of  Harcourt :  born  1736,  died 
1765. 


94  EXTRACTS   FROM   MISS   BERRY'S    LETTERS.  [1799 

glad  to  have  heard  that  you  had  found  some  old  friends  among 
the  new-comers,  that  might  have  replaced  those  to  whom  you 
kindly  gave  up  so  much  of  your  time. 

We  met  the  Duchess  of  Devonshire,  several  of  my  grchildn, 
and  Miss  Trimmer,*  at  Oxford  :  this  last  is  the  governess  to  the 
Lady  Cavendishes,  whom  I  wish  you  to  notice  when  you  see  her, 
because  she  is  excellent  in  herself  and  invaluable  to  them ;  and 
you  will  therefore  feel  with  me  that  the  more  weight  can  be 
given  to  her  by  others  the  better :  indeed,  she  is  in  a  very  inde- 
pendent situation,  and  has  never  been  on  any  other  footing  than 
that  of  a  friend. 

I  am  here  in  a  most  beautiful  place ;  the  weather  is  delight- 
ful, and  my  early  rising  gives  me  many  hours  to  stroll  about 
before  the  society  I  am  in  begin  to  live.  But  I  want  my  sweet 
child,  to  whom  I  might  point  out  a  thousand  striking  scenes, 
and  I  often  long  for  Miss  Douglas's  pencil  and  yours  to  fix  them 
on  my  memory.  The  way  of  living  here  is  in  the  old  style, 
which  tho'  the  modern  world  would  call  formal,  has,  like  many 
old  customs,  sterling  worth — great  regularity,  decent  magnifi- 
cence, and  much  real  charity  and  beneficence  of  every  kind  is 
daily  going  forward,  besides  a  little  drawing-room  loisir  for 
general  conversation,  which,  when  there  is  anybody  that  under- 
stands what  the  thing  means,  is  not  unpleasant.  But  I  forget  I 
am  only  thanking  you  for  your  letter,  and  not  commencing  a 
correspondence,  for  which  having  neither  time  nor  talent  to  bear 
my  part,  I  am  not  unreasonable  enough  to  request.  I  beg  my 
best  regards  to  Miss  Agnes,  and  my  compliments  to  Mr.  Berry, 
And  am,  dear  Miss  Berry, 

Your  faithful  and  affectionate, 
jjumbie  serv^ 

G-.  SPENCER. 

P.S. — Have  you  ever  seen  the  3d  vol.  of  Mason's  Poems, 
published  two  years  ago  ?  I  never  did  till  I  came  here ;  and  I 
have  found  some  sweet  things  in  them,  which  I  have  been  read- 
ing this  morning  in  the  flower-garden  facing  the  cinerary  urn 
Lord  Harcourt  has  erected  to  his  memory. 

I  cannot  help  translating  the  end  of  a  sonnet  written  in  his 

*  Daughter  of  Mrs.  Trimmer,  the  well-known  authoress  of  children's 
books  and  works  of  education. 


1799]  SCENERY   NEAR   MALVERN.  95 

70th  year,  which  you  will  not  wonder  at  my  being  particularly 
pleased  with, — but  I  wish  you  was  here  to  mend  my  pen. 

Still  round  my  shelter'd  lawn  I  pleas'd  can  stray, 
Still  trace  my  sylvan  blessings  to  their  spring; 

Being  of  Beings  !     Yes,  that  silent  lay 
Which  musing  Gratitude  delights  to  sing, 

Still  to  thy  sapphire  throne  shall  Earth  convey, 
And  Hope,  the  cherub  of  unwearied  wing. 

Lord  Harcourt  makes  me  open  this  again,  to  add  his  very 
particular  compliments. 

From  Miss  Berry. 

Great  Malvem,  Sept.  10, 1799. 

.  .  .  Never  was  any  place  better  calculated  than  this  to 
enjoy  clear,  sunny,  calm  weather.  You  heard  me  last  year, 
after  only  a  slight  acquaintance,  talk  in  raptures  of  it ;  and  I 
assure  you  that  now,  after  a  ten  days'  residence  here,  and  having 
explored  both  the  mountains  and  the  plain,  I  am  quite  con- 
vinced it  is  the  most  beautiful  and  enjoyable  part  of  Eng- 
land, as  to  every  rural  perfection,  that  I  have  seen.  The 
village  is  in  itself  singularly  rural  and  cheerful.  We  are  lodged 
in  the  parsonage-house. 

.  .  We  were  to  have  gone  to'  Lord  Sommers's,  at  Castle- 
ditch,*  in  this  neighbourhood,  to-morrow ;  but  their  house  being 
full,  we  have  happily  cribbed  two  or  three  more  days  here.  On 
Monday  we  shall  proceed  on  our  peregrination  by  going  down 
the  Kiver  Wye  from  Ross  to  Chepstow,  a  navigation  which  is 
famous  for  its  romantic  scenery.  From  Chepstow  we  shall  go  on 
to  the  first  place  upon  the  coast  in  Wales,  where  my  father 
thinks  he  can  get  a  fortnight's  good  bathing 

The  Inn  at  Pyle  in  Glamorganshire, 
Tuesday,  Sept.  24, 1799. 

-...  Of  your  public  affairs  in  Holland  /  have  thought 
wretchedly  from  the  moment  that,  after  the  first  engage- 
ment, the  whole  country  did  not  rise  and  join  the  English 
troops,  who,  on  the  contrary,  seem  to  have  gained  not  an  inch 

*  Charles  Cocks,  of  Castleditch,  created  Lord  Somers  1784 ;  inherited 
from  his  mother,  Mary  Cocks,  the  seat  of  Castleditch,  now  known  as  East- 
nor  Castle. 


96  MISS  BERRY'S  TOUR  IN  WALES.  [1799 

of  ground  but  that  they  fought  for The 

ministerial  prdneurs,  however,  still  maintain  that  everything  is 
going  on  well ;  but  the  Dutch  in  this  country,  I  know,  are  in 
very  bad  spirits.* 

Miss  Berry  omitted,  in  her  brief  summary  of  this  year's 
events,  a  little  expedition  into  Wales,  made  in  company 
with  her  father  and  sister,  and  of  which  she  kept  a  jour- 
nal. The  following  extracts  will  show  the  changes  that 
have  taken  place  in  the  mode  of  travelling  through  this 
part  of  the  country,  and  the  very  different  estimate  now 
taken  of  the  picturesque. 

Monday,  September  16^.  —  Left  Castleditch  (Lord 
Somers's)  for  Eoss  ;  the  road,  most  part  of  the  way,  very 
bad — sometimes  stony,  sometimes  deep  and  very  hilly. 
The  town  of  Eoss  a  wretched,  black-looking,  ill-built 
place.  The  churchyard  neat,  and  the  spire  of  the  church 
pretty,  and  the  view  fine,  but,  in  this  country  of  fine 
views,  not  remarkable. 

Tuesday,  17th. — Left  Eoss  at  half-past  10  A.M.  The 
weather  precluded  all  idea  of  going  on  the  Wye.  The 
road  from  Eoss  to  Monmouth  good — towards  Monmouth 
generally  near  the  river,  and  very  romantic  and  beautiful. 
Monmouth  is  an  old,  ugly,  unpicturesque  town,  prettily 
situated,  and  with  a  very  pretty  spire  to  the  church,  in 
the  same  fashion  and  much  the  same  proportion  as  that 
at  Eoss. 

Wednesday,  18^. — Left  Monmouth  at  10  A.M.  ;  arrived 
at  Chepstow  at  half-past  three,  by  the  river.  The  banks 
of  this  winding  river  are  very  high,  rocky,  and  well 
wooded,  particularly  about  Tintern  Abbey,  which,  though 

*  An  expedition  to  Holland  was  concerted  between  Great  Britain  and 
Russia,  in  the  confidence  that  numbers  of  the  Dutch,  opening  their  eyes  to 
their  real  interests,  would  combine  with  them  as  their  deliverers,  as  soon  as 
they  saw  they  could  with  safety  act  according  to  their  wishes. — Annual 
Register,  1799. 


1799]  CHEPSTOW — NEWPORT.  97 

near  the  water,  is  not  seen  from  it.  The  scattered  cottages 
of  the  village  of  Tintern,  upon  the  side  of  the  hill  imme- 
diately rising  from  the  water,  very  pretty.  The  approach 
to  Chepstow  upon  the  river,  on  coming  in  sight  of  Fierce- 
field,  beautiful.  I  recollect  nothing  finer  than  the  ruins 
of  the  immense  Castle  of  Chepstow  crowning  the  per- 
pendicular rock  that  rises  from  the  river,  and  which  is,  as 
well  as  the  river,  diversified  with  every  variety  of  foliage. 
The  town  of  Chepstow  is  an  inconsiderable  place,  with 
but  one  inn  (the  Beaufort  Arms),  a  very  bad  one,  that 
keeps  a  few  post  horses,  all  of  which  were  engaged.  The 
day  after  we  arrived,  we  were  obliged  to  send  forward 
the  whisky  to  Newport  (sixteen  miles),  in  order  that 
horses  might  be  sent  back  for  us  and  the  chaise.  It  was 
late  before  the  Newport  horses  got  back  and  were  suffi- 
ciently rested  to  return  with  us ;  and  they  were  all  so  bad, 
and  the  hill  out  of  Chepstow  so  steep,  that  they  refused 
to  draw  at  all,  and  others  had  to  be  sent  for.  It  was 
eight  o'clock,  and  long  dark,  before  we  arrived  at  New- 
port. The  approach  to  Newport  was  over  a  long  stone 
bridge,  now  building,  and  left  without  any  parapet  or  rail 
whatsoever  on  either  side.  The  lamps  to  our  carriage 
just  showed  us  our  situation  when  we  were  on  the  bridge  ; 
and  I  am  glad  I  did  not  see  more  of  it,  for  it  would  cer- 
tainly have  made  me  very  giddy,  though  the  danger  might 
be  little  with  tired  horses  who  knew  the  way. 

Friday,  20 lth. — Newport  is  a  small  town,  with  a  pretty 
round  castle  upon  the  edge  of  the  river.  The  inn  is  new 
and  large,  now  building  by  Sir  Charles  Morgan,*  only 
half  finished  and  less  than  half  furnished ;  d'ailleurs  clean, 
and  the  people  civil.  Left  Newport  at  eight  o'clock ; 
breakfasted  at  Cardiff.  The  road  is  rather  less  hilly ; 
still  we  regretted  not  having  taken  four  horses.  Cardiff 

*  Sir  Charles  Gould,  married  Jane,  daughter  of  Sir  William  Morgan, 
K.B.,  of  Tredegar,  and  assumed,  under  the  will  of  his  brother-in-law,  the 
name  and  arms  of  Morgan  of  Tredegar.     Died  1806. 
VOL.  II.  H 


98  MISS  BERRY'S  TOUR  IN  WALES.  [1799 

is  a  small  ugly  town,  situated  on  the  edge  of  the  flat 
low  country  which  goes  down  to  the  Bristol  Channel. 
Cardiff  Castle,  belonging  to  Lord  Bute*  in  right  of  his 
wife  (a  Windsor),  has  been  repaired  ;  was  fitting  up  for 
a  dwelling-house  for  the  young  Lord  Mount-Stuart,f  who 
died.  On  his  death,  the  building,  furnishing,  &c..  were 
stopped.  Some  of  the  rooms  are  floored  and  ceiled,  and 
some  family  pictures  of  the  Windsors  hung  up  in  two 
of  them.  The  enclosure  of  the  castle  is  turned  into  a 
lawn  with  shrubs,  the  ruined  keep  left  as  a  ruin  in  the 
middle  of  it,  and  a  walk  round  the  walls.  The  entrance, 
which  is  the  old  gate,  is  the  prettiest  thing  about  it. 
There  are  the  remains  of  some  dungeon-rooms  joining 
to  it,  in  one  of  which  they  say  Eobert,  William  the 
Conqueror's  eldest  son  (who  is  buried  at  Gloucester),  was 
confined  by  his  brother.  From  Cardiff  to  Cowbridge  the 
road  much  the  same — stony  and  hilly,  but  in  general 
good.  Cowbridge  is  a  wretched  little  town,  or  rather 
village,  with  one  bad  inn,  which  keeps  post  horses.  From 
Cowbridge  to  Pyle  the  road  and  the  country  much  the 
same.  The  distinctive  characteristics  of  South  Wales  are 
hills,  universally  enclosed  and  cultivated,  and  cottages, 
universally  white  ;  and  these  more  often  dropt  about 
singly  than  collected  in  villages.  The  fashion  of  white- 

O      V 

washing  is  so  general  in  South  Wales,  that  they  whiten 
even  the  outer  walls  of  their  little  enclosures  and  their 
pig-stys.  This  certainly  gives  a  clean  and  cheerful  look 
to  everything,  but,  in  a  picturesque  point  of  view,  makes 
too  many  white  spots  in  the  landscape.  Pyle  is  a  very 

*  John,  fourth  Earl  of  Bute,  born  1744  ;  ambassador  to  the  Court  of  Spain, 
1792 ;  created  marquis  1796 ;  married,  first,  1766,  Charlotte  Jane,  eldest 
daughter  and  co-heir  of  Herbert  Windsor  Hickman,  second  and  last 
Viscount  Windsor  of  the  kingdom  of  Ireland — she  died  in  1800;  and, 
secondly,  to  Frances,  second  daughter  of  the.  late  Thomas  Coutts,  Esq.  He 
died  at  Geneva,  1814,  and  was  succeeded  by  his  grandson. 

t  John  Viscount  Mount -Stuart,  born  1767;  died  1794,  aged  twenty- 
seven,  in  consequence  of  a  fall  from  a  horse.  He  married,  1792,  Eliza- 
beth, daughter  of  Patrick  Crichton,  Earl  of  Dumfries. 


1799]  NEWTON — PUBLIC   AFFAIRS.  99 

small  village,  composed  of  a  few  scattered  houses  along 
the  roadside,  with  an  excellent  inn.  It  was  built  by 
Mr.  Talbot,  of  Margam.  The  garden,  which  is  a  shelf  of 
rock  with  a  wooded  bank  below,  is  laid  out  with  extremely 
good  taste.  There  is  an  extensive  view  of  the  sea,  and  in 
fine  weather  of  the  opposite  coast  of  Devonshire. 

Saturday,  21st — Went  from  Pyle  to  Newton,  a  little 
village  at  about  four  miles'  distance,  immediately  upon 
the  coast,  where  the  landlord  at  Pyle  has  a  house,  and 
where  they  receive  people,  boarding  them  together  as 
at  Malvern  Wells  ;  but  the  house  in  itself  is  small,  cold, 
and  comfortless.  It  is  surrounded  on  every  side  with 
loose  sandhills,  which  shut  out  the  view  from  the  sea 
as  thoroughly  as  if  they  were  Alps.  There  is  •  so  much 
of  the  same  loose  sand,  that  it  is  impossible  to  stir  out 
without  getting  above  our  shoes  in  it :  in  short,  a  place 
more  destitute  of  beauty  or  comfort  I  never  saw.  We 
found  here  four  Welsh  ladies  and  an  Irishman  living 

o 

together  at  a  very  bad  ordinary ;  and  as  the  company 
was  not  large  enough  to  be  entertaining,  we  returned  to 
the  inn  at  Pyle  on  Monday  morning. 

Extract  of  a  Letter  from  Miss  Berry  to  Mrs.  Clwlmeley. 

Cheltenham,  Saturday,  Oct.  6, 1799. 

.  .  .  .  The  weather  has  become  a  most  serious  considera- 
tion with  respect  to  the  harvest.  Not  all  the  wheat,  and  very 
little  of  the  barley,  is  housed  even  in  this  country ;  what  you 
are  to  do  in  the  North  I  have  no  idea.  I  had  hoped  that,  from 
the  very  extraordinary  lateness  of  the  season  in  every  respect, 
your  harvest  might  not  be  yet  begun,  and  that  you  might  still 
have  some  fine  weather  for  it  in  this  month.  Wheat  is  here  at  the 
same  price  you  mention  it  with  you,  1 4s.  a  bushel.  A  scarcity  of 
bread  in  the  winter  will  not  mend  our  public  affairs,  which,  I 
think,  are  going  on  as  ill  as  possible  everywhere  but  in  India, 
where  those  who  really  know  say  that  the  death  of  Tippoo  Saib 
for  the  present  entirely  secures  our  possessions,  and  frustrates 

11  2 


100  EXTRACTS   FROM   MISS   BERRY'S    LETTERS.  [1799 

all  the  designs  of  the  French,  even  if  they  ever  reach  India, 
which,  I  feel  convinced,  in  spite  of  the  victories  of  that  Alman- 
zor,  Sr  Sidney  Smith,*  they  will.  As  to  Holland,  if  the  D.  of 
York  f  and  the  rest  of  them  would  but  be  persuaded  to  pocket 
the  affront,  the  sooner  they  all  come  back  the  better,  and  the 
less  disgrace  will  attend  them ;  for  if  the  Dutch,  like  the  wife 
of  the  4  Medecin  malgre  lui,'  choose  to  be  beat  and  hanged  and 
robbed  and  murdered  by  the  French,  it  is  vain  that  we  oppose  it. 
We  may  step  between  and  receive  some  of  the  blows,  but  we 
shall  never  prevent  them. 

The  only  person  you  know  here,  I  believe,  is  Mme  de  Coigny.  :f 
I  never  see  her  in  London,  but  am  very  glad  to  meet  her  here, 
for  she  is  very  entertaining  and  really  uncommonly  clever. 
Mentioning  her  puts  me  in  mind  of  a  book  which  I  am  now 
devouring  with  delight,  though  no  new  one,  and  though  I  am 
now  reading  it  for  the  third  time.  I  mean  Madme  de  Sevigne's 
Letters.  Are  you  well  acquainted  with  them  ?  But  I  forgot 

*  Admiral  Sir  Sidney  Smith,  bom  1764;  served,  1781,  during  the 
American  war  j  shared  in  Rodney's  victory  over  the  French,  April  1,  1782 ; 
and  was  post-captain  at  the  age  of  nineteen.  He  then  entered  the  Swedish 
service,  and,  in  1793,  as  a  volunteer  in  the  Turkish  marine ;  distinguished 
himself  at  Toulon,  under  Lord  Hood.  In  1794  he  commanded  a  frigate, 
to  the  terror  of  the  French  coast.  In  1796,  he  was  taken  prisoner  at 
Havre-de-Grace,  and  imprisoned  in  the  Temple ;  was  treated  with  great 
rigour,  and  his  exchange  refused.  At  the  end  of  two  years  he  made  his 
escape ;  reached  England  in  1798,  a,nd  commanded  in  the  Mediterranean. 
Buonaparte  was  preparing  to  subjugate  Syria.  The  gallant  and  skilful  re- 
sistance then  made  by  Sir  Sidney  Smith  at  Jean  d'Acre  cost  the  French  the 
loss  of  4,000  men,  and  at  the  end  of  two  months  they  were  obliged  to 
retreat  to  Egypt.  For  this  brilliant  success  Sir  Sidney  received  the  thanks 
of  both  Houses  of  Parliament.  His  career  as  a  naval  commander  continued 
till  the  year  1814.  He  died  at  Paris,  1841. 

f  The  Duke  of  York  had  landed  in  Holland  the  13th  of  September. 

I  Madame  de  Coigny,  daughter  of  the  Marquis  de  Conflans  and  grand- 
daughter of  the  Mare"chal  d'Amenthieres,  married  to  the  Marquis  de  Coigny, 
son  of  the  Due  de  Coigny,  Feb.  1775.  'This  lady,  whose  figure  and 
talents,  together  with  the  favour  of  her  husband's  family  at  court,  con- 
spired to  place  for  several  years  at  the  pinnacle  of  fashion  in  Paris,  was, 
during  the  early  period  of  the  Revolution,  long  resident  in  England,  where 
the  cheerfulness  with  which  she  submitted  to  the  loss  of  her  former  bril- 
liant existence  and  to  the  difficulties  of  her  actual  situation  are  remembered 
with  hardly  less  admiration  than  was  excited  by  the  uncommon  liveliness 
of  her  conversation  and  the  quickness  of  her  repartees. —  Vide  Miss  Berry's 
Notes  to  M.  du  Duffantfa  Letters. 


1799]  MADAME   DE   COIGNY.  101 

you  don't  like  gossiping  books,  and  this  is  certainly  eminently 
so.  But  what  a  heart  had  that  woman,  what  a  capacity  of  affec- 
tion !  Then  her  ideas  are  always  so  lively,  so  just,  so  clear ! 
She  gives  you  a  faithful  and  curious  transcript  of  the  then 
world,  and  suggests  more  reflections  to  a  thinking  mind  than 
almost  any  book  I  know.  Besides,  I  love  the  woman,  and  am. 
intimately  acquainted  with  all  her  friends,  and  very  seldom  find 
any  society  in  which  I  pass  an  hour  so  agreeably 

Cheltenham,  Monday,  Oct.  14,  1799. 

.  .  .  We  go  on  just  as  we  did  here,  and  the  weather 
goes  on  just  as  it  did ;  that  is  to  say,  we  never  yet  have  two 
fair  days  together,  and  but  once  since  our  return  one  completely 
fair  day.  What  you  will  do  in  the  North  I  have  no  idea.  Hay 
and  corn  have  already  risen  here  ;  and  the  price  of  bread,  I  fear, 
will  be  enormous,  which,  not  only  in  its  immediate  effects,  but 
in  all  its  consequences  to  a  great  capital,  is  dreadful.  We  must 
hope  to  get  through  it  as  we  did  the  last  scarcity,  and  many 
other  mauvais  pas  which  we  have  seen,  and  which,  when  passed, 
I  always  wonder  how  we  ever  got  over  them. 

.  .  .  .  Madme  de  Coigny  is  still  here,  and  is  of  these 
parties ;  but  they  are  so  little  in  her  way,  that  though  she  makes 
a  depense  d'esprit  that  would  ruin  anybody  else,  she  cannot 
much  mend  them.  .  .  .  Madame  de  Coigny  said  the  other  day, 
speaking  of  the  possibility  of  a  very  disagreeable  man  finding 
anybody  to  marry  him,  *  II  y  a  des  personnes  si  amoureuses  en 
manage,  qu'elles  ne  regardent  pas  du  tout  le  mari.' 

Cheltenham,  Tuesday,  Oct.  22,  1799. 

....  What  think  you  of  this  tour  of  Buonaparte's  ?  For 
my  part,  I  think  it  very  likely  to  be  the  coup  de  grace  to  the 
affairs  of  the  Allies ;  for  if,  as  is  more  than  probable,  he  has 
contrived  to  negociate  a  peace  between  France  and  the  Turks, 
and  now  comes  to  head  a  victorious  army  in  Europe,  what  have 
we  to  oppose  to  him  but  the  arrogance  and  ignorance  of  our 
Ministers?  which  is  certainly  quite  as  remarkable  as  his  con- 
duct and  luck.  If  one  was  not  likely  to  be  so  seriously  involved 
without  a  possibility  of  preventing  them,  in  the  misfortunes  of 
one's  country,  what  an  interesting  and  entertaining  age  do  we 
live  in ! 


102  EXTRACTS   FROM   MISS   BERRY'S   LETTERS.  [1799 

Cheltenham,  Monday,  Oct.  28,  1799. 

....  As  Madme  de  Coigny  for  the  last  week  almost  lived 
with  us,  I  ought  to  have  much  wit  to  repeat  to  you,  which  I  am 
too  unwell  at  present  to  recollect.  .  .  .  She  is  a  cheerful-minded, 
contented  creature,  after  a  fall  from  such  a  brilliancy  of  situation 
as  would  have  first  weakened  and  then  soured  the  minds  of 
most  other  people.  This  I  attribute  in  a  great  degree  to  an 
extremely  religious  education  (the  only  education  indeed  she 
ever  received),  and  which  no  prosperities,  no  dissipation,  no 
anything  has  been  able  to  obliterate  from  her  mind.  She  calls 
herself  *  1'enfant  gate  de  la  Providence,'  and  has  an  unfeigned 
and  uninterrupted  cheerfulness  about  her,  which  she  is  more 
likely  to  receive  from  her  belief  in  such  an  idea  than  any  other 
circumstance  in  her  situation 

I  am  too  unwell  to  begin  talking  of  Holland.  I  have  long 
been  perfectly  convinced,  by  several  circumstances  that  have 
come  to  my  knowledge,  of  the  entire  and  disgraceful  ignorance 
of  our  Ministers  as  to  foreign  politics.  Would  to  heaven,  for 
the  sake  of  the  many  brave  men  that  have  fallen,  that  they 
had  not  given  all  Europe  such  a  convincing  proof  of  their 
ignorance ! — a  proof  by  which  their  own  country,  I  fear,  is  not 
in  a  state  to  profit  as  it  ought. 

....  Do  you  know,  I  doat  on  Mme  de  Sevigne  too  much  to 
bear  her  being  spoken  even  slightingly  of.  I  have  now  read 
her  over  for  the  3rd  time  with  equal  pleasure  and  redoubled  admi- 
ration. I  wish  I  could  convey  this  taste  to  you,  however  you  may 
think  fit  to  despise  it,  because  you  would  find  it  a  source  of 
great  cheerful  interest,  which  is  a  thing  you  want  in  life 

N.  Audley  Street,  Monday,  Nov.  4,  1799. 

.  .  .  .  Imagine  what  the  roads  must  be  when  we  were  11 
hours  and  \  coming  from  Oxford  with  a  pr  of  post  horses  in  our 
own  carriage.  Posting  is  everywhere  raised  to  14  or  15  pence 
a  mile,  and  the  stage  next  London  to  18d.  The  charges  at  the 
inns,  too,  seem  to  be  encreased  in  proportion,  so  that  the  inn- 
keepers, at  least,  will  be  no  losers  by  the  extravagant  price  to 
which  I  see  everything  is  or  will  be  immediately  raised 

I  am  told  the  general  discontent  and  ill-humour  about  Holland 
is  great — well  it  may.*  I  could  almost  wish  it  greater,  that 

*  This  expedition  to  Holland  was  a  grievous  failure.     On  October  17,  a 


17&9]  COMPANY  AT   STRAWBERRY   HILL.  103 

even  sober,  dull  people  might  be  convinced  of  the  total  inca- 
pacity of  our  Ministers  for  foreign  affairs. 

.  .  .  .  The  weather  is  as  completely  wintry  as  it  can  be 
in  December  since  we  left  Cheltenham.  It  has  been  continued 
cold  rain  and  wind ;  wretched  weather  for  the  return  of  our 
poor  troops  1  Most  of  them  however,  I  understand,  are  already 

arrived 

Strawberry  Hill,  Tuesday,  Nov.  12,  1799. 

.  .  .  .  We  mean  to  return  here  the  beginning  of  next 
week.  As  we  find  our  company  a  real  comfort  while  they  stay 
here,  and  that  it  is  impossible  to  be  more  perfectly  at  one's 
ease  and  more  comfortable  than  anybody  may  now  be  in  this 
house,  the  having  effected  making  this  house,  such  as  you 
remember  it,  both  comfortable  and  warm,  is  nearly  next  to 
a  miracle.  The  Burns,  both  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  you  have  heard 
me  mention  as  very  agreeable  people,  rational,  well-informed, 
and  cheerful ;  and  we  have  besides  sometimes  Lady  Howe  * 
of  an  evening  (now  a  neighbour  at  Twickenham),  some- 
times Lady  Cecilia,  and,  in  short,  no  want  of  extraneous  com- 
pany  Lady  Ailesbury  is,  I  think,  particularly  well 

and  in  good  spirits,  and  is,  indeed,  the  picture  of  what  an  old 
woman  of  between  70  and  80  ought  to  be,  and  so  seldom  is. 
Mrs.  Darner  chips  away  at  her  marble  one  half  of  the  morning, 
and  trots  about  the  grounds  the  other  half  in  all  weathers,  and 
is  much  the  better  for  this  variety  of  exercise 

Lady  Howe,  who  was  at  the  Drawing-room  on  Thursday, 
says  all  the  poor  officers  look  very  thin  and  weather-beaten,  and 
none  of  them  much  like  talking  of  their  adventures.  Never 
was  there  such  deadly  fighting; — our  men  drawn  up  upon  a 
totally  exposed  sandbank,  where  no  considerable  number  could 
ever  be  formed  together  from  the  nature  of  the  country  (which 
I,  who  have  been  all  over  it,  exactly  recollect),  set  up  as  marks 

suspension  of  arms  vas  agreed  on ;  and,  as  the  price  of  permission  to  the 
British  troops  to  re-embark  on  board  their  transports  without  molestation, 
8,000  of  the  seamen,  whether  Batavian  republicans  or  French,  who  were 
prisoners  in  England,  were  to  be  given  up  to  the  French  Government :  the 
combined  English  and  Russian  army  to  evacuate  Holland  before  the  end  of 
November. 

*  Sophia  Charlotte,  Baroness  Howe  of  Langar,  daughter  of  Admiral  first 
Earl  Howe.  She  married,  first,  the  Hon.  Penn  Asheton  Curzon,  and, 
secondly,  Sir  Jonathan  Watkin  Waller,  Bart. 


104  EXTRACTS    FROM   MISS   BERRY'S    LETTERS.  [1799 

to  be  shot  at  by  the  people  from  their  intrenchments,  and  from 
ditches,  barns,  and  houses  in  the  flat  below  them.  Never  was 
there  nearly  so  large  a  portion  of  officers  killed  and  wounded ; 
in  the  1st  batt.  of  Guards  six  officers  only  escaped  totally  unhurt. 
The  scene  upon  the  parade  when  the  Guards  last  week  marched 
into  town  was,  they  say,  heart-breaking ;  numbers  of  women  and 
children  running  eagerly  through  the  ranks  and  enquiring  for 
husbands  and  fathers,  of  whose  fate  they  were  entirely  ignorant, 
and  many  of  whom  they  were  destined  never  to  see  again !  The 
houses  of  the  officers  of  the  Guards  who  arrived  before  the  men 
were,  they  say,  beset  with  women  for  the  same  purpose.  Heavens ! 
how  much  harder  such  a  duty  to  a  heart  of  humanity  than  any 
they  had  yet  gone  through !  Lord  Chatham  was  saved  by  the 
button  of  his  epaulet,  which  turned  aside  a  ball  whose  only  effect 
was  a  great  contusion  on  his  shoulder.  Thomas  Grosvenor  had 
half  his  moustache  and  the  tip  of  his  ear  shot  off.  These  are 
people  not  mentioned  among  the  wounded.  •  Grey,  Sr  Charles 
Grey's  son,  is  still  at  the  Helder,  and,  they  say,  cannot  live,  not 
having  strength  to  bear  a  necessary  amputation  of  leg.  Column, 
the  maid  of  honour's  brother,  is  shot  through  the  lungs ;  can- 
not yet  be  turned  in  his  bed,  and  is  by  no  means  out  of  danger. 
To  all  these  people  the  French  general  and  officers  behave  with 

the  utmost  degree  of  attention  and  kindness 

My  young  friend  (for  I  cannot  call  her  my  little  friend)  Lady 
Georgiana  Cavendish  came  to  me  in  N.  Audley  Street.  .  .  . 
She  is  a  charming,  warm-hearted,  affectionate  girl.  .  .  .  Lady 
Spencer,  when  we  parted,  recommended  her  to  me  with  the 
most  flattering  expressions  of  all  the  service  I  might  be  to  her. 
In  this  she  probably  deceives  herself;  but  she  shall  not  be  de- 
ceived in  me.  .  .  . 

Strawberry  Hill,  Tuesday,  Nov.  19,  1799. 

.  .  .  .'  My  other  adventures  in  town,  were  going  to 
Devonshire  House  to  see  Lady  Georgiana,  and  become  ac- 
quainted with  the  Duchess.  Hitherto  we  had  only  known  each 
other  at  second-hand.  Her  manner  is  very  pleasing  and 
unaffected.  She  was  excessively  civil  to  us,  and  asked  us  toge- 
ther next  night,  Saturday,  to  the  play  with  her,  where  she  has 
got  a  large  private  box.  Poor  Ag.  was  so  unwell  that  she  could 
not  be  of  the  party ;  but  I  went.  The  women  were  only  the 


1799]  FEENCH   AFFAIRS.  105 

Dgs,  Ly  G-eorgiana,  and  myself.  We  had  all  the  few  men  in 
London  in  the  box,  several  that  I  knew,  and  it  was  very  agree- 
able. There  I  first  heard  of  this  marvellous  revolution  in 
France,  of  which  you  will  see  the  papers  full ;  and,  I  fancy,  more 
than  the  papers  nobody  can  at  present  tell  you.  For  my  part, 
I  think  it  will  be  better  dealing  with  one  or  even  with  three 
rogues  than  500 ;  but  it  will,  in  all  probability,  shortly  end  in 
Bonaparte's  assassination ;  for,  in  a  country  where  every  man 
thinks  himself  equally  able  and  equally  fit  to  govern,  the  go- 
vernment of  one  or  two  or  three  must  ever  be  looked  upon  with 
invidious  eyes,  and  not  long  looked  upon  at  all,  where  murder 
is  no  crime. 

Just  before  I  left  town,  I  received  a  note  from  the  DM  about 
a  print  of  Ld  Orford  that  I  had  promised  her.  She  adds  in 
the  prettiest  and  most  affectionate  terms  towards  her  daughter, 
that  she  must  take  the  opportunity  of  telling  how  much  she  is 
flattered  by  '  the  kindness  I  have  shown  to  her  dearest  Geor- 
giana.'*  .... 

»  Saturday  night. 

As  I  am  sure,  my  dear  Miss  Berry,  you  will  not  think  ill  of  me  for  having1 
a  hobby-horse,  and  as  I  hope  that  you  will  not  think  me  very  impudent  in 
urging  its  claims  to  you,  I  take  the  liberty  of  writing  to  ask  you  if,  without 
indiscretion,  I  might  petition  for  one  of  the  private  prints  of  Lord  Orford. 
The  Duke  has  given  me  the  large-paper  set ;  and  I  have  the  greatest  wish 
to  ornament  it  to  my  utmost  with  any  prints,  or  even  scraps  of  writing,  &c., 
that  may  render  it  a  treasure  above  other  copies. 

I  have  got  all  '  the  noble  authors '  that  Harding  has  engrav'd,  and  I  shall 
procure  drawings  of  the  others  ;  but,  in  spite  of  my  eagerness  in  this  pur- 
suit, if  I  am  guilty  of  an  indiscretion,  I  entreat  you  to  refuse  me. 

I  must  take  this  opportunity  of  telling  you  how  very  highly  I  am  flat- 
tered by  the  kindness  you  have  shown  to  my  dearest  G.  I  think  her  a  very 
extraordinary  creature,  from  the  pood  qualities  of  her  heart  and  mind ;  and 
how  much  then,  loving  her  as  I  do  to  adoration,  must  I  be  gratified  by  a 
goodness  which  I  must  look  upon  as  a  very  distinguished  happiness  to  her ! 

Pray  excuse  this  letter.  Je  dors  debout  et  vous  demande  grace ;  but  I 
could  not  help  writing  to  express  my  humble  petition  before  your  departure. 

Pray  say  a  thousand  things  to  Mrs.  Darner,  whom  I  hope  very  soon  to 
see  at  D.  H.  Felicissima  notte. 

G.  DEVONSHIRE. 

DR  MADAM, — You  have  augmented  the  favour  of  accepting  the  print 
which  I  offered  by  your  manner  of  claiming  it. 

Your  Grace  will  observe  that  this  portrait  is  the  same  as  that  prefixed  to 
the  works.  It  is  one  of  the  proof  impressions  which  we  had  taken  before 
we  allowed  the  bookseller  to  make  use  of  the  plate.  There  are  two  other 


106  EXTRACTS   FROM   MISS   BERRY'S   LETTERS.  [1799 

Strawberry  Hill,  Tuesday,  Nov.  26, 1799. 

.  .  .  .  You  will  see  by  the  papers,  which  contain  all  that 
anybody  knows  about  France,  that  the  Triumvirate  have  begun 
their  government  with  just  the  same  bits  of  justice  that  the  last 
Eevolution  did,  only  sending  a  still  greater  number  without  a 
shadow  of  trial  to  Gruiana.  France  is  now  to  me  like  Caleb 
Williams,  or  some  such  vile  interesting  book,  in  which,  tho'  its 
principles  disgust,  one  cannot  help  longing  to  know  what  will 
come  next 

Strawberry  Hill,  Tuesday,  Dec.  3,  1799. 

.  Apropos  to  the  Douglas's,  they  say  his  speech 
upon  the  Irish  Union  is  one  full  of  facts  and  information.  It 
is  directly  in  answer  to  Foster.  The  Irish  Speaker's,  the  only 
rational  one  upon  that  side  of  the  question.  Ld  Minto's,  upon 
the  other,  I  have  heard,  too,  universally  praised  as  the  clearly- 
stated  and  well-reasoned  arguments  of  a  great  statesman.  They 
are  all  published ;  and  if  you  are  curious  upon  the  subject,  I 
advise  you  to  read  them,  which  I  mean  to  do,  not  by  way  of 
making  up  my  mind  upon  the  subject,  which  has  long  since 
been  done,  but  to  read  some  good  sense  and  good  reasoning  upon 
it,  of  which  the  debates  in  the  newspapers  never  contained  a 
single  word. 

prints  of  Lord  Orford,  both  of  which,  I  think,  should  obtain  a  place  in  a 
complete  copy  of  his  works,  and  both  of  which  I  shall  have  the  honour  of 
offering  your  Grace  when  I  return  to  town ;  for  I  cannot  now  lay  my  hand 
upon  them. 

I  have  likewise  several  other  little  scaps,  both  of  prints  and  printing, 
which  in  the  eyes  of  a  collector  are  not  without  value,  much  at  your  ser- 
vice. I  shall  think  myself  happy  in  thus  contributing  my  mite  at  once  to 
your  Grace's  amusement,  and  to  honouring  the  works  of  my  deceased 
friend. 

I  cannot  express  how  much  I  am  gratified  by  the  part  of  your  note  which 
relates  to  Lady  Georgiana.  I  think  I  may  venture  to  say  that  I  am  hardly 
less  aware  than  yourself  of  the  claims  of  her  character,  of  the  integrity  and 
warmth  of  her  heart,  and  the  excellence  of  her  understanding ;  and,  indeed, 
the  great  disproportion  between  her  years  and  mine  makes  your  Grace  per- 
haps the  person  in  the  world  best  able  to  judge  of  the  nature  of  my  affec- 
tion for  her.  It  is  such  as  I  shall  rejoice  in  every  occasion  of  proving,  and 
such  as  will  make  me  follow  her  happiness,  her  successes,  her  evils  in  life, 
with  an  anxiety  and  an  interest  which  nothing  but  real  friendship  can  feel, 
and  real  merit  inspire. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be  Your  Grace's  most  obliged. 


1799]  ORDER   ESTABLISHED   IN   FRANCE.  107 

N.  Audley  Street,  Monday,  Dec.  16, 1799. 

I  have  hardly  been  out  of  the  house  yet  of 

an  evening,  and  seen  but  few  people  in  the  morning :  for  receiv- 
ing morning  visits  in  London  is  the  abomination  of  desolation 
of  time,  of  which  I  never  will  be  guilty — occupied  you  know  I 

always  am  with  one  thing  or  another The 

Mathew  Montagu's*  I  saw  yesterday  morning  established  in  the 
ground-floor  of  the  great  house  in  Portman  Sq%  while  the  old 
lady,  who  no  longer  goes  out  at  all  and  sees  hardly  anybody, 
occupies  the  grand-floor,  an  arrangement  so  proper  and  so 
natural  that  all  the  world  wondered  it  was  not  done  before. 

.  .  .  .  Last  night  we  had  a  comfortable  quiet  game  at 
whist  here  with  only  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Burn,  Jerningham,  Mrs. 
Darner  and  myself,  and  Mdme  De  Coigny  the  latter  part  of  the 
evening  as  a  looker-on  with  Agnes.  News  there  is  none,  French 
or  English,  public  or  private,  or  between  Mr.  Burn  and  Mme  De 
Coigny  we  should  have  heard  it.  It  is  but  too  true  that  the 
French  have  left  the  support  of  their  prisoners  here  to  us,  which 
in  this  time  of  scarcity  is  truly  villainous  and  truly  distressing. 
Some  French  people  are  already  returning  to  France,  and  all 
the  Eoyalists  in  high  spirits.  The  fiction  of  having  discovered 
the  little  Louis  XVII.  alive,  nobody  believes,  and  it  is  never 
hinted  at  in  any  of  the  French  papers,  tho'  I  own,  if  true  after 
all,  it  would  not  at  all  surprise  me ;  and  I  have  ever  thought 
when  (if  ever)  peace  and  security  comes,  a  great  many  of  the 
guillotined  will  make  their  appearance  again. 

N.  Audley  Street,  Thursday,  Dec.  26,  1799. 

What  little  I  could  read  during  two  days  and 

part  of  two  nights  has  been  Mercier'sf  Nouveau  Paris,  a  sort 
of  continuation  of  his  former  Tableau  de  Pans.  This  last,  in 
six  vols.  is  one  of  the  most  stupid,  unclearly  thought,  ridiculous 
books  I  ever  saw,  and  yet  I  read  it,  not  without  entertainment 
and  instruction ;  because  I  am  sure  that,  without  intending  it, 

*  Mathew  Montagu,  Esq.,  born  Nov.  1762 ;  married,  1785,  Elizabeth, 
daughter  and  heir  of  Francis  Charlton,  Esq.,  became  fourth  Lord  Rokeky  in 
18L>9 ;  died  1831. 

t  Bartholomew  Mercier,  a  learned  French  bibliographer  and  miscellaneous 
writer,  familiarly  known  by  the  name  of  the  Abbe"  de  St.  Leger,  was  born 
1734  j  died  1799. — Le  Nouveau  Paris,  published  1799. 


108  EXTRACTS   FROM   MISS   BERRY'S   LETTERS.  [1799 

he  gives  me  a  better  idea  than  anybody  else  of  the  state  of  mind 
and  the  habits  of  the  people,  and,  consequently,  of  the  real 
causes  which  have  influenced  them  in  the  different  crises  of  their 
revolution,  and  made  them  what  they  are.  Yet  I  can  hardly 
recommend  the  lecture  to  anybody  else :  for  the  facts  he  tells 
you,  and  the  truths  he  lets  you  into,  are  all  drowned  in  bother- 
headed  arguments  which  don't  deserve  the  name  of  reasoning, 
and  false  information,  and  false  ideas.  Of  a  very  different 
nature  is  a  little  book  I  have  lately  read  over  again  for  the  third 
or  fourth  time, — I  mean,  Mackintosh's  accounts  of  his  proposed 
lectures  on  the  Law  of  Nature  and  Nations.  Such  a  compen- 
dious syllabus  of  all  the  leading  principles  of  truth  and  virtue  I 
never  met  with  I  I  mentioned  it  to  you,  I  think,  last  year  when 
I  first  got  it.  My  approbation  has  now  at  least,  none  of  the 
enthusiasm  of  novelty,  but  is  the  deep-felt  approbation  of  a 
plain  understanding  and  a  warm  heart. 

Gr.  Ellis's  work  will,  I  dare  say,  be  very  entertaining :  when 
is  it  to  make  its  appearance  ?  he  always  writes  neatly  and  well 
I  think.  Talking  of  works,  don't  let  me  forget  to  answer  your 
question  about  the  Walpoliana.  If  you  had  seen  it,  you  would 
not  doubt  what  we  must  think  about  it, — that  it  is  infamous  thus 
to  make  a  dead  man  speak,  and  consequently  say  whatever  his 
editor  pleases,  which  is  notoriously  the  case  in  many  instances 
in  the  Walpoliana.,  besides  repeating  private  and  idle  conver- 
sation, of  which,  of  all  other  things,  poor  Ld  Orford  had  the 
greatest  dread.  I  was  at  first  almost  sorry  to  find  that  the  man 
had  spoken  civilly  of  us,  for  fear  anybody  might  suppose  we 
countenanced  such  a  work ;  but  I  am  told,  which  I  own  I  did 
not  expect,  that  it  has  not  at  all  succeeded,  that  it  is  generally 
decried,  known  not  to  have  our  sanction,  and  that  the  bookseller 
has  lost  money  by  it,  which  last  one  must  be  glad  to  hear,  as 
otherwise  the  editor  might,  and  I  dare  say  would,  have  made 
other  two,  or  other  six  such  vols.,  whenever  he  pleased. 


THOUGHTS  ON  ARCHITECTUEE,    1799. 

The  only  art  completely  possessed  by  the  architects  of  this 
country  seems  to  be  that  of  making  a  large  building  look  small, 
in  which  their  success  is  wonderful !  As  witness  Somerset 


1799]  THOUGHTS   ON   ARCHITECTURE.  109 

Place,  all  the  barracks,  and  indeed  almost  all  the  public  build- 
ings of  this  reign  (George  III.). 

London  itself  seems  to  have  been  built  as  if  by  common 
consent  upon  this  principle.  All  enormous  as  it  is,  it  is  only  a 
congregation  of  smaller  towns.  Grosvenor  Square,  one  of  the 
largest  in  Europe,  has  by  no  means  an  imposing  air  in  propor- 
tion to  the  magnitude  of  its  space ;  because  neither  the  houses 
as  parts  of  that  space,  nor  the  doors  and  windows  as  parts  of 
those  houses,  are  at  all  in  proportion  to  it.  Proportion !  that 
indefinable  soul  of  beauty  in  almost  all  external  objects  ! 

Very  different  was  the  art  of  the  M.  Angelos,  the  Bramantes, 
the  Palladios,  and  Scamozzis.  They  contrived,  often  in  a  very 
confined  space,  by  a  division  of  large  parts  in  proportion  to  one 
another  and  to  the  whole  (whatever  that  whole  might  be),  to  im- 
press with  ideas  of  grandeur  and  magnitude.  A  strong  instance 
of  this,  among  thousands  that  might  be  re-called,  is  the  entrance 
into  the  Laurentian  Library  at  Florence,  designed  by  M.  Angelo. 
It  is  just  twenty-two  feet  square,  from  the  middle  of  which 
springs  a  staircase  ;  yet  so  far  from  giving  an  idea  of  anything 
small  or  crowded,  it  is  impossible  not  to  be  struck  with  an  idea 
of  size  and  even  magnificence  on  entering  it. 


110  EXTRACTS   FROM   MISS   BERRY'S    LETTERS.  [1800 


EXTRACTS   FEOM   LETTEES. 

1800. 

'  WE  are  at  Strawberry  Hill  in  November.  We  go  in 
the  winter  to  Broadlands,  and  in  our  way  there  to  the 
Bishop  of  Winchester  at  Farnharu.' 

A  few  extracts  from  Miss  Berry's  letters  to  Mrs. 
Cholmeley  and  others,  together  with  the  play-bill  of  the 
pieces  performed  at  Strawberry  Hill,  and  the  prologue 
written  by  Lord  Mount  Edgcumbe,*  which  were  treasured 
amongst  her  papers,  is  all  that  remains  of  this  year. 

N.  Audley  St.,  Thursday,  Jan.  2,  1800. 

.  .  To-day  we  are  flattered  with  a  thaw,  but  I  fear 
it  is  too  good  to  last.  Most  earnestly  it  is  to  be  wished  on  every 
account,  for  if  we  were  to  continue  to  have  a  very  hard  winter, 
much  cattle,  I  should  fear,  must  absolutely  be  starved,  to  say 
nothing  of  man. 

What  think  you  of  the  man  Buonaparte  ?  f  absolute  King 
of  France,  quietly  established  in  the  Tuileries !  For  my  part 
I  admire  him,  and  think,  if  he  can  keep  his  place,  he  does 
his  country  a  service.  Nothing  ever  gave  me  so  desperate  an 
opinion  of  our  Ministers  and  their  yet  more  desperate  projects 
than  the  abuse  which  is  daily  vomited  forth  in  all  the  minis- 
terial and  soi-disant  impartial  papers  against  Buonaparte  and 
this  new  order  of  things.  Formerly  they  said  we  were  fighting 
and  aiding  the  other  side  because  it  was  impossible  to  make 
peace  with  an  absolutely  democratical  government;  now  that 
an  absolutely  aristocratical  government  is  established,  what 
is  it  to  us  whether  Louis  Capet  or  Louis  Buonaparte  is  at  its 

*  Richard,  second  Earl  of  Mount  Edgcumbe,  born  1764;  married  Sophia 
Hobart,  daughter  of  John,  second  Earl  of  Buckinghamshire ;  died  1839. 

t  Buonaparte  was  appointed  First  Consul.  Sieyes  and  Roger  Ducos  were 
displaced  in  favour  of  Cambaceres  and  Le  Brun. 


1800]  LETTER   TO   MRS.    CHOLMELEY.  Ill 

head  ?  If  the  nation  is  once  in  a  state  to  maintain  the  rela- 
tions of  peace  and  the  conditions  of  treaties,  what  have  we, 
what  ought  we  to  have  to  do  with  the  means?  I  confess  that, 
as  a  •  citizen  of  enlightened  Europe,  after  all  the  various  ty- 
rannies under  which  the  French  have  laboured,  I  should  really 
he  sorry  to  see  them  return  to  their  old  original  worn-out 
tyranny  under  the  Bourbons.  For  slaves  I  am  convinced  they 
can  be  alone  fit,  till  their  many  stains,  contracted  in  the  fange 
of  the  despotism  in  which  they  were  born  and  bred,  have  been 
washed  out  and  purified  by  a  purgatory  of  I  know  not  how 
many  revolutions ;  but  to  return  so  soon  and  after  such  dreadful 
convulsions  to  the  point  from  whence  they  set  out,  even  I  don't 
wish  them. 

I  have  been  reading  (for  the  little  I  could  read)  a  new  novel 
of  Godwin's,  in  four  vols.,  called  'The  Travels  of  St.  Leon.'* 
It  is  an  odd  work,  like  all  his,  and,  like  all  his,  interesting,  tho' 
hardly  ever  pleasantly  so  ;  and  while  one's  head  often  agrees 
with  his  observations,  and  sometimes  with  his  reasoning,  never 
does  one's  heart  thoroughly  agree  with  his  sentiments  on  any 
subject  or  in  any  character.  He  now  allows  that  the  social 
affections  may  be  cultivated  to  advantage  in  human  life,  and 
upon  this  plan  his  present  novel  is  formed.  I  should  tell  you, 
which  I  know  from  Edwards,  that  it  was  written  for  bread, 
agreed  for  by  the  booksellers  beforehand,  and  actually  com- 
posed and  written  as  the  printers  wanted  it.  I  think  you  will 
see  many  marks  of  this  throughout  the  work  if  you  read  it, 
which  I  should  recommend  to  you,  if,  like  me,  you  have  not 
seen  a  readable  novel  for  this  age.  Lord  Minto's  speech  on  the 
Union  is  really  a  very  clear,  logical,  and  admirable  dissertation 
upon  federal  governments  and  the  various  modes  of  separate 
and  united  legislatures,  but  I  do  not  think  his  logic  is  suffi- 
ciently abridged,  concentrated,  and  forcibly  put,  for  a  speech 
delivered  in  any  public  assembly,  where  one  must  always  count 
upon  one  quarter  being  stupid  and  three  parts  idle.  The  first 
frank  I  get  I  will  send  you  a  copy  of  a  letter  of  the  K.  of 
Naples  to  Lord  Nelson,  which  I  think  will  please. 

N.  Audley  Street,  Saturday,  Jan.  11,  1800. 
.     .     .     .    Mrs.  John  Hunter  is  assuredly  and  declaredly  not 

*  By  William  Godwin,  published  1719. 


112  EXTEACTS   FROM   MISS   BERRY'S    LETTERS.  [1800 

the  author  of  the  plays.     St.  Leon,  when  you  get  it,  I  think 
you  will  find  a  very  disagreeable  book. 

Feb.  1800. 

I  am  much  more  disgusted  in  society  by  the  little  impression 
made  by  real  merit,  than  by  the  so  often  lamented  tolerance  of 
vice.  This  tolerance — for  tolerance  only  it  is — cannot  satisfy 
even  those  who  are  the  objects  of  it,  and  could  never  be  borne 
by  a  mind  deserving  anything  more.  By  real  merit  I  don't 
mean  partial  excellence  or  particular  talents,  that  make  them- 
selves useful,  or  desirable  in  this  or  that  particular  situation  or 
circumstance,  for  these,  I  think,  are  always  rated  even  above 
par  in  the  stock  of  common  esteem.  But  I  mean  general 
superiority  of  intellect  and  excellence  of  character.  In  what 
light  must  the  steady,  rational,  consistent  mind,  which  such 
superiority  and  such  excellence  supposes,  view,  not  the  incapa- 
city of  one-half  of  the  world  to  distinguish  them  at  all,  but  the 
very  little  impression  made  on  those  who  have  distinguished, 
and  ivould  be  capable  of  appreciating  them  ?  How  often  will 
they  have  occasion  to  refer  to  that  philosophy  and  knowledge 
of  human  nature  which  must  necessarily  form  a  part  of  their 
character,  when  they  see  that  all  their  excellences  and  all 
their  acquirements  will  not  outweigh  the  most  trifling  object  of 
self-interest,  the  most  open  attacks  of  flattery,  or  even  the 
pushing  perseverance  of  those  who,  conscious  they  have  little 
else  to  recommend  them,  take  care  by  being  always  in  the  way, 
to  make  it  much  less  trouble  to  take  notice  of  than  to  avoid 
them. 

The  false  pictures  given  of  human  life  in  most  novels,  and 
which  alone  (in  my  opinion)  makes  them  dangerous  reading 
for  young  people,  is,  not  that  the  sentiments  and  conduct  of  the 
hero  or  heroine  are  exalted  above  the  common  level  of  huma- 
nity, for  there  is  no  well-conceived  novel  which  is  not  read 
by  many  an  ingenuous  and  noble  mind,  who  can  reflect  with 
pleasure  that  they  have  acted  on  some  occasion  with  all  the 
high  sense  of  honour,  the  exalted  generosity,  the  noble  dis- 
interestedness described  in  their  author.  But  what  they  must 
not  look  for  in  real  life,  what  they  would  expect  in  vain,  what 
it  is  necessary  to  guard  them  against,  is,  supposing  that  such 
conduct  will  make  a  similar  impression  on  those  around  them, 


1800]      PRIVATE   THEATRICALS   AT   STRAWBERRY   HILL.        113 

that  the  sacrifices  they  make  will  be  considered,  and  the  prin- 
ciples on  which  they  act  understood  and  valued,  as  the  novel 
writer,  at  his  good  pleasure,  makes  them.  Among  the  thousands 
who  have  erred  like  Julia,  how  many  more  have  resembled  her 
in  character  and  subsequent  conduct  than  in  possessing  a  friend 
like  Claire! 

It  was  during  the  month,  of  November  this  year,  when 
Miss  Berry  mentions  they  were  staying  at  Strawberry 
Hill,  that  Mrs.  Darner  indulged  in  the  favourite  amuse- 
ment of  private  theatricals,  on  which  occasion  Miss  Berry, 
her  sister,  and  her  father  took  part. 

THEATRE,    STRAWBERRY    HILL, 

November,  1800. 

Will  be  presented  a  COMEDY  in  Two  Acts,  called 

THE    OLD    MAID. 

Mr.  Harlow Mr.  BURN. 

Clerimont EARL  of  MOUNT  EDGCUMBE. 

Captain  Cape  .......        Mr.  BERRY. 

Mrs.  Harlow  .......        Miss  BERRY. 

Miss  Harlow Mrs.  BURN. 

Trifle •.'.'.        MissA.BERRY. 

To  which  will  be  added, 

THE   INTRIGUING  CHAMBERMAID. 

Goodall Mr.  BURN. 

Valentine EARL  of  MOUNT  EDGCUMBE. 

Oldcastk         .        .        .        .        .        .        .  Mr.  BERRY. 

Trusty  and  Col.  Bluff Mr.  HERVEY. 

Slap  and  Security    .        .        .        .        .        .  Mr.  CAMPBELL. 

Mrs.  Highman Mrs.  BURN. 

Charlotte MissA.BERRY. 

Lattice Hon.  Mrs.  DAMER. 

The  PROLOGUE  to  the  Performance  to  be  spoken  by  the 

EARL  of  MOUNT  EDGCUMBE. 
The  EPILOGUE  by  the  Hon.  Mrs.  DAMER. 
VOL.  II.  I 


114        PRIVATE   THEATRICALS  AT  STRAWBERRY  HILL.      [1800 
PEOLOaUE, 

WEITTEN   BY  THE  EARL   OF   MOUNT   EDGCUMBE, 

And  spoken  by  him  at  the  opening  of  the  Theatre,  Strawberry  Hill, 
Nov.  1800. 


Noise  and  disputing  behind  the  Scenes. — The  Curtain  begins  to  rise. 
(Speaks  ivithin.) 

HOLD,  hold !  What 's  this  ?  No  prologue  to  our  play  ? 
Down  with  the  curtain — let  it  down,  I  say ; 
Let  me  go  forth — I  must,  I  will  have  way  ! 

(Enters.) 

So,  I  've  escaped  at  length  ;  with  much  ado, 
With  threats,  entreaties,  ay,  and  wrangling  too, 
I  've  forc'd  my  passage,  ere  the  curtain  rise, 
To  mark  your  looks,  your  thoughts  to  scrutinize, 
And  read  our  doom,  before-hand,  in  your  eyes. 
Long  in  the  green-room  was  the  point  contested ; 
Scarce  to  my  pray'r  a  half-assent  I  'd  wrested ; 
When,  loudly  summon'd  by  the  prompter's  bell, 
(To  young  adventurers  tremendous  knell !) 
Restraint  disdaining,  hastily  I  flew 
To  state  the  case,  and  plead  my  cause  to  you. 
What !  an  unpractis'd,  novice  band  engage, 
With  vent'rous  step,  to  tread  the  awful  stage  ; 
Before  this  dread  tribunal  dare  t'  appear ; 
Face  such  an  audience  as  I  now  see  here ; 
Nor  send  one  humble  messenger  before, 
To  court  your  favor,  and  your  smile  implore  ! 
Thus  did  I  vainly  urge :  they  all  reply, 
'  But  -who  so  bold  will  venture  ?  '     Who  will  P— I. 
Give  me  your  Prologue  ;  let  this  task  be  mine, 
Or  I  '11  no  longer  be  your  Valentine.* 
Thus  then — but  soft !  methinks  I  here  descry 
Smiles  of  good  humour  beam  from  ev'ry  eye ; 
The  gen'rous  sentiment  each  bosom  move, 
That  prompts  to  pardon,  if  it  can't  approve : 
Yes,  in  these  partial  looks  with  pride  I  view 
Our  fondest  wishes  realiz'd  by  you. 
No  more,  no  more :  I'll  hasten  to  my  friends  ; 
Tell  them,  in  their  despite,  I've  gain'd  my  ends ; 
Bid  them  with  confidence  dispel  their  fear, 
Certain  to  meet  a  kind  reception  here. 

*  The  part  of  Valentine  in  the  '  Intriguing  Chambermaid.' 


1800]         MARRIAGE   OP   LADY   GEORGIANS  CAVENDISH.        115 

It  was  at  the  close  of  this  year  that  Lady  Georgiana 
Cavendish's  marriage  was  settled  with  the  Earl  of  Carlisle. 
Miss  Berry's  continued  and  affectionate  interest  in  her 
welfare  is  warmly  expressed  in  her  letter  of  congratula- 
tion to  her  brother,  Lord  Hartington,  in  answer  to  the 
announcement  of  the  intended  marriage. 

Little  Strawb.,  Tuesday,  Dec.  23, 1800. 

Let  me  congratulate  you  upon  what  seems  to  give  you  all  so 
much  pleasure,  and  which  I  enter  into  as  heartily  as  I  can, 
considering  how  little  I  personally  know  the  person  in  question. 
I  hope  at  least  he  is  worthy  of  her,  that  he  is  aware  of,  and  will 
do  justice  to,  her  character.  .  .  .  She  has  a  deep,  serious, 
thinking  mind  and  a  warmth  and  integrity  of  heart  which  will 
constitute  her  happiness  while  doing  right,  and  her  misery  if  led 
into  error.  What  a  character  to  set  out  with  !  What  ties  upon 
her  good  conduct  in  every  relation  of  life  !  It  is  he,  he  that  is 
to  be  congratulated.  May  he  know,  and  deserve  his  happiness, 
by  contributing  to  hers ! 

Let  us  hope  that,  as  she  deserves  all  good,  all  good  awaits 
her,  which  no  heart  but  your  own  can  invoke  more  sincerely, 
or  rejoice  in  more  thoroughly,  than  that  of  your  faithfully 
attached 

M.  BERRY. 


i  2 


116         PKIVATE   THEATRICALS  AT   STRAWBERRY   HILL.      [1801 


PEIVATE  THEATEICALS  AT  STKAWBEEEY 

HILL. 

1801. 

THE  only  entry  in  Miss  Berry's  Memoranda,  for  this 
year,  is,  that  the  amusement '  of  private  theatricals  at 
Strawberry  Hill  was  repeated,  and,for  the  first  time,  a 
comedy  in  five  acts,  written  by  Miss  Berry  herself,  and 
entitled  c  Fashionable  Friends,'  was  performed  by  the 
troop  of  amateur  actors.  The  Prologue  and  Epilogue 
were  contributed  by  her  friend  Miss  Joanna  Baillie,* 
and  are  pleasing  specimens  of  that  kind  of  composition. 
The  parts  were  cast  as  follows  : — 

FASHIONABLE  FRIENDS. 

COMEDY  in  Five  Acts. 

Dramatis  Persones. 

Sir  Dudley  Dorimant       .        .        .  Lord  MOUNT  EDGCUMBE. 

Sir  Valentine  Vapour       .        .        .  Mr.  BEERY. 

Mr.  LoveU Mr.  BROWNLOW  NORTH. 

John Mr.  CAMPBELL. 

Lapierre Mr.  BURST. 

Doctor  Syrop  ....  

Lady  Selina  Vapour         .        .         .  Honourable  Mrs.  DAMER. 

Mrs.  Lovett Miss  BERRY. 

Mrs.  Rackett Mrs.  BURN. 

Miss  Rackett Miss  A.  BERRY. 

Trimming Lady  ELIZABETH  COLE. 


*  Miss  Berry's  intimacy  with  this  distinguished  authoress  appears  to  have 
been  well  established  at  this  time,  and  she  preserved  to  the  last  a  very  high 
opinion  of  Miss  Baillie's  poetical  powers,  and  the  greatest  esteem  and  affec- 
tion for  her  character. 


1801]  *  FASHIONABLE   FEIENDS.'  117 

PROLOGUE   TO   THE   « FASHIONABLE   FEIENDS.'* 

BY  MISS    JOANNA    BAILLIE. 

IN  ancient  times,  when  harvest's  yellow  store, 

In  barns  well  lodged,  call'd  to  the  field  no  more, 

And  good  folks  sat  the  cheerful  fire  about, 

And  merry  mummers  play'd,  and  loud  laugh'd  every  lout, 

Winter  approach'd  with  no  forbidding  grace, 

And  dull  November  wore  a  waggish  face. 

In  the  same  season,  whilst  our  favour'd  land 

Toasts  Ceres'  bounty  and  the  olive  wand, 

We  Ve  dight  us  out  in  guise  and  motley  geer, 

And  thus  before  these  friendly  ranks  appear. 

As  heretofore  you  've  been,  Oh  !  be  ye  still 

The  gentle  judges  of  our  mimick  skill ! 

Before  you  now  we  bring — I  will  aver  it — 

A  comedy  of  no  ignoble  merit, 

If  wit,  and  sense,  and  unstrained  nature  may 

Its  listed  pleader  warrant  so  to  say. 

Such  as  to  please  had  own'd  no  humble  pow'rs, 

Taste,  not  perhaps  quite  so  refined  as  ours, 

In  other  days,  when  plays,  as  plays  have  been, 

Were  written  to  be  heard  as  well  as  seen, 

And  gleams  of  cheering  favour  sometimes  thrown 

On  what  was  said  as  well  as  what  was  shown. 

But  times,  like  the  clos'd  scen'ry  of  a  play, 

With  all  their  good  old  fashions,  pass  away. 

If  nought  but  plot  and  bustle  can  engage 

(That  hunt-the-slipper  bus'ness  of  the  stage) 


•  Hainpstead,  October  14, 1801. 

I  send  you  a  plain  simple  Prologue  of  no  pretensions,  but  such  I  hope  as 
you  will  not  dislike ;  if  you  do,  throw  it  aside,  and  I  shall  not  be  at  all 
offended.  Whatever  1  have  done  in  the  way  of  poetry  I  am  sure  I  have 
lied  well  for  you,  and  that  is  all  the  merit  I  can  claim.  I  should  have  sent 
it  to  you  sooner,  but  I  have  been  very  much  occupied  in  a  great  many 
divers  ways,  and  of  all  things  I  hate  at  present  to  write  one  word  more 
than  I  can  possibly  help. 

I  hope  you  receive  pleasure  from  this  blessed  prospect  of  peace  that  is 
opened  upon  us  so  suddenly.  I  have  rejoiced  heartily,  and  paid  for  our 
clay  and  candles  with  no  begrudging  spirit.  Perhaps  it  opens  to  you  some 
pleasant  views  independent  of  the  public  good.  If  it  does,  may  they  prove 
in  reality  such  as  your  imagination  represents  them. 

Farewell!  and  let  me  hear  soon  how  you  do. 

Yours  affectionately, 

J.  B. 


118        PRIVATE   THEATRICALS  AT   STRAWBERRY   HILL.      [1801 

Your  much-priz'd  favour  now,  so  let  it  be, 
I  drop  my  claim,  and  urge  another  plea. 
This  piece  an  outcast  helpless  foundling  stands, 
Whose  uncapp'd  head  receives  from  worldly  hands 
No  kind  endearing  stroke.     '  Out  on  the  brat ! 
'Tis  harelipp'd,  ricketty,  and  blear' d,  and  squat,, 
And  squints,  and  halts.    Away,  I  can't  abide ! ' 
Alas  !  no  partial  parent  smiles  beside. 
But  do  the  generous  such  sternness  show 
To  the  outcast  and  the  unown'd  ?     0  no  ! 
They  look  on  such  still  with  a  friendly  eye, 
And  in  its  form  ev'n  added  beauties  spy ; 
As  left  and  lonely  things,  with  wondrous  grace, 
Wave  their  neglected  heads  in  some  unbidden  place. 
Then  to  this  gen'ral  sympathy  confess'd, 
A  native  inmate  of  each  gentle  breast, 
I'll  freely  leave  it,  with  no  anxious  fear, 
To  meet  the  judgment  that  awaits  it  here. 


EPILOGUE. 

BY   MISS   JOANNA  BAILLIE. 

WHILST  fogs  along  the  Thames'  damp  margin  creep, 

And  cold  winds  through  his  leafless  willows  sweep, 

And  fairy  elves,  whose  summer  sport  hath  been 

To  foot  it  lightly  on  the  moonlight  green, 

Now,  hooded  close,  in  many  a  cowering  form, 

Troop  with  the  surly  spirits  of  the  storm ; 

Whilst  by  the  blazing  fire,  with  saddled  nose, 

The  sage  turns  o'er  his  leaves  of  tedious  prose, 

And  o'er  their  new-dealt  cards,  with  eager  eye, 

Pale  dowagers  look  and  smile,  or  inly  sigh, 

And  blooming  maids  from  silken  work-bags  pour, 

Like  tangled  sea-weed  on  the  vexed  shore, 

Of  patch-works,  nettings,  fringe,  a  strange  and  motley  store ; 

Whilst  all,  attempting  many  a  different  mode, 

Would  from  their  shoulders  hitch  times'  heavy  load, 

Thus  have  we  chose,  in  comic  sock  bedight, 

To  wrestle  with  a  long  November  night. 

'  In  comic  sock  ! '  methinks  indignant  cries 

Some  grave  fastidious  friend,  with  angry  eyes, 

Scowling  severe, '  No  more  the  phrase  abuse  ! 

So  shod  indeed  there  had  been  some  excuse, 

But  in  these  walls,  once  a  well-known  retreat, 

Where  taste  and  learning  kept  a  fav'rite  seat; 

Where  Gothic  arches,  with  a  solemn  shade, 


1801]  EPILOGUE   TO   '  FASHIONABLE   FRIENDS.'  119 

Should  o'er  the  thoughtful  mind  their  influence  spread  ; 

Where  pictures,  vases,  busts,  and  precious  things, 

Still  speak  of  sages,  poets,  heroes,  kings, 

On  which  the  stranger  looks  with  pensive  gaze, 

And  thinks  upon  the  worth  of  other  days ; 

Where  learning's  rock,  the  time-defying  Press, 

Hath  oft  sent  forth,  prankt  in  its  wordy  dress, 

The  new-coin'd  thought,  in  fair  and  goodly  print, 

Sterling  and  bright  as  guinea  from  the  Mint ; — 

Like  foolish  children  in  their  mimick  play, 

Confined  at  grandame's  on  a  rainy  day, 

Who  borrow'd  robes  o'er  stools  and  benches  sweep, 

And  thro'  chink'd  doors  and  tattered  curtains  peep, 

With  paltry  farce,  and  all  its  bastard  train, 

Grotesque  and  broad  such  precincts  to  profane! 

It  is  a  shame — but  no,  I  will  not  speak ; 

It  makes  the  blood  rise  mantling  to  my  cheek.' 

Indeed,  wise  Sir !     Perhaps  'tis  very  true  ; 

But  lack  a  day !  what  will  not  woman  do  ? 

Ah  !  he  who  o'er  our  heads  those  arches  bent, 

And  stored  these  relics  dear  to  sentiment, 

More  mild  than  you,  with  grave  pedantic  pride, 

Would  not  have  ranged  him  on  your  surly  aide. 

But  now  to  you,  who  on  our  frolic  scene 

Have  look'd  well  pleased,  and  gentle  critics  been, 

Who  have  received,  with  minds  from  caption  freed, 

The  better  will,  for  the  imperfect  deed, 

Nor  would  our  homely  humour  proudly  spurn,— 

To  you,  the  good,  the  gay,  the  fair  I  turn, 

And  thank  you  all ;  if,  here,  our  feeble  powers 

Have  lightly  wing'd  for  you  some  wintry  hours ; 

If  these  remembered  scenes,  that  now  are  past, 

Shall  on  some  future  minutes  pleasure  cast ; 

Shall  still  amidst  your  mazy  fancies  gleam, 

Or  on  your  pillow  hang  one  pleasant  dream ; 

To  right  good  end  we  've  worn  our  mumming  guise, 

And  we  're  repaid  and  happy — ay,  and  wise ! 

Who  says  we  are  not ;  on  his  sombre  birth 

Gay  Fancy  smil'd  not,  nor  heart-light'ning  Mirth, 

Home  let  him  hie  to  his  unsocial  rest, 

And  heavy  set  the  night  mare  on  his  joyless  breast ! 

The  following  verses  may  be  considered  as  a  tribute  to 
the  success  of  4  Fashionable  Friends,'  written  by  some 
approving  spectator,  but  no  name  is  given : — 


120         PRIVATE   THEATRICALS  AT  STRAWBERRY   HILL.      [1801 

Verses  sent  to  Mrs.  Darner  after  the  first  representation  of  the 
'  Fashionable  Friends '  at  Strawberry  Hill,  Nov.  1801. 

Sweet  be  the  rest  and  undisturbed 
That  crowns  the  pleasant  toil  to-night, 
And  long  may  its  remembrance  live, 
Long,  long  be  cherish'd  with  delight. 

Or  if  the  spirits,  highly  wrought, 
Court  not  so  soon  th'  oblivious  hour  j 
If  e'en  in  slumbers  unsubdued, 
Genius  and  Fancy  yet  have  power ; 

(Since  all  that  beauties  choose  to  say 
With  faith  implicit  is  receiv'd, 
Since  ladies  never  yet  could  lie, 
And  tales  so  grave  are  sure  believ'd,) 

0  !  may  the  parent  of  your  child, 
For  your  fond  cares  his  thanks  bestow, 
Farquhar  support  the  trembling  sprite, 
While  Darner  wreathes  his  modest  brow. 

Mark  how  he  bends  to  sprightly  Burn, 
See  how  he  kneels  at  Berry's  feet, 
And  owns  that,  but  for  Edgcumbe's  worth, 
He  could  have  punish'd  foul  deceit 

That  youth — O'Brien  is  his  name  ? 
His  hand  the  grateful  Bard  shall  seize, 
Glad  on  some  stage  to  find  again 
One  gentleman  who  moves  with  ease. 

The  vision  flies — but  not  in  dreams 
Alone  shall  live  this  pleasant  night, 
For  long  shall  its  remembrance  live, 
Long,  long  be  cherish'd  with  delight. 

The  more  critical  prose  opinion,  which  appears  to  have 
been  written  by  some  other  spectator,  but  to  whose  MS. 
no  name  is  appended,  was  certainly  encouraging  to  give 
a  wider  publicity  than  that  of  private  theatricals  to 
'  Fashionable  Friends.' 

The  great  strength  of  the  play  is  witty  sprightly  dialogue, 
kept  up  uniformly  throughout,  without  ever  flagging  in  any 
part ;  and  in  the  great  skill  with  which  one  of  the  chief  cha- 
racters, Lady  Selina,  is  drawn :  the  weakness,  if  it  has  any, 
seems  to  me  to  be  this,  that  the  plan  and  conduct  of  the  plot 


1801]  '  FASHIONABLE   FRIENDS.'  121 

resemble  those  of  many  plays  that  we  have  already,  and  the 
first  part  of  the  play  has,  perhaps,  less  action  carried  on  in  it 
than  the  present  taste  in  plays  may  require.  I  think,  however, 
that  its  strength  will  do  more  than  get  the  better  of  its  weak- 
ness, and  that  represented  in  a  theatre  where  the  dialogue  may 
be  distinctly  heard,  it  will  meet  with  the  warmest  applause. 

The  event  of  the  following  year  unhappily  proved  that 
this  prophecy  was  not  fulfilled. 


122  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [iso-2 


1802. 

THE  state  of  the  Continent  now  enabled  Miss  Berry 
again  to  indulge  in  her  taste  for  foreign  travel,  and  after 
an  interval  of  eleven  years,  she  left  England  with  Mrs. 
Darner,  on  a  visit  to  Paris. 

A  visit  of  scarcely  more  than  a  month's  duration,  to  a 
foreign  country,  can  furnish  but  little  deeper  than  surface 
knowledge  of  its  social  and  political  condition  ;  in  so  short 
a  time,  little  can  be  gathered  which  does  not  come  under 
the  traveller's  own  immediate  observation. 

Miss  Berry  made  notes  of  what  she  saw  and  of  who  she 
saw.  The  social  habits  and  the  persons  composing  the 
society  through  which  she  was  now  passing,  had  under- 
gone great  changes  since  she  had  last  been  in  France, 
and  she  set  down  in  detail  whatever  came  before  her  eyes. 
Her  Journal  is,  strictly  speaking,  a  daily  account  of  what 
she  saw  and  did  at  Paris,  and  nothing  more  ;  it  contains 
neither  essays,  speculations,  or  prophecies.  She  saw  and 
made  acquaintance  with  many  whose  names  had  already 
become  historical,  but  had  more  opportunity  of  observing 
their  personal  appearance  than  of  judging  of  their  cha- 
racter or  conversation  ;  to  her  it  was  the  exchange  from  the 
misty  ideas  associated  with  mere  names,  to  the  substantive 
reality  of  living  men,  and  though  the  perusal  of  her 
Journal  cannot  impart  a  similar  gratification  to  others, 
it  tends  to  approximate  the  reader  to  those  times  and 
scenes,  to  which  he  is  thus  introduced,  by  an  eye-witness. 

Miss  Berry  was  much  impressed  with  the  magnificence 
of  the  interior  decorations  of  the  Tuileries,  and  of  the 
official  houses  of  ministers,  &c. ;  but  so  great  has  been 
the  subsequent  development  of  manufacturing  power  and 


1802]  FROM   LOXDOX   TO   DOVEE.  123 

tasteful  skill,  that  many  objects  which  then  excited  her 
surprise  by  their  richness  and  splendour,  are  now  within 
reach  of  moderate  fortunes  to  procure,  and  the  silk 
hangings,  embroidered  muslins,  rich  candelabra,  and  orna- 
mental furniture,  &c.,  are  to  be  found  repeated  over 
and  over  again  in  the  large  country-houses  of  England. 
Some  allowance  must  also  be  made  for  the  heightened 
effect  which  novelty  and  fashion  give  to  whatever  is 
decorative.  It  would  seem,  for  instance,  that  in  1802 
the  combination  of  mahogany  and  ormolu,  carried  with 
it  ideas  of  richness  and  elegance,  that  it  would  not  now 
convey,  and  handsome  mirrors  were  thought  to  have 
gained  in  effect  by  light  drapery,  in  place  of  the  massive 
gold  frames  now  again  so  highly  prized ;  but  Miss  Berry 
was  an  experienced  judge  of  luxury  and  magnificence, 
and  the  impression  conveyed  to  her  mind  by  what  she 
saw  of  republican  splendour  was  no  doubt  correct,  ac- 
cording to  the  taste  of  the  time. 

JOURNAL. 

Monday,  March  8th. — Left  London  at  half-past  eleven 
o'clock,  arrived  at  Sittingbourne  at  seven  in  the  evening. 
The  road  from  London  to  Dartford  so  very  deep  in  stiff 
mud  that  four  horses  could  hardly  drag  the  coach  (though 
by  no  means  heavy)  at  more  than  a  foot's  pace  for  several 
miles  together.  The  morning  foggy  and  very  cold.  No 
great  road  that  I  know  in  England  is  so  tedious  to  travel 
as  this  to  Dover ;  the  stages  are  long,  the  road  continually 
up  and  down  hills,  several  of  which  are  long  and  severe, 
and  the  postilions  in  all  the  stages  stop  at  a  half-way 
house  to  give  their  horses  water.  To  go  from  London 
to  Dover  in  one  day  would  at  the  best  time  of  the  year 
be  a  very  long  day's  journey.* 

*  This  once  laborious  day's  journey  is  now  accomplished  in  2  hours  and 
20  min. ;  and  that  from  London  to  Paris  in  9  hours. 


124  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [iso-2 

Tuesday r,  9^A.  —  Arrived  at  Dover  at  half-past  one 
o'clock.  The  day  bright  and  sunny,  but  cold,  with  a 
great  deal  of  wind  at  north-east.  The  country  about 
Canterbury  pretty,  even  at  this  bare  season.  Saw  Dover 
Castle  from  a  hill  six  miles  from  Dover.  The  York  Hotel 
at  Dover  much  more  cheerfully  situated,  looking  to  the 
sea,  than  the  '  City  of  London,'  and  the  accommodation 
much  better.  Since  dinner  I  have  walked  down  to  the 
pier ;  though  I  have  twice  landed  here  before  from  France, 
I  was  always  sick  and  sorry,  and  in  a  hurry  to  get  away, 
and  never  walked  about  the  place.  It  is  picturesquely 
situated  close  under  its  high  chalk  cliffs,  the  most  elevated 
point  of  which  is  surmounted  by  its  fine  and  extensive 
castle,  its  inner  and  outer  harbour,  both  crowded  with 
shipping,  which  interrupts  the  view  of  a  number  of  mean- 
looking  houses.  All  this  I  have  seen  this  afternoon 
lighted  up  by  a  bright  sun,  and  it  has  struck  me  very 
much.  Had  we  arrived  here  a  couple  of  hours  sooner, 
so  as  to  have  got  our  carriage  on  board,  and  to  have 
saved  the  tide,  there  was  wind  enough  to  have  carried 
us  to  Calais  in  two  hours  and  a  half ;  but  having  missed 
the  day's  tide,  it  would  be  useless  to  sail  in  the  night,  as 
at  whatever  time  we  reached  Calais  we  should  be  kept 
on  board  our  vessel  till  the  morning. 

Wednesday,  lO^A. — A  clear  sunny  day,  with  hardly  a 
cloud.  Went  on  board  the  Swift,  Captain  Blake,  at 
Dover  quay,  at  eleven  o'clock ;  got  to  Calais  harbour  at 
ten  minutes  past  four,  and  alongside  the  quay  in  ten 
minutes  more,  the  same  tide  carrying  us  from  one 
harbour  to  the  other.  The  pier  and  the  quay  were 
crowded  with  sailor-looking  people,  as  there  was  another 
English  packet  just  leaving  the  quay  with  a  number  of 
passengers. 

A  shabby  custom-house  officer  immediately  came  on 
board  the  vessel  (an  old  invalid  officer  or  soldier,  I  know 
not  which),  begged  to  see  our  passports,  and  desired  us  to 


1802]  CALAIS.  125 

write  down  our  names  and  nations.  We  were  kept  on 
board  till  somebody  from  the  vessel  had  gone  and  re- 
turned to  some  municipal  officer ;  not  the  smallest  rude 
comment  or  remark  was  made  upon  us  by  the  crowd 
upon  the  quay,  and  the  moment  the  captain  said  we 
might  leave  the  vessel,  half  a  dozen  dirty  civil  hands 
were  held  out  to  help  us  up  the  ladder.  With  the 
captain  of  our  vessel  and  the  old  invalid  (or  whatever 
he  was)  we  proceeded  first  to  one  of  the  low  small 
houses  close  by  the  quay,  where  our  names  and  nations 
were  again  set  down,  and  then  to  a  sort  of  bureau  of  the 
custom-house,  where  we  were  desired  to  declare  if  we 
had  anything  upon  us  contre  les  droits ;  our  declaration 
in  the  negative  being  immediately  taken,  we  went,  still 
with  our  captain,  our  old  invalid,  and  M.  Quillaque  (the 
successor  of  M.  Dessein),  who  had  now  joined  us,  to 
the  Hotel  de  Ville,  where  the  commissaire  de  police  read 
our  passport,  and  everyone  answered  to  their  names. 
Here  we  left  our  pass  from  M.  Otto  *  with  a  promise 
from  the  commissaire  that  we  should  have  his  that  even- 
ing. All  these  ceremonies  passed  without  any  rudeness, 
impertinent  questions,  or  delays  whatsoever. 

From  the  Maison  de  Ville  we  went  directly  to  Des- 
sein's,  and  were  in  possession  of  a  very  comfortable 
apartment  by  five  o'clock.  The  only  thing  that  I  re- 
marked with  surprise  at  Calais  was  that  in  passing  from 
the  quay  through  the  gates  and  the  market-place,  and 
from  thence  to  the  inn,  I  did  not  see  one  single  soldier 
except  a  sentinel  at  the  door  of  the  Maison  de  Ville. 
Pessein's  inn  is  very  clean  and  comfortable,  but  neither 
the  cooking  nor  the  wine  good,  and  immoderately  dear. 

*  Louis  Guillaume  Otto,  a  native  of  Baden,  was  the  French  commissioner 
for  prisoners  in  England.  He  was  born  1754 ;  employed  in  early  life  by  M. 
de  la  Luzerae,  made  Comte  de  Moslay  by  Buonaparte  in  1805,  and  a  Peer 
of  France  by  Louis  XVIII. — Correspondence  of  Lord  Cornwallis,  vol.  iii. 
p.  385. 


MISS  BERET'S  JOURNAL.  [isoa 

Thursday,  1.1th. — Left  Calais  between  eight  and  nine 
o'clock.  The  first  thing  that  must  strike  anybody  who 
knew  the  appearance  of  this  part  of  the  country  formerly, 
is  the  improved  state  of  cultivation,  all  the  land  looking 
clean,  well  cropped,  and  neatly  ploughed,  and  the  cottages 
cleaner  (on  the  outside  at  least)  and  infinitely  more  com- 
fortable than  they  were.  I  think,  too,  those  scattered 
about  the  country  were  more  numerous  than  formerly. 
The  people,  the  children  particularly,  struck  me  as  look- 
ing much  better,  fatter,  fairer,  and  better  fed.*  The  only 
buildings  that  wear  a  melancholy  and  ruinous  appearance 
in  the  country  are  the  poor  churches,  all  of  which,  even 
in  the  little  villages,  have  their  windows  broken,  the  tops 
of  their  spires  knocked  off,  and  with  most  of  them  their 
roofs  falling  to  pieces ;  at  the  same  time  I  believe  they 
are  almost  all  used.  Those  belonging  to  abbeys,  of 
which  in  the  course  of  this  day's  journey  we  passed  two 
or  three,  are,  for  the  most  part,  actually  pulled  down. 
They  have  been  sold  to  individuals  with  ground  belong- 
ing to  the  establishment,  and  have  been  taken  down  piece- 
meal as  they  found  means  of  using  or  disposing  of  the 
materials. 

The  road  between  Calais  and  Montreuil  is  excellent. 
Between  every  change  of  horses  there  is  now  one,  and 
generally  two  turnpikes, — a  simple  bar,  which  would, 
in  case  of  necessity,  push  across  the  road,  not  like  our 
gates.  The  tolls  are  very  high  (for  a  berlin  with  six 
horses  and  a  courier,  57  livres  between  Calais  and 
Paris,  2Z.  7s.  6d.),  and  I  find,  it  is  supposed,  at  present, 
that  the  necessities  of  the  Government  do  not  allow  much 

*  Miss  Berry's  personal  observations  on  this  subject  fully  bear  out  M. 
de  Tocqueville's  opinions,  written  about  fifty  years  later : — '  La  revolution 
d'ailleurs  n'avait  pas  accable"  le  pays  d'une  maniere  e"gale  ;  quelques-uns  en 
avaient  porte"  le  faix,  un  grand  nombre  y  avaient  trouve"  des  biens  tres-pre- 
cieux  mele's  aux  maux  qu'elle  causait.  Je  crois  que  le  peuple  proprement 
dit  avait  e'te'  beaucoup  moins  atteint  dans  son  bien-etre  qu'on  ne  se  1'imagine 
commune'ment.' — CEuvres  et  Correspondance  inedites  d1  Alexis  de  Tocqueoitte, 
par  Gustave  de  Beaumont. 


1802]  CALAIS   TO   MONTREUIL.  127 

of  it  to  go  to  the  conservation  of  the  road.  However, 
there  were  many  people  working  where  it  was  out  of 
repair.  At  Saumer,  a  wretched  little  town  two  posts 
from  Boulogne,  where  the  carriage,  according  to  the 
ancien  regime,  was  surrounded  by  beggars,  I  observed 
the  first  tree  of  liberty  I  have  yet  seen.  It  was  a  shabby 
little  lime,  which  had  been  transplanted  when  too  old  to 
flourish,  and  was  surrounded  by  a  little  white  railing,  in 
the  place  or  market-place. 

At  Montreuil,  where  we  slept,  1'Eglise  de  Notre  Dame, 
the  principal  church  in  the  town,  is  an  entire  ruin, 
nothing  remaining  but  a  part  of  the  walls,  the  broken 
tracery  of  some  very  handsome  Gothic  windows,  and 
one  or  two  of  the  Gothic  pillars  of  the  inside.  On 
questioning  the  people  at  the  inn  at  what  time  their 
church  was  demolie,  they  all  denied  it  being  demo- 
lished, and  said  it  had  fallen  down.  At  last  the  maid 
who  was  waiting  upon  us  owned  that  it  had  been 
pulled  down — that  a  rich  individual  of  the  town  had 
bought  the  church  and  meant  to  preserve  it,  but  that  the 
people  of  the  place,  dans  le  temps  de  la  terreur  (which 
they  now  all  talk  of  as  if  it  had  taken  place  in  the 
days  of  St.  Louis),  had  threatened  him  with  the  guil- 
lotine if  he  did  not  allow  it  to  be  destroyed,  and  so, 
indeed,  it  has  been  most  completely.  But  what  struck 
us  extremely,  was  the  sort  of  shyness  which  the  people 
had,  both  to  ourselves  and  servants,  of  owning  this,  or 
allowing  it  to  have  been  demolished,  as  if  they  considered 
it  as  a  disgrace.  Two  convents  were  likewise  destroyed 
in  this  little  town.  It  possessed  no  less  than  seven 
churches ;  the  one  I  have  mentioned  is  the  only  one 
destroyed,  but  of  the  seven  there  are  but  two  open  for 
worship.  All  the  chateaux  (of  which  we  passed  several 
small  ones  in  this  day's  journey)  in  part  or  in  whole  shut 
up  and  visibly  neglected,  but  not  defaced  or  pulled  down. 

Friday,  \'2th. — Left  Montreuil.  The  road  sandy  and 
the  country  near  it  very  open,  but  everywhere  well 


128  MISS  BERET'S  JOURNAL.  [1502 

cultivated.  Much  wood  about  a  long  straggling  village 
through  which  we  passed,  all  the  houses  thatched,  and 
every  one  having  a  gardener  an  orchard  belonging  to  them. 

At  Namport,  the  first  post  from  Montreuil,  a  wretched 
village,  a  shabby  wooden  cross  is  still  subsisting,  placed 
against  a  bank,  the  first  I  have  seen  in  France.  Of  a 
large  chateau  very  near  the  road,  in  a  village  near  Nou- 
vion,  the  windows  were  broken  and  shut  up,  and  the  woods 
and  walks  neglected  but  not  cut  down.  Abbeville,  which 
is  a  large  town,  struck  me  as  looking  very  wretched  ;  in- 
deed, it  is  the  appearance  of  the  country,  its  culture,  and 
its  inhabitants,  not  of  the  towns  and  little  bourgs,  that  is 
improved.  The  fortifications  of  Abbeville  seem  quite 
neglected,  and  in  some  places  pulled  down.  I  observed 
fixed  against  the  gate  a  Defense  aux  Citoyens,  in  the  name 
of  liberte  and  egalite,  to  pull  down  or  injure  the  walls,  &c. 
There  is  a  small  barrack  near  the  gate,  at  the  entrance  of 
which  I  saw  a  dragoon,  absolutely  the  first  soldier  (the 
sentinel  at  Calais  excepted)  I  have  seen  in  France.  While 
our  horses  were  changing,  observing  a  church  very  near 
the  post-house  less  mutilated  than  usual  and  open,  I  ran 
over  to  see  it.  It  was  in  tolerable  good  order  inside,  with 
some  pictures  remaining,  and  the  brass  candlesticks  of  the 
principal  altar.  In  each  of  the  side  aisles  was  a  priest 
standing  at  a  table  and  surrounded  by  above  a  hundred 
poor  ragged  children  of  both  sexes,  whom  he  was  hearing 
their  catechism.  Eoad  beyond  Abbeville  planted  with 
apple  trees  on  each  side  for  several  miles,  all  of  which  are 
in  good  order,  and  many  young  ones  neatly  and  carefully 
planted. 

Flexcourt  and  Pecquigny  are  wretched  villages  in  the 
old  style,  full  of  beggars.  At  Flexcourt  we  were  detained 
twenty  minutes  for  horses.  Near  Pecquigny,  on  the  bank 
of  the  Somme,  is  the  very  large  Abbaye  du  Garde.*  The 

*  The  Abbaye  du  Garde  is  occupied  by  monks  of  the  order  of  La  Trappe. 
— Murray's  Handbook,  1844.  The  present  proprietor  of  the  Abbaye  du  Garde 
is  M.  Bocquillon  de  Genlis.  1860. 


1802]  AMIENS.  129 

church  is  entirely  pulled  down.  The  Abbaye,  which 
looks  like  a  large  modern-built  chateau,  is  purchased  by 
a  negociant  of  Amiens,  who  inhabits  it  as  his  country 
house.  Immediately  above  the  village  of  Pecquigny  is  a 
large  chateau  of  the  Cte.  D'Artois's,*  with  half  the  roof 
off  and  otherwise  quite  ruined. 

Arrived  at  Amiens,  through  a  very  long,  straggling, 
dirty  faubourg.  The  town  itself  looks  well,  and  has 
wide  and  good  streets.  The  cathedral  here  has  not  been 
touched,  and  the  people  boast  they  have  heard  much 
more  than  they  have  seen  of  the  Eevolution.  We  sent 
a  note  to  Lord  Cornwallis  to  enquire  after  him,  asking  his 
orders  for  Paris.  Mr.  Merry  f  knew  of  our  coming,  and 
was  with  us  in  an  hour  after  we  arrived.  The  account 
he  gave  of  the  way  in  which  the  negotiators  pass  their 
time  at  Amiens  was  curious.  Lord  Cornwallis  riding 
every  morning,  and  Joseph  Buonaparte  not  getting  up 
till  one  or  two  o'clock.  The  conferences,  which  are  very 

*  The  Castle  of  Pecquigny  was  built  at  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century. 
Madame  de  Sevigne"  thus  describes  it  in  her  letter,  dated  April  27,  1639 : — 
'  C'est  un  vieux  batiment  (Sieve"  au-dessus  de  la  ville  comme  Grignan  ;  un 
parfaitement  beau  chapitre  comme  en  Grignan  ;  un  doyen,  douze  chanoines ; 
je  ne  sais  si  la  fondation  est  aussi  belle,  mais  ce  sont  des  terrasses  sur  la 
riviere  de  Somme  qui  fait  cent  tours  dans  les  prairies ;  voila  ce  qui  n'est 
point  a  Grignan.  II  y  a  un  camp  de  Ce"sar  a  un  quart  de  lieu  d'ici,  dont  on 
respecte  encore  les  tranche'es.' 

The  castle  of  Pecquigny  was  sold  by  Jean  d'Ailly,  in  1774,  for  500.000  frs. 
to  M.  de  Ber,  who  resold  it  the  following  year  to  the  Jew  Calmer ;  finding 
his  religion  deprived  him  of  the  power  of  appointing  to  the  dependent 
livings,  he  resold  it  to  the  Comte  d'Artois,  who  kept  it  till  the  Revo- 
lution. The  castle  was  then  sold  as  national  property.  It  belongs  now 
to  the  Baron  Adrien  de  Morgan,  Membre  du  Conseil  General  de  la  Somme, 
who  bought  it  twelve  or  fifteen  years  ago  from  the  post-master  at  Pec- 
quigny. 

f  Lord  Cornwallis,  in  writing  to  a  friend,  says  of  his  mission  : — '  My 
family  on  this  occasion  is  circumscribed,  and,  exclusively  of  Mr.  Merry,  who 
hiv,  been  negotiating  at  Paris,  and  Mr.  Moore,  of  the  Secretary  of  State's 
office,  who  is  to  act  under  him,  consists  only  of  Lt.-Col.  Li ttlehales,  and 
Lt.-Cc.l.  Nightiugall.'  Mr.  Andrew  Merry  married,  in  1803,  the  widow  of 
John  Leather,  Esqr.,  was  Minister  in  France,  the  United  States,  Denmark, 
and  Sweden,  from  April  1802  to  April  1809.  He  died  1836.— Corre- 
spondence of  Lord  Comioallis,  vol.  iii.  p.  384. 
VOL.  II.  K 


130  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1802 

frequent,  never  begin  till  three  or  four,  and  last  till  dinner, 
which  is  never  sooner  than  six,  seven,  or  eight  o'clock. 
These  dinners  are  confined  to  a  round  of  four  or  five 
houses,  of  which  the  Prefect  and  the  Mayor  of  the  town 
are  two,  and  they  are  all  heartily  tired  of  always  seeing 
the  same  faces.  These  dinners,  however,  last  a  very  short 
time ;  the  carriages  are  kept  waiting,  and  then  they  all 
go  to  the  theatre,  except  our  good  Lord  Cornwallis,  who 
sits  on  quietly  drinking  a  glass  of  wine  with  anybody 
who  will  sit  with  him.* 

Saturday,  13^. — Left  Amiens.  In  the  very  open 
country  I  observed  some  women  for  the  first  time  working 
in  the  fields.  Beyond  St.  Just,  for  a  quarter  of  a  mile, 
the  road  so  bad  that  I  think  in  wet  weather  a  heavy 
English  berlin  would  not  have  been  able  to  pass,  but 
everywhere  a  quantity  of  materials  are  to  be  seen  ready 
collected  for  repairs.  At  Breteuil  a  large  new  chateau 
more  than  half  demolished.  At  Clermont  is  a  large  park 
of  the  Due  de  Fitz- James,  f  The  house  is  entirely 

*  This  account  is  fully  confirmed  by  the  following  extracts  from  a  letter 
of  Lt.-Col.  Nightingall :  —  '  Nobody  need  envy  us ;  the  only  thing  like 
comfort  is  on  those  days  when  we  dine  quietly  at  home  by  ourselves,  and  as 

for  amusements,  there  are  none  of  any  kind We  meet  every  day  the 

same  people,  and  always  the  same  formal  parties  at  dinner.  The  company 
consists  of  Joseph  Buonaparte,  who  is  rather  the  best  among  them,  though 
he  has  not  at  all  the  manners  of  a  gentleman  ;  he  means,  however,  to  do  well 
and  to  be  civil.  His  wife  (Maria  Julia  Clary,  m.  1794)  is  a  veiy  short,  very 
thin,  very  ugly,  and  very  vulgar  little  woman,  without  anything  to  say  for 
herself.  The  Dutch  Ambassador  is,  I  think,  above  par,  and  his  wife,  who 
has  been  pretty,  has  more  the  manners  of  a  gentlewoman  than  any  one  here. 
The  next  in  the  list  is  the  Prefect  (Nicholas  Marie  Quinette,  afterwards 
Baron  de  Rochemont).  He  is  a  very  ill-looking  scoundrel,  and  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  National  Convention  .  .  .  This  man  is  not  likely  to  become  a 
bosom  friend  of  ours.  .  .  .  The  next  are  the  Mayor  and  his  wife.  .  .  .  We 
have  generally  one  or  two  great  dinners  a  week — dine  once  at  Joseph's  and 
once  at  Schimmelpennick's,  and  sometimes  with  the  Mayor  or  Prefect.  As 
there  is  no  variety  whatever,  you  are  now  in  possession  of  our  style  of  living 
at  Amiens.  ...  I  forgot  to  mention  that  when  we  dine  out  we  get  nothing 
fit  to  eat  or  drink,  which  does  not  add  much  to  the  pleasure  or  satisfaction 
of  the  party.' — Correspondence  of  Lord  Cormvallis,  vol.  iii.  p.  436. 

+  The  park  and  chateau,  formerly  the  property  of  the  Duke  de  Fitzjames, 
are  passed  on  the  right  (from  St.  Just)  shortly  before  reaching  Clermont 


1802]  FKOM    CHANTILLY   TO    PAKIS.  131 

pulled  down,  and  there  are  breaches  in  the  park  wall 
every  here  and  there,  but  the  trees  are  untouched  and 
nourishing.  The  country  about  Clermont  and  Lingue- 
ville,  and  between  it  and  Chantilly,  very  pretty. 

Sunday,  14^. — Not  a  single  tree  cut  down  in  the  road 
between  Chantilly  and  Paris.  The  chateau  at  Chantilly 
totally  demolished  ;  the  stables  remained,  and  have  been 
used  as  dragoon  barracks.  The  town. through  which  we 
passed  (for  the  inn,  a  new  one,  is  beyond  the  town) 
looked,  I  thought,  much  worse  than  formerly.  At  a 
village  between  Lusarche  and  Ecouen,  where  there  is  a 
large  stone  church  undefaced,  many  people  were  going 
to  church.  At  another  village,  upon  another  undefaced 
church  the  words  Temple  de  la  Raison  were  painted  over. 
Most  of  the  churches  between  Chantilly  and  Paris  are 
less  injured  than  any  that  we  have  yet  seen.  I  wish  I 
could  say  as  much  of  the  venerable  and  beautiful  church 
of  St.  Denis,  now  christened  la  Franqiade,  but  univer- 
sally called  St.  Denis.  Its  roof  is  more  than  half  off, 
that  is  to  say,  nothing  but  the  broken  charpente  left,  which 
has  the  most  melancholy  appearance  possible,  and  one  of 
its  spires  is  quite  destroyed,  down  to  the  tower,  from 
which  it  rose.  The  corresponding  spire  seems  to  have 
been  spared,  and  the  portail  and  the  beautiful  Gothic 
tracery  of  the  east  window  appeared  to  me,  as  I  saw  it 
(en  passant],  not  much  injured.  The  entrance  to  Paris 
this  way  was  never  striking,  and  we  had  got  into  the 
Chaussee  d'Autin,  now  called  the  Eue  du  Mont  Blanc, 
and  stopped  at  Perregaux's*  door,  before  I  knew  where 
we  were.  The  Boulevard  struck  me,  as  it  always  did, 
with  its  appearance  of  gaiety,  though  I  think  the  large 

sur  Oise. — Murray's  Handbook,  1834.     The  present  owner  is  M.  de  Beau- 
mesril.    1860. 

*  Jean  Frederic  Perre'gaux,  Senator  and  President  of  the  Bank  at  Paris, 
was  born  at  Neufchatel,  in  Switzerland.  He  established  one  of  the  first 
banking  houses  in  Paris,  and  was  much  favoured  by  Xapoleon. — Diet,  des 
Contemporains. 

K  2 


132  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1302 

houses  looked  less  well  painted  and  less  well  kept  up 
than  they  used  to  be.     From  Perregaux's  door  we  drove 
to  the  Hotel  de  1'Empire,  Eue  Cerutti,  a  street  above  the 
Boulevard  where  we  had  taken  an  apartment.    The  salon 
was  adorned  with  great  glasses  and  expensive  pieces  of 
furniture,  but  was  by  no  means  as  comfortable  as  any 
apartments  I  ever  occupied  before  in  Paris,  and  is  at  the 
enormous  price  of  eighteen  louis  for  fifteen  days,  or  thirty 
for  a  month.     After  a  little  consideration,  a  little  mur- 
muring, and  a  good  deal  of  regret  at  losing  time  in  getting 
settled,  we  sent  the  maid  and  the  courier  in  search  of 
another  in  the  Faubourg  St.  Germain,  the   quarter  of 
Paris  to  which  we  were  both  most  accustomed.     After  a 
tedious  absence  they  returned,  having  been  in  more  than 
half-a-dozen  hotels  which  were  all  full,  but  saying  that 
we  might  have  the  first  floor  of  the  Hotel  d'Orleans,  Eue 
des  Petits  Augustins,  for  the  next  day,  at  the  rate  of  five 
louis  a  week.      The  hotels  in  the  F.  St.  Germain  are  no 
longer  the  fashion,   as  they  used  to  be.      The  brilliant 
quartier  is  the  one  we  left,  and  is  -so  far  convenient  that  it 
is  now  near  all  the  theatres,  and  in  the  Hotel  de  1'Empire 
there  are  certainly  most  elegant  apartments,  arid  indeed 
they  ought  to  be  so,  for  Mr.  Caulfield,  a  young  Irishman, 
was  occupying  one  for  which  he  paid  ninety   louis   a 
month.     The  rest  of  the  house  was  full  of  English.     "We 
hoped,  in  spite  of  our  .unsettled  state  all  the  morning,  that 
in  the  evening  at  least  we  should  be  able  to  go  to  some 
one  of  the  theatres  in  some  loge  grillee  of  Perregaux's,  as 
in  former  days.     Mais,  point  du  tout,  Perregaux  never 
came  ;  and  we  spent  the  evening  in  posting  our  journals, 
not  without  often  complaining,  with  Titus,  diem  perdidi. 

Monday,  15.2A. — Left  the  Hotel  de  1'Empire  in  a  fiacre, 
of  which,  by-the-bye,  there  are  more  than  ever  at  Paris, 
and  certainly  better  than  they  used  to  be,  though  by  no 
means  *  good  carriages,,'  as  in  England  we  heard  they  were. 
There  are  as  many  chariot-fiacres  as  coaches,  and,  in 


1802]  THE   LOUVRE. 

addition  to  these,  there  are  long  stands  of  cabriolets  to 
hire  in  the  same  way,  in  almost  every  quartier  of  Paris, 
and  both  the  horses,  the  harness,  and  the  carriages  are 
much  neater  and  better-looking  than  one  could  possibly 
expect.  They  have  all  a  number  painted  upon  them,  as 
the  hackney  coaches,  and  are  obliged  at  night  to  have 
lamps  lighted  and  at  all  times  a  grelot  under  the  horse's 
neck  or  somewhere  about  the  harness.  So  have  all  the 
cabriolets  belonging  to  individuals,  and  all  are  under  the 
same  obligations  with  respect  to  lanterns  and  grelots.  In 
our  chariot-fiacre  (chariots  seem  to  be  considered  as  the 
genteeler  of  the  two)  we  arrived  at  our  Hotel  d'Orleans, 
where  I  found  not  one  pin  had  been  altered  since  I  knew 
it  sixteen  years  ago  ;  consequently,  it  was  not  a  little  dirty 
as  to  hangings,  painting,  and  furniture. 

Eeceived  a  visit  from  Barrois,  the  son  of  a  great  book- 
seller here,  whom  we  knew  formerly  with  Edwards*  in 
London,  and  whom  Edwards  had  desired  to  come  to  us 
as  soon  as  we  arrived.  From  him,  a  very  sensible,  unpre- 
judiced young  man,  we  learnt  a  number  of  things  by  no 
means  favourable  to  the  present  state  of  affairs  in  this 
country,  and  from  him  and  his  sentiments  could  pretty 
well  guess  at  the  opinions,  the  fears,  the  prejudices,  and 
the  prospects  of  the  far  greater  part  of  the  better  order 
of  people,  if  not  in  France,  at  least  in  Paris. 

At  one  o'clock  went  to  the  Gallery  of  the  Louvre. 
To  strangers  it  is  open  every  day  (except  the  Decades) 
from  ten  till  four,  by  merely  showing  their  passports 
at  the  door.  To  give  any  idea  of  this  gallery  is  quite 
impossible.  You  ascend  to  it  (at  present)  by  a  com- 
modious plain  staircase,  and  first  enter  a  large  square 
room  about  twice  the  size  of  the  exhibition  room  in 
Somerset  House,  lined  with  all  the  finest  Italian  pictures, 
very  well  placed  as  to  light.  Out  of  this  room  you  enter 

*  A  well-known  bookseller  in  London  :  shop  in  Pall  Mall. 


134  MISS    BEKRY'S   JOURNAL.  [l802 

a  gallery — such  a  gallery !  But  such  a  gallery ! ! !  as  the 
world  never  before  saw,  both  as  to  size  and  furniture  ! 
So  long  that  the  perspective  ends  almost  in  a  point,  and 
so  furnished  that  at  every  step,  tho'  one  feels  one  must  go 
on,  yet  one's  attention  is  arrested  by  all  the  finest  pictures 
that  one  has  seen  before  in  every  other  country,  besides 
a  thousand  new  ones.  The  small  pictures,  and  all  those 
taken  from  palaces,  are  in  their  own  handsome  gilt  frames, 
but  the  large  ones  and  those  taken  out  of  churches  are, 
for  the  present  at  least,  only  in  flat  frames  of  yellow  wood. 
The  first  half  of  this  gallery  contains  the  Flemish,  Dutch, 
and  French  schools ;  about  the  middle  there  is  a  recess  on 
each  side,  from  whence  commences  the  Italian  schools. 
All  I  can  say,  and,  indeed,  all  I  could  see,  of  the  pictures 
was,  that  each  of  these  general  divisions  contained  all  the 
noted  and  exquisite  pictures  that  one  had  formerly  ad- 
mired in  their  separate  countries.  They  appeared  in  very 
good  order,  and  not  as  if  they  had  been  varnished  or 
worked  upon.*  The  light,  too,  is  by  no  means  bad,  and 
if  they  had  blinds  to  the  windows,  as  is  intended,  would 
be  as  good  as  could  be  expected  for  such  a  multitude  of 
pictures.  In  the  same  immense  gallery,  on  the  ground 
floor,  are  the  statues,  but  here  the  space  is  divided  into 
several  different  rooms  (called  by  the  different  names  of 
salle  d'Apollon,  salle  des  Muses,  &c.  &c.)  or  rather  divi- 
sions made  by  columns,  all  open  one  to  another.  The 
walls  are  stucco,  painted  to  look  as  if  incrusted  with  red 
and  green  granite,  in  a  fine,  simple  style,  worthy  of  Italy, 
and  at  the  same  time  very  advantageous  to  the  statues, 
which  are  all  a  thousand  times  better  placed  than  ever 
they  were  in  Italy,  not  excepting  the  Apollo,  which  stands 
in  a  niche  at  the  end  of  the  rooms,  and  admirably 

*  Upon  further  examination,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  we  found  this  not  to  be 
the  case  with  the  Italian  pictures  of  the  old  schools,  which  their  reparations 
are  destroying.  I  mean  destroying  the  identity  of  the  picture  and  the  touch 
of  the  master. — M.  2?. 


1802]  VISIT   THE   THEATRE.  135 

lighted.  Of  the  statues,  their  numbers,  their  beauty,  the 
feelings  they  excited  as  old  acquaintance,  &c.  &c.,  like 
the  pictures,  I  shall  say  nothing.  In  the  gallery  we  met 
Mrs.  Cosway,*  who  is  etching  a  general  view  of  it,  with 
a  little  sketch  of  each  of  the  pictures.  She  introduced 
us  to  a  secretary  or  keeper,  M.  de  la  Vallee,  a  modest  quiet 
man  who  seemed  really  to  have  taste,  and  showed  us 
many  things. 

In  the  evening  we  had  intended  going  to  the  Theatre 
Fran9ois,  now  called  the  Theatre  de  la  Kepublique,  but 
rinding  no  places  either  in  the  first  or  second  row,  we 
enquired  of  our  valet  de  place  (who  in  Paris  are  sort  of 
cicerones,  and  used  to  be  extremely  clever  in  their  office) 
in  what  other  good  theatre  we  were  likely  to  get  in.  He 
carried  us  to  the  Theatre  de  Vaudeville  close  by.  We 
were  shown  into  a  box  au  premier  rang,  where  only  one 
man  of  very  ordinary  appearance  was  sitting  in  the  front 
row.  We  supposed  he  would  offer  us  his  place,  mais 
point  de  tout,  he  did  not  even  look  towards  us  ;  he  never 
even  made  the  least  movement  by  way  of  inviting  us  to 
sit  beside  him.  This  is  indeed  a  revolution  in  France, 
and  such  a  one  as  I  could  not  have  believed  if  I  had  not 
seen  it !  We  found  ourselves  in  a  good-sized  theatre, 
rather  dirty  but  prettily  ornamented,  and  filled  by 
people  whose  appearance  certainly  promised  veiy  little  ; 
but  it  is  now  quite  as  impossible  to  judge  from  appear- 

*  Maria  Cosway,  daughter  of  an  innkeeper  of  the  name  of  Hadfield,  at 
Leghorn,  wife  of  the  English  artist  of  that  name,  and  artist  herself.  After 
her  husband's  death  she  went  to  Paris  with  the  object  of  drawing  the  Gallery 
of  the  Louvre,  and  accompanying  each  separate  drawing  with  a  history  of  the 
picture  and  its  painter.  This  intention  was  not  fulfilled  ;  but  she  remained 
at  Paris,  and  became  the  devoted  admirer  of  David  the  artist.  After  some 
years'  residence  in  Paris,  tired  of  the  pleasures  of  the  world,  she  retired  to  a 
convent  near  Lyons,  of  which  she  became  the  Superior. — Diet,  des  Contem- 
porains.  Mrs.  Cosway  was  no  new  acquaintance  of  Miss  Berry's.  As  early 
as  a  letter  dated  June  8, 1791,  Horace  Walpole  says,  '  I  am  glad  Mrs.  Cosway 
is  with  you.  She  is  pleasing ;  but  surely  it  is  odd  to  drop  a  child  and  her 
husband  and  country  all  in  a  breath.' 


136  MISS  BEKRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1802 

ances  in  France  as  it  was  formerly,  though  from  directly 
opposite  reasons.  We  sat  for  a  time  behind  our  man, 
who,  to  complete  the  business,  chewed  tobacco,  and  at 
every  instant  spat  into  the  empty  place  beside  him  !  In 
time  we  obtained  from  the  ouvreuse  a  stage-box,  and 
were  thus  relieved  from  the  neighbourhood  of  the  spit- 
ting man,  which  had  really  made  us  sick.  The  appear- 
ance of  the  men  in  this  theatre  was  still  worse  than  that 
of  the  women — I  mean  more  dirty  and  slovenly.  More 
of  them  were  powdered  than  would  have  been  in  England, 
but  in  great-coats,  boots,  and  had  in  every  way  a  neglected 
appearance.  The  women  were  none  of  them  indecently 
dressed,  but  few  smart,  and  all  unbecoming.  The  sortie 
of  this  little  theatre  is  convenient,  under  cover,  and  one 
carriage  only,  being  able  to  come  up  at  a  time. 

Tuesday,  16th. — Went  to  deliver  some  letters  of  in- 
troduction to  Madame  Chabot  de  Castillane,  to  Madame  de 
Beauvau,  and  Madame  de  Mortemart,  to  Madame  Louise 
de  Talleyrand  Perigord,  to  Madame  d'Audenarde,  &c.  It 
used  to  be  a  necessary  etiquette  at  Paris  to  deliver  your 
letters  yourself,  and  even  ask  to  be  admitted  before  the 
people  knew  you,  and  when  they  were  to  read  the 
letter  in  your  presence,  that  was  to  tell  them  who  you 
were.  But  now  sending  them  by  a  servant  with  a 
ticket  would,  I  believe,  do  quite  as  well.  Went  to 
Madame  le  Eoi,  at  present  the  Mademoiselle  Bertin  of 
Paris.*  She  is  lodged  in  a  ground-floor  of  a  magni- 
ficent hotel  in  the  Eue  de  Eichelieu,  now  the  Rue  de 
la  Loi.  She  was  very  civil,  and  not  at  all  pert ;  but 
if  she  had  anything  pretty,  treated  us  en  dames  etran- 
geres,  and  showed  us  nothing  that  I  should  have  liked 

*  The  well-known  Mdlle.  Rose  Bertin  was"  dressmaker  to  Marie  An- 
toinette. During  the  Reign  of  Terror  she  was  visited  by  commissaries  of 
the  Government,  desiring  to  know  the  amount  and  details  of  the  queen's  debts 
to  her ;  but  apprised  of  their  intended  visit,  she  destroyed  her  accounts, 
and  declared  with  unshaken  firmness  that  the  queen  owed  her  nothing. 
Mdlle.  Bertin  died  in  1813. — Diet,  des  Cvntemporains. 


1802]  FRENCH   OPERA   AND   BALLET.  137 

to  have  worn,  not  on  account  of  its  singularity  or  youth- 
fulness,  but  of  its  common  vulgar  look.  Mrs.  Darner 
ordered  a  bonnet  (at  the  price  of  two  louis)  to  be  made 
on  the  model  of  one  entirely  of  lace,  which  was  to  cost 
seventy-two  louis.  The  furniture  of  Madame  le  Eoi's  apart- 
ment was  elegant  in  the  extreme,  purple  lustring,  festooned 
a  I' antique  with  a  deep  orange  fringe.  The  chairs,  &c.  &c., 
mahogany,  with  the  same  furniture.  Mahogany  furniture 
is,  I  find,  become  very  general  at  Paris.  In  the  evening 
went  to  the  Opera;  in  a  box  au  premier,  containing  six 
places,  for  which  we  paid  the  enormous  price  of  57  livres. 
But  the  crowd  is  always  great  there,  and  on  the  beaux 
jours,  of  which  this  was  one,  no  possibility  of  securing 
places  in  any  other  manner. 

This  theatre,  built  in  the  Eue  Eichelieu,  is  new  and 
handsome.  It  has  three  rows  of  boxes,  and  some  near 
the  stage,  for  the  people  of  the  theatre.  The  ornaments 
are  all  in  pale  browns,  and  bronze,  and  gold,  not  very  gay. 
The  lustre  or  circle  of  Argand  lamps  by  which  it  is 
lighted,  in  perfect  taste.  The  pieces  given  were  '  Ana- 
cre'on'  with  a  long  dance  introduced ;  and,  at  the  end, 
'  Telemaque.'  Lays,*  the  first  man  of  the  opera,  who  was 
Ariacreon,  has  a  very  fine  voice,  and  the  music  very 
pretty,  and  they  were  all  perfectly  well  dressed  a  lf  antique. 
The  head  of  Anacreon  was  perfect :  but  a  French  opera 
is  always  a  dull  thing.  The  dancing  is  certainly  more 
marvellous  than  ever.  I  do  not  think  it  more  pleasing. 
In  the  first  ballet  there  was  only  one  entree  of  men,  three 
together,  all  the  rest  were  women,  of  whom  six  were 
capital  dancers ;  but  the  women  now  dance  in  the  style 
of  men,  that  is  to  say,  with  all  the  difficult  steps  and 
tours  de  force  possible.  A  long  pas  de  deux  was  per- 
formed with  such  a  perfect  ensemble  and  precision,  that 

*  Francis  Lays,  born  1757,  was  originally  destined  for  the  Church ;  but 
in  1779  he  appeared  on  the  stage,  and  continued  a  favourite  with  the  public 
till  his  retirement  in  1822. — Diet,  des  Contemporains. 


138  MISS  BEREY'S  JOUKNAL.  [1502 

one  was  obliged  to  rub  one's  eyes  to  feel  sure  it  was  not 
two  machines  moved  by  the  same  strings.  '  Telemaque  ' 
was  not  half  so  well  given  as  by  D'Esrville  in  London. 

»/ 

Vestris  *  was  Telemaque — that  style  of  dancing  never 
was  what  suited  him  best — he  is  still  marvellous  and 
has  movements  that  nobody  else  ever  had,  but  he  is 
grown  so  much  thicker  that  his  figure  looks  ecrase  and 
his  head  too  large  ;  his  wig  was  bushy  light  hair,  curled 
all  over.  Mdlle.  Clotilde  was  Calypso,  f  and  at  first 
I  did  not  much  admire  her  figure,  which  is  remark- 
ably tall,  but  when  she  came  in  dressed  for  hunting,  she 
was  the  exact  copy  of  the  statue  called  the  Diana  Cacia- 
trice,  the  drapery  of  which  is  open  just  above  the  knee, 
and  in  my  life  I  never  saw  such  perfect  legs,  nor  legs  so 
perfectly  resembling  those  of  the  Apollo,  into  the  atti- 
tudes of  which  they  fell  a  thousand  times.  All  the  other 
women  dancers  were  dressed  in  one  petticoat  of  white 
muslin,  or  something  as  thin,  with  another  drapery  of  the 
same  stuff  arranged  in  various  ways  about  half  as  long  as 
the  first,  but  both  allowing  the  whole  form  to  be  fairly 
perceived  up  to  the  waist,  covered  with  flesh-coloured 
tricot.  Some  of  them  had  no  covering  above  the  waist 
but  flesh-coloured  tricot,  with  some  little  strap  on  one 
shoulder.  The  company  at  the  Opera,  though  everybody  was 
there,  did  not  appear  brilliant;  the  women  all  wrapped 
up  in  their  frightful  shawls,  with  heads  by  no  means 
looking  dressed,  and  the  men,  even  at  this  most  favourite 
spectacle,  have  a  neglected,  dirty  appearance.  Indeed,  it 
is  at  the  sortie  of  the  theatre  that  one  of  the  wonderful 
changes  that  have  taken  place  in  Paris  is  very  decidedly 

*  Auguste  Vestris,  son  of  the  celebrated  dancer  known  by  the  name  of 
Dieu  de  la  Danse,  and  who  retired  from  the  stage  in  1781.  Auguste  Vestris, 
like  his  father,  was  considered  the  best  dancer  of  his  time. 

f  Clotilde  Augustine  Malflattrai,  born  in  1776.  She  was  pupil  of  the 
elder  Vestris,  and  appeared  first  in  1793.  In  1802  she  married  Boildieu, 
the  composer,  but  her  misconduct  was  such  that  in  1808  they  were  finally 
separated.  She  quitted  the  stage  1819,  and  died  1826. 


1802]  APPEARANCE    OF   PARISIAN   SOCIETY.  139 

visible.  That  of  the  Opera,  where  one  used  to  see  bril- 
liant groups  of  all  the  young  people  of  fashion,  and  all 
the  fashionable  filles  who  rivalled  and  surpassed  them  in 
appearance,  is  now  the  strangest  collection  of  odd,  black- 
guard-looking people  that  can  be  conceived.  We  stood 
for  some  time  waiting  for  our  carriage,  and  had  leisure  to 
remark  them.  I  did  riot  see  one  woman  who  had  the  ap- 
pearance of  a  gentlewoman,  though  there  was  one  stand- 
ing next  me  for  some  time  who  had  a  lace  veil  over  her 
hat  which  could  not  have  cost  less  than  sixty  or  eighty 
guineas,  and  a  large  real  shawl  nearly  as  costly.  The 
order  in  going  away  is  still  very  good  in  these  great 
theatres  ;  if  one  stays  to  the  last,  one  is  obliged  to  wait 
some  time  for  the  carriage,  but  it  is  sure  to  come  up  and 
get  away  without  interruption  or  accident. 

Thursday,  18th. — Went  with  Barrois  to  the  Prefecture 
de  la  police  generate.  The  passport  given  at  Calais  (or 
anywhere  else  on  entering  France)  obliges  you  to  show 
yourself  at  this  office  as  soon  as  possible,  after  your 
arrival ;  so  people  go  within  three  or  four  days,  as  it 
suits  them,  and  say  they  arrived  the  day  before.  The 
two  men-servants  went  with  us,  as  they  are  much  more 
difficult  about  men  than  about  women.  We  passed  up  a 
very  dirty  back  stair  into  a  large  room  full  of  as  dirty- 
looking  clerks,  into  another  partition  of  a  large  room, 
where  two  or  three  other  people  were  waiting  for  the 
same  business  .as  ourselves.  The  man  to  whom  we  spoke 
was  very  civil,  and  after  detaining  us  about  a  quarter  of 
an  hour,  copying  our  names  into  half-a-dozen  books, 
allowed  us  to  depart ;  but  the  servants  were  detained 
nearly  an  hour  before  they  made  out  the  paper  which  is 
given  in  lieu  of  the  passport  whilst  staying  in  Paris.  In 
this  office  (where,  if  they  do  the  business  they  are 
appointed  to  do,  it  must  be  immense),  all  the  papers  are 
kept  in  bandboxes  on  shelves  round  the  rooms.  One 
might  have  fancied  oneself  at  a  milliner's  instead  of  an 
office  of  police. 


140  MISS  BEKRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1302 

In  the  evening  to  the  Theatre  de  la  Kepublique,  for- 
merly called  Fran9ais.  This,  too,  is  a  new  salle  :  the 
beautiful  one  in  the  Faubourg  St.  Germain  was  burnt 
down,  and  another  was  built  before  this,  which  did  not 
please.  This  has  no  right  to  better  success,  for  it  is 
both  ugly  and  inconvenient.  They  have  had  the  rage 
of  making  everything  a  I' antique  lately,  and  this  house  is 
quite  spoilt  by  too  many  columns  and  too  small  apertures 
for  boxes.  There  is  an  amphitheatre,  called  la  galerie, 
of  two  rows,  entirely  round  the  house,  in  which,,  when 
people  stand,  they  prevent  those  in  the  side  boxes  from 
seeing,  and  when  they  speak,  from  hearing.  The  piece, 
'Bazazet,'  *  acted  by  the  four  actors  of  the  theatre.  Mdlle. 
Eaucourt,f  now  a  great  fat  red-faced  woman,  acted  Eoxane 
in  the  worst  taste  possible — violent  inflexions  of  voice, 
and  sometimes  speaking  three  or  four  lines  together 
entirely  in  a  whisper,  which  was  meant  to  have  great 
effect,  but  which  in  fact  only  prevented  her  being  heard. 
Mdlle.  Vanhove,J  in  Athalie,  much  better  :  her  figure  is 
not  dignified  for  tragedy,  but  her  acting  natural  and  im- 
passioned. The  Vizir  Acomat  well  acted  by  Dupres— a 
fine  figure,  clear  enunciation,  and  much  spirit  without 
rant.  The  dresses  handsome,  and  scrupulously  exact  in 
costume.  It  was  followed  by  '  Defiance  et  Malice,'  acted 
by  Saint  Val  §  and  Mdlle.  Mezeray.||  She  copied  Mdlle. 

*  Racine. 

t  FratNjodse  Marie  Antoinette  Sancerotte  Raucourt,  born  1756.  She 
made  her  debut  at  Paris  1772,  and  was  enthusiastically  received.  In  1776 
she  lost  favour  with  the  public,  and  travelled  abroad.  In  1779  she  returned 
to  Paris,  and  recovered  her  former  popularity.  In  1793  she  was,  during  six 
months,  a  prisoner  in  the  Temple ;  and  afterwards,  with  other  actors,  re- 
opened a  second  Theatre  Franqais,  and  fortunately  obtained  the  protection 
of  Bonaparte  in  1799.  In  1806  she  opened  a  theatre  at  Milan.  Died  1815. 
— Eiog.  Univ. 

\  Afterwards  married  to  Talma.     Retired  from  the  stage  1810. 

§  Saint  Val  first  appeared  with  great  success  in  comedy.  In  1793  he 
was  imprisoned  with  the  other  actors  till  1794.  He  was  afterwards  much 
admired  as  a  tragic  actor.  Retired  from  the  stage  1818  :  died  1835. 

||  Josephine  Me"zeray,  born  1772 ;  appeared  at  the  Theatre  Francais  1791. 
Her  personal  attractions  and  admirable  acting  in  the  parts  of  coquettes, 


18C2]  PARISIAN   SHOPS.  141 

Contat,  but  hand  passibus  equis.  He  is  a  stumpy  ignoble 
figure  in  comedy.  Had  I  never  seen  the  piece  admirably 
acted  in  society  in  England,  I  don't  know  that  I  should 
ever  have  been  as  much  pleased  with  it  as  I  was. 

Friday,  Wth. — In  the  morning  at  shops.  Vache,  a 
great  silk  mercer,  is  lodged  in  a  vast  hotel,  Eue  Vivienne, 
under  the  same  roof  with  Lignereuse,  the  successor  of 
d'Aquerre,  and  likewise  with  a  considerable  depot  of 
Sevres  china.  These  sort  of  shops  being  in  great  hotels 
is  quite  a  new  thing  at  Paris.  Vache's  magazin  is  in  a 
very  large  apartment,  and  consists  of  everything  that  has 
to  do  with  silk  mercery,  trimmings,  &c.  &c. ;  it  is  reckoned 
the  first  magazin  in  Paris.  Lignereuse's  disappointed  me. 
There  were  fewer  things  than  I  expected ;  all  in  the  most 
expensive,  and  very  few,  if  any,  in  real  good  taste.  Of 
mahogany  and  ormolu  mixed  together  almost  everything 
is  now  composed ;  and  the  ornaments  of  the  candelabra, 
the  pendules,  &c.,  in  a  minute  frittered  style.  The  new 
Sevres  china,  too,  is  not  in  pretty  taste  :  tortoise-shell, 
steel,  and  all  sort  of  odd  dark  colours  form  the  ground  of 
the  cups,  with  gold  borders  upon  them. 

Dined  at  Madame  Chabot  de  Castellane,  to  whom  Madame 
de  Staremberg  had  given  us  a  letter.  We  were  appointed 
at  half-past  five.  A  prettyish  house  in  a  garden,  Eue 
Pluniet,  Faubourg  St.  Germain.  The  lady  herself  looking 
cross,  but  civil  and  sensible.  Company  consisted  of  nine 
persons,  of  whom  ourselves  and  the  master  and  mistress 
of  the  house  and  the  instituteur  of  their  children  (who 
dined  at  a  side  table)  made  five ;  the  others  were  Madame 

secured  her  success.  In  1794  she  was  imprisoned  ;  on  her  release  she  joined 
Mdlle.  Raucourt.  The  theatre  was  closed  at  the  revolution  of  the  18th 
Fructidor,  on  the  ground  of  being  a  reunion  of  royalists.  She  reappeared  at 
the  Theatre  Franqais,  but  a  professional  jealousy  disturbed  her  mind,  and 
she  was  found  one  night  in  a  ditch  full  of  water  behind  the  Invalides. 
The  piteous  cries  of  her  little  dog  attracted  attention  to  the  spot,  and  she 
was  rescued,  but  died  a  few  days  later  in  a  state  of  raving  insanity,  June 
1823.— Biog.  Univ. 


142  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURXAL.  [1802 

de  Stael,  Mat.  de  Montmorency,  M.  de  Crillon  (a  very 
gentlemanlike  Frenchman  of  the  best  sort  of  middle-aged 
man).  The  dinner  all  served  at  once,  except  a  remove  of 
fish  and  four  plates  of  vegetables,  which  made  more  meat 
on  the  table  than  ever  I  saw  before  in  a  French  house. 
The  dinner  lasted  a  still  shorter  time  than  formerly. 

Saturday r,  2Qth. — Went  to  the  Paper  Magazin  on  the 
Boulevard — formerly  Arthur's,  now  Eobert's  Papers.  All 
flock,  of  one  colour,  to  look  like  casemir,  with  flock 
borders  ;  very  good  effect.  But  here  again  the  taste  less 
good  than  I  expected. 

In  the  evening  went  with  Mr.  Jackson  to  make  visits 
to  some  of  the  Ministers'  wives — to  Madame  Lu9ay,  the 
wife  of  the  Prefet  du  Palais,  and  Madame  Fouche,  of  the 
Minister  of  Justice.  We  sat  out  on  this  business  a 
little  before  ten.  Got  to  Berthier's,*  the  War  Minister, 
who  received  on  this  day.  He  is  lodged  in  a  great 
hotel,  called  the  Hotel  de  la  Genevre ;  the  staircase 
dirty,  and  no  appearance  of  servants  or  attendants.  (At 
all  the  Ministers'  houses  there  are  sentinels,  not  only  at 
the  door  but  in  the  antechamber.)  The  apartment  very 
handsome.  In  the  second  room  were  a  number  of  men 
only ;  in  the  third,  where  Berthier  received  (for  he  has 
no  wife),  about  a  dozen  women,  and  a  great  many  men 

*  Louis  Alexandra  Berthier,  born  1755;  brought  up  as  a  soldier,  he 
remained  faithful  for  a  time  to  the  Bourbons,  and  assisted  the  escape  of  the 
aunts  of  Louis  XVI.  Under  the  republic  he  was  made  chef  d'etat-major  to 
the  army  in  Italy.  In  1798  he  commanded  at  Eome,  when  the  Pope  was 
deposed.  It  is  said  he  unwillingly  accompanied  Buonaparte  to  Egypt,  having 
fixed  his  affection  on  an  Italian  lady.  On  the  downfall  of  the  Directory, 
1799,  he  became  Minister  of  War.  In  1806  created  Prince  de  Neufchatel ; 
and  married  Princess  Elizabeth  Marie  of  Bavaria-Birkenfeld.  After  the 
campaign  against  Austria  he  was  created  Prince  of  Wagram.  He  accom- 
panied Napoleon  to  Russia.  In  1814,  he  returned  to  his  old  allegiance,  and  in 
1815  accompanied  Louis  XVIII.  to  Ghent.  Wishing  to  remain  neutral,  he 
retired  to  Bamberg.  Here  he  was  murdered  by  six  men  in  masks,  supposed 
to  be  emissaries  of  some  secret  societies,  who,  suddenly  entering  his  room, 
thrust  him  out  of  window  into  the  street,  from  whence  he  was  taken  up 
dying. 


1802]  BERTHIER. — CAMBACERES. — MACDOXALD.  143 

in  uniforms  of  some  sort,  either  military  or  of  the  con- 
stituted authorities.  Berthier  received  us  very  civilly. 
He  is  a  little  rather  ill-looking  man,  with  a  crop  curled 
head  of  dark  hair ;  his  dress  the  uniform  of  a  Minister 
d'Etat — blue  cloth,  with  a  broad  silver  embroidery.  But 
a  greater  revolution  seems  to  me  to  have  taken  place  in 
the  race  of  tailors  than  in  that  of  any  other  set  of  men. 
Nobody's  coat  is  now  well  made,  and  more  especially  the 
uniforms  of  the  constituted  authorities — they  all  look  too 
long  and  too  big  ;  in  short,  like  coats  made  by  a  village 
tailor.  Cambaceres,*  the  Second  Consul,  was  among  the 
company :  he  came  late,  and  was  received  without  any 
sort  of  distinction.  He  is  an  uncommonly  ill-looking, 
shortish,  thick  man,  with  his  eyes  sunk  in  his  head  ;  his 
hair  badly  dressed  ;  his  dress  the  undress  uniform  of 
the  Consuls — blue  velvet,  with  a  broad  gold  embroidery, 
fustian  breeches,  and  common  turn-down  boots.  General 
Macdonaldf  (he  that  commanded  in  Italy),  neatly  dressed 
in  uniform,  like  a  soldier,  and  with  a  very  intelligent 
though  not  a  noble  countenance ;  the  hereditary  Prince 
of  Orange,  in  his  uniform  ;  the  President  of  the  Tribunat, 
in  his  uniform — blue  cloth,  embroidered  with  gold,  panta- 
loons, and  hussar  boots  bound  with  gold  tassels.  We 


*  Jean  Jacques  Regis  de  Cambaceres,  born  at  Montpelier  Oct.  1783  ;  died 
at  Paris  June  1824.  He  served  as  a  deputy  in  the  Convention  1792  ;  be- 
came President  of  the  Assembly,  and  afterwards  President  of  the  Com- 
mittee of  Public  Safety.  He  lost  the  confidence  of  the  Directory,  having 
refused  to  vote  '  La  Mort  du  Tyran.'  He  was  chosen  by  Buonaparte  as 
Second  Consul.  When  Buonaparte  became  Emperor,  Cambaceres  was  ap- 
pointed '  Archi-Chancelier,'  in  which  office  he  remained  till  the  fall  of 
Napoleon. 

f  Stephen  James  Joseph  Macdonald,  Mare"chal  of  France,  Duke  of  Ta- 
rentum,  born  at  Sedan  in  1765,  of  a  Scotch  family  long  settled  in  France. 
He  distinguished  himself  at  Jemappes,  and,  in  1795,  at  Menin  Commines 
and  Courtrai,  he  passed  the  Wahl'  on  the  ice,  and  captured  the  Dutch  fleet. 
At  Wagram,  created  Marshal  on  the  field  of  battle,  he  bore  his  part  in  the 
Russian  campaign,  and  fought  at  the  battle  of  Leipsic,  1813.  He  attended 
Napoleon  at  Fontainebleau,  and  urged  his  abdication.  He  afterwards  ad- 
hered to  the  Bourbons.  He  died  in  1831. 


144  .   MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1502 

found  ourselves  almost  immediately  surrounded  by  a 
number  of  acquaintance  whom  we  had  met  elsewhere  — 
the  old  original  Princess  Sta.Croce,  looking  quite  as  young 
and  well  as  ever  she  did  in  Italy,  and  quite  as  uncovered 
as  anybody  in  France ;  Madame  Doria  from  Genoa,  &G. 
&c.  We  were  presented  to  a  number  of  French  women  — 
Mesdames  de  SemerviUe  and  Joubert,*  Madame  Le  Con- 
teuse,  Madame  de  Marmont,  Perregaux's  daughter  (married 
to  General  Marmont,  a  favourite  of  Buonaparte),  Madame 
Visconti,  a  very  handsome  Italian,  the  mistress  en  titre  of 
the  master  of  the  house  ;  Madame  de  Stael  too  there.  Most 
of  the  ladies  loaded  with  finery  of  shawls,  laces,  and  a  good 
many  diamonds,  and  abominably  ill-dressed ;  Madame  Vis- 
conti well  dressed  in  black  velvet,  with  only  diamonds  in 
her  head.  The  servants  who  served  refreshments  were  in 
boots.  The  ladies  sat  all  round  the  room,  as  in  a  small 
assembly  in  London  ;  and  the  men  stood  in  the  middle. 
Here  we  remained  till  near  twelve  o'clock,  when  the 
rooms  began  to  be  very  thin. 

Two  people,  a  man  and  his  wife,  who  kept  a  little 
shop  upon  the  Pont  Neuf,  were  murdered  last  night  at 
half-past  six,  that  is  to  say  in  daylight,  with  hundreds  of 
people  passing  every  instant,  and  a  Corps  de  Garde  upon 
the  bridge  ;  these  shops,  too,  being  only  the  recess  formed 
by  the  top  of  the  pier  of  the  arches  of  the  bridge,  one 
hardly  conceives  how  it  is  possible  for  two  people  to  let 
themselves  be  egorges  without  calling  for  help,  which  must 
have  been  near. 

Sunday,  2~lst. — Walked  in  the  Tuileries  from  the  Place 
de  Louis  XV.  to  the  door  at  the  Pont  Eoyal.  The  day 
was  not  fine,  and  threatened  rain  ;  however,  as  the  Decade 

*  Mdlle.  de  Montholon  was  married  to  General  Joubert  on  the  16th  of 
July  1799,  at  the  moment  when  he  was  ordered  to  take  the  command  of  the 
army  in  Italy.  He  left  his  bride,  according  to  some,  the  day  after  the  mar- 
riage ;  according  to  others,  a  few  days  after ;  they  parted  at  Pont-de-Vaux, 
never  to  meet  again.  On  the  15th  of  August  he  was  killed  at  the  battle  of 
Novi. 


1802]  GARDENS   OF   THE    TUILERIES.  145 

and  the  Sunday  happened  to  meet,  a  good  many  people 
were  walking  in  the  alley  next  the  Terrace  des  Feuillans ; 
but  there  exists  now  little  of  that  charming  variety  which 
used  to  distinguish  the  public  walks  of  Paris.  All  the 
men  are  about  equally  ill-dressed  ;  and  among  the  women 
the  old  costume  of  different  etats  has  almost  vanished. 
The  parterre  before  the  Palace  is  much  prettier  than  it 
was  :  in  each  former  division  of  parterre  they  have  made 
a  grassplat  surrounded  by  borders,  which  divisions  are 
enclosed  with  a  sort  of  rough  treillage  and  very  pretty 
shrubs  and  plants  growing  well  within.  Several  of  the 
statues  have  been  removed  from  other  places  to  the 
terrace  immediately  before  the  Palace. 

In  the  evening  at  the  Theatre  du  Louvois,  by  far  the 
prettiest  I  have  seen  in  Paris,  both  as  to  coupe  and  deco- 
rations :  the  coupe  is  that  of  the  burnt  Theatre  Fran9ais ; 
the  decorations,  a  pink  or  dark  buff-coloured  ground, 
with  arabesques,  griffins,  &c.,  in  bronze  colour  ;  the  backs 
of  the  boxes  painted  as  if  hung  with  blue  cloth  or  silk. 
The  pieces  given  were  '  Les  Provinciaux  a  Paris,'  followed 
by  '  La  petite  Ville ; '  both  most  laughable  comedies,  or 
rather  successions  of  scenes  written  by  Picard,*  himself  an 
excellent  actor  in  both  pieces — indeed,  all  the  characters 
were  represented  with  that  perfect  naturel,  that  en- 
semble only  to  be  found  on  the  French  stage.  In  the 
morning  called  on  Madame  de  Stael.  Found  her  in  an 
excessively  dirty  cabinet — sofa  singularly  so ;  her  own 
dress,  a  loose  spencer  with  a  bare  neck.  The  shops, 
between  its  being  both  Decade  and  Sunday,  were  nearly 
all  half  shut,  and  many  altogether. 

Monday •,    22nd.  —  In   the   morning,    Statue    Gallery 


*  Louis  Benedict  Picard,  dramatist,  born  at  Paris  1769  ;  died  in  1828. 
His  first  production  was  '  Le  Badinage  Dangereux,'  followed  by  a  long  suc- 
cession of  clever  comedies.  '  Le  Contrat  d'Union,' '  La  Petite  Ville,'  and 
'  Les  Marionettes,'  are  considered  the  best.  He  was  also  a  writer  of  poems 
and  of  novels. — Hose's  Biog.  Dictionary. 
VOL.  II.  L 


146  MISS  BEKRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1302 

and  some  brocantines.  These  shops  at  present  contain 
treasures  of  old  Sevres  china  and  rich  ornaments  of 
all  sorts,  which  have  been  bought  for  nothing  out  of  the 
great  hotels,  and  are  selling  now  for  a  fourth  of  their 
original  price. 

In  the  evening  to  Madame  de  Lucy's,  the  wife  of  the 
Prefet  du  Palais.  This  again  was  an  assembly  about  as 
numerous  as  that  at  Berthier's,  but  less  well  composed  as 
to  women  ;  here  again,  was  all  the  Corps  Diplomatique  : 
Cardinal  Caprera,*  the  Nonce  du  Pape,  in  his  regular 
cardinal's  dress,  Cardinal  Erskine,f  in  that  of  a  monsig- 
nor ;  he  is  as  yet  only  a  cardinal  in  petto  as  it  is  called, 
consequently  has  no  right  to  the  dress.  The  same  Italian 
squad  of  women  and  some  French,  but  dreadfully  vulgar- 
looking. 

The  apartment  was  too  small  for  an  assembly,  but 
arranged  prettily  enough,  painted  to  look  like  panels  of 
satin-wood  and  mahogany.  The  mistress  of  the  house  a 
pretty  and  very  civil  little  person ;  the  master  very  civil 
too,  Men  coiffe  and  not  in  uniform.  To  this  meeting  we 
went  at  ten  o'clock,  came  back  to  our  hotel  a  little  before 
twelve  to  supper,  and  then  started  for  a  ball  at  what  is  called 
the  Circle  des  Strangers :  it  is  given  in  a  large  and  very 
handsome  hotel  near  or  upon  the  Boulevards,  in  the  Eue 
Grange  Batliere,  and  I  believe  the  expenses  are  defrayed 
by  a  club  of  men.  We  were  told  that  here  we  should  see 
les  nouveaux  riches.  If  all  the  company  consisted  of  them 
they  are  numerous  indeed !  It  was  a  meeting  of  many 


*  Cardinal  Caprera,  born  1733 ;  was  sent  to  France  in  1801,  when  the 
First  Consul  solemnly  re-established  the  ordinances  of  religion.  The  Car- 
dinal led  the  Te  Deum  that  concluded  the  ceremony  on  this  occasion  ;  and 
in  1805  he  crowned  the  Emperor  Napoleon  King  of  Italy.  He  died  in 
1810. — Diet,  des  Contemporains. 

t  Charles  Erskine,  born  at  Rome  1753 ;  descendant  of  a  Scotch  family 
who  followed  the  Stuarts  into  exile.  Ke  was  made  Cardinal  by  Pius  VII. 
and  was  well  received  by  the  First  Consul.  He  died  in  1811.— Diet,  des 
Contemporains. 


1802]  SOCIETY  AT    PARIS.  147 

hundreds,  I  think  not  less  than  three  hundred  or  four 

hundred  persons.     There  was  a  file  of  carriages  of  nearly 

a  quarter  of  a  mile  long  on  the  Boulevard,  another  in  the 

street  by  which  we  came.     In  London  this  would  have 

been  the  means  of  breaking  a  dozen  carriages ;   here, 

some  soldiers  stationed  on  the  Boulevard  allowed  one 

carriage  of  each  file  to  come  up  successively.     Of  the 

dress  and  the  undress  of  the  women  in  the  ball,  and  the 

appearance  of  the  men,  and  indeed  of  the  whole  company, 

I  can  give  no  idea.     The  little  coloured  prints  of  the 

Paris  fashions  are  exact  unexaggerated  representations  of 

their  dresses,  but  in  reality  they  are  seldom  exhibited  upon 

as  handsome  figures.     Loads  of  finery  in  gold  and  silver, 

excessively  fine  laces,  bare  necks  and  shoulders  more  than 

half-way  down  the  back,  with  the  two  bladebones  squeezed 

together  in  a  very  narrow-backed  gown ;   arms  covered 

with  nothing  but  a  piece  of  fine  lace  below  the  shoulder ; 

and  trains  that  never  ended  :   in  short,  an  endless  variety 

of  bad  taste,  without  one  single  figure  that  one's  eye  could 

repose  on  with  pleasure.  Such  were  the  women.  Among  the 

men,  in  vain  I  looked  for  les  merveilleux  et  les  incroyables. 

A  general  unsmartness  of  appearance  pervaded  them  all ; 

even  those  who  we  saw  dance  (and  excessively  well)  a 

French  country  dance.    We  left  the  bah1  between  one  and 

two  o'clock,  with  people  still  coming  in.    It  continues  all 

night,  and  the  company  sup  at  any  time  they  like  in 

separate   rooms.     I   must  not  forget  to  say  that  these 

extraordinary  figures  of  men  and  women  waltzing  together, 

in  the  slow  and  deliberate  manner  in  which  in  France 

they  think  it  graceful  to  perform  this  dance,  was  ludicrous 

in  the  extreme.     From  every  circumstance,  both  of  the 

meeting  and  of  the  people  composing  it,  it  was  nearly 

impossible  to  believe  oneself  at  Paris ;  but  then  I  should 

add  we  were  told  that  the  principal  part  of  the  company 

was  what  they  call  the  second  order  of  the  nouveaux 

riches. 

i.  2 


148  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [iso? 

Tuesday,  %3rd. — In  the  evening  went  to  the  Princess 
de  Beauvau's  (Mdlle.  de  Montemart's  sister),  to  whom 
I  carried  a  letter  from  Mrs.  Harcourt :  as  I  did  not 
even  know  that  it  was  meant  as  one  of  introduction, 
their  civilities  to  us  were  the  more  marked.  They  are 
lodged  in  a  small  house,  the  apartment  more  like  an 
English  than  a  French  one  in  size  and  furniture.  Indeed, 
having  been  all  long  in  England,  (Mdlle.  de  Monte- 
mart  from  a  child)  they  are  much  attached  to  English 
manners,  habits,  and  fashions,  and  speak  English  better 
than  any  French  persons  I  ever  heard.  We  were  the  first 
of  the  party ;  after  us  came  Madame  de  Bouillie  (wife 
to  the  son  of  the  Marquis  de  Bouillie,  an  uncommonly 
pretty,  fair,  quiet-looking  young  woman),  Madame  d'Hen- 
nin,  Madame  de  la  Eochefoucauld  (widow  of  the  Due 
who  was  assassinated*),  the  Due  de  Eohan-Chabot,  his 
nephew  the  Chevalier  de  Chabot,  Mr.  Jackson,  Lord 
Cowper,  Mr.  Luttrell  f ,  and  Lord  Henry  Petty.  J  We  sat 

*  Louis  Alex,  de  la  Rochefoucauld  supported  warmly  many  of  the  doc- 
trines of  the  Revolutionary  party,  but  was  not  prepared  to  go  the  lengths 
of  its  most  violent  partisans.  He  openly  disapproved  of  the  conduct  of 
Pethion  and  of  Manuel  in  1792.  The  friends  of  these  men  becoming  the 
dominant  party,  the  Duke  was  insulted  and  persecuted.  He  left  Paris ;  but 
his  retreat  was  discovered,  and  assassins  were  sent  to  Gisors,  where  he 
was  murdered,  Sept.  1793,  aged  circ.  sixty  years.  His  mother  narrowly 
escaped  a  similar  fate. — Diet.  Univ. 

f  Henry  Luttrell,  Esq.,  was  distinguished  through  life  by  his  conver- 
sational powers ;  he  had  a  fund  of  anecdote  at  command  and  a  ready  flow 
of  epigrammatic  wit ;  but  his  satire,  though  pointed,  was  seldom  calculated 
to  wound,  and  he  was  a  favoured  guest  in  every  society  in  which  he  lived. 
He  was  the  author  of  '  Letters  to  Julia/  published  1822.  Mr.  Luttrell  died 
at  an  advanced  age  in  1851. 

f  Lord  Henry  Petty,  second  son  of  William,  first  Marquis  of  Lansdowne, 
born  1780,  succeeded  to  his  brother's  titles  and  estates,  1809 ;  married  Louisa 
Emma,  daughter  of  second  Earl  of  Hchester ;  died  1863.  Miss  Berry's 
mention  of  Lord  Henry  Petty  in.  his  early  youth,  can  hardly  be  passed  over 
without  a  word  of  tribute  to  one  who  afterwards  filled  for  so  many  years  a 
most  prominent  and  useful  position,  both  in  public  and  social  life.  His 
political  career  began  at  the  age  of  twenty  six,  when  he  was  appointed  Chan- 
cellor of  the  Exchequer.  As  a  statesman,  his  sound  judgment  and  consistent 
principles  secured  him  the  confidence  of  those  who  acted  with  him,  and  the 
respect  of  those  who  were  opposed  to  him.  His  liberal  encouragement 


1802]  ST.    ROC.  149 

round  a  very  small  room  in  conversation,  these  people 
dropping  in  at  different  times  till  twelve  o'clock,  when  a 
cold  supper  was  served  in  one  of  the  coldest  dining-rooms 
I  ever  felt ;  we  returned  up  stairs  in  about  half  an  hour, 
and  were  at  home  by  half  after  one.  The  supper,  I  believe, 
was  for  us  and  the  other  English,  for  few  or  no  suppers 
are  now  given  here,  either  by  the  new  or  the  old  set. 

Wednesday,  24^. — In  the  morning  to  St.  Koc,  the 
church  in  the  Eue  St.  Honore.  This  church  and  Notre 
Dame  are  those  which  suffered  the  most  in  the  days  of 
devastation,  and,  nota  bene,  it  is  now  the  most  fashionable 
church  in  Paris  next  to  the  Carmes  de  la  Eue  Vaugerard. 
The  side  chapels  are  entirely  degarnie,  the  altars  and 
everything  taken  away  from  them  ;  the  sides  of  the  church 
and  the  basement  which  support  the  columns  Of  the  aisles, 
were  formerly  lined  with  marbles ;  this  lining  is  in  many 
places  taken  away,  and  all  the  pictures,  and  all  the  fine 
frontispieces  of  even  the  remaining  altars.  There  are  two 
chapels  behind  the  great  altar  in  this  church,  and  in  the 
farthest  they  have  placed  a  marble  crucifix  bigger  than 
life,  and  very  well  executed ;  it  was  formerly  in  the 
church  of  the  Mont  Calvaire  ;  here  it  is  lighted  from 
above,  and  seen  through  two  recesses,  and  the  effect  is 
admirable.  In  this  church  there  were  a  few  shabby- 
looking  people  saying  their  prayers,  and  one  woman  I 


of  art,  and  his  taste  for  literature,  made  him  the  Maecenas  of  his  day,  and 
those  who  benefited  by  his  generosity,  or  whose  society  he  sought,  for  their 
merit,  though  often  cheered  by  his  kindness,  were  never  oppressed  by  his 
patronage.  Lord  Lansdowne  had  seen  much,  and  heard  much  ;  he  had  read 
much ;  he  had  observed  much  ;  his  memory  was  retentive,  and  his  power 
of  collecting  facts  and  amalgamating  the  knowledge  derived  from  experience, 
made  him,  not  only  a  valuable  leader  and  adviser  in  the  affairs  of  state,  but 
also  a  most  agreeable  and  instructive  member  of  society ;  he  died  in  the 
fulness  of  years,  and  there  are  few  whose  death  was  ever  regretted  by  so 
wide  a  circle  of  persons,  who  could  proudly  and  gratefully  claim  the  right  to 
mourn  him  as  a  friend  and  a  patron.  Miss  Berry's  acquaintance  with  Lord 
Lansdowne  probably  dated  from  this  visit  to  Paris,  it  continued  with 
warm  unvarying  friendship  and  intimacy  to  the  close  of  Miss  Berry's  life. 


150  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1302 

saw  at  confession.  The  children  of  a  number  of  different 
parishes  are  sent  here  to  say  their  catechism,  and  by  the 
multitude  of  chairs  piled  up  in  every  part  of  the  church, 
one  must  suppose  that  it  is  often  very  full. 

In  the  evening,  Comedie  Fran£aise :  '  The  Philosophe 
sans  le  savoir,'  and  'La  Gageure  imprevue.'  The  first  is  a 
piece  of  Sedaine's,*  much  admired  and  very  frequently 
given  now,  perhaps  because  perfectly  well  acted  by 
Mole,f  Fleury,  and  Mdlle.  Contat.J  It  is  in  itself  one  of 
the  flattest  pieces  of  nothing  but  comings  in  and  goings 
out  that  I  ever  saw.  Whether  for  or  against  duelling  one 
don't  know.  The  'Gageure'  is  an  old  petite  piece,  in  which 
I  have  formerly  seen  Preville.  §  It  is  now  admirably  acted 
in  every  character.  Mole  is  still  super-excellent,  though 
old ;  Mdlle.  Contat,  whom  I  have  seen  in  her  brilliant 
days,  seen  grown  fat  but  still  brilliant,  is  now  still  fatter 
and  no  longer  brilliant,  but  has  a  lovely  countenance, 
and  in  the  roles  de  tantes,  which  she  has  now  adopted,  is 
as  excellent  as  she  was  formerly  in  those  of  the  coquettes. 
Nobody  ever  to  my  ears  pronounced  her  language  so 
prettily. 

*  Michael  John  Sedaine,  dramatic  writer,  born  at  Paris  1717,  died  1797, 
author  of  '  Rose  and  Colin,'  '  Wife  Revenged,'  &c. — Watts 's  Dictionary. 

t  Francis  Reni  Mole,  born  1734,  appeared  on  the  stage  in  1754 ;  hia 
politics  saved  him  from  sharing  the  fate  of  his  comrades  in  1793 ;  he  was 
considered  one  of  the  best  comedians  of  his  time,  and  enjoyed  a  reputation 
as  a  tragedian.  He  died  in  December  1802,  and  was  followed  to  the  grave 
by  all  the  actors  of  all  the  theatres  ia  Paris,  and.  by  a  deputation  from  the 
Institute,  of  which  he  was  a  member. — Biog.  Univ. 

\  Louise  Contat,  born  at  Paris,  1760.  She  was  the  pupil  of  Madame 
Preville,  and  made  her  appearance  on  the  stage  at  sixteen  years  old.  Her 
first  great  success  was  in  the  part  of  Suzanne  in  Beaurnarchais'  Mariage  de 
Figaro,  1784 ;  and  she  became  a  distinguished  performer  at  the  Theatre 
Francais.  Her  immense  size  obliged  her  to  change  her  line  of  characters. 
She  quitted  the  stage  three  years  before  her  death  in  1813. 

§  Pierre  Louis  Dubus,  commonly  known  by  the  name  of  Preville,  was 
born  in  1721.  After  a  brilliant  career  of  thirty-five  years  on  the  stage  he 
retired,  appearing  only  twice  again — in  1791  and  in  1794,  to  celebrate 
the  restoration  of  himself  and  his  colleagues  to  liberty,  after  the  Reign  of 
Terror  in  1793  ;  he  died  in  1800. 


J802]  M.    AND    MADAME    FOUCHE.  151 

It  was  near  eleven  o'clock  before  we  got  to  Madame 
Fouche,  the  wife  of  the  Minister  of  Police,  who  had  an 
assembly  that  night,  and  to  which  Mr.  Jackson  had 
announced  our  coming.  All  the  company  were  leaving 
when  we  entered  the  room  ;  luckily  we  found  Mdlle. 
de  Contuela,  whom  we  knew,  and  who  presented  us  to 
a  fair  vulgar-looking  woman  in  a  yellow  wig,  with  a  very 
fine  gold-muslin  gown  with  a  border  of  gold,  and  a  very 
fine  lace  handkerchief,  which  fell  down  like  an  apron 
before  her.  This  was  Madame  Fouche.*  Our  visit 
lasted  less  than  ten  minutes ;  we  had  not  half  time  to 
admire  the  beauty  of  their  most  splendid  apartments. 
They  inhabit  the  Hotel  de  Mazarin,  upon  the  Quai  de 
Voltaire,  which  has  been  remis-a-neuf  for  its  present 
inhabitants ;  the  salon  is  hung  in  panels  with  the  most 
exquisite  Gobelins,  and  surrounded  with  such  a  pro- 
fusion of  carving  and  gilding  in  admirable  taste  as  I 
never  saw  in  any  palace.  Son  of  a  grocer  at  Nantes,  he 
(Fouche  f)  was  of  the  religious  society  called  Oratoriens, 
which  they  could  quit  when  they  pleased.  He  was  a 
Deputy  to  the  Convention  (that  is  to  say  the  Third  General 
Assembly),  and  was  sent  as  a  Deputy  or  Pro-Consul  to  La 
Vendee,  where  he  distinguished  himself  as  aide-de-camp 
to  Carrier,  Ministre  de  la  Police  Generate,  before  the 
return  of  Buonaparte.  When  the  Jacobin  clubs  were  open- 
ing again,  he,  though  supposed  a  violent  Jacobin,  had  them 

*  Madame  Touches  maiden  name  was  Guoico.  '  Des  femmes  titre"es  detin- 
rent  les  amis  intimes  de  Madame  Fetiche",  femme  de  beaucoup  d'esprit,  qui 
les  traitait  sans  ce"remonie.'  Madame  Fouche"  died  1813. — Biog.  nouvelle  des 
Contemporains. 

t  Joseph  Fouche",  afterwards  Bnc  d'Otranto,  born  1763.  He  was  twenty- 
five  years  old  when  the  Revolution  broke  out ;  was  married,  and  settled  in 
his  native  town.  He  voted  with  D«nton  for  the  death  of  the  King,  and  was 
sent  with  Collot  d'Herbois  to  Lyons,  1793.  In  1799  he  was  raised  to  the 
office  of  Minister  of  Police.  He  married,  in  1815,  a  lady  of  the  family  of 
Castellane.  His  well-known  history  is  too  long  and  too  much  involved  in  the 
history  of  the  time  to  be  comprised  in  a  biographical  note.  He  was  exiled 
in  181*6,  and  died  at  Trieste  in  1820. 


152  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [iso2 

shut  up  to  keep  his  place,  and  was  maintained  in  it  by 
Buonaparte,  though  known  still  to  be  a  Jacobin.  Fouche 
himself  was  in  the  anteroom,  and  we  only  just  made  our 
curtsies  en  passant.  His  figure  is  not  prepossessing ;  a 
little  man,  with  a  pale  flattish  face  and  small  grey  eyes  ; 
his  dress  that  of  a  minister  of  state,  blue  velvet  embroid- 
ered in  silver,  hussar  boots. 

Thursday ',  2bth. — In  the  morning,  to  the  Musee  des 
Monuments  Nationaux,  which  occupies  the  whole  em- 
placement of  the  Convent  des  petits  Augustins.  Here 
they  have  brought  together  all  the  figures  of  their  kings, 
from  St.  Denis  and  every  other  place ;  all  the  tombs 
and  monuments  of  their  great  men  and  women ;  in  short, 
all  the  spoils  of  their  churches  and  convents  from  almost 
every  part  of  the  country.  Everything  of  former  ages  in 
way  of  sculpture,  which  the  Vandalism  of  the  present 
time  in  the  moments  of  effervescence  left  undestroyed. 
These  are  partly  arranged  and  arranging  (for  there  are  a 
vast  number  of  workmen  now  employed  here  by  a  M. 
Le  Noir)  in  large  salles,  some  formed  by  the  church,  and 
others  by  the  cells  and  dormitory  of  the  monks,  and 
everything  is  thrown  together  according  to  their  cen- 
turies,— that  is  to  say,  all  the  sculptures  and  tombs  of  the 
thirteenth  century  together,  then  of  the  fourteenth,  and 
so  on.  We  had  only  time  to  give  a  rapid  coup  d'ceil, 
but  M.  Le  Noir  gave  us  tickets  to  revisit  the  Musee  when 
we  pleased.  It  is  curious  to  observe  the  rapid  decay  of 
the  art  from  the  days  of  Francis  I.  to  those  of  Louis  XIV. 
The  admired  tomb  of  Cardinal  Eichelieu,  which  happens 
to  be  placed  in  what  was  the  Capucins'  Church,  and  sur- 
rounded with  a  number  of  tombs  of  the  former  period, 
will  not  bear  any  comparison  with  them.  In  the  garden 
surrounded  by  the  cloisters  are  hundreds  of  figures  yet 
unplaced  :  a  beautiful  one  of  Ignatius  Loyola,  in  marble  ; 
a  whole-length  bronze  of  Louis  XIV.,  a  boy,  very  clever. 
At  all  these  museums  and  collections  one  must  be  an 


1802]  M.    CAMBACERES.  153 

artist,  and  only  an  artist,  to  admire  without  regret  or 
often  without  indignation.  In  the  large  garden  of  the 
convent,  which  is  prettily  planted,  M.  Le  Noir  is  arranging 
tombs  and  cenotaphs  to  all  the  great  geniuses  of  France. 
Here  he  has  (or  says  he  has)  the  heart  of  Moliere  and 
the  bones  of  Eacine,  &c.  &c. ;  in  short,  he  calls  it  the 
Champs  Elysees.  This  said  M.  Le  Noir,  the  only  violent 
Jacobin  (in  conversation)  that  I  have  heard,  is  the  only 
person  who  viseed  in  his  discourse,  towards  the  abuse  of 
religion,  &c. 

In  the  evening  we  were  presented  by  Mr.  Jackson 
to  the  Second  and  Third  Consuls ;  we  went  first  to 
Cambaceres',  who  inhabits  the  Hotel  d'Elbceuf :  we  founct 
him  in  the  second  room  of  a  large  apartment  on  the 
ground-floor,  lined  entirely  with  Gobelin  tapestry,  Turkish 
stories,  after  designs  of  a  French  painter ;  when  admiring 
its  freshness,  he  (M.  Cambaceres)  said,  it  had  been  up 
above  sixty-four  years,  and  is  certainly  still  more  brilliant 
than  even  pictures  for  furniture. 

The  company  consisted  of  a  circle  of  men  all  standing 
as  at  a  levee,  in  the  middle  of  which  we  were  presented 
to  the  consul,  and  led  by  him  to  a  row  of  chairs,  where 
were  ranged  about  eight  or  ten  other  women,  all  of  them 
the  wives  of  some  of  the  constituted  authorities ;  they 
were  only  in  demi-toilette,  as  this  is  not  called  an 
assembly.  Most  of  the  men  in  uniforms,  military  or  civil. 
M.  Cambaceres'  manner  is  very  ciyil ;  he  spoke  as  much 
to  us  as  in  such  a  meeting  one  can  expect,  and  asked  us 
to  come  to  his  next  assembly  on  Septidi  (Sunday). 

From  hence  we  went  to  Le  Brun's ;  *  he  is  lodged  in 

*  Charles  Francois  le  Bran,  Duke  of  Piacenza,  born  1739  ;  deputy  to  the 
States-General  1789 ;  appointed  TJrird  Consul  Dec.  1799;  Arch-Treasurer  of 
the  Empire  1804;  Governor- General  of  Liguria,  Duke  of  Piacenza,  in 
1805.  Signed  the  constitution  that  recalled  the  House  of  Bourbon,  and 
created  a  Peer  of  France  by  Louis  XVIII.  After  the  return  of  Napoleon 
in  1815,  accepted  the  peerage  from  him,  and  the  place  of  Grand  Master  of 
the  University,  -which  rendered  him  incapable  of  sitting  in  the  new 
Chamber  formed  in  Aug.  1815.  He  died  in  1824. 


154  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [iso-2 

that  part  of  the  Tuileries  called  the  Pavilion  de  Flore, 
entered  from  the  corner  of  the  Great  Cour.  The  apart- 
ment is  small,  not  magnificently  furnished  like  the  others, 
but  containing  some  good  pictures.  Here  was  just  the 
same  sort  of  meeting  as  at  Cambaceres,  indeed  many  of 
the  same  faces  who  nad  followed  or  preceded  us  there ; 
amongst  the  rest  General  La  Fayette  *  was  announced ; 
he  was  in  no  sort  of  uniform — a  plain  blue  coat,  round 
hat,  and  cropped  head ;  he  is  rather  a  gentlemanlike, 
sickly-looking  man,  but  as  I  never  happened  to  see  him 
before,  I  am  no  judge  how  much  he  is  changed.  I 
observed  that  two  young  men,  the  one  General  De  la 
Eoche,  the  other  the  general  who  commanded  at  Porto 
Ferrajo  ;  neither  of  them  spoke  to  him.  Cambaceres  has 
no  wife  or  lady  who  does  the  honours.  At  Le  Bran's 
(who  is  a  widower),  there  was  an  old  vulgar-looking 
housekeeper  woman,  some  relation,  to  whom  everybody 
made  a  bow ;  she  came  civilly  and  sat  by  me,  but  she 
was  so  entirely  ignorant  of  everything  around  her,  that 
she  did  not  even  know  the  names  of  anyone  in  the  room. 
Le  Brun  was  the  son  of  a  farmer  of  Vire,  in  Normandy, 

*  Marie  Jean  Motier,  Marquis  de  la  Fayette,  born  1757,  at  the  Castle  of 
Chevagnac  in  Auvergne.  Aa  a  general  and  as  a  politician  he  occupied  a 
prominent  place  in  three  great  revolutions,  and  acquired  fame  in  both 
hemispheres.  The  history  of  La  Fayette  is  too  well  known  and  too  closely 
interwoven  with  the  history  of  France,  to  be  attempted  in  a  short  biogra- 
phical note.  He  was  married  at  the  age  of  sixteen  to  a  daughter  of  the 
Duke  of  Ayen.  In  1777  he  sailed  for  America.  He  sat  as  deputy  for  the 
nobles  of  Auvergne  at  the  Assembly  of  the  States-General  in  1789.  In 
1790  he  swore  on  the  'Altar  of  the  Country '  in  the  Champ  de  Mars,  fidelity 
to  the  King,  the  law,  and  the  nation.  A  year  afterwards  he  was  denounced 
by  Robespierre,  and  accused  by  Collot  d'Herbois,  but  not  condemned  by  the 
Assembly.  In  1792  he  took  refuge  in  flight  into  Austria ;  he  endured  five 
years'  imprisonment  at  Olmutz  ;  set  at  liberty  by  Napoleon's  intervention, 
in  1797 ;  re-entered  France  on  Napoleon's  becoming  First  Consul.  His 
conduct  in  1830  decided  the  fate  of  the  old  dynasty,  and  established  that  of 
the  new.  He  was  Commander  of  the  National  Guard.  He  declined  nego- 
tiation with  the  King's  party,  by  publicly  replying  :  '  II  n'est  plus  temps,' 
and  on  the  same  day  giving  a  public  reception  to  the  Duke  of  Orleans.  He 
died  May  1834. — Imperial  Dictionary  of  Universal  Biography. 


180-2]  M.    LE    BRUX.  155 

secretary  to  the  famous  Maupeou,  for  whom  he  wrote  all 
the  edicts  and  proclamations  ;  called  by  Maupeou  '  Mon 
Bijou ; '  was  of  the  Constituent  Assembly ;  then  of  the 
Conseils  des  Anciens,  from  whence,  wrhen  Buonaparte 
came  from  Egypt,  he  was  made  Consul.  He  has  the 
manners  and  appearance  of  a  clever  man  ;  he  recollected 
Mrs.  Darner,  from  having  seen  her  as  long  ago  as  when 
the  Prince  of  Conti's  pictures  were  sold  here  in  1775. 
He  is  a  man  of  letters,  has  translated  '  Tasso's  Jerusalem ' 
and  the  '  Iliad  of  Homer '  into  French  prose. 

After  staying  about  half  an  hour  at  Le  Brun's,  we 
returned  where  Barrois  was  to  meet  us,  and  changing 
our  dress,  that  is  to  say,  making  ourselves  less  smart,  we 
were  conducted  by  him  to  one  of  the  many  public  rooms 
open  most  nights-  for  dancing  in  this  great  town.  The 
one  we  chose,  as  the  nearest,  was  called  the  Hotel  de 
Longueville,  in  the  Place  de  Carouzel.  It  is  a  very  long 
low  room,  painted  in  arabesques,  very  dirty,  but  very 
well  lighted  by  the  patent  lamps  suspended  from  the 
ceiling.  We  found  this  place  at  eleven  o'clock  about  half 
full  of  shabby-looking  people ;  masks  were  admitted  that 
night,  so  that  a  third  of  the  company  were  in  masks, 
which  I  regretted.  After  all  the  repeated  histories  one 
has  heard  of  the  indecency  of  the  dress  and  manners  of 
Paris,  I  felt  some  degree  of  uneasiness  before  I  went  in, 
for  fear  of  seeing  somewhat  too  much.  My  fears  were 
quite  superfluous.  I  never  was  in  a  more  quiet  decent 
assembly;  there  was  not  one  woman  dressed  the  least 
indecorously,  not  one  half  as  naked  as  those  at  the  Bal  des 
Etrangers.  Nor  was  there  any  impropriety  of  manners ; 
there  was  indeed  much  less  gaiety  than  I  should  have 
expected  in  such  a  meeting,  much  less  than  I  have  for- 
merly seen  in  dances  of  this  order  of  people  in  France. 
The  dances  were  principally  waltzes,  for  which  there  is 
such  a  rage  at  present,  that  in  every  society  they  have  in 
a  manner  superseded  their  own  pretty  country  dances,  in 


156  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isc2 

which  they  excel,  while  they  don't  waltze  half  as  well  as 
the  Germans.  All  the  women  who  dance  in  the  sort  of 
balls  I  am  now  speaking  of,  are  sensees  to  be  of  bad 
character,  which  made  the  decency  of  their  dress  and 
manners  the  more  remarkable.  There  were  several  bons 
bourgeois,  both  men  and  women,  walking  up  and  down 
the  room,  for  it  is  only  dancing  which  is  forbid  a  des 
honnetes  femmes  in  these  places.  There  were  several 
women  in  men's  clothes,  a  fashion  now  very  general  in 
this  order  of  people,  sometimes  for  convenience,  and  at 
other  times,  I  dare  say,  for  less  excusable  reasons.  There 
were  likewise  several  men  in  women's  clothes,  but  these 
wore  masks,  or  intended  to  do  so.  We  remained  at  this 
ball  near  an  hour,  and  left  the  room  much  fuller  than 
when  we  entered.  It  was  to  continue  all  night. 

Friday,  26th. — In  the  morning,  walked  in  the  Champs 
Elysees  from  the  Place  de  Louis  XV.  quite  up  to  the 
Barriere.  It  was  between  three  and  four  o'clock,  and 
there  was  almost  a  string  of  carriages  then  going  to  the 
Bois  de  Boulogne — so  much  are  the  hours  of  Paris  altered. 
The  Bois  de  Boulogne  is  more  than  ever  the  fashionable 
rendezvous  of  all  the  world  that  have  horses  and  carriages. 
Saw  three  women  on  horseback,  well  mounted,  with  hats 
and  habits  exactly  like  English  women.  The  road  upon 
each  side  of  the  pave  through  the  Champs  Elysees  very 
rough,  and  the  walks  between  the  trees  are  by  no  means 
in  good  order.  There  were  not  many  people  walking, 
though  the  day  was  fine  and  warm.  Dined  at  Mr.  Jackson's 
(our  Minister).  He  is  well  lodged  in  a  rez-de-chaussee  apart- 
ment in  the  Hotel  de  Caraman,  Eue  St.  Dominique.  The 
company  consisted  of  Madame  Brignole,  Madame  de  Stael, 
the  ci-devant  Abbe,  now  M.  de  St.  Phar,  the  Prince  Auguste 
d'Aremberg,  called  formerly  theComte  de  la  March e,  Baron 
Amfelt,  Adrien  de  Montmorency,*  the  Swedish  Minister 

*  Anne  Pierre  Adrien  Montmorency,  born  1769,  succeeded  to  the  title  of 
Due  de  Laval  on  his  father's  death,  1816.      He  served  in  the  army  as  a 


1802]  GENERAL   MARMONT.  157 

(Baron  Ehrenswerd),  the  Marquis  of  Douglas,*  and  General 
Marmont's  f  wife  (Perregaux's  daughter),  a  pretty  little 
woman,  but  with  airs  and  graces  and  certain  careless 
impertinence  of  manner  which  rencheried  upon  all  the 
ci-devant  duchesses  and  marquises ;  her  husband  is  an 
affide  of  Buonaparte's ;  is  one  of  the  five  who  returned 
with  him  from  Egypt,  and  now  much  in  his  confidence. 
He  is  rather  short,  with  black  hair  out  of  powder,  and 
much  beard ;  a  sensible,  intelligent,  grave  countenance  : 
he  put  me  something  in  mind  of  the  second  daughter  of 
the  Archbishop  of  York.J 

While  we  were  dressing,  between  five  and  six,  to 
dine  at  Mr.  Jackson's,  the  cannons  of  the  Invalides 
announced  to  us  that  the  long-expected  peace  was  at 
last  signed.  It  seemed  to  make  very  little  impression 
on  the  company  with  whom  we  dined.  Our  Minister 
seemed  much  in  the  dumps,  for  which  probably  he  had 
reasons  of  his  own.  The  news  in  no  way  occupied 
any  part  of  the  conversation  or  attention  of  the  rest  of 
the  company.  At  the  Opera  or  in  the  streets,  I  expected 
to  see  some  lively  demonstrations  of  some  sort  or  other. 
Mais  point  du  tout !  in  the  streets  there  were  no  crowds, 
or  groups,  or  bonfires,  or  anything;  the  public  offices 
were  illuminated  with  little  pots-a-feu  upon  the  outside  of 


young  man,  but  giving  up  his  profession  he  returned  to  France  in  1801.  In 
1814  he  was  roused  again  to  take  part  in  the  Royalist  cause  ;  the  same  year 
he  was  sent  as  ambassador  to  Madrid ;  he  filled  the  same  position  afterwards 
at  Rome  and  in  London. 

*  Alexander,  Marquis  of  Douglas,  born,  1767,  succeeded  his  father  as  Duke 
of  Hamilton,  1819  ;  died  1852. 

t  Auguste  Frederic  Louis  de  Marmont,  Due  de  Ragtisa,  was  born  in 
1774,  of  an  ancient  and  respectable  family.  He  entered  the  army  in  1789. 
Iii  1796  he  was  first  aide-de-camp  to  Napoleon,  when  commanding  the  armv 
of  Italy,  and  was  from  that  time  engaged  in  constant  military  service  and 
commands,  and  generally  with  distinction,  till  defeated  by  the  Duke  of 
Wellington,  at  Salamanca.  On  the  return  of  the  Bourbons  he  gave  in  his 
adhesion,  and  accompanied  Louis  XVIII.  to  Ghent.  Died  at  Venice,  1852. 

J  Dr.  William  Markhain. 


158  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1802 

the  walls,  but  hardly  any  private  houses  were  lighted — 
nothing  like  a  general  illumination.  The  Tuileries  were 
beautiful  with  straight  lines  of  fire  along  the  immense 
extent  of  the  building,  and  again  upon  the  iron  rails  and 
gates  of  the  cour  in  front.  At  the  Opera,  where  we  did 
not  arrive  till  near  nine  o'clock,  the  announcement  of  the 
peace  had  taken  place  immediately  after  the  curtain  drew 
up,  and  was  received,  we  were  told,  with  loud  applause 
by  a  crowded  house.  But  this  first  applause  over,  there 
was  no  return,  no  allusions,  no  anything  that  could  lead 
one  to  suppose  a  great  event  had  taken  place.  I  am  told 
that  the  people  of  Paris  have  now  for  long  been  so 
fatigued  with  emotions  and  changes  and  great  events,  that 
they  are  grown  perfectly  indifferent,  and  that  all  those 
events  that  have  happened  in  their  own  history  for  these 
last  three  years,  have  been  received  with  equal  indifference. 

The  opera  was '  Edipe  a  Colonne,'  the  music  very  pretty. 
The  ballet '  Paris,'  admirable  ;  but  unfortunately,  in  the 
midst  of  it,  Jackson  announced  to  us  in  a  very  unqualified 

manner,  the  death  of ,  which  he  had  just  heard  from 

England  !  Of  the  ballet  I  saw  little  more  ! 

Saturday,  27th. — I  had  a  bad  night,  and  woke  with 
such  a  violent  attack  of  nervous  headache,  that  I  was 
confined  to  my  bed  all  day. 

Sunday,  28th. — Drove  through  the  Bois  Boulogne  to 
Bagatelle.  It  is  now  open  to  all  the  world  upon  pay- 
ing sevenpence  a-piece  for  people  walking,  or  fifteen 
pence  for  a  carriage.  The  first  corps  de  bdtiment, 
through  which  we  drove  to  the  little  pavilion  itself,  is 
inhabited  by  a  traiteur,  who,  I  fancy,  is  a  considerable 
proprietor  of  the  whole,  and  I  dare  say  makes  it  answer 
very  well,  for  on  this  fine  Sunday  there  were  above  half  a 
dozen  cabriolets  and  other  carriages  in  the  cour,  and  a 
number  of  people  walking  about  the  grounds,  which  are 
kept  in  very  tolerable  order,  though  very  different  from 
what  I  saw  it  when  we  breakfasted  there  with  the  Duke 


1802]  BAGATELLE. — HAMEAU   DE   CHAXTILLT.  159 

of  Dorset*  in  1785.  The  Pavilion,  too,  is  open  to  all 
comers.  The  arabesques  upon  the  walls,  the  ceilings, 
and  the  chimney-pieces  remain  the  same,  only  much  less 
clean.  Some  of  its  Sunday  visitors  were  playing  in  the 
billiard-room.  The  grounds  are  pretty,  though  the  trees 
have  ill-thriven,  and,  I  think,  the  evergreens  and  firs  have 
positively  not  grown  an  inch  in  the  last  fifteen  years.  The 
water,  too,  is  ridiculous,  conducted  in  little  narrow  wind- 
ing channels,  with  half-a-dozen  bridges  of  all  sorts  and 
sizes  over  it,  and  half-a-dozen  different  rock-works  and 
caverns  on  its  banks.  In  the  Bois  de  Boulogne  were 
numbers  of  people  walking  and  sitting  in  groups  under 
the  trees.  On  our  return,  between  three  and  four  o'clock, 
all  the  carriages  of  Paris — bad,  good,  and  indifferent— 
were  drawn  up  in  the  great  alley  of  the  Champs  Elysees, 
opposite  the  garden  of  the  house  formerly  belonging  to 
the  Duchess  de  Bourbon,  now  a  public  garden,  and  called 
the  Hameau  de  Chantilly,  from  whence  a  balloon  was  just 
going  off.  We  saw  it  inflated  and  appearing  above  the 
wall  of  the  garden,  and  soon  after  our  return  home  saw 
it  passing  over  our  heads  at  a  vast  height.  This  day  has 
convinced  me  how  much  Sunday  is  now  kept  by  the 
Parisians.  Most  of  the  shops  were  shut,  everybody  in 
the  streets  or  in  the  public  walks,  in  their  best  clothes ; 
in  short,  a  dimanche  bien  constate  of  the  ancien  regime. 
The  gaiety  of  Paris  and  its  environs  in  a  fine  day  of  this 
sort  must  strike  every  mind  agreeably,  even  one  as  little 
disposed  to  cheerfulness  as  mine  is  at  this  instant. 

In  the  evening  at  Cambaceres'  assembly.  It  is  exces- 
sively entertaining  to  us  to  see  there  the  figures  of  a  num- 
ber of  persons  whose  names  one  has  been  reading  of  in 
newspapers  for  these  last  ten  years.  Among  those  we 
saw  was  a  garcon  imprimeur,  who  became  the  editor  of  a 

*  John  Frederick,  third  Duke  of  Dorset,  appointed  ambassador  to  France 
December  1783.  He  married,  1790,  Arabella  Diana  Cope,  daughter  of  Sir 
Charles  Cope,  Bart.  He  died  July  1799. 


MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1302 

journal,  which  he  composed,  printed,  and  distributed  him- 
self,— General  Brune*  (who  commanded  in  Holland) ;  he  is 
one  of  the  very  tallest  men  I  ever  saw,  between  thirty  and 
forty,  rather  awkward,  with  a  sensible  but  not  agreeable 
countenance.  Massena  f  was  there,  not  in  uniform  ;  a  crop, 
with  thick  black  hair  ;  a  vulgar-looking  intelligent  coun- 
tenance, and  rather  a  short  thick  figure.  There  were 
several  whose  name  we  could  not  learn,  in  general's  full- 
dress  uniforms,  which  is  extremely  rich  :  blue  embroidered 
in  gold,  with  scarlet  cuffs,  a  monstrous  high  scarlet  collar, 
both  covered  with  embroidery;  white  pantaloons  flourished 
all  over  with  embroidery  in  the  front,  and  likewise  down 
the  seams,  to  hussar  boots  bound  with  gold  and  gold  tassels ; 
a  broad  scarlet  belt,  covered  with  gold  ornaments,  and 
fastened  with  a  large  plaque  in  front ;  a  large  and  highly 
ornamented  sabre.  Cambaceres  received  us  in  the  great 
apartment  on  the  first  floor,  consisting  of  I  know  not  how 
many  rooms.  As  in  London,  the  first  room  only  was  full. 
This  hotel  (the  Hotel  d'Elboeuf )  is  a  specimen  of  the  fine 
old  ones,  remis  a  neuf,  and  some  new  furniture,  such  as 
bookcases,  &c.,  and  beautiful  carpets,  to  which  one's  atten- 
'tion  was  every  minute  disagreeably  called  by  all  the  men 
indiscriminately  spitting  upon  them.  There  were  many 


*  Mare"chal  Guillaume  Marie  Anne  Brune,  born  1763.  He  was  sent  to 
Paris  to  study  the  law;  wrote  pamphlets  on  the  state  of  public  affairs,  and 
in  1790-91  was  editor  of  the  Journal  de  la  Cour  et  de  la  Ville,  He  aided 
Danton  in  forming  the  Club  des  Cordeliers.  He  commanded  in  Belgium, 
1799,  when  the  Prussian-English  army  capitulated.  In  1800  he  commanded 
in  La  Vendee,  and  in  1803  was  sent  ambassador  to  Constantinople.  In  1814 
he  gave  in  his  adhesion  to  Louis  XVIII. ;  joined  the  standard  of  Napoleon 
on  his  return  from  Elba,  and  repeated  his  submission  to  Louis  XVIII.  after 
the  Cent  Jours — but  was  murdered  at  Avignon  on  his  way  to  Paris. — Hose's 
Biog.  Diet,  and  Biog.  Univ. 

f  Andre"  Massena,  born  1758 ;  in  1793  he  commanded  the  right  wing  of 
the  army  in  Italy ;  his  constant  successes  obtained  for  him  from  Napoleon 
the  title  of  '  L'Enfant  chtirie  de  la  Victoire.'  In  1810  he  replaced  Soult  in 
Spain,  and  was  repulsed  by  the  Duke  of  Wellington.  In  1814  he  gave  in 
his  adhesion  to  Louis  XVIII.  After  Waterloo  he  was  Commander-in- 
Chief  of  the  National  Guard;  died  1817. 


1802]  THE   OPERA  AND   BALLET.  1G1 

more  women  at  this  meeting  than  I  have  seen  at  any  of 
the  others — all  of  the  new  world,  or  foreigners.  Many  of 
them  strange,  uncouth  figures,  all  meaning  to  be  smart 
loaded  with  finery. 

Monday,  29th. — I  never  even  in  England  experienced 
such  a  violent  and  sudden  change  in  the  temperature  as 
took  place  between  yesterday  and  to-day.  Yesterday  it 
was  oppressively  hot  in  the  sun,  without  a  breath  of  air. 
To-day,  the  wind  having  got  into  the  north,  it  was  so  cold 
that  snow  fell  in  the  morning.  Called  at  Madame  de 
Boufflers  (the  wife  of  the  Chevalier)  and  Madame  de 
Castellane,  whom  we  found  at  home.  Her  account  why 
the  two  present  societies  cannot  easily  amalgamate  is 
curious  and  very  true  by  what  we  have  seen. 

In  the  evening  at  the  Opera.  'Astyanax'  was  the  opera, 
and  '  Psyche  '  the  ballet.  All  French  operas  are  so  like 
one  another  that  it  is  only  of  the  decoration  that  one  can 
speak.  The  last  scene,  of  Pyrrhus  going  on  board  a  vessel 
with  Astyanax  and  Andromache,  and  sailing  away  with  all 
his  fleet,  was  very  good;  but  au  reste,  it  is  always  the  same 
scrambling  and  violent  exertion  of  voice,  always  the  same 
exaggerated  action,  always  a  scene  which  we  have  called 
the  tearing  scene,  where,  from  sorrow,  or  joy,  or  fear,  or 
entreaty.  Us  sejettent  Pun  sur  Vautre,  and  after  half  pulling 
one  another  to  pieces,  are  always  either  torn  asunder,  or 
go  off  in  one  another's  arms.  The  bodily  fatigue  of  these 
grand  roles  d  opera  is  so  great  that  the  people  must  have 
monstrous  strong  constitutions,  as  well  as  monstrous  strong 
voices,  to  support  them.  Mdlle.  Maillard,  a  great  fat 
woman,  acted  Andromache  not  without  some  dignity ;  but 
there  is  no  fine  female  actress  at  the  Opera  at  present.  The 
ballet  of  *  Psyche,'  as  they  give  it  here,  is  a  long  pantomime, 
little  dancing,  but  admirable  in  its  way.  Madame  Gardel* 

*  Marie  Anne  Elizabeth  Gardel,  wife  of  a  favourite  dancer  of  that  name, 
born  1770.    She  appeared  in  1786,  and  from  the  year  1792  was  held  in  high 
VOL.  II.  M 


162  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [iso-2 

was  Psyche,  and  is  lightness  and  grace  itself.  St.  Amand 
was  Amour.  The  scene  of  Psyche  ascending  the  rock,  of  her 
being  carried  off  in  the  clouds  by  Cupid,  and  of  her  tor- 
ments in  Tartarus  ;  of  her  toilet  and  her  lesson  of  dancing 
given  by  Terpsichore,  charming.  In  all  the  ballets  here, 
even  when  there  are  not  many  entrees  of  the  principal 
dancers,  the  remplissage  of  figurants,  &c.  is  never  tiresome, 
because  it  is  done  with  a  grace  and  a  perfection  of  execu- 
tion which  exists  here,  and  here  only. 

Tuesday,  3(M. — In  the  morning  to  the  Abbe*  Sicard's* 
Institution  for  the  instruction  of  the  deaf  and  dumb. 
Every  decade,  I  believe,  he  gives  a  public  lesson,  or  rather 
exhibits  some  of  his  pupils  in  public.  Lord  Henry  Petty, 
who  recommended  us  to  go,  procured  us  some  tickets.  It 
is  a  seminary  (formerly  a  religious  one),  called  St.  Maglaire. 
We  entered  a  large  room,  with  circular  benches  filling  it 
up,  to  a  sort  of  estrade,  where  the  abbe  stood,  and  about 
twenty  of  his  pupils,  in  uniform  of  pepper  and  salt  faced 
with  blue,  seated  on  each  side  of  him.  The  most  enter- 
taining part  was  when  he  gave  a  first  lesson  to  a  very 
pretty  little  boy  of  eight  years  old,  and  when  he  allowed 
his  most  advanced  pupils  to  prove  how  thoroughly  they 
understand  both  language  and  grammar,  and  how  clear 
and  just  are  their  ideas.  This  was  done  by  one  deaf  and 
dumb  reading  (by  signs)  out  of  a  quite  new  pamphlet  to 
another  deaf  and  dumb,  who,  as  fast  as  anybody  speaking 

estimation  by  the  public.     She  retired  in  1816  but  reappeared  in  1819  on 
the  occasion  of  her  husband's  benefit. 

*  Roch-Amboise  Cucurron  Sicard  (Abbe"),  born  1742.  In  1791  the  Con- 
stituent Assembly  adopted  his  establishment  for  the  instruction  of  the  deaf 
and  dumb  as  a  national  institution.  In  1792  he  was  seized  whilst  instruct- 
ing his  pupils  and  thrown  into  prison ;  he  appealed  to  a  Protestant  friend, 
M.  Laffon  de  Lade"bat,  from  the  chambre  d'arret  of  L'Abbaye  St.  Germain- 
des-Pres,  saying  he  was  the  only  priest  the  people  had  not  yet  sacrificed; 
his  appeal  was  not  in  vain,  and  he  was  rescued  from  a  most  perilous  position. 
He  afterwards  endured  two  years  of  exile,  but  was  restored  to  his  labours 
and  his  institution  by  the  revolution  of  the  18  Brumaire.  He  died  in  1822 
at  the  age  of  eighty. — Diet,  des  Contemporains. 


1802]  THE   ABBE   SICARD.  163 

could  dictate,  wrote  down  word  for  word  what  was  con- 
tained in  the  book  upon  a  large  slate  tablet,  exposed  to 
the  eyes  of  all  the  spectators,  and  afterwards  making  upon 
another  slate  tablet  by  the  side  of  it,  a  grammatical 
analysis  of  what  he  had  written ;  that  is  to  say,  taking 
out  all  the  propositions  or  assertions  made  in  the  phrase 
he  had  written,  and  placing  them  one  after  the  other  in 
their  grammatical  construction,  and  without  their  con- 
necting prepositions,  conjunctions,  &c.  This  was  both 
curious,  satisfactory,  and  amusing ;  but  when  the  master 
talked  himself,  which  he  did  in  a  proportion  which  more 
than  made  up  for  the  dumbness  of  all  the  others,  he 
proved  that  if  he  had  the  powers  of  giving  others  clear 
ideas  he  had  not  left  a  single  one  for  himself.  He  em- 
brouilleed  himself  in  systems  of  general  grammar,  of  mind, 
and  of  logic,  till  he  became  so  excessively  confused  and 
tiresome,  that  after  sitting  there  from  eleven  till  past  one 
o'clock,  and  finding  there  was  no  hope  of  his  ending,  we 
contrived  to  get  away,  resolving  never  to  trust  ourselves 
to  the  eternal  Babel  of  a  teacher  of  deaf  and  dumb  till  we 
had  become  theirs*  ourselves,  and  had  no  objection  to 
remain  the  second. 

From  this  we  went  to  the  Tuileries,  to  see  the  apart- 
ments occupied  by  Buonaparte.  Sandos,  a  Swiss  tailor, 
settled  here  and  much  employed  by  Madame  Buona- 
parte, procured  us  this  permission,  which  is  only  obtained 
by  favour,  as  it  is  by  no  means  shown  to  all  the  world. 
It  is  well  they  are  not.  Republican  simplicity  might 
well  be  excused  for  being  startled  at  such  magnifi- 
cence. I  have  formerly  seen  Versailles,  and  I  have 
seen  the  Little  Trianon,  and  I  have  seen  many  palaces 
in  other  countries,  but  I  never  saw  anything  surpassing 
the  magnificence  of  this.  The  apartment  was  that  in 
which  they  actually  live;  it  is  the  lower  range  of  win- 
dows looking  to  the  garden  from  the  Pavilion  de  Flore 
to  the  centre.  It  consists  of  a  large  antechamber ;  a 

M  2 


164  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL. 

salon,  hung  and  furnished  with  blue-lilac  lustring  em- 
broidered in  the  honey-suckle  pattern  with  maron,  in  the 
best  taste  possible.  The  curtains  had  the  same  pattern  in 
an  applique  of  cloth.  In  this  room  is  the  beautiful 
St.  Cecilia  with  a  turban,  playing  upon  the  harp,  by 
Dornenichino — I  think  from  the  Borghese  Palace.  The 
second  salon  was  furnished  with  yellow  satin  and  brown 
and  sang  de  boeuf  fringes,  and  nothing  can  be  more  mag- 
nificent than  this  room ;  the  glasses  were  all  drapes,  ands 
not  framed,  which  has  a  much  handsomer  effect ;  beneath 
the  glasses  stood  beautiful  porphyry  and  other  fine  marble 
tables,  and  upon  these  tables  magnificent  vases  of  Sevres 
and  of  granite,  &c.,  mounted  in  ormolu,  and  very  fine 
candelabra ;  in  the  middle  of  the  room  hung  a  lustre  of 
English  crystals,  mounted  with  a  great  deal  of  ormolu  ; 
the  chairs,  exquisite  tapestry.  The  next  room  was  the 
bedchamber,  the  one  where  they  actually  both  sleep  in  one 
bed.  The  furniture  here  was  blue  silk  with  white  and 
gold  fringes — the  bed,  in  a  recess  drape ;  it  is  of  ma- 
hogany, with  rich  and  rather  heavy  ormolu  ornaments. 
The  room  is  hung  with  some  small  old  pictures ;  beyond 
this  a  small  salle  des  bains,  without  any  particular  orna- 
ment ;  here  Buonaparte  shaves  and  makes  his  very  short 
toilet ;  and  from  hence  an  escalier  derobe  leads  up  to  his 
cabinet  de  travail  above ;  beyond  this  room  (the  salle  des 
bains],  from  which  a  passage  is  taken  off,  is  a  cabinet  de 
lecture,  that  is  to  say,  a  smallish  room,  with  bookcases  all 
round  about  the  height  of  a  chimney-piece,  shut  up,  of 
rosewood  inlaid  a  la  Grecque  with  satin-wood,  the  walls 
above  hung  with  green ;  and  in  this  room  is  placed  the 
'Madonna  della  Sedia,'  but  it  immediately  struck  both 
Mrs.  D.  and  myself  to  be  a  copy,  or  if  the  original, 
painted  over  so  as  to  be  no  longer  itself — I  hope  and 
believe  it  is  a  copy.  Beyond  this  is  Madame  Buonaparte's 
dressing-room,  fitted  up  with*  the  same  elegance — a  low 
room — white  muslin  embroidered,  and  white  lustring 


1802]          VISIT  TO  BUONAPARTE'S  APARTMENTS.  165 

curtains  with  white  and  gold  fringes.  Here  was  a  rose- 
wood cabinet,  or  rather  large  necessaire,  containing  every- 
thing for  ladies'  work,  all  in  cut  steel,  the  outside  much 
ornamented  with  the  same ;  it  was  brought  from  England 
to  Madame  Buonaparte  by  General  Lauriston.*  Beyond 
this  dressing-room  is  a  small  bedchamber,  inhabited  by 
Mademoiselle  de  Beauharnoisf  till  she  married.  It  contains 
a  very  large  cabinet  lately  brought  from  Versailles,  and 
meant  to  be  placed  in  one  of  the  large  apartments.  It 
was  originaUy  made  "to  contain  the  queen's  jewels,  and  is 
by  far  the  richest  meuble  I  ever  saw,  though  neither 
pretty  or  in  good  taste,  but  covered  with  ormolu  nacre- 
de-perle,  Sevres  china,  and  painted  cameos.  From  hence 
we  went  up  stairs,  meaning  to  see  the  great  apartment, 
but  it  was  locked.  The  next  day  we  made  another 
attempt  under  the  auspices  of  Mr.  Sandos,  a  personage 
seemingly  in  high  favour  at  the  Tuileries.  I  fancy  seeing 
this  is  attended  with  some  difficulty,  owing  to  no  one 
being  admitted  into  Buonaparte's  cabinet  de  travail,  which 
was  indeed  what  we  principally  wished  to  see. 

In  the  evening  went  to  Berthier's.  It  was  novidi,  his 
day,  and  he  had  made  it  a  ball.  There  were  benches 
placed  ah1  round  the  first  room,  which  was  empty  when 
we  arrived ;  but  in  time  the  rooms  were  occupied  by 
women,  while  a  wide  passage  was  left  behind  them  for 
the  men  to  move  about.  We  got  places  upon  these 
benches,  and  I  saw  a  great  deal  of  excellent  dancing. 
The  dress  much  less  naked  and  extravagant  than  at 
the  Bal  des  Etrangers.  Madame  d'Hamelin  one  of  the 
best  dancers,  but  she  is  not  pretty,  and  has  a  heavy 
figure.  M.  de  Chatillon  the  best  among  the  men, 


*  General  Lauriston,  born  at  Pondicherry,  1764,  was  employed  on 
various  missions  by  Buonaparte  when  First  Consul ;  he  was  sent  to  Eng- 
land with  the  ratification  of  the  preliminaries  of  the  Peace  of  Amiens. 

t  Hortense,  born  1783,  married  to  Louis  Buonaparte,  afterwards  King  of 
Holland,  January  6,  1802. 


166  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [iso-2 

though  many  danced  admirably;  but  I  never  saw  any 
dancing  like  his  off  the  opera  stage,  and  his  figure  made 
for  it.  They  all  wore  crops,  and  very  few  bien  peigne 
or  looking  clean.  There  was  a  supper  for  above  a 
hundred  people.  Among  the  company  at  Berthier's 
was  General  Moreau*  and  his  wife.f  He  is  a  middle- 
sized,  quiet-looking  man,  who  at  a  distance  gave  me  a 
little  the  idea  of  Sir  G.  Beaumont,  though  shorter  and 
blacker ;  but  I  was  not  near  enough  to  see  his  counte- 
nance. His  wife  is  a  very  pretty,  very  modest-looking 
young  person,  prettily  dressed,  and  dancing  very  well. 
Young  Beauharnois  was  among  the  dancers  ;  he  is  rather 
good-looking,  but  by  no  means  distinguished.  Monge,J 
who  was  once  the  Minister  of  Marine  and  was  afterwards 
at  the  head  of  the  Egyptian  Institute,  was  likewise  there, 


*  Jean  Victor  Moreau,  general  of  the  French  Eepublic,  born  1763 ;  he 
took  up  arms  at  Rennes,  where  he  had  gone  to  study  the  law,  in  1787.  He 
assisted  Pichegru  in  the  conquest  of  Holland,  and  opened  the  campaign  of 
1796  by  the  defeat  of  the  Austrians.  The  discovery  of  the  secret  corre- 
spondence carried  on  by  Pichegru  with  the  Bourbons  involved  him  in  that 
disgrace,  and  he  retired  from  the  army.  In  1798  he  was  again  employed. 
At  the  close  of  1800  he  won  the  battle  of  Hohenlinden.  In  1804  he  was 
again  charged  with  being  implicated  in  the  Eoyalist  conspiracies ;  he  was 
condemned  to  prison,  but  allowed  to  go  to  America.  In  1813  he  returned 
to  Europe,  and  was  induced  by  the  sovereigns'  of  Russia,  Austria,  and 
Prussia  to  aid  in  the  direction  of  the  allied  armies  against  his  own  country. 
He  was  dangerously  wounded  on  the  27th  of  August,  in  the  attack  on 
Dresden,  and  died  in  consequence  on  the  1st  of  September.  He  was  buried 
at  St.  Petersburg ;  the  Emperor  of  Russia  provided  for  his  widow,  who 
received  the  title  of  Mare"chale  from  Louis  XVIII. — Rose's  Biog.  Diet. 

t  Madame  Moreau  was  the  daughter  of  General  Halot  d'Osery. 

J  Gaspard  Monge,  born  1746,  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Polytechnic 
School.  He  was  employed,  at  the  age  of  sixteen,  to  teach  natural  philo- 
sophy in  the  College  at  Lyons.  In  1796  he  accompanied  the  army  in 
the  invasion  of  Italy,  and  afterwards  in  the  expedition  to  Egypt ;  and  to  him, 
with  Bertholet  and  Fourier,  all  the  scientific  fruits  of  that  expedition  are 
due.  An  intimacy  sprang  up  there  between  Monge  and  Buonaparte,  which 
made  the  former  so  zealous  an  adherent  of  the  latter,  that  he  was  expelled 
from  the  Institute  at  the  final  restoration  of  Louis  XVIII.  Monge  was 
the  author  of  various  scientific  works  of  great  reputation.  He  died  in  1818. 
— Rose's  Biog.  Diet. 


1802]  LA   PLACE. — MONGE.  167 

and  La  Place,*  the  great  mathematician,  a  smooth,  sickly, 
ordinary-looking  man.  To  him  we  were  introduced  by 
Sir  C.  Blagden,f  and  to  Monge  by  Madame  de  Stae'l. 
But  a  ten  years'  separation  of  the  two  countries  seems  to 
have  made  them  entirely  forget  England  and  English 
people,  and  everything  that  concerns  them.  They  have 
not,  thank  God,  had  emigrants  during  this  period  to  keep 
up  their  acquaintance  with  us ! 

Wednesday,  31s£. — Made  some  visits.  To  Madame  de 
Coigny ;  found  her  at  home.  She  lives  in  Eue  d'Agnes- 
seau,  Faubourg  St.  Honore,  and  has  a  comfortable  apart- 
ment in  the  house  that  was  her  mother's,  the  Marquise  de 
Conflans.  In  the  evening  to  the  Opera,  in  the  box  of  the 
Swedish  Minister.  '  LesMysteres  d'Isis.'  The  music  is  really 
beautiful,  by  Mozart ;  but  all  music  becomes  nearly  alike 
by  the  manner  in  which  they  sing  it,  except  just  the  two 
or  three  airs  given  by  Lays.  '  The  Mysteres  d'Isis '  is  re- 
markable, even  here,  for  its  decorations  and  coup  de  theatre. 
A  view  of  Tartarus  upon  one  side  of  the  stage,  and  the 
Elysian  Fields  upon  the  other,  showed  in  succession  to  the 
hero;  admirable  tableaux.  The  last  scene,  of  a  vast 
palace  (I  know  not  where)  where  the  hero  (I  know  not 
who)  is  rewarded  with  the  hand  of  his  mistress,  very 
good,  but  not  sufficiently  lighted.  This,  I  understand, 
always  happens  after  the  first  three  or  four  representa- 
tions of  a  new  piece ;  they  economise  upon  the  lights  and 
so  spoil  a  part  of  the  effect. 

After  the  opera,  went  to  M.  le  Comte   de  Crillons, 

*  Pierre  Simon  La  Place,  the  celebrated  mathematician  and  astronomer, 
born  1749,  was  son  of  a  farmer  in  Normandy.  D'Alembert  procured  for 
him  a  chair  of  mathematics  at  the  Military  School  in  Paris.  In  1709 
he  was  made  Minister  of  the  Interior  by  Buonaparte,  afterwards  removed 
to  the  Presidency  of  the  Conservative  Senate.  In  1814  he  voted  for  the 
deposition  of  Napoleon.  He  was  created  a  count  by  the  Emperor,  and  a 
marquis  by  Louis  XVIII.  He  died  in  March  1827.  He  was  the  author  of 
a  long  list  of  works  on  mathematics,  astronomy,  &c.— Rose's  Biog.  Diet. 

t  The  author  of  several  works  on  subjects  of  natural  philosophy  and 
medicine. 


168  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1802 

with  whom  we  had  dined  at  Madame  de  Castellane's. 
Madame  de  Crillon  gave  a  little  ball,  or,  as  it  was  called, 
a  souper  dansant,  to  which  Madame  de  Coigny  was  told 
to  ask  us.  I  sent  in  my  name  from  the  antechamber  to 
Madame  de  Coigny,  who  presented  me  to  Madame  de 
Crillon,  a  civil  woman  of  about  fifty,  who  it  seems  had 
a  considerable  fortune  aux  isles.  The  party  was  very 
select,  some  of  the  best  danseuses  of  the  ancien  regime. 
The  company,  consisting  of  about  seventy  or  eighty 
people,  were  of  that  party.  Mdlle.  de  Coigny's  dancing, 
much  as  I  had  heard  of  it,  did  not  disappoint  me ;  it  is  as 
excellent  as  Madame  Hamelin's.  The  dress,  too,  of  these 
people  was  as  simple  as  the  others  were  recherche — plain 
chemises  of  muslin,  short  for  the  dancers,  with  their  hair 
coiffe  en  cheveux,  with  a  bunch  of  flowers,  was  the  general 
costume,  and  no  bosom  more  displayed  than  it  would 
have  been  in  England.  There  was  an  excellent  supper 
served  in  a  fine  salle  a  manger,  at  one  o'clock,  with  room 
for  every  one  to  sit  down.  M.  de  Crillon  is  the  youngest 
son  of  the  Due  de  Crillon,  who  commanded  against 
Gibraltar.  By  prudence  and  by  remaining  at  his  post,  he 
has  got  through  the  Eevolution  less  shaken  by  the  general 
convulsion  than  almost  anybody  else  that  can  be  quoted. 
He  inhabits  the  same  house  (one  of  the  noble  ones  in  the 
Place  de  Louis  XV.),  is  served  even  by  the  same  servants, 
and  in  short,  except  by  taxes  and  the  loss  of  seigneurial 
rights,  &c.,  is  much  where  he  was.  I  had  remarked  him 
at  Madame  de  Castellane's  dinner  as  a  particularly  gentle- 
manlike man. 

Thursday,  April  ~Lst. — In  the  morning  went  with  Mrs. 
Cosway  to  be  presented  to  Buonaparte's  mother.  On 
arriving  at  her  house  in  the  Chausse  d'Autin,  I  im- 
mediately recognised  it  to  be  that  which  belonged  to  the 
family  of  Montfermeil,  of  whom  we  saw  so  much  when 
we  were  for  the  first  time  at  Paris.  Of  them  I  can  learn 
nothing  but  that  they  emigrated,  and  my  informer  said 


1302]  VISIT  TO  BUONAPARTE'S  MOTHER.  169 

he  believed  M.  de  Montfermeil  had  died  in  Germany, 
but  he  seemed  to  know  little  of  the  matter.  The  house 
suffered  much  during  '  le  temps  de  la  terreur '  (as  it  is 
always  called).  It  was  a  maison  darrestation^  and  has 
since  been  sold  three  or  four  times  over,  and  a  great  part 
of  the  beautiful  garden  turned  into  a  potager,  and  the 
rest  badly  laid  out  a  VAnglaise.  The  house  for  its  present 
possessor  has  been  newly  painted  and  furnished  mag- 
nificently. The  beautiful  salle  a  manger  en  coupole  is 
painted  as  if  incrusted  with  porphyry  and  other  marbles, 
which  they  imitate  now  at  Paris  in  the  greatest  perfection. 
In  the  salon,  chairs  of  crimson  velvet  laced  with  gold  and 
crimson  lustring,  curtains  with  gold  open  fringes.  The 
room  in  which  she  received  us  was  lined  with  Italian 
pictures  and  furnished  with  purple-striped  satin  with  deep 
gold-coloured  fringes.  Madame  Buonaparte  walked  with 
us  over  the  whole  apartment,  all  furnished  in  the  same 
style,  all  covered  with  magnificent  carpets,  and  all  full  of 
fine  candelabra,  &c.  She  herself  is  a  woman  turned  fifty, 
with  large  dark  eyes,  an  intelligent  mild  countenance,  and 
great  remains  of  having  been  very  handsome.  She  has  a 
civil  quiet  manner,  but  no  mark  of  particular  cleverness 
either  in  her  conversation  or  in  her  manner.  She  is  said 
to  be  in  all  the  heights  of  Swedenborgism,  or  at  least 
what  used  to  be  called  quietism  here ;  and  I  should  fancy 
it  was  true  by  her  partiality  for  our  introductress,  but  I 
hardly  see  that  she  has  influence  or  interest  with  any- 
body. Her  son,  when  she  is  ill,  comes  to  see  her,  has 
lodged  her  well,  takes  good  care  of  her,  and  I  fancy  has 
little  more  to  do  with  her.  All  the  family  of  Buonaparte, 
however,  live  very  much  together,  and  as  there  are  five 
brothers  and  three  sisters,  they  constitute  no  small 
society.  She  endeavours,  I  believe,  to  protect  the  quon- 
dam convents  of  women  and  their  attendant  priests  in 
the  conquered  countries;  how  far  she  succeeds  I  know 
not. 


170  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1802 

Dined  at  Madame  de  Steel's  with  twenty  people.  Gene- 
ral and  Madame  Marinont,  Madame  Eecamier,  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Neckar,  Saussure,  Lord  Archibald  Hamilton,  Comte 
Marcoff  (the  Eussian  Minister),  Benjamin  Constant,  M. 
de  Chauvelin,  Lord  Henry  Petty,  Le  Marquis  Lacchesini, 
Comte  Louis  de  Narbonne,*  General  Dessolles, f  Mr.  Giran- 
din  (now  President  of  the  Tribunal,  son  of  the  proprietor 
of  Hormononville),and  two  other  men  whose  names  I  don't 
know.  Luckily  I  got  seated  next  Comte  Louis  de  Nar- 
bonne,  who  is  uncommonly  sensible  and  pleasant  in  con- 
versation ;  on  my  other  hand  was  General  Dessolles,  who 
was  at  the  head  of  Moreau's  etat-major,  and  wrote  the 
account  of  the  battle  of  Hohenlinden,  supposed  here  to 
be  the  best  military  despatch  that  ever  was  penned.  He 

*  Count  Louis  de  Narbonne,  Minister  of  War  in  the  reign  of  Louis  XVI., 
was  born  in  the  Duchy  of  Parma,  1755.  His  mother  was  dame  d'honneur 
to  the  Duchess  of  Parma  (daughter  to  Louis  XV.),  and  his  father  first 
gentilhomme  de  la  chambre.  After  the  death  of  the  duchess,  he  was 
brought  up  at  court,  where  his  mother  was  dame  d'honneur  to  Madame 
Victoire.  Though  attached  by  duty  and  gratitude  to  the  house  of  Bour- 
bon, he  shared  in  many  of  the  more  liberal  opinions  of  the  revolutionary 
party.  He  assisted  the  King's  aunts  in  leaving  France  for  Rome  in  1791. 
He  emigrated  to  England  in  1792,  and  was  settled  with  Madame  de  Stael 
and  her  party  at  Juniper  Hall,  Surrey.  He  accepted  employment  under 
Buonaparte,  and  was  created  a  lieutenant-general.  He  accompanied  the 
French  army  to  Moscow,  and  died  in  the  retreat,  at  Torgau,  1813.  Miss 
Burney  gives  a  more  romantic  and  scandalous  account  of  the  parentage  of 
Count  Louis  de  Narbonne.  (See  Madame  D'Arblay's  Journal.) 

t  Marquis  Jeyan  Jos.  P.  Aug.  Dessolles,  born  1767.  Accompanied  Bona- 
parte in  his  Italian  campaign,  defeated  the  Austrians  in  the  Valteline,  and 
was  engaged  in  military  service  till  the  peace  of  Luneville,  and  was  then 
named  '  commandant  en  chef,  provisoire  de  l'Arme"e  du  Hanovre.'  He  was 
replaced  by  Bernadotte,  and  sent,  in  1808,  to  Spain.  He  accompanied 
Prince  Eugene  in  the  Russian  expedition,  but  his  health  obliged  him  to 
return.  In  1814  the  Provisional  Government  appointed  him  to  the  com- 
mand of  .the  f  Garde  Nationale,'  at  Paris,  and  he  declared  in  favour  of  the 
Bourbons.  In  1815  he  appealed  to  the  Garde  Nationale  to  stop  the  progress 
of  Napoleon,  and  accompanied  Louis  XVIH.  After  the  battle  of  Waterloo 
resumed  his  command  of  the  Garde  Nationale,  but  disapproving  of  the 
conduct  of  those  in  power,  he  resigned.  In  the  Chambre  des  Pairs  he 
continually  raised  his  voice  against  the  infringements  of  the  '  Charte/  and 
was  one  of  the  firmest  supporters  of  public  liberty. 


1802]  VISIT  TO   MADAME   BUONAPARTE.  171 

has  a  niild  quiet  countenance  and  manner.  The  little 
conversation  I  had  with  him  was  on  the  subject  of  fine 
climates,  for  which  we  were  both  equal  enthusiasts. 
Switzerland,  by  accident,  was  touched  upon ;  he  regretted 
what  had  been  done  there,  believed  it  to  have  been  the 
cause  of  much  evil  to  the  French.  We  left  Madame  de 
Steel's  early,  and  felt  ourselves  so  thoroughly  fatigued 
with  the  veilles  of  the  night  before,  that  we  indulged  our- 
selves in  staying  quietly  at  home. 

Friday,  2nd. — This  was  the  day  that  our  friend  the 
Swiss  tailor  assured  us  that  Madame  Buonaparte  was,  by 
her  own  appointment,  to  receive  us  at  his  recommenda- 
tion, as  two  ladies  who  had  come  from  England  particu- 
larly desirous  to  see  the  Grand  Consul,  and  to  make  her  ac- 
quaintance. We  were  to  have  gone  at  mid-day,  but  as  they 
only  returned  from  Mal-Maison  at  twelve  o'clock  the  night 
before,  our  tailor  brought  us  word  that  at  three  o'clock  she 
would  see  us.  I  own  I  doubted  it  to  the  last  moment, — 
however,  at  three  o'clock  we  went  to  the  Tuileries,  and, 
after  some  enquiries  for  our  tailor,  we  were  shown  into 
one  of  the  salons  we  had  before  seen.  Here  we  waited 
for  about  ten  minutes,  examining  the  picture  of  the  '  Bat- 
tle of  Marengo,'  which  still  remained  in  the  room,  while 
several  people  (four  or  five  ladies)  were  ushered  through 
it :  at  last  our  tailor  came,  hoping  we  did  not  mind  a 
little  detour,  and  then  led  us  through  a  passage  at  the 
back  of  the  apartment  to  the  door  of  the  little  waiting- 
room  between  the  dressing-room  of  Madame  Buonaparte 
and  the  little  red  chamber  beyond  it.  Here  we  found 
two  or  three  little  black  boys  in  waiting,  and  a  Mameluc 
(as  they  are  called),  that  is  to  say  an  Asiatic  black,  in  a 
sort  of  Turkish  dress,  keeping  the  door.  Our  tailor  con- 
ducted us  to  the  door  of  Madame  Buonaparte's  dressing- 
room,  where  she  met  us,  and  the  tailor  disappeared.  She 
crossed  the  room  to  the  chairs  that  were  ranged  along  the 
wall,  and,  sitting  down  first  herself,  begged  us  to  be  seated 


172  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [iso2 

also.  She  is  a  thin,  dark,  very  genteel-looking  woman, 
about  the  size,  and  not  unlike,  Lady  Elizabeth  Foster,  but 
with  a  more  sensible  and  less  minaudiere  countenance ;  in 
her  manners,  without  assuming  those  of  a  queen,  she 
unites  much  protection  and  dignity  with  much  civility. 
I  think  elle  se  tire  d  affaire  (and  it  is  no  easy  matter)  very 
cleverly.  We  talked  of  the  taste  of  her  apartment,  of 
Mal-Maison,  of  her  garden  there,  of  the  plants  she  was 
getting  from  England,  from  Lee  and  Kennedy's,  of  those 
she  wished  to  have,  &c.  She  asked  us  if  we  had  places 
for  the  parade ;  when  we  mentioned  those  we  had,  she 
said  they  were  not  good  ones  ;  that  she  would  place  us 
better,  and  then  rising  went  to  the  door,  and  calling  to 
Sandos,  said,  '  Vous  amenerez  ces  dames  le  jour  de  la  pa- 
rade, je  les  ferai  bien  placees ;'  upon  which  we  curtsied,  and 
with  many  thanks  took  our  leave.  Who  she  took  us  for — 
whether  the  tailor  had  ever  explained  who  Mrs.  D.  was — 
Heaven  knows !  But  it  is  certain  she  had  no  idea  of  Mrs. 
D.'s  talent,  or  at  least  did  not  take  the  least  notice  of  it, 
though  I  gave  her  a  fair  opportunity  by  asking  if  the 
little  bust  of  Buonaparte,  which  stood  upon  a  coin  in  the 
room,  was  like  ;  she  said  it  was  very  little  like,  but  with- 
out releveiny  the  subject  at  all.  In  short  she,  like  all  the 
rest  who  have  not  emigrated,  seem  to  have  totally  forgot- 
ten all  the  very  little  they  ever  knew  about  England  or 
English  people.  All  Buonaparte's  servants,  and  we  saw 
several  in  the  antechamber  and  on  the  staircase,  are  in  a 
livery — a  lightish  blue  coat,  waistcoat,  and  breeches,  with  a 
silver  lace  round  the  collar. 

Before  we  went  to  Madame  Buonaparte's,  we  had 
called  on  Madame  de  Beauvan  and  her  sister :  they  are 
two  particularly  amiable  people,  and  I  regret  not  seeing 
more  of  them.  I  received  a  long  visit  from  M.  Fregeville,* 
whom  we  knew  long  ago  at  Montpelier.  He  is  become  a 
general  de  division,  their  highest  military  grade  ;  was  at 

*  Charles,  afterwards  Marquis  de  Fregeville. 


1802]  VISITS.  173 

one  time  deputed  to  the  legislative  body ;  in  short  has,  as 
he  said  himself,  had  a  very  successful  career.  He  is  mar- 
ried again  and  has  one  child  living ;  he  has  purchased  a 
terre  in  Languedoc,  and  I  fancy  is  very  well  off  there. 

In  the  evening  went  to  the  Theatre  de  Montansier,  at 
the  upper  end  of  the  Palais  Eoyal.  This  theatre  is  almost 
entirely  filled  and  supported  by  the  files  of  the  Palais 
Eoyal  and  their  amateurs.  The  theatre  is  not  of  a  pretty 
coupe  ;  there  are  some  boxes,  grilles  or  not  grilles,  as  you 
please  to  make  them  :  by  taking  one  of  these  one  can  go 
to  this  theatre  just  as  well  as  to  any  of  the  others,  for 
there  is  no  noise,  no  squabbles,  no  indecorum,  either  on  or 
off  the  stage.  The  mauvaise  compagnie  here  (and  I  have 
now  been  twice  among  them)  are  quite  as  decently  be- 
haved, and  more  decently  dressed,  than  that  which  call 
themselves  la  bonne  compagnie.  At  this  theatre  they  give 
four  and  sometimes  five  little  pieces.  Those  we  saw  were, 
'  La  Guerite,'  '  La  Jolie  Parfumeuse,'  and  '  Cadet  Eoussel 
aux  Champs  Elysees.'  The  first  entirely  supported  by  the 
acting  of  Brunet,  the  hero  of  this  theatre  and  a  very  good 
actor  in  the  low  comic.  The  drollery  of  the  third 
depended  upon  slip-slop  speaking,  modes  of  pronuncia- 
tion, which  to  us  was  not  very  entertaining. 

From  the  theatre  we  came  home,  supped,  changed 
our  gowns,  and  between  eleven  and  twelve  went  to 
the  great  ball  given  by  M.  Demidoff,  a  young  Eussian, 
who  has  been  here  all  the  winter,  and  spending  more 
than  anybody.  He  is  lodged  at  the  Hotel  de  Mont- 
holon  on  the  Boulevard.  The  house  is  in  itself  much 
ornamented,  and  was  now  decorated  with  much  pink 
and  silver  drapery,  and  artificial  flowers  for  the  fete ; 
but  the  rooms  are  not  large,  nor  many  of  them,  so 
that  the  company  was  too  large  for  the  house.  The  first 
person  I  met  here  was  my  old  acquaintance  the  Due 
de  Eichelieu.  He  looks  much  better  than  when  I  saw 
him  in  England,  and  is  an  uncommonly  gentlemanlike 


174  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1302 

man.  He  seemed  really  glad  to  see  me.  Indeed,  nothing 
can  be  more  striking  upon  all  occasions  than  the  manners 
of  the  old  and  new  world :  the  first  are  all  prevenances, 
attentions,  and  politeness ;  the  latter  seem  not  to  know  or 
totally  to  neglect  all  common  forms,  returning  visits,  &c. 
It  is  impossible  that  these  two  worlds  should  ever  amalga- 
mate in  society:  their  children  may.  Till  I  saw  them 
both  I  blamed  the  old  world ;  but  it  is  still  more  the  fault 
of  the  new.  All  the  jeunesse  de  Paris  were  there  of  the 
new  regime^  and  very  many  of  the  old ;  all  the  Foreign 
Ministers'  wives,  and  a  good  many  strangers.  Vestris, 
who  was  there,  danced  a  quadrille,  which  was  composed 
of  the  very  best  dancers  of  society ;  he  danced  with  Ma- 
dame Hamelin,  M.  de  Lafitte*  (the  supposed  best  dancer 
of  Paris),  with  Madame  Ferval;  the  other  two  ladies 

were  Mdlle.  Carlot  and  Madame .     Vestris's  figure 

was  curious  ;  his  coiffure  was  one  of  those  bustling,  frizzed 
and  powdered  heads  which  were  worn  about  twenty 
years  ago,  and  in  dancing  showers  of  powder  came  out  of 
it,  and  it  flapped  up  and  down  in  the  most  ridiculous 
manner.  M.  de  Lafitte  was  likewise  frizzed  and  pow- 
dered, while  the  other  two  men,  and  indeed  all  the  other 
men,  wore  crops.  This  took  much  from  that  sort  of 
similarity  of  dress  which  certainly  adds  to  the  effect  and 
beauty  of  a  dance.  The  women  were  in  general  well- 
dressed,  all  coiffees  en  cheveux  with  flowers,  and  all  the 
young  ones  dressed  in  white,  trimmed  with  bunches  of 
flowers.  In  the  antechamber  was  a  bouquetiere,  who 
gave  every  lady  as  she  entered  a  large  bouquet  of  beau- 

*  Jacques  Laffitte,  the  -well-known  banker  at  Paris,  was  born  1767;  he 
was  placed  in  Perre"gaux's  bank  in  1788 ;  in  1804  became  a  partner.  He 
was  distinguished  by  his  knowledge,  his  conduct,  and  his  principles  in  all 
matters  of  finance.  In  1814  he  was  appointed  governor  of  the  Bank  of 
France.  He  took  an  active  part  in  political  and  economical  questions  in  the 
Chamber  of  Deputies,  and  acquired  the  respect  of  all  parties.  He  was  well 
known  for  his  liberality  when  charitable  contributions  were  needed.  He 
died  in  1844. 


1802]  M.    DEMIDOFF.  175 

tiful  forced  flowers,  roses,  carnations,  &c.,  such  as  at  Paris 
at  this  season  could  not  cost  less  than  twelve  or  eighteen 
livres  a  piece.  These  bouquets  were  changed  as  often  as 
you  pleased.  The  liveries  of  this  Eussian  are  more  covered 
with  gold  lace  than  anyone  ever  saw  anywhere,  upon 
a  fond  of  dark  green  ;  and  there  were  besides  chasseurs 
and  coureurs,  and  jocki/M,  and  blacks,  and  little  boys 
habilles  a  la  Tartare,  but  all  equally  gallones  upon  scar- 
let and  black  ;  and  besides  all  this,  the  persons  who  served 
(out  of  livery)  were  all  in  brown  coats  with  a  gold  em- 
broidery, comically  like  that  of  the  tribunes  here :  yet,  with 
ah1  this  magnificence  of  servants,  they  were  not  properly 
ranged  and  placed,  and  did  not  make  the  effect  they 
ought.  The  supper  was  served  as  people  desired  it,  and 
in  any  room  where  it  was  called  for.  To  have  the  whole 
honour  of  this  ball,  Demidoff  received  himself,  and  did  not 
allow  his  wife  to  do  the  honours ;  but  people  just  gave 
their  tickets  at  the  door,  and  half  the  people  in  the  room 
I  am  convinced  he  did  not  know. 

Saturday,  3rd. — In  the  morning  took  a  walk  upon  the 
quais,  and  poked  into  a  number  of  brocanteur  shops.  In 
the  evening  went  to  Madame  Fouche's  assembly — very  few 
people — as  all  the  world  had  gone  to  Mole's  benefit.  We 
saw  there  Barbe  de  Marbois,*  the  one  of  the  Deportes  to 

*  Count  Francis  de  Barbe"  Marbois,  born  at  Metz,  1745,  where  his  father 
was  director  of  the  Mint.  He  began  life  as  tutor  to  the  family  of  M.  de 
Castries,  Minister  of  the  Marine,  was  afterwards  Consul-general  in  the 
United  States,  and  then  In  tend  ant  of  St.  Domingo.  He  returned  to  France 
in  1790,  in  1791  was  named  ambassador  to  the  German  Diet,  and  the  year 
after  to  Vienna.  In  1795  he  attacked  the  conduct  of  the  Directory;  and 
was  sentenced  to  transportation,  but  survived  the  influence  of  the  climate  of 
Guiana,  and  returned  to  France  after  the  18th  Brumaire,  became  a  coun- 
sellor of  state  in  1801,  director  of  the  Treasury,  and  finally  Minister.  As  a 
senator,  in  1814,  he  pronounced  the  fall  of  Napoleon,  and  he  received  from 
the  Bourbons  similar  situations  to  those  he  had  held  during  the  Republic 
and  the  Empire.  In  1815  Louis  XVHI.  made  him  Garde  des  Sceaux,  and 
he  swore  allegiance  to  Louis  Philippe  in  1830,  and  continued  in  office  till 
1834.  He  was  the  author  of  several  works,  and  died  in  the  year  1837,  aged 
ninety-two. 


176  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1302 

Cayenne,  who  would  not  escape  with  the  others,  but  re- 
mained conformably  to  the  orders  of  his  country,  till 
recalled  by  Buonaparte.  He  is  now  Ministre  du  Tresor 
public.  He  is  a  tall  thin  man  of  past  fifty ;  not  hand- 
some, but  with  an  uncommonly  fine  head,  and  a  great  deal 
of  character  about  it ;  in  short,  he  is  the  only  man  that 
I  have  yet  seen  wearing  the  uniform  of  a  Ministre  dEtat 
who  had  the  look  of  a  gentleman.  Mine,  de  Stael,  who  one 
is  sure  to  find  talking  or  endeavouring  to  talk  to  the  most 
distinguished  man  in  company,  brought  him  near  us,  and 
was  asking  him  questions  about  Guiana,  and  his  manner 
of  passing  his  time  there,  &c.  &c. ;  which,  without  affec- 
tation or  reluctance  on  his  part,  led  to  several  curious  and 
melancholy  particulars  of  their  life  there.  This  man  I 
find  has  the  reputation  of  being  one  of  the  honestest  men 
in  France,  and  of  having  no  equal  in  probity  among  his 
confreres  in  the  present  government. 

From  Madame  Fouche's  we  went  to  an  assembly  at 
the  Duchesse  de  Luines' — one  of  the  very  few  houses 
among  what  I  call  the  old  world  that  still  receive  com- 
pany, and  the  company  is  confined  exclusively  to  the 
old  world,  for  of  the  new  I  saw  only  Madame  Visconti 
there.  Four  rooms  were  open ;  in  the  first  a  table 
was  spread  with  refreshments,  at  which  sat  Madame 
de  Luines  and  most  of  the  ladies.  In  the  salon  they 
were  playing  at  beribi,  in  another  room  at  crepes,  and  in 
a  third  at  whist.  I  fancy  a  good  deal  of  play  goes  on  at  this 
house.  The  old  world  is  certainly  much  better-looking 
as  well  as  much  better  and  more  simply  dressed  than  the 
new  world.  There  were  at  this  assembly  a  number  of  very 
pretty  women.  Madame  de  Bouillie,  Madame  de  Chev- 
reuse  (the  belle  jille  of  the  house),  Madame  de  Montmorenci, 
and  many  others.  They  were  none  of  them  more  decoltee 
than  they  would  have  been  in  England — coiftees  en  cheveux 
with  flowers.  Madame  de  Beauvan  presented  us  there  ;  we 


1802]  M.    AND   MADAME   RECAMIER.  177 

remained  in  the  antechamber  till  she  led  us  up  to  Madame 
de  Luines. 

Sunday,  kth. — Many  of  the  shops  are  open  to  do  busi- 
ness here  of  a  Sunday,  though  certainly  more  are  quite 
shut  than  on  the  Decade. 

Went  to  the  Gallery,  which  the  more  one  sees  the  more 
it  astonishes  ;  and  it  would  be  very  long  before  I  should 
sufficiently  get  the  better  of  this  astonishment  to  be  able 
to  fix  my  mind  quietly  to  one  picture  or  one  set  of  pic- 
tures, and  really  enjoy  them  as  I  used  to  do  when  there 
were  not  above  half-a-dozen  of  the  most  exquisite  in  a 
collection. 

Dined  at  Mr.  Jackson's  :  the  women  were  Madame  de 
Brignole,  Madame  Eecteren,  a  Spaniard,  wife  to  a  Count 
Eecteren,  formerly  Minister  from  Holland  to  Spain,  a  lively- 
looking  woman,  and  Madame  Eecamier,*  a  rich  banker's 
wife  here,  who  has  the  finest  house  in  Paris  in  the  new 
style,  and  is  herself  the  decided  beauty  of  the  new  world, 
for  if  she  can  be  called  handsome,  it  is  entirely  a  figure  de 
fantasie.  She  has  a  clear  complexion,  is  young,  tall, 
dressed  with  much  affectation  of  singularity  in  the  ex- 
travagance of  the  mode ;  her  manners  are  doucereuses, 
thinking  much  of  herself  with  perfect  carelessness  about 
others  ;  for,  besides  being  a  beauty,  she  has  pretensions, 
I  understand,  to  bel-esprit  They  may  be  as  well-founded, 
and  yet  not  sufficient  to  burn  her  for  a  witch.  The  men 
of  our  dinner  were  nothing  remarkable.  General  Dessolles 
sat  by  me  at  table.  He  is  doux  and  facile  in  his  manners, 

*  Madame  Re"camier,  the  daughter  of  a  notary  at  Lyons,  named  Bernard, 
was  bora  1777.  At  the  age  of  fifteen  she  was  married  to  M.  Re"camier, 
forty-three  years  old.  Her  career  as  a  beauty,  exercising  a  large  amount  of 
social  influence,  has  been  recently  the  subject  of  more  than  one  biographical 
sketch.  At  the  age  of  seventy  she  is  said  to  have  received  an  offer 
of  marriage  from  M.  de  Chateaubriand,  then  near  eighty,  but  which  she  did 
not  accept.  She  died  of  the  cholera,  May  1849. 

M.    Re"camier   was  formerly  a  hatter  at  Lyons.      By  successful"  opera- 
tions in  the  course  of  the  Revolution,  he  has  acquired,  I  was  assured  very 
honourably,  a  large  fortune. — M.  B. 
VOL.  II.  N 


178  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1802 

but  I  fancy  is  rather  a  good  general  than  un  homme 
d'esprit 

We  left  Mr.  Jackson's  before  nine — came  home — changed 

our  gowns,  and  went  with  Barrois  to  the  Hameau  de  Chan- 

tilly,  one  of  the  many  public  gardens  open  most  nights  for 

dancing,  &c.    This  was  formerly,  as  said  before,  the  hotel 

and  garden  of  the  Duchesse  de  Bourbon.     The  entrance 

is  by  a  large  court  from  the  Faubourg  St.  Honore.     The 

garden  goes  back  to  the  Champs  Elysees.     It  is  extremely 

well  laid  out  with  many  little  intricacies,  a  large  alley  that 

goes  round  it,  a  broad  terrace  by  the  house,  and  a  large , 

sloping   lawn  before  it.      All  this  is  well  lighted  with 

patent  lamps,  placed  in  large  square  glass  lanterns  hung 

across  the  walks  and  fixed  in  the  bosquets  and  under  the 

trees.      Nothing  can  be  prettier  than  both  the  general 

effect  and  the  details  of  this  garden.     Under  the  trees 

was   an   excellent   orchestra,  led  by  the  same   man   (a 

Creole)  who  conducted  the  music  at  M.  Dernidoff's,  and 

there  were,  I  know  not  how  many,  sets  of  French  country 

dances ;  we  saw  two  danced  by  different  sets  extremely 

well.      The  dancers  were  ouvrieres,  mantua-makers,  &c. 

&c.,  orjittes,  mostly  the  latter  and  shopmen,  &c.  &c.     In 

the  intervals  of  the  dancing  they  spread  themselves  about 

the  garden,  where  at  every  step  are  placed  little  green 

tables  with  two  or  three  chairs,  and  every  here  and  there 

little  rooms  like  cottages  on  the  outside,  and  the  lower 

part  of  the  house  is  open.     All  the  gilding  and  painting 

upon  the  walls,  and  the  glasses  remain  just  as  they  were 

in  the  time  of  Madame  de  Bourbon ;  and  in  one  of  the 

rooms  are  still  the  fine  tapestry  fauteuils  that  originally 

belonged  to  the  house ;  we  were  struck  also  with  the 

locks  and  fastenings  to  the  doors  and  windows  being  much 

handsomer  than  usual,  and  found  that  the  arms  of  France 

were  carefully  obliterated  from  every  one  of  them.     All 

these  rooms  are  well  lighted,  and  full  of  little  tables  and 

chairs ;  and  here  refreshments  are  to  be  had,  with  prices 


1802]  VISIT   TO   THE    HAMEAU   DE   CHANTILLY.  179 

affixed  to  them  in  a  long  paper  called  la  carte.  But  this 
is  not  all.  The  entry  of  this  garden  is  24  sous,  of  which 
15  are  allowed  en  consomation,  as  it  is  called,  that  is, 
15  sous  worth  of  anything  you  please  in  food  or  in 
amusements  ;  three  country  dances  cost  5  sous  a-piece,  or 
three  turns  of  &jeu  de  bague  or  three  courses  upon  the 
little  lakey  on  which  there  are  about  a  dozen  little  boats, 
ready  for  anybody  who  pleases  to  paddle  about ;  in 
summer,  they  say,  they  are  never-  empty. 

A  large  salon  for  dancing  was  arranged  with  treillage 
paper,  treillage  columns  and  painted  flowers  and  trees 
with  the  perspective  of  a  garden  and  avenue  at  the  end, 
and  green  boxes  for  real  flowers  all  round  it,  and  a  recess 
painted  like  a  forest.  Not  the  least  remarkable  part  of 
this  evening  was  that  we  were  walking  about  at  ten  o'clock 
at  night  on  the  4th  of  April  and  sitting  in  the  open  air, 
without  feeling  cold,  with  the  green  buds  all  bursting  over 
our  heads  and  the  almond  trees  in  full  blow.:  the  warmth 
was  rather  that  of  the  end  of  May  than  the  beginning  of  April. 

Before  I  quit  this  place  I  must  again  take  notice  of  the 
extreme  decency  and  propriety  of  behaviour  which  reigned 
here,  as  in  all  the  meetings  of  the  lower  orders  where  I 
have  been.  This  was  a  garden  where  everybody  was  walk- 
ing about  in  pairs  or  in  parties,  and  everybody  seeming 
very  well  disposed  to  amuse  themselves,  but  one  never 
heard  an  improper  propos,  or  saw  anything  that  marked 
the  smallest  dereglement. 

While  looking  on  at  the  dancing  a  man  came  up  and 
very  civilly  asked  me  to  join — thanking  him  I  said,  that 
I  did  not  dance ;  he  made  me  a  bow  and  retired  as  civilly 
as  he  had  come  forward. 

Monday,  5fA, — At  last  I  have  seen  this  famous-  parade, 
which  all  the  Parisians  have  been  talking  of  for  a  month 
past.  I  was  not  disappointed  in  it,  because  my  great  ob- 
ject was  to  see  Buonaparte,  and  I  knew  beforehand  how 
little  one  could  possibly  see  of  him  upon  such  an  occasion, 

N  2 


180  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1802 

although,  whenever  we  complained  of  not  having  seen 
him,  everybody  referred  us  to  the  parade,  as  if  that  was 
to  give  us  entire  satisfaction.  We  were  unfortunate  in 
weather ;  it  rained  hard  the  whole  time  he  was  on  horse- 
back. We  were  conducted  by  our  friend  the  tailor  to  a 
window  in  the  entresol  of  the  Tuileries  leoldng  into  the 
Court,  the  best  situation  possible,  as  it  is  above  the  lines  of 
infantry  and  not  much  above  the  level  of  a  man  on  horse- 
back. There  were  several  people  at  the  same  window  with 
ourselves ;  Madame  B.  herself,  and  a  party  of  people 
with  her,  occupied  other  windows  in  the  same  range  of 
rooms. 

Great  part  of  the  troops  marched  in  by  the  centre  door 
of  the  grille  which  now  divides  the  large  space  before 
the  Palace,  from  the  Place  de  Carousel  and  this  space, 
though  large,  is  small  for  a  review.  Buonaparte  mounted 
his  horse  (a  light-coloured  dun  with  a  white  mane  and  tail) 
before  one  o'clock,  at  the  great  centre  door  of  the  Palace 
accompanied  by  the  generals  of  the  different  divisions  of 
infantry,  cavalry,  and  artillery  ;  they  then  rode  along  the 
lines,  so  that  Buonaparte  twice  passed  our  window,  once 
near  enough  to  see  what  one  can  see  of  a  'man  on  horse- 
back gently  trotting  by  with  his  head  much  enfonce  in 
his  hat.  I  saw  enough  to  convince  me  he  is  not  much 
like  his  busts.  But  all  I  saw  was  a  little  man,  remarkably 
well  on  horseback,  with  a  sallow  complexion,  a  highish 
nose,  a  very  serious  countenance,  and  cropped  hair.  He 
wore  the  dress  of  some  infantry  regiment,  blue  with  a 
plain  broad  white  lappel  and  a  plain  hat  with  the  very 
smallest  of  national  cockades  in  it.  After  riding  along 
all  the  four  lines,  he  and  his  attendant  generals  placed 
themselves  beyond  the  second  line,  exactly  opposite  our 
window,  while  all  the  troops — first  infantry,  then  cavalry, 
and  then  artillery — marched  before  him  with  their  music 
playing  and  colours  flying ;  none  of  the  officers  saluted 
but  their  colonel.  After  passing  Buonaparte  they  filed  off, 


1S02]  A   REVIEW.  181 

and  when  the  last  had  passed,  he  came  again  to  the  same 
door  of  the  Tuileries,  dismounted  and  disappeared.  This 
is  all  that  those  who  best  see  the  parade  can  see  of  the 
mover  of  the  whole  machine.  I  am  quite  unacquainted 
with  military  details,  and  therefore  shall  not  pretend 
to  give  any  opinion  about  the  troops  :  all  I  could  observe 
was  that  they  never  marched  in  straight  lines,  and  that 
their  muskets  were  carried  in  various  directions  ;  any  of 
our  colonels  of  militia  would  have  been  ashamed  of  their 
men  so  marching  before  the  king.  The  dress  too  of  these 
troops,  particularly  of  the  consular  guard,  of  which  I 
had  heard  much,  struck  me  as  much  less  smart  than  any 
of  our  regiments  of  dragoons  or  light  horse.  It  is  a  dark 
blue  coat  with  a  red  cape,  and  a  long  large  gold-coloured 
worsted  shoulder-knot,  part  of  which  is  always  tucked 
up  to  the  button-holes  in  front  of  the  coat.  Their  hats 
are  looped  up  with  the  same  coloured  worsted,  and  a  very 
high  plume  of  green  and  red,  or  blue  and  red,  or  red 
and  white,  like  those  they  have  lately  given  our  troops ; 
their  hair  en  queue.  The  consular  guard,  both  horse  and 
foot,  are  allowed  to  be  I  elite  of  the  armies  in  point  of  size 
and  appearance.  The  other  regiments  looked  very  small. 
The  regiment  of  hussars,  commanded  by  the  young  Beau- 
harnois,  was  the  next  best — the  dress  of  the  officers  is 
pretty,  and  the  trappings  of  their  horses,  all  of  peau  de 
tigre,  with  the  muffle  of  the  tiger  embroidered,  or  rather 
pldqu4,  upon  the  housing  that  covers  the  back  of  the 
horse,  had  a  very  pretty  effect ;  but  half-a-dozen  officers 
thus  accoutred  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  dress  of  the 
troops. 

Although  it  was  such  a  bad  day,  there  were  a  great 
many  spectators  in  the  Place  de  Carousel  looking  through 
the  grille,  and  at  all  the  windows  in  all  the  houses ;  but 
not  the  smallest  applause  or  shouting  or  notice  taken  when 
Buonaparte  was  riding  along  the  lines  quite  near  them, 
though  this  is  the  first  time  he  has  appeared  in  public 


182  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1802 

since  the  peace.  It  was  raining  hard  as  we  waited  for  our 
carriage,  and  the  arcades  of  the  Tuileries  were  full  of  all 
sorts  of  people  ;  a  Hue  of  grenadiers  kept  a  passage  up 
the  staircase,  and  prevented  people  coming  in  ;  but  they 
struck  me  as  doing  their  duty  in  a  much  gentler  manner 
than  I  remember  by  the  Garde  Suisse  and  Franchise  doing 
formerly  upon  similar  occasions. 

In  the  evening  to  Madame  de  Stae'l.  It  was  a  sort  of 
concert.  When  we  arrived,  somebody  was  playing  on 
the  pianoforte,  and  the  servant  begged  we  would  wait  in 
the  outer  room  till  the  piece  was  over.  To  this  we  readily 
consented.  The  Prince  of  Orange  arriving  soon  after,  the 
same  injunction  was  put  upon  him,  and  we  laughingly 
remonstrated  against  keeping  the  Prince  of  Orange  in  the 
antechamber ;  but  the  servant  stuck  to  his  orders,  and  the 
Prince  remained  very  quietly  with  us,  and  others  who  fol- 
lowed till  the  piece  of  music  was  finished,  when  we  all 
entered  together.  Garat,*  a  public  singer,  allowed  to  be 
the  first  voice  in  Paris,  performed.  He  first  sang  an  Italian 
air  abominably,  with  the  most  violent  and  forced  expres- 
sion. He  has  a  good  and  flexible  voice,  and  seems  to 
understand  music,  but  Ills  taste  is  a  thorough  French  taste. 
The  Chevalier  de  la  Caineaf  was  there  too,  and  sang  better 
than  ever.  I  really  began  to  pity  poor  Garat,  although 
the  greatest  coxcomb  in  appearance  that  ever  was  be- 
held. But  one  need  never  pity  a  Frenchman  where  self- 
conceit  can  bring  him  off:  he  is  on  all  such,  occasions 
invulnerable.  At  last  they  sang  a  duet  together,  in  which 

*  There'were  two  singers  of  the  name  of  Garat — Pierre-Jean,  and  Joseph 
Dominique  Fabry — brothers.  It  was  probably  the  elder  brother  to  whom 
Miss  Berry  alludes,  as  he  appears  to  have  enjoyed  a  high  reputation  at 
Paris  as  a  concert-singer.  In  1795,  not  having  a  carte  de  surete,  he  was 
arrested  as  a  suspect.  He  amused  himself  by  singing,  till  the  commandant 
of  the  fort,  together  with  the  soldiers,  crowded  round  to  listen  to  him,  and 
like  another  Orpheus,  he  so  enchanted  his  audience  that  they  carried  him 
in  triumph  to  his  home. 

t  The  Chevalier  de  la  Cainea,  a  Neapolitan  nobleman,  afterwards  married 
to  Sophia,  daughter  of  Sir  Richard  Mill,  of  Mottisfont,  Hants. 


1802]  M.  DAVID'S  'KAPE  OF  THE  SABIXES.'  183 

Garat  did  not  spoil  the  effect  of  La  Cainea's  exquisite 
singing,  and  he  afterwards  gave  us  two  French  opera 
airs  with  much  taste.  The  company  consisted  more  of 
the  old  than  the  new  world.  Ice  and  cakes  were  carried 
about,  and  afterwards  punch  ;  no  supper. 

Tuesday r,  6/A. — Walked  about  upon  the  quais  to  a 
number  of  shops  ;  dined  at  home,  and  went  in  the  even- 
ing to  the  Theatre  de  Louvois :  the  pieces  were  '  Le  Pere 
Suppose,'  'LeVapoureur,' and  'Le Voyage  Interrompu.'  The 
second  was  most  tiresome — all  sentiment  and  nonsense; 
but  a  piece  a  sentiment  is  here  always  applauded,  parti- 
cularly where  a  child  is  brought  on  the  stage,  which  is  a 
means  of  interesting  to  which  of  late  they  for  ever  resort. 
The  children  (par  parenthese)  all  act  their  parts  admi- 
rably. The  'Voyage  Interrompu'  is  one  of  Picard's,  in 
which  he  himself  acts  a  chattering  notaire  to  perfection  : 
it  was  very  amusing  and  laughable. 

Wednesday,  7th. — Went  in  the  morning  to  meet  Mrs. 
Cosway  in  the  Gallery,  to  see  David's  picture  of  the  '  Eape 
of  the  Sabines ; '  but  it  happened  to  be  the  day  of  the  De- 
cade, on  which  it  is  shut  to  all  the  world,  to  be  swept  and 
cleaned — certainly  very  necessary  in  so  public  a  place. 
We  went  on  with  Barrois  to  see  David's  picture,  which 
is  exhibited,  for  his  own  profit,  at  one  shilling  and  six- 
pence a-piece.  Barrois  said  many  other  painters  in  Paris 
had  attempted  thus  exhibiting  their  works,  but  nobody 
had  found  it  worth  their  while  but  David ;  and  I  dare  say 
very  few  people  indeed  except  strangers  go  and  see  this 
picture.  It  is  in  a  room  by  itself,  and  a  glass  so  placed 
as  to  reflect  it.  It  is  worth  seeing,  as  a  picture  in  which 
the  artist  has  done  his  utmost,  and  that  utmost  is  some- 
thing considerable.  It  is  well  drawn,  and,  generally 
speaking,  well  composed  ;  the  details  well  executed  ;  the 
colouring  of  the  two  principal  male  figures  too  good — 
I  mean  out  of  harmony  with  the  rest  Of  mellowness  it 
has  none :  it  gave  me  the  idea  of  a  finely-coloured  bas- 


184  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1802 

relievo  more  than  of  a  picture.  The  old  French  school 
rises  greatly  indeed,  placed  as  it  now  is  in  the  Gallery, 
not  only  by  comparing  it  with  other  modern  schools,  but 
still  more  by  the  modern  French. 

Went  afterwards  to  the  great  Bibliotheque  du  Eoi, 
in  the  Eue  de  Eichelieu,  now  converted  into  the  Biblio- 
theque Rationale,  Eue  de  la  Loi,  and  enriched  with  all  the 
spoils  of  Italy.  We  had  a  letter  to  the  librarian,  but  as 
seeing  a  library  beyond  a  general  coup  d'oeil  is,  in  my 
opinion,  of  all  wastes  of  time  the  greatest,  we  did  not 
deliver  our  letter,  but  just  walked  through.  The  library 
is  open  every  day  to  the  public.  It  occupies  an  immense 
apartment  round  a  court.  The  books  are  in  wooden 
cases  with  wire  doors,  and  are  the  height  of  the  rooms. 
The  cases  and  their  arrangement  are  in  no  respect  altered 
from  what  they  were,  but  new  shelves  are  placed  between 
the  windows,  with  the  shelves  still  empty,  because  (it  is 
said)  the  carpenter  has  never  been  paid  for  making  them, 
and  won't  let  the  books  be  placed  till  he  is !  One 
immense  long  room  is  entirely  filled  with  tables,  each  for 
about  eight  or  ten  people,  and  nearly  every  seat  was 
occupied  by  persons  reading  or  transcribing  from  books. 

Dined  at  Perregaux's  with  twenty-six  people,  more  than 
half  of  which  were  English.  Among  the  French,  the 
only  person  of  marque  whom  I  had  not  before  seen  was 
the  Minister  of  the  Marine — General  (Admiral?)  Decres. 
He  is  the  same  who  defended  so  gallantly  the  'Guillaume 
Tell  '*  when  she  was  taken  by  us  coming  out  of  Malta.  He 
is  one  of  the  fattest,  vulgarest,  ugliest  black  men  I  ever 


*  March  30, 1800.  The  '  Guillaume  Tell/  Captain  Saulnier,  bearing  the 
flag  of  Rear  Admiral  Denis  Decres,  came  out  of  Valetta ;  she  was  chased 
and  attacked,  but  defended  herself  most  gallantly  against  the  'Foudroyant/ 
'  Lion/  and  '  Penelope/  though  at  last  compelled  to  yield  to  such  superior 
force.  'A  more  heroic  defence  than  that  of  the  "  Guillaume  Tell"  is  not 
to  be  found  among  the  records  of  naval  actions.  She  became,  under  the 
name  of  the  "  Malta,"  the  largest  two-decker  in  the  British  navy,  except  the 
"  Tonnant."  '—From  James'  Naval  History,  vol.  iii.  pp.  23-27,  edit.  1826. 


1802]  VISIT   TO    THE    TUILERIES.  185 

saw.  I  had  no  opportunity  of  judging  more  of  him  than 
his  appearance.  Madame Marmont,  to  keep  up  her  character 
of  fine-ladyism,  was  among  the  last  of  the  company  who 
arrived.  Five  was  the  hour  on  the  card ;  we  dined  about 
six.  Perregaux  still  inhabits  (as  before  the  Eevolution) 
the  famous  Pavilion  built  by  the  Prince  de  Soubise  for 
Mdlle.  Guimard  ;  *  it  has  been  new  carpeted  and  new 
furnished,  but  the  decorations  of  the  walls  are  the  same. 
In  the  evening  to  the  Theatre  de  la  Eue  Feydeau :  it  is  the 
only  one  in  Paris  which  is  the  same  as  I  remember  it,  and 
very  pretty  it  is.  The  piece  we  saw  was  '  Une  Folie,'  a 
French  comic  opera  ;  the  music  was  extremely  pretty  and 
well  sung. 

Thursday,  8th. — Went  at  three  o'clock  to  the  Tui- 
leries  to  be  presented  to  Madame  Buonaparte.  It  had 
been  announced  some  days  before  by  the  Prefet  du 
Palais,  M.  Du  Lugay,  to  the  Foreign  Ministers,  that  she 
would  on  this  day  receive  the  Foreign  Ministers'  wives, 
and  les  etrangeres  de  marque  qui  desiraient  lui  etre  pre- 
sentees. We  went  in  at  the  door  in  the  corner  of  the 
court  of  the  Tuileries  which  leads  to  Madame  Buona- 
parte's apartment,  and  were  ushered  into  the  yellow 
salon  which  I  have  before  described.  In  the  antechamber 
were  half-a-dozen  servants  in  Buonaparte's  livery.  The 
door  a  deux  battons  was  opened  for  every  person  by  a 
man  not  in  livery.  Here  we  found  already  about  half-a- 
dozen  ladies  and  as  many  gentlemen,  all  Foreign  Ministers, 
or  their  wives,  or  foreigners.  They  continued  arriving 
till  there  were  about  forty  women  and  about  as  many  men. 

There  was  a  range  of  chaises-a-dos  placed  all  round  the 
room,  upon  which  the  ladies  were  invited  to  sit  down  by 

*  Marie  Madeleine  Guimard,  celebrated  dancer,  born  1748.  She  was 
plain,  dark,  thin,  and  pitted  with  the  small-pox,  but  much  admired  for  her 
extraordinary  grace  in  dancing  and  pantomime.  She  became  the  maUresse 
en  titre  to  the  Mare"chal  Prince  de  Soubise.  In  the  Rue  de  la  Chausse'e 
d'Antin  a  house  was  built  for  her,  called  the  Temple  of  Terpsichore,  and  a 
theatre  holding  500  persons.  She  died  181G. 


186  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1802 

Madame  de  Lucay.  We  all  placed  ourselves,  and 
the  men  remained  in  a  peloton  before  the  window 
at  the  bottom  of  the  room.  Buonaparte  himself  and 
Madame  B.  entered  at  the  same  time  from  the  door 
of  the  bedchamber.  The  moment  of  their  entry  I  did 
not  see,  happening  to  have  turned  my  head  another  way ; 
when  I  looked  round  again  she  was  already  in  conver- 
sation with  the  first  lady  on  her  right  hand,  and  the 
Consul,  in  his  undress  uniform  of  Consul,  between  the 
two  Prefets  du  Palais,  in  their  dress  uniforms  (scarlet  and 
silver),  in  conversation  with  the  Princess  Sta.  Croce.  He 
went  regularly  round,  speaking  to  every  lady  for  about 
two  or  three  minutes — M.  Lu9ay,  the  Prefet,  having  a 
sheet  of  paper  in  his  hand,  on  which  was  written  the 
name  and  nation  of  each  lady,  which  he  announced  to 
Buonaparte  as  he  approached  her.  We,  standing  at  the 
further  part  of  the  circle  from  whence  he  began,  had  the 
opportunity  of  observing  his  manner  and  address — it  is 
very  simple  and  unaffected.  He  asked  one  lady  if  she 
could  ride  on  horseback,  another  if  she  had  been  long 
in  France ;  to  the  Italians,  of  which  there  were  several, 
he  spoke  in  Italian,  saying  much  the  same  sort  of  royal 
nothings.  My  turn  happening  to  come  before  Mrs.  D.'s, 
he  asked  me  if  I  had  been  long  at  Paris.  '  Plus  de  trois 
semaines.'  '  Comment  trouvez  vous  1'Opera  ; '  or,  'Etes 
vous  contente  de  1'Opera  ? '  '  Oh !  bien  beau,  mais  nous 
avons  taut  vu  1'Opera.'  He  seemed  to  feel  by  my  answer 
that  he  might  have  addressed  us  better ;  but  totally 
ignorant  of  who  either  of  us  was,  he  knew  not  how  to 
change  the  subject,  and  continued  it  with  Mrs.  Darner, 
by  asking :  '  Si  nous  avions  d'aussi  bons  danseurs  en 
Angleterre  ? '  '  Oh  non,  nous  en  faisons  venir  d'ici.' 
'  Cependant  vous  avez  une  bien  belle  voix,  c'est  Madame 
Billington,*  je  1'ai  entendu  en  Italic.'  '  Oui,  assurement, 

*  Mrs.  Billington  was  the  daughter  of  a  German  of  the  name  of  Weich- 
salj  married  to  James  Billington,  of  Drury  Lane,  to  whom  her  father  had 


1802]  INTEEVIEW  WITH   THE   FIRST  CONSUL.  187 

elle  a  une  tres  belle  voix,  et  c'est  une  Anglaise.'  '  Oui, 
c'est  une  Anglaise,  mais  elle  a  epouse  un  Francais  et 
etudie  en  Italic,  de  maniere  qu'elle  appartient  aux  trois 
nations.' 

And  so  he  passed  on  to  the  next  person,  who  hap- 
pened to  be  a  Eussian,  and  repeated  the  same  royal 
enquiry,  si  elle  montait  a  cheval — which  put  me  laugh- 
ably in  mind  of  the  '  Do  you  get  out  ? '  of  St.  James's. 
One  could  not  but  regret  in  every  way  that  Mrs.  Darner's 
talents  had  never  reached  his  ears,  nor  the  principal 
object  of  our  journey  to  Paris,  or  he  would  certainly,  had 
it  only  been  pour  change  de  these,  have  addressed  us 
upon  some  other  subject,  of  which  many  might  have  im- 
mediately offered  themselves,  and  have  reserved  the 
opera  for  younger  women.* 

While  he  was  thus  going  round  the  circle,  Madame 
Buonaparte  followed  him,  leaving  always  a  distance  of 
two  or  three  persons  in  the  circle  between  them.  She  in 
her  turn  spoke  to  everybody,  but  had  no  attendant  upon 
her,  nobody  to  tell  her  who  anybody  was,  so  that  the 


partly  confided  her  musical  education.  She  came  out  at  DubBn,  and  in 
London,  and  afterwards  at  Paris,  where  she  had  lessons  from  Sacchini. 
Her  singing  was  much  admired  in  Italy.  In  1799,  her  husband  having 
died,  she  married  M.  Felessart,  a  Frenchman.  She  reappeared  at  Covent 
Garden  in  1801 ;  died  1818. 

*  The  object  of  Mrs.  Darner's  visit  appears  to  have  been  to  offer  the  First 
Consul  a  bust  of  Mr.  Fox,  but  through  whom  the  offer  was  made  does  not 
transpire.  It  is  to  be  presumed  that  neither  the  First  Consul  nor  Madame 
Buonaparte  could  have  been  aware  of  Mrs.  Darner's  intentions  before  this 
reception;  at  any  rate,  this  bust  was  more  graciously  acknowledged  when 
received  years  after. 

The  following  account,  which  appears  in  a  work  entitled  '  Queens  of 
Society,'  by  no  means  accords  with  Miss  Berry's  simple  narrative  of  all  that 
really  passed  during  Mrs.  Darner's  interview  with  the  First  Consul.  'After 
the  Peace  of  Amiens,  Mrs.  Darner  set  out  to  Paris,  and  wag  presented  to 
the  great  man,  who  charmed  Jter  with  his  conversation.  She  was  known  to 
be  a  friend  and  warm  supporter  of  Charles  Fox,  and  the  First  Consul 
expressed  his  anxiety  to  have  from  her  hand  a  bust  of  the  "  Man  of  the 
People."  ' — The  Queens  of  Society,  by  Grace  and  Philip  Wharton,  vol.  ii. 
p.  203. 


188  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1802 

presentation  was  in  fact  one  in  form  to  Buonaparte  and 
none  at  all  to  her,  only  that  he  received  and  had  the 
ladies  presented  to  him  in  her  apartment. 

After  he  had  thus  gone  round  to  every  woman,  he 
came  to  the  group  of  men,  spoke  par-ei  et  par-la,  to 
about  six  or  seven  of  them,  and  then  slipped  out  by  the 
same  door  at  which  he  entered.  Madame  Buonaparte 
in  the  meantime  had  made  her  round,  and  had  stopped 
at  the  fauteuil  by  the  side  of  the  fire.  As  soon  as  Buona- 
parte was  gone  she  sat  down,  and  invited  us  to  do  so  like- 
wise ;  she  spoke  two  or  three  words  across  the  room  to 
two  or  three  ladies,  among  others  to  Lady  Caher,  *  and 
was  surprised  at  her  going  away  so  soon,  and  hoped  she 
would  have  stayed  till  autumn.  We  observed  this,  as  it 
seemed  as  if  she  wished  it  publicly  to  appear  that  she  had 
no  particular  intimacy  with  Lady  Caher,  which  by  their 
having  met  at  Plombieres  last  summer  had  been  sup- 
posed. She  then  spoke  to  two  or  three  of  the  men 
nearest  her,  and  amongst  others  to  the  Hereditary  Prince 
of  Orange,  but  without  rising  or  making  any  difference 
in  her  address  to  him.  After  ten  minutes  of  this  circle 
she  rose,  bowed  a  la  Francaise  to  all  the  company,  and 
went  out  at  the  same  door  as  Buonaparte  had  done,  into 
her  own  bedchamber.  We  remained  talking  to  one 
another  for  ten  minutes  more,  and  then  marched  off  as 
fast  as  we  could. 

Madame  Buonaparte  struck  us  both  still  more  like 
Lady  E.  F.,  en  representation  than  even  she  had  done 
before  in  private  :  but  did  not  gain  as  much  by  being 
more  dressed,  as  I  expected.  She  wore,  by  way  of  being 
in  a  smart  demi-parure,  a  pink  slight  silk  gown,  with  a 
pink  velvet  round  spot  upon  it,  a  small  white  silk  or 
satin  hat,  with  three  small  white  feathers,  tied  under  the 
chin  ;  a  handkerchief,  and  no  fan,  in  her  hand ;  in  short, 

*  Daughter  of  James  St.  John  Jeffreys ;  married  to  Lord  Caher  (after- 
wards created  Earl  of  Glengall)  in  1793.  Lord  Glengall  died  in  1819. 


1802]  PERSONAL  APPEARANCE  OF  THE  FIRST  CONSUL.    189 

a  decided  half-dress  ;  while  we  were  all  as  much  dressed 
as  the  present  fashions  (without  any  decided  robe  de  cour) 
admits  of.  Buonaparte  himself,  as  I  have  already  said, 
was  in  his  undress  consular  uniform,  but  with  silk  stock- 
ings and  small  buckles.  His  hair  is  very  dark,  and 
cropped  much  shorter  than  it  appears  on  any  of  his  busts, 
and  it  does  not  lay  well  or  smoothly  upon  his  head.  He, 
by  no  means  struck  me  as  so  little  as  I  had  heard  him 
represented,  and  as,  indeed,  he  appeared  on  horseback. 
His  shoulders  are  broad,  which  gives  his  figure  impor- 
tance. His  complexion,  though  pale  and  yellow,  has  not 
the  appearance  of  ill  health.  His  teeth  are  good,  and  his 
mouth,  when  speaking,  as  I  saw  him  in  good  humour,  has 
a  remarkable  and  uncommon  expression  of  sweetness. 
Indeed,  his  whole  countenance,  as  I  saw  him  in  this  circle, 
was  more  that  of  complacence  and  quiet  intelligence  than 
of  any  decided  penetration  and  strong  expression  what- 
soever. The  Man  of  the  Parade  and  the  Man  of  the  Circle 
has  left  a  totally  different  impression  on  my  mind,  and  I 
can  hardly  make  the  two  countenances  (one  of  which  I 
saw  so  imperfectly)  belong  to  the  same  person.  His  eyes 
are  light  grey,  and  he  looks  full  in  the  face  of  the  person 
to  whom  he  speaks.  To  me  always  a  good  sign.  Yet, 
after  all  I  have  said  of  the  sweetness  of  his  countenance,  I 
can  readily  believe  what  is  said  that  it  is  terrible  and  fire- 
darting  when  angry,  or  greatly  moved  by  any  cause. 

In  the  evening  to  the  Theatre  de  la  Republique.  The 
pieces  were  '  Tancrede '  and  '  La  Reconciliation  malgre 
soi.'  Talma  was  Tancrede.*  He  acts  with  fire  and  just 
expression,  but  his  voice  is  rough,  hoarse,  and  very  dis- 
agreeable. His  countenance,  too,  is  against  him,  for  he 

*  Franqois  Joseph  Talma,  born  at  Paris  1766 ;  brought  up  in  England, 
where  his  father  practised  as  a  dentist;  returned  to  Paris,  and  made  his 
de"but  in  1797,  at  the  Theatre  Fran^ais,  in  the  character  of  Seide  in  Vol- 
taire's '  Mahomet.'  He  became  the  first  tragedian  of  his  time,  and  effected 
a  reform  in  the  costume  of  the  stage.  He  was  greatly  favoured  by  Buona- 
parte. He  married  Mdlle.  Vanhove,  a  distinguished  actress.  Died  in  1826. 


190  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1802 

squints.  Were  he  better  endowed  by  nature,  I  think 
he  would  be  a  very  good  actor ;  as  it  is,  he  is  reckoned 
one  of  their  best.  A  debutante  (Mdlle.  le  Court)  per- 
formed Amenaide  very  badly  indeed.  Her  gestures  were 
so  singularly  awkward,  that  the  parterre  laughed.  When 
this  begins  at  Paris,  it  is  generally  followed  up  in  a  very 
painful  manner,  everything  being  taken  in  a  ludicrous 
light,  and  all  efforts  of  the  poor  unfortunate  actor  to  restore 
gravity  are  in  vain.  However,  this  was  not  quite  the 
case  on  this  occasion,  for  though  a  repetition  of  the  same 
awkwardness  occasioned  the  same  laugh,  it  was  each 
time  hushed  by  applause.  The  debutante  was  considered 
(as  she,  indeed,  deserved)  to  have  totally  failed.  When 
they  succeed  tolerably  they  are  always  called  for  after 
the  piece.  The  curtain  draws  up,  and  they  appear  to 
make  their  curtsey  to  the  audience,  and  receive  new 
applauses. 

Friday,  9#A. — In  the  morning  called  to  take  leave  of 
Madame  de  Castellane,  Madame  de  Goigny,  Madame  de 
Stael,  and  Madame  de  Beauvan.  We  found  most  of  them 
at  home,  and  all  very  curious  to  hear  the  details  of  our 
presentation  at  the  Tuileries,  which  we  recounted  from 
beginning  to  end  two  or  three  times  in  the  course  of  this 
day.  In  the  evening  visited  Madame  d'Haussenville  (a 
daughter  of  M.  de  Guerchy,*  formerly  ambassador  in 
England)  and  Madame  de  Brignole. 

Saturday,  Wth. — In  the  morning  to  Mdlle.  Martin's 
to  buy  rouge.  I  thought,  from  having  heard  all  my 
life  of  the  fame  of  Mdlle.  Martin's  rouge,  that  her  receipt 
must  by  this  time  have  descended  to  her  great-grand- 

«/ 

children.  Mais  point  du  tout  The  original  Mdlle.  Martin 
herself,  now  a  large  fat  old  woman,  with  a  very  intelligent 
countenance,  served  us.  She  was  dressed  in  a  large  bon- 
net, long  powdered  hair,  the  costume  of  twenty  years  ago. 

*  Count  de  Guerchy,  frequently  mentioned  in  Horace  Walpole's  letters. 
Came  to  London  October  1763. 


1802]  MADAME   KECAMIEK'S   HOUSE.  191 

Afterwards  called  at  Madame  de  Fleury's  and  at  Madame 
Le  Conteulx,  whom  we  found  in  one  of  those  charming 
houses  in  the  Faubourg  St.  Honore,  where  the  gardens  go 
down  to  the  Champs  Elysees,  and  the  windows  down  to 
the  ground  opening  into  these  gardens.  Went  to  the 
house  of  Madame  Eecamier.  We  were  resolved  not  to 
leave  Paris  without  seeing  what  is  called  the  most  elegant 
house  in  it,  fitted  up  in  the  new  style.  It  is  that  formerly 
inhabited  by  Necker  in  the  Chaussee  d'Antin,  close  to 
Perregaux's.  There  are  no  large  rooms,  nor  a  great 
many  of  them  ;  but  it  is  certainly  fitted  up  with  all  the 
recherche  and  expense  possible  in  what  is  now  called  le 
gout  antique.  But  the  candelabra,  pendules,  &c.,  though 
exquisitely  finished,  are  in  that  sort  of  minute  frittered 
style  which  I  think  so  much  less  noble  than  that  of  fifteen 
or  twenty  years  ago.  All  the  chairs  are  mahogany 
enriched  with  ormolu,  and  covered  either  with  cloth  or 
silk,  those  in  the  salon  trimmed  with  flat  gold  lace  in 
good  taste.  Her  bed  is  reckoned  the  most  beautiful  in 
Paris — it,  too,  is  of  mahogany  enriched  with  ormolu 
and  bronze,  and  raised  upon  two  steps  of  the  same  wood. 
Over  the  whole  bed  was  thrown  a  great  coverlid  or  veil  of 
fine  plain  muslin,  with  rows  of  narrow  gold  lace  at  each 
end,  and  the  muslin  embroidered  as  a  border.  The  cur- 
tains were  muslin,  trimmed  and  worked  like  the  coverlid 
suspended  from  a  sort  of  carved  couronne  de  roses,  and 
tucked  up  in  drapery  upon  the  wall,  against  which  the  bed 
stood.  At  the  foot  of  the  bed  stood  a  fine  Grecian  lamp 
of  ormolu,  with  a  little  figure  of  the  same  metal  bending 
over  it ;  and  at  the  head  of  the  bed  .another  stand,  upon 
which  was  placed  a  large  ornamented  flower-pot,  contain- 
ing a  large  artificial  rose-tree,  the  branches  of  which  must 
nod  very  near  her  nose  in  bed.  Out  of  this  bedroom  is  a 
beautiful  little  salle  de  bain.  The  walls  inlaid  with  satin- 
wood  and  mahogany,  and  slight  arabesques  patterns  in 
black  upon  the  satin-wood.  The  bath  presents  itself  as  a 


192  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1802 

sofa  in  recess,  covered  with  a  cushion  of  scarlet  cloth 
embroidered  and  laced  with  black.  Beyond  this  again 
is  a  very  little  boudoir  entirely  lined  with  quilted  pea- 
green  lustring,  drawn  altogether  in  a  bunch  in  the  middle 
of  the  ceiling. 

Sunday,  \\th. — Left  Paris  at  three.  When  we  had  got 
upon  the  Quai,  just  opposite  the  College  des  quatre 
Nations,  one  of  the  wheel  horses  stumbled  and  fell  from 
the  slipperiness  of  the  pavement,  and  threw  the  postilion. 
By  the  manner  in  which  he  lay  on  the  pavement,  it  was 
easy  to  perceive  that  he  was  more  stunned  by  previous 
drunkenness  than  by  his  fall.  A  crowd  in  an  instant 
gathered  round  him,  each  one  making  him  out  worse 
than  the  other ;  one  declaring  his  legs  were  broken,  and 
another  his  head,  and  everyone  advising  different  cures. 
He  was  presently  seated  upon  the  kerbstone  of  the  pave- 
ment, and  wanted  to  remount  his  horse  again,  which  we 
did  not  allow.  However,  the  delay  occasioned  by  this, 
and  going  slowly  over  the  pavement  for  the  rest  of  our 
trajet  through  Paris,  made  us  nearly  two  hours  getting 
to  St.  Denis.  It  was  dusk  by  the  time  we  arrived  at 
Chantilly.  Lord  and  Lady  Caher,  and  a  party  who  had 
left  Paris  with  them,  had  taken  possession  of  the  inn 
there ;  we  proceeded  therefore  to  Clermont.  The  weather 
had  entirely  changed  in  the  course  of  the  night ;  a  violent 
wind  came  on  due  north,  and  there  were  alternate  showers 
of  hail  and  sunshine. 

Monday,  12th. — An  iron  having  been  broken  at  Cler- 
mont, we  could  not  get  away  till  ten  o'clock,  and  by  the 
time  we  arrived  at  Amiens  at  five  o'clock,  I  was  so  ill  that 
we  remained  there  all  night. 

Tuesday,  ~L3th. — Left  Amiens ;  when  we  had  got  about 
a  mile  beyond  Pecquigny  we  found  that  the  iron  of  the 
carriage  had  not  been  properly  repaired  ;  were  obliged 
to  get  out  at  a  little  village  called  the  Chaussee  de  Pec- 
quigny. We  went  into  the  house  of  the  blacksmith  of 


1802]  ARRIVE   AT   CALAIS.  193 

the  village,  who  was  employed  in  examining  the  carriage. 
It  was  a  mere  thatched  cottage  in  as  inconsiderable  a  little 
village  of  a  few  thatched  houses  as  one  could  anywhere 
see,  and  yet  a  more  comfortable  peasant's  house  I  have 
nowhere  met  with.  It  was  clean  too  in  the  inside,  though 
the  good  woman  of  the  house  was  in  the  midst  of  her 
lessive.  They  had  plenty  of  plates  and  dishes  set  up 
above  a  dresser,  good  bacon  hanging  up  in  an  adjoin- 
ing bedroom,  and  behind  their  house  much  poultry, 
the  eggs  of  which  the  woman  said  they  lived  upon  and 
seldom  sold ;  they  had  also  a  bit  of  garden :  in  short,  I 
much  doubt  if  in  any  cottage  in  France,  ten  years  ago,  be- 
longing to  the  same  order  of  people,  one  could  have  spent 
three  hours  as  comfortably,  and  left  it  with  the  same  feel- 
ings we  did  that  of  the  blacksmith  at  the  Chaussee  de 
Pecquigny.  From  this  and  other  delays  we  did  not  get  to 
Montreuil  till  past  eleven,  and  then  found  all  the  best 
rooms  in  the  inn  occupied  by  the  Duchess  of  Cumberland* 
and  her  suite,  and  a  French  general  de  division  into  the 
bargain  ;  however,  they  took  us  in. 

Wednesday,  \kth. — Left  Montreuil ;  arrived  at  Calais  in 
about  ten  hours.  Found  Madame  de  Vaudreuil  lodged 
in  the  same  inn,  and  waiting  for  letters  from  Paris  to 
continue  her  route  thither. 

Thursday,  15^. — The  wind  so  contrary  that  Captain 
Blake,  whom  we  found  waiting  for  us,  could  not  sail. 
Called  upon  M.  Mengaud,  the  commissaire-general  de 
police,  to  enforce  the  letters  we  carried  him  from  Mr. 
Jackson  and  Mr.  Merry,  begging  to  be  allowed  to  return 
in  an  English  vessel,  which  he  agreed  to,  though  to  no- 
body else  would  he  grant  it. 

*  Anne,  eldest  daughter  of  Simon,  Earl  of  Carhampton,  and  widow  of 
Christopher  Horton,  Esq.,  of  Catten  in  Derbyshire,  married,  in  1771,  to 
Henry  Frederick,  Duke  of  Cumberland,  brother  to  George  III.  He  died 
1790. 

VOL.  II.  0 


194 


MISS    BERRY  S   JOURNAL. 


[1802 


Friday,,  16th. — Went  on  board  the  '  Swift ;'  sailed  from 
Calais  Pier  a  quarter  after  eleven  :  fine  day,  but  the  wind 
fell  almost  entirely.  At  seven  o'clock  in  the  evening  we 
were  within  five  miles  of  Dover  in  a  dead  calm ;  got  into 
a  Dover  boat,  were  rowed  into  the  harbour,  and  arrived 
at  the  York  Hotel  at  a  quarter  after  eight,  having  been  just 
nine  hours  on  our  passage.  Gave  a  passage  in  our  vessel 
to  Lord  and  Lady  Caher,  whom  Mengaud  would  not 
allow  to  have  another  English  vessel. 

Saturday,  llth. — Slept  at  Eochester. 

Sunday ',  18th. — Arrived  in  North  Audley  Street  at 
three  o'clock. 


A  month  after  Miss  Berry  returned  from  France,  she 
had  the  mortification  of  finding  that  the  play  which  had 
been  acted  in  private  with  such  flattering  success  the 
preceding  year  at  Strawberry  Hill,  did  not  receive  the 
sanction  of  the  public  voice.  It  was  brought  out  at 
Drury  Lane  with  a  cast  of  parts,  comprising  names  which 
must  greatly  have  conduced  to  its  success,  and  the  cause 
of  its  failure  cannot  be  attributed  to  the  want  of  ability 
on  the  part  of  the  performers. 


Damatis  Persona. 


Sir  Valentine  Vapour 

Sir  Dudley  Dorimant 

Mr.  Lovell 

Dr.  Syrop 

Music  Master 

Shopman 

La  Pierre 

John 

Servants 

Lady  Selina  Vapour 
Mrs.  Lovell 
Mrs.  Socket 
Miss  Racket 
Trimming 
Lappet 


Mr. 

Mr.  C.  KEMBLE. 

Mr.  BARRYMORE. 

Mr.  STJETT. 

Mr.  MADDOCKS. 

Mr.  EVANS. 

Mr.  WEURTZER. 

Mr.  CHIPPENDALE. 
f  Messrs.  GIBBONS, 
\  FISHER,  &  WEBB. 

Miss  Du  CAMP. 
Mrs.  YOUNG. 
Miss  POPE. 
Mrs.  JORDAN. 
Mrs.  HARLOWE. 
Miss  TIDSWELL. 


1802]  PROLOGUE    TO   'FASHIONABLE    FRIENDS.'  195 

The    Prologue*    was    written    by    William    Eobert 

*  HARD  is  the  chase  poor  authors  now  pursue, 
In  this  old  world,  to  hunt  out  something  new  ! 
Where  can  the  modern  poet  turn  to  find 
One  undiscover'd  treasure  of  the  mind, 
One  drop  untasted  yet  in  Learning's  spring, 
Or  one  unwearied  plume  in  Fancy's  wing  ? 
Our  grandsire  bards,  with  prodigal  expense, 
Squander'd  the  funds  of  genius,  wit,  and  sense ; 
Annuitants  of  fame,  they  took  no  care 
How  ill  their  beggar'd  successors  might  fare  : 
Each  thought  exhausted,  all  invention  drain'd, 
A  selfish  immortality  they  gain'd, 
And  left  no  spot  in  all  Apollo's  garden, 
No  farm  in  all  Parnassus,  worth  a  farthing  ! 
Some  keen  observers,  on  Dame  Nature's  face, 
The  crow-foot  marks  of  time  and  sickness  trace ; 
No  wonder,  then,  if  our  poetic  sires 
Felt  for  her  youthful  bloom  more  genuine  fires ; 
Nature  to  them  her  virgin  smiles  display'd. 

They  woo'd  a  spotless,  we  a  ruin'd  maid ! 
For  she  was  won,  if  chronicles  speak  truth, 

By  many  a  Grecian,  many  a  Unman  youth  ; 

But  still  the  lovely  libertine  retain'd 

Charms  yet  unview'd,  and  favours  yet  ungain'd ; 

For  one  immortal  boy !  to  him  alone, 

Her  beauties  and  her  failings  all  were  shown. 

Heedless  of  time,  or  place,  or  mode,  or  fashion, 

Disorderly  she  own'd  her  glorious  passion, 

What  time  all  rules  of  critic  prudery  brav'd. 

In  Avon's  hallow'd  stream  her  angel  form  she  lav'd ! 

Her  fading  graces  now  less  transport  move, 

We  feel  for  Nature  artificial  love, 

Though,  for  her  age,  the  dame  looks  passing  well, 

Six  thousand  years'  hard  living  still  must  tell ! 

E'en  for  the  satirist  few  themes  remain, 

Folly  herself  has  long  been  in  the  wane ; 

Folly,  though  here  immortal  still  she  dwells, 

In  Strulburg  palsy  shakes  her  rusted  bells ! 

Is  Folly  then  so  old  ? — Why,  let  me  see, 

About  what  time  of  life  may  Folly  be  ? 

Oh,  she  was  born,  by  nicest  calculation, 

One  moment  after  woman's  first  creation  ! 

This  night  our  unknown  author  will  produce 

Old  subjects  modernis'd  for  present  use; 

If  you  're  displeas'd,  be  cautious  how  you  show  it 

Perhaps  your  nearest  neighbour  is  the  poet ; 

But  if  you  're  pleas'd  and  anxious  to  befriend  us, 

I  Jke  Fashionable  Friends,  in  crowds  attend  us. 
61 


196  MISS  BERRY'S  COMEDY.  [1802 

Spencer,*  Esq.,  and  was  spoken  by  Mr.  C.  Kemble.     The 
Epilogue  f  was  written   by  the  Hon.  Wm.  Lamb,  and 

*  Son  of  Lord   Charles   Spencer,   translator  of    '  Leonora/   author  of 
1  Urania/  and  other  poems. 

f  SURE,  had  our  author,  whom  in  vain  we  seek, 

Compos'd  the  play,  you  just  have  seen,  last  week, 

He  would  not  now  have  sent  me  to  attend, 

In  Italy,  the  death-bed  of  my  friend ; 

To  throw  away  this  gay  auspicious  year, 

And  lose  the  prospect  which  is  opening  here. 

Is  this  a  time  for  me  abroad  to  roam  ? 
Now  Peace  will  send  so  many  lovers  home ; 
Sailors  victorious  still  on  every  sea 
O'er  every  foe,  who  yet  must  strike  to  me  ; 
And  captains,  cover'd  with  hard-earn'd  renown, 
From  Eastern  climates  beautifully  brown ; 
Peace,  which  in  every  face  throughout  the  isle 
Has  spread  a  heart-felt,  universal  smile, — 
Peace,  which  in  all  most  variously  excites 
New  views,  new  thoughts,  new  fancies,  new  delights. 
Some  think  on  pleasure,  some  alone  on  gain, 
On  price  of  stocks,  or  plenty  of  champagne — • 
Exports  and  imports  trading  men  engage, 
Cloth  for  new  marts,  new  dancers  for  the  stage — 
Forward  the  epicure  with  transport  looks 
To  a  fresh  troop  of  revolution  cooks, 
And  o'er  the  pie  exults,  whose  precious  store 
Has  been  denied  him  ten  sad  years  before ; 
While  the  gay  nymph,  who  lures  a  crowd  of  slaves, 
Prepares  her  charms,  resolv'd  to  cross  the  waves ; 
Besolv'd  the  beaux  of  Paris  to  invade, 
And  flirt  with  whisker'd  generals  of  brigade. 

Amidst  these  different  tastes,  may  I  advance 
The  grounds  on  which  I  vote  for  peace  with  France  ? 
Then — though  through  all  this  time  of  woe  and  fear, 
We  have  not  suffer'd  much  in  England  here, 
Yet  now,  I  own,  new  hopes  within  me  rise, 
Oft  times  more  great,  more  happy,  and  more  wise — 
Now  London  shall  appear  herself  again, 
Adorn'd  with  fresh  supplies  of  handsome  men, 
No  thought  of  business  now  shall  e'er  invade 
The  nightly  ball,  and  frequent  masquerade  ; 
Now  luxury  again  on  wealth  shall  thrive, 
And  pleasure  rule,  and  usury  revive. 
Exulting  fashion  hails  the  happy  league, 
Hence  love  of  cards,  and  leisure  for  intrigue ; 
Credit  and  curricles  and  dice  increase, 
Racing,  and  all  the  useful  arts  of  peace. 


1802]  PREFACE.  197 

spoken  by  Miss  Du  Camp.*  Miss  Berry's  own  account  of 
the  causes  of  condemnation  forms  the  preface  to  'Fashion- 
able Friends  '  in  the  last  edition  of  her  works. 

PKEFACE. 

'  This  comedy  was  acted  for  three  nights  in  May  1802,  and 
then  withdrawn.  In  addition  to  its  inherent  defects  of  wanting 
the  bustle  and  intricacies  of  a  popular  plot,  and  all  the  exag- 
gerations of  character  which  such  plots  often  make  necessary, 
it  was  believed  at  the  time  to  be  the  production  of  some  of  a 
certain  Pic-nic  Club  then  existing  much  addicted  to  theatrical 
amusements,  to  which  the  pit-filling  public  (ignorant  of  its 
harmless  dulness)  had  endowed  with  a  supposed  power  of  pro- 
pagating loose  principles  and  profligate  wit.  This  piece,  there- 
fore, emanating  as  they  believed,  from  such  a  focus  of  evil,  they 
indignantly  determined  to  stifle  in  its  birth,  and  came  to  the 
first  night  determined  to  damn  without  hearing  it.  The  real 
author,  living  in  the  midst  of  the  world  described  in  the  comedy, 
was  particularly  anxious  to  avoid  all  suspicions  of  authorship ; 
so  that  the  piece,  being  entirely  unprotected  by  its  natural  friends 
and  attacked  by  prejudiced  enemies,  must  have  possessed  much 
greater  merit  than  it  can  boast  to  have  secured  such  a  fair  hearing 
as  might  have  fairly  condemned  it.  The  abuse  which  the  news- 
papers of  the  day  lavished  upon  it,  made  the  Advertisement, 
which  is  here  prefixed  to  it,  necessary  to  its  first  publication.' 

The  Morning  Post  may  now  display  unfurl'd 
Four  columns  of  the  Fashionable  World, 
And  not  confin'd  to  tell  of  war's  renown, 
Spread  all  the  news  around  of  all  the  town : 
While  gay  Gazettes  the  polish 'd  Treasury  writes, 
Of  splendid  fashions,  not  of  vulgar  fights, 
Proud  to  record  the  tailor's  deeds  and  name, 
And  give  the  milliner  to  deathless  fame, 
Who  first  shall  force  proud  Gallia  to  confess 
Herself  inferior  in  the  arts  of  dress. 
Oh !  join  to  pray  my  hopes  may  not  be  vain, 
Commence,  gay  Peace,  a  long  and  joyous  reign, 
May  Europe's  nations,  by  my  counsels 'wise, 
Learn  e'en  thy  faults  to  cherish  and  to  prize, 
And  shunning  glory's  bright,  but  fatal  star, 
Prefer  thy  follies  to  the  woes  of  war ! 


Afterwards  Mrs.  C.  Kemble. 


198  MISS  BEKRY'S  COMEDY.  [1802 

A  dvertisement. 

'  This  comedy,  found  among  the  papers  of  the  late  Earl  of 
Orford,  and  remaining  unclaimed  in  the  hands  of  his  executors 
for  two  years,  was  brought  forward  at  the  request  of  Mr.  Kemble 
on  the  Theatre  Koyal,  Drury  Lane.  After  the  extraordinary 
abuse  that  bas  been  lavished  upon  it,  the  executors  considered 
it  as  a  duty  to  the  unknown  autbor  to  publish  it.' 

It  is  often  difficult  to  judge,  from  reading  only,  what  may 
be  the  effect  produced  by  any  dramatic  work  when  placed 
on  the  stage.  Miss  Berry's  explanation  of  the  condemnation 
of  her  play  may  be  correct,  and  it  may  have  owed  its  re- 
jection to  the  prejudices  entertained  by  the  public  against 
some  supposed  author,  for  it  is  certainly  not  deficient  in 
skilful  arrangement  of  dramatic  position,  in  stage  intrigue, 
or  in  pointed  and  epigrammatic  dialogue,  but,  on,  the 
other  hand,  it  must  be  confessed  that  no  such  play  would 
be  written  by  a  lady  of  the  present  day,  or  be  performed 
in  private  theatricals,  or  be  offered  to  the  public  as  the 
representation  of  fashionable  manners.  A  greater  proof 
of  the  happy  change  that  has  taken  place,  in  the  course 
of  the  last  sixty-three  years,  in  the  manners,  the  morals, 
and  the  refinement  of  the  higher  classes  could  not  well  be 
adduced.  The  plot,  the  characters,  and  the  dialogue  all 
turn  upon  the  most  undisguised  love  intrigues  of  married 
couples ;  and  though  the  author's  purity  of  intention  is  to 
be  seen  in  making  virtue  gain  some  triumph  over  vice,  and 
her  love  of  truth  is  to  be  traced  in  the  way  she  exposes,  in 
all  its  odiousness.  the  false  professions  of  a  hollow  friend- 
ship ;  though  there  is  no  intended  propagation  of  loose 
principles,  no  confusion  of  right  and  wrong  in  the  mind 
of  the  author,  yet  there  is  a  tone  of  easy  license  with 
which  criminal  attachments  are  treated,  little  credit- 
able to  the  taste  and .  morality  of  that  society  which  the 
author  professes  to  describe  from  personal  acquaintance, 
and  which  certainly  could  no  longer  be  accepted  as 


1802]  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  199 

a  representation  of  the  habits  and  manners  of  '  Fashion- 
able Friends,'  and  which  would  not  now  be  borne  either 
in  private  theatricals  or  in  the  public  stage. 


JOURNAL. 

Tuesday,  October  26th.  —  Left  North  Audley  Street. 
A  very  fine  sunny  morning. 

Wednesday,  27th. — Arrived  at  Dover ;  found  Captain 
Blake  waiting  for  us,  too  late  to  save  the  tide. 

Thursday,  28th. — A  south  wind  so  directly  in  our  teeth, 
that  it  was  impossible  to  sail.  Walked  about  Dover  and 
to  the  Parade  upon  the  beach  about  half  a  quarter  of  a 
mile  to  the  west  of  the  town,  where  a  whale  no  less  than 
eighty-seven  feet  long  had,  about  three  weeks  before, 
been  towed  ashore  by  two  fishing-boats.  It  had  at  first 
been  seen  by  the  Deal  boats  lying  upon  the  Goodwin 
Sands,  and  was  taken  for  a  vessel ;  it  was  then  floated 
nearer  this  way,  and  was  dead  and  much  wasted  be- 
fore they  brought  it  in  here.  When  I  saw  it,  the  enor- 
mous backbone,  with  a  quantity  of  shapeless  flesh  and 
skin  about  it,  was  lying  within  water  mark,  arid  looked 
exactly  like  a  large  irregular  shelf  of  rock.  The  jaw- 
bones, both  upper  and  under,  had  been  pretty  well  cleared 
of  flesh,  and  were  lying  on  different  parts  of  the  beach, 
likewise  the  tail  with  all  the  flesh  still  upon  it,  cut  off 
from  the  fish  at  the  lowest  vertebra  of  the  backbone. 
The  length  of  the  under  jawbone  of  this  stupendous 
animal  I  measured  6 £  yds.,  and  the  length  between  the 
fork  of  the  tail,  18  ft.  The  length  of  the  upper  jaw- 
bone must  have  been  much  greater,  but  it  lay  incon- 
veniently for  measuring.  I  much  regret  having  missed 
seeing  this  enormous  creature  while  it  was  entire,  for 
from  the  mangled  remains  of  its  body  no  idea  could  be 
formed  of  its  shape.  The  farmers  in  the  neighbourhood 
have  been  ever  since  employed  in  carrying  away  cart- 


200  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1302 

loads  of  its  flesh  to  manure  their  ground.  A  Greenland 
captain,  who  happened  to  be  here  at  the  time,  said  that 
he  had  hardly  ever  seen  a  longer  whale,  but  that  it  was 
a  young  one  and  much  wasted. 

Friday,  29th. — The  wind  still  south,  we  could  not  sail. 
As  the  morning  was  very  fine,  walked  up  to  Dover 
Castle.  Beautiful  views  from  every  part ;  a  great  deal  of 
money  lately  expended  in  making  a  road  up  to  it  on 
which  the  heaviest  artillery  can  be  dragged  with  ease. 
The  whole  castle  apparently  kept  in  very  good  order ; 
two  regiments,  consisting  of  about  500  men  each,  now 
there. 

Saturday,  30th. — The  wind  changed,  and  we  went 
on  board  in  a  boat  from  the  beach.  The  wind  fell  so 
entirely,  that  we  lay  motionless  on  the  water.  After  much 
whistling  for  a  wind,  a  little  breeze  sprang  up  which 
carried  us  to  Calais  Harbour,  time  enough  to  save  the 
tide  and  land,  after  a  passage  of  seven  hours  and  a  half : 
on  deck  the  whole  time. 

The  pier  at  Calais  was  less  crowded  than  when  Mrs. 
Darner  and  I  arrived  in  the  spring ;  I  suppose  they  are 
no  longer  curious,  after  the  infinite  number  of  English 
faces  they  have  seen  in  the  course  of  the  summer.  Took 
possession  of  the  very  apartment  I  had  left  in  April. 

Sunday,  3Ist. — The  Custom  House  was  shut  at  five 
o'clock.  Money  was  also  to  be  got  from  a  banker,  who 
had  the  modesty  to  take  only  at  the  rate  of  7  per  cent, 
from  us.  Got  to  Cormont  that  night. 

Monday,  November  ~Lst. — Arrived  at  Amiens. 

Tuesday,  2nd. — Reached  Chantilly.  At  the  Posts  at 
Clermont  we  found  General  Andreossi,  *  the  French  am- 

*  Count  Antoine  Francois  Andreossi,  born  1761,  a  distinguished  French 
officer  and  scientific  writer,  served  in  all  the  revolutionary  campaigns,  ac- 
companied Napoleon  to  Egypt,  was  appointed  ambassador  to  the  English 
Court  after  the  Peace  of  Amiens.  He  was  at  the  battle  of  Austerlitz  and 
of  Wagram.  Afterwards  ambassador  at  Constantinople,  but  superseded  in 
1814.  On  the  return  of  Napoleon  from  Elba,  he  joined  his  cause,  but  was 


1802]  OCCUPY    OUR   OLD   APARTMENTS   AT   PARIS.  201 

bassador,  on  his  way  to  England ;  he  was  travelling  in  a 
handsome  new  French  coach  a  VAnglaise,  and  a  post- 
chaise  a  I'Anglaise  accompanied  it,  which,  a  la  Franqaise, 
had  something  about  it  broken. 

Wednesday,  3rd. — Arrived  at  the  Hotel  d'Orleans,  the 
apartment  upon  the  first  floor  ready  to  receive  us ;  and 
finding  everything  just  as  I  had  left  it  six  months  before, 
I  could  hardly  persuade  myself  that  I  had  been  away  at 
all.  Sent  to  Barrois  and  Mr.  Merry,  both  of  whom  we 
saw  in  the  evening,  and  Mr.  Jerningham,  who  we  found 
lodged  in  the  same  hotel,  as  well  as  Mr.  William  Throck- 
morton  *  and  Mr.  Eobert  Clifford. 

Thursday,  kth. — In  the  morning  to  the  Musee  and  to 
shops,  and  to  call  at  Madame  de  Vaudreuil,  at  1'Hotel 
de  Caraman  (her  father's  house).  In  the  evening  to  the 
The'&tre  du  Louvois,  Mr.  Moore  f  and  Mr.  Throckmorton 
of  our  party.  The  pieces  '  Le  Mari  Ambitieux,'  and  c  Les 
Conjectures,'  both  by  Picard,  and  in  both  he  acted  very 
well ;  but  the  first  is  a  satire  upon  the  intrigant  and 
ambitieux  of  the  present  day,  whose  means  and  whose 
ends  were  both  too  ignoble  to  be  interesting. 

At  the  Musee  the  large  square  anteroom  to  the  gallery, 
which  I  had  seen  in  the  spring  lined  with  all  the  finest 
Italian  pictures,  was  now  filled  with  the  exhibition  of 
works  of  their  modern  artists,  and  I  am  sorry  to  say 
many  more  historic  pictures,  and  many  better  than  our 
own  Exhibition  can  boast.  The  one  which  everybody 

instrumental  in  moderating  the  decree  against  the  Royal  Family.  After 
Waterloo,  was  one  of  the  five  commissioners  to  negotiate  an  armistice.  He 
died  1828,  leaving  many  works  written  on  different  subjects. — Rose's  Biog. 
Diet. 

*  Mr.  William  Throckmorton,  father  of  the  late  Sir  Robert  Throck- 
morton, born  1762 ;  married  Frances,  daughter  of  Thomas  Giffbrd,  Esq.,  of 
Chillington.  Died  1819. 

t  Francis  Moore,  brother  of  General  Moore,  born  1787,  died  in  Ischia, 
1854 ;  married  Frances,  daughter  of  Sir  William  Twysden.  He  was  in  the 
Foreign  Office  from  July  1784  to  Jan.  1802;  then  Deputy-Secretary  at 
War  to  Dec.  1802. — Correspondence  of  Lord  Cornwallis,  vol.  iii.  p.  382. 


202  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [iso* 

agreed  in  extolling  as  a  capo  $  opera  was  a  Phaedra  and 
Hyppolitus  by  Gerard,  a  young  artist,  of  whom  there  is 
an  extremely  good  portrait  by  a  brother  artist  just  under 
his  great  picture.  He  is  evidently  of  the  school  of 
David,  but  seems  likely  to  avoid  his  defects — that  high 
finishing  and  hardness  which  makes  his  great  pictures  all 
foreground.  In  short,  the  French  now  are  evidently 
forming  themselves  upon  the  Eoman  school,  while  ours 
have  taken  the  Venetian,  which,  though  a  Sir  Joshua 
Eeynolds  ennobled,  I  think  has  been  the  bane  of  all  our 
artists. 

Friday,  £>th. — In  the  evening  the  Opera.  Mr.  Moore, 
Mr.  Throckmorton,  and  Mr.  Pigou  of  our  party.  The 
opera  '  Tamerlane.'  The  story  is  Voltaire's  '  Orphelin 
de  la  Chine,'  but  all  French  great  operas  are  so  exactly 
alike  in  their  make,  that  it  is  never  any  matter  what  they 
are  called.  This  opera  was  over  unusually  early.  We 
were  waiting  nearly  half  an  hour  for  the  carriage.  I 
thought  the  company  in  the  lobby  had  decidedly  a  better 
appearance  than  in  the  spring,  but  I  believe  princi- 
pally from  there  being  a  vast  number  of  foreigners  there. 

Saturday,  6th. — In  the  morning  called  on  Mdlle.  de 
Mortemer,  and  on  Lady  Mount  Edgcumbe.  In  the  even- 
ing on  Lady  Elizabeth  Foster. 

Sunday,  7th. — Went  with  Barrois  to  the  Pantheon.  The 
whole  bas-relievos  of  the  faqade  have  been  altered  from 
those  of  St.  Genevieve  to  emblems  of  liberty,  and  between 
the  six  large  columns  which  support  the  pediment,  are 
four  colossal  figures  in  plaster,  meant  as  models  to  be 
executed  in  marble,  of  Strength,  Genius,  the  Eepublic, 
and  another  figure  which  I  did  not  make  out.  The 


*  Francois  Gerard,  born  at  Rome  in  1770,  in  the  house  of  Cardinal  de 
Bernis,  his  father  a  Frenchman,  and  his  mother  an  Italian.  His  first  works 
were  exhibited  in  1795.  He  was  considered  as  the  rival  of  David,  and  held 
in  the  highest  estimation  in  France  as  a  portrait  and  historical  painter. 
Died  1837. 


1802]  THE    PANTHEOX.  203 

inside,  while  intended  for  a  church,  was  never  finished. 
It  is  a  Greek  cross  of  very  fine  proportions.  Each 
division  of  the  cross  would  have  made  a  very  beautiful 
modern  church.  One  of  the  great  piers  which  support 
the  cupulo  had  given  way  (I  think  before  the  Revolu- 
tion), and  the  whole  arch  between  pier  and  pier  is  now 
filled  up  with  a  great  charpente  to  support  it.  In  the 
lower  church,  or  what  in  a  Gothic  church  one  should 
call  the  crypt,  supported  by  Tuscan  columns  without 
bases,  are  the  tombs,  or  rather  cenotaphs,  of  Voltaire  *  on 
one  side,  and  Eousseau  on  the  other.  In  the  middle  had 
been  placed  Marat,  but  no  trace  of  him  now  remained. 
They  are  both  enormous  sarcophagi,  of  plaster  or  wood 
columns  like  red  granite,  in  which  I  suppose  they  are 
intended  (ad  Grcecas  kalendas]  to  be  executed.  On  Vol- 
taire's are  inscriptions  on  every  side,  telling  what  he  did 
pour  .1' esprit  humain.  On  Rousseau  is  only  written  on 
both  sides  '  A  1'Homme  de  la  Nature.'  From  the  Pantheon 
we  walked  through  the  Luxembourg  garden,  great  part 
of  which  has  been  newly  planted,  and  is  one  of  the  finest 
public  gardens  in  the  middle  of  a  large  town  that  can 
possibly  be  seen.  The  Luxembourg  palace  too  has  been 
whitened  and  refreshed  since  it  was  the  palace  of  the 
Directory.  It  is  now  that  of  the  Conservative  Senate,  and 
some  of  them,  I  understand,  have  apartments  there,  and 
charming  they  must  be.  In  the  evening  to  the  Theatre 
Feydeau.  In  the  '  Concert  Interrompu '  and  '  Le  Calif  de 
Bagdat '  f  Ellevieu  J  acted.  He  has  a  good  voice,  and  is 

*  On  the  tomb  of  Voltaire  are  the  following  inscriptions  : — '  Poete,  his- 
torien,  philosophe,  il  aggrandit  I'esprit  humain,  il  lui  apprit  qu'il  devoit  etre 
libre.'  '  II  de"fendit  Galas,  Serven,  de  la  Barre,  et  Montbuilly.'  '  II  combattit 
lea  Athe"es  et  les  fanatiques,  inspira  la  tolerance  et  reclama  les  droits  de 
1'homme  contre  la  servitude  et  la  fe"odaliteV  The  remains  of  Voltaire  and 
of  Rousseau  were  removed  to  the  Pantheon  during  the  first  Revolution,  but 
were  secretly  taken  away  during  the  Restoration. — Galignanfs  Paris  Guide. 

t  By  St.  Just. 

J  Ellevieu,  born  1770,  became  so  popular  an  actor,  that  he  gave  his  name 


204  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1802 

by  far  the  genteelest  actor  I  have  seen  upon  the  French 
stage  of  late  years.  Madame  du  Gazon  acted  the  mother 
in  the  '  Calif  .de  Bagdat,'  and  though,  as  the  French  say 
of  her,  '  c'est  une  ruine  que  le  temps  n'a  pas  respectee,' 
she  acted  so  well,  that  she  made  something  of  what  would 
otherwise  have  been  nothing.  The  house  was  very  full, 
as  ah1  the  theatres  generally  are  on  Sunday,  and  the 
parterre  very  noisy.  They  were  somehow  or  other  (I 
never  could  make  out  why)  particularly  diverted  with  a 
shawl  and  a  fur  tippet  hanging  over  the  side  of  a  box  on 
the  same  row  in  which  we  were,  full  of  English  people. 
This  shawl  and  fur  tippet  were  pulled  in  and  put  over 
again,  always  to  the  redoubled  amusement  of  the  parterre, 
who  all  talked,  and  laughed,  and  roared  at  once  to  the 
box,  and  this  lasted  at  two  or  three  different  reprises  for 
above  half  an  hour.  The  quiet  better  sort  of  people  in 
the  galerie  under  our  box  were  shocked  at  the  behaviour 
of  the  pit. 

Tuesday,  9th.  —  In  the  morning  at  the  Musee.  In 
the  evening  at  the  French  theatre  to  see  Mdlle.  Du- 
chenois,*  debutante  in  '  Phedre,'  who  has  appeared  in  a 
variety  of  characters  in  tragedy  this  autumn  with  the 
greatest  success.  She  is  a  tall,  very  plain  young  woman, 
and  has  not  yet  acquired  (if  she  ever  is  to  acquire)  grace 


to  a  certain  number  of  characters,  and  it  was  said  of  other  actors  '  on  debute 
dans  les  Ellevieu/  or  '  on  etude,  on  joue  les  Ellevieu.' — Diet,  de  Contem- 
porains. 

*  Catherine  Josephine  Duchenois,  whose  real  name  was  Rafin,  born  near 
Valenciennes  in  1786.  The  effect  produced  on  her  mind  at  eight  years  old 
by  the  acting  of  Mdlle.  Raucourt  determined  her  future  profession.  At 
thirteen  she  appeared  at  Valenciennes,  in  the  character  of  Palmiras  in  '  Ma- 
homet,' acted  for  a  charity,  astonishing  the  audience  with  her  dramatic 
power.  On  the  21st  July,  1802,  she  made  her  debut  at  the  Theatre  Francais 
in  the  character  of  Phedre,  and  never  lost  the  favour  of  the  public.  In  her 
last  moments  she  was  attended  by  the  Archbishop  of  Paris,  a  circumstance 
without  example  in  the  annals  of  the  French  stage.  She  died  1835,  and  is 
buried  near  Talma,  in  the  cemetery  of  Pere  la  Chaise. — Diet,  des  Contempo- 
rains,  and  Rose's  Biography. 


18C2]  MADEMOISELLE    DUCHENOIS.  205 

and  action.  Moreover,  she  has  an  inexpressive  counte- 
nance. Yet  with  all  this,  she  is  certainly  a  good,  though 
an  unequal  actress.  She  enters  thoroughly  into  the 
spirit  of  her  part,  seems  to  understand  it,  and  has  often 
admirable  touches  of  nature,  which  the  French  begin  to 
admire,  even  in  that  least  natural  of  all  compositions — 
a  French  tragedy.  With  Mdlle.  Duchenois  they  are 
enchanted.  As  soon  as  the  curtain  dropped,  a  crown  of 
laurel  was  thrown  upon  the  stage  from  some  upper  box. 
The  parterre  then  insisted  upon  the  actress  making  her 
appearance,  which  she  did,  still  in  her  stage  dress,  for  an 
instant  at  the  back  of  the  stage,  and  made  her  bows  to 
the  audience.  Still  they  were  not  satisfied.  The  second 
piece  was  attempted  to  be  begun.  They  obliged  the 
actors  to  retire.  At  last,  upon  reiterated  noise  and  con- 
fusion, a  manager,  or  director  of  some  sort,  came  forward, 
and  said : — '  Messieurs,  si  c'est  la  lecture  des  vers  que 
vous  desirez,  vous  me  permettrez  de  vous  observer  que 
nous  Favons  en  commande  de  ne  jamais  lire  des  vers  quel- 
conques  sur  le  theatre.'  This  message  was  well  received. 
The  verses  alluded  to  were  some -fastened  to  the  crown 
of  laurel.  But  the,  noise  still  continuing,  the  actress 
again  appeared  at  the  back  of  the  stage,  her  stage-dress 
off,  and  led  in  by  the  manager.  She  again  made  her 
bow,  and  again  retired.  Still  the  noise  continued,  and 
the  farce  was  again  in  vain  attempted.  The  audience 
wanted  to  see  the  actress  crowned  by  her  companions. 
At  last,  after  this  violent  noise  and  bustle  had  lasted  I 
know  not  how  long,  the  actress  a  third  time  appeared  at 
the  back  of  the  stage,  led  in  by  the  same  man,  who  put 
the  crown  upon  her  head,  which  she  instantly  and  very 
modestly  pulled  off,  and  disappeared.  The  noise  then 
ceased,  and  the  second  piece  was  allowed  to  begin.  It 
is  remarkable  that  now  that  the  theatres  at  Paris  have  no 
longer,  as  formerly,  soldiers  in  the  parterre  to  keep 
everything  quiet,  that  though  they  often  make  a  great 


206  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1802 

noise  in  a  body  about  the  entertainment,  an  actor  or 
actress,  &c.  &c.,  yet  they  maintain  a  better  police  than 
ever  they  had  before,  in  allowing  nobody  to  talk  too 
loud,  or  to  disturb  in  any  way  the  performance. 

Wednesday,  10th. — Left  Paris.  The  Forest  of  Fontaine- 
bleau,  with  all  the  beech  trees  turned  into  gold  by  the 
season,  and  all  its  birch  trees  still  in  leaf,  hanging  over 
those  odd  masses  of  rock,  was  beautiful  beyond  ex- 
pression. 

Thursday,  llth. — Left  Villeneuve.  At  Sens  is  a  fine 
church  (where  the  last  king's  father  and  mother  were 
buried),  the  outside  of  which  does  not  seem  much  de- 
grade. 

At  Joigny,  upon  the  stone  bridge  which  crosses  the 
river,  is  a  wooden  arc  de  triomphe,  with  a  plaster  bust  of 
Buonaparte  upon  it,  with  this  inscription :  '  Au  Eesto- 
rateur  de  la  Paix,  le  Peuple  reconnaissant ; '  I  suppose, 
erected  at  the  time  of  his  journey  to  Lyons,  when  he  must 
have  passed  through  Joigny.  All  the  little  towns  upon 
this  day's  journey  have  those  sort  of  picturesque  old  gates 
which  one  sees  so  often  represented  in  Sylvesties'  prints. 
Beached  Auxerre.  . 

Friday,  \%th. — Between  Vermanton  and  Lucy  les  Bois 
passed  a  large  abbaye,  with  the  church  entirely  pulled 
down  to  the  fagade.  At  five  o'clock,  on  a  very  rainy 
foggy  November  night,  we  found  ourselves  only  at  Kou- 
vray,  a  poor  village,  where  we  determined  to  stay.  The 
inn  was  one  of  those  large,  cold  barns  of  houses,  with 
half-a-dozen  beds  in  each  room,  and  a  great  open  smoking 
chimney. 

Saturday,  13th. — Left  Eouvray.  In  this  day's  journey 
passed  a  good  deal  of  common,  the  first  I  have  seen  in 
France.  The  people  hereabout  look  very  wretched,  though 
there  are  many  little  scattered  cottages,  and  all  the  valleys 
much  enclosed  with  corn,  and  vines,  and  wood.  Arrived 
at  Autun  at  three  o'clock,  but  the  people  gave  us  so  bad 


180-2]  FKOM   AUTUN   TO    LYONS.  207 

an  account  of  the  two  intermediate  places  that  we  thought 
it  best  to  stay  where  we  were.  Autun  is  a  considerable 
town,  with  a  large  cathedral. 

Sunday,  \Mh. — The  road  from  Autun  to  Em  eland  con- 
tinues mountainous  till  reaching  the  great  plain  in  which 
Chalons  stands,  and  which  is  all  pasture  and  corn.  We 
slept  at  Tournus. 

Monday,  loth. — We  hoped  to  be  at  Lyons  between 
four  and  five  o'clock,  but  we  were  detained  at  St.  George 
de  Eenand  by  finding  postilions  and  no  horses,  and  at 
Ause  by  finding  neither  the  one  nor  the  other.  At  three 
different  posts  we  found  neither  the  master  nor  mistress 
at  home,  and  at  two  they  did  not  even  live  at  the  post : 
one  can  easily  suppose  what  frequent  vexation  and  delay 
this  must  occasion  to  travellers.  At  Ause  we  set  out  with 
four  wretched  sick  horses,  mounted  by  I  know  not  whom  ; 
before  the  long  montee  we  all  got  out  and  walked,  from 
the  impossibility  of  their  dragging  us  up.  At  Limonest 
again  no  horses.  These  delays  prevented  our  arriving  at 
Lyons  till  late.  At  Lyons  we  went  to  the  Hotel  de 
1'Europe,  which  was  formerly  the  house  of  an  individual 
of  large  fortune. 

Tuesday,  \§th. — It  rained  last  night,  and  continued  all 
this  day  without  a  moment's  intermission,  so  that,  how- 
ever curious  we  were  to  see  the  ravages  of  the  Kevolution 
upon  this  magnificent  city,  we  could  not  stir  out.  My 
father  found  out  a  Mr.  Fels,  a  little  Swiss  negotiant,  long 
settled  and  married  at  Lyons,  to  whom  we  had  been 
recommended  long  ago  when  we  were  first  here,  a  civil, 
little,  quiet,  intelligent  man,  who  came  to  us  in  the 
evening. 

Wednesday,  Ylth. — The  rain  continued  with  unceasing 
obstinacy,  but  we  were  so  afraid  of  leaving  Lyons 
without  seeing  anything  of  its  present  condition  that  we 
sent  for  a  hackney  coach,  and  after  going  with  Mr.  Fels 
to  two  or  three  shops,  drove  round  the  Place  de  Bellecour 


208  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1302 

and  along  the  Quai  du  Bhone.  Two  sides  of  the  Place 
de  Bellecour  are  reduced  to  a  heap  of  ruins,  and  bring 
forward,  instead  of  its  handsome  fagades,  the  fronts  of 
the  two  streets  that  ran  at  its  back.  Of  the  arsenal  upon 
the  bank  of  the  Saone  nothing  remains  but  the  outward 
walls,  and  in  many  parts  of  the  town  similar  ravages  are 
visible.  But  the  destruction  of  buildings  in  this  unfor- 
tunate city  is  nothing  and  not  worth  mentioning  in  com- 
parison to  the  destruction  of  men,  of  industry,  and  of 
commerce,  which  it  will  be  years  before  they  can  re- 
establish, if  ever.  It  is  impossible  to  walk  through  the 
streets  of  Lyons  and  not  be  struck  with  the  miserable 
appearance  of  the  greatest  part  of  the  people,  and  most 
especially  of  the  women,  nor  to  enter  their  shops  and 
magazines  without  being  struck  with  their  altered  and 

o  o 

reduced  state,  their  small  stock,  and  the  absence  of  all 
appearance  of  their  former  affluence.  The  whole  town 
seems  yet  terrassee  with  the  dreadful  blows  it  received ; 
and  careless,  volatile,  and  thoughtless  as  French  people 
are,  at  Lyons,  and  Lyons  only  it  is,  that  I  have  seen 
the  Eevolution  has  left  a  deep  and  lasting  impression  of 
horror  upon  the  minds  of  all  orders  of  people.  Well  it 
may  !  Such  particulars  of  horror  as  Fels  gave  us,  him- 
self having  been  eye-witness  to  such  as  one  had  before 
hoped  only  existed  in  exaggerated  accounts.  This  little 
quiet  man,  after  remaining  at  Lyons  on  account  of  the 
person  whom  he  has  since  married  much  longer  than  (as 
being  a  Swiss)  he  need,  was  at  last  obliged  to  seek  his 
personal  safety  by  concealment  in  a  village  near  Lyons, 
where  he  worked  for  six  weeks  as  a  journeyman  car- 
penter. All  those  young  men  who  had  taken  up  arms  to 
preserve  the  tranquillity  of  their  town  against  the  Terrorists 
were,  without  any  other  forme  de  proces  than  reading 
their  names,  shot,  and  all  the  older  men  who  were  of  the 
same  disposition  guillotined  by  dozens  in  a  day.  Two 
hundred  and  nine  of  the  young  ones  were  chained  to- 


1802]  DOWN  THE   RHOXE.  209 

gether  and  fired  at  with  grape  shot  in  the  Place  de  Belle- 
cour,  till  nothing  was  to  be  heard  but  the  cries  of  these 
miserable  people,  requesting  any  friendly  hand  to  put 
them  out  of  their  pain. 

*  Oh  Francia,  Francis,  vituperio  delle  grate  ! ' 

Thursday,  18^ — The  rain  had  at  last  ceased,  but  from 
the  bad  account  we  heard  of  the  roads  and  my  father's 
wishing  to  go  by  water,  we  determined  to  go  down  the 
Eh  one,  and  to  start  the  following  day.  We  took  a  long 
and  dirty  walk  in  the  streets  and  upon  the  quais.  Lyons 
is  certainly  a  most  beautifully  situated  town ;  the  views 
from  all  the  bridges  of  the  high  and  rocky  bank  of  the 
Saone,  covered  with  all  sorts  of  picturesque  stone  build- 
ings, intermixed  with  trees  and  vineyards,  surpasses  any- 
thing I  know  elsewhere.  The  streets  are  in  themselves 
very  narrow  and  nasty,  but  the  two  great  rivers  passing 
through  tj^e  town  prevent  it  from  being  close,  and  all  the 
quais  are  handsome. 

Friday,  19^. — We  went  on  board  our  boat  from  the 
Quai  du  Saone  at  seven  o'clock  in  the  morning,  with  the 
sun  breaking  through  a  fog  and  gilding  in  the  most  beau- 
tiful manner  in  the  world  the  buildings  and  the  banks  of 
the  river.  It  was  an  hour  before  we  got  clear  of  Lyons 
and  fairly  into  the  Ehone,  at  a  wooden  bridge  called  De 
la  Perrache,  just  below  the  confluence  of  the  two  streams. 
The  fog  cleared  away,  and  it  was  a  fine  sunny  day,  but 
between  eleven  and  twelve  a  wind  suddenly  rose  from 
the  south,  which  made  the  water  rough  and  retarded  the 
motion  of  our  loaded  bark.  Besides  the  carriage  on  board, 
it  had  what  they  call  a  chambre  ;  the  chambre  is  a  space 
covered  over  with  rough  boards  like  a  tilt,  and  a  piece  of 
gauze-like  canvass  thrown  over,  and  in  some  degree  keep- 
ing the  air  out ;  this  with  a  plank  put  all  round  by  way  of 
bench,  and  a  good  deal  of  straw  in  the  bottom  over  the 
loose  planks,  forms  the  whole  furniture  and  accoutrements 

VOL.  II.  P 


210  MISS  BEEEY'S  JOUBNAL.  [1802 

of  these  most  awkward  barks.  Nothing  but  their  being  in 
constant  use,  and  accidents  seldom  happening,  could  per- 
suade one  they  were  not  the  most  dangerous  of  all  convey- 
ances ;  but  they  never  attempt  to  cope  with  any  difficulties. 
The  moment  the  wind  blew  our  boatmen  pushed  to  shore, 
and  there  we  lay  till  between  two  and  three,  when  the 
wind  lowered ;  we  then  pushed  out,  but  we  had  hardly 
got  into  the  current  of  the  stream  before  we  found  the 
wind  as  high  as  ever,  and  again,  therefore,  came  to  the 
bank  on  the  other  side  of  the  river  near  Givors,  and 
opposite  a  little  wretched  sort  of  ale  or  wine-house,  used 
only  by  the  men  and  horses  who  drag  boats  up  the  river. 
It  was  now  three  o'clock,  and  no  appearance  of  the  wind 
lowering,  we  despatched  the  courier  to  Vienne  to  get  a 
carriage  of  some  sort  to  convey  us  thither.  My  father, 
tired  of  sitting  in  the  boat,  accompanied  the  courier  Gibaud, 
and  they  were  nearly  two  hours  and  a  half  getting  there  ; 
and  so  by  the  time  Gibaud  returned  to  us  in  the  cabriolet 
it  was  eight  o'clock,  an  excessively  dark  night  threatening 
hard  rain,  the  road  so  bad,  so  narrow,  and  so  near  the 
Ehone  that  he  had  walked  with  a  /allot  at  the  horses' 
heads  all  the  way.  We  therefore  resolved  to  remain 
quietly  in  the  coach  all  night,  and  to  send  Peter  in  the 
cabriolet  to  my  father  with  a  note.  We  lighted  our  lamps, 
ate  some  of  our  cold  provisions,  and  then  composed  our- 
selves for  the  night,  that  is  to  say,  resolved  two  of  us  to 
sleep  and  one  to  watch.  Gibaud  and  the  two  boatmen 
slept  upon  straw  in  the  chambre  of  the  boat.  It  rained 
most  part  of  the  night.  • 

Saturday,  2Qth.  —  We  all  slept  very  quietly  till  four 
o'clock  in  the  morning,  when,  it  being  perfectly  calm  and 
not  very  dark,  I  persuaded  the  men  to  set  out  again,  and 
we  arrived  at  Vienne  at  half-past  five,  long  before  it  was 
light.  One  of  the  coach  lanterns  lighted  us  to  the  inn 
near  the  waterside.  Here  we  woke  my  father,  who  had 
gone  late  to  bed,  and  passed  an  anxious  night,  as  Peter  and 


1802]  TAIN. — TOURNOX.  211 

the  cabriolet  had  never  arrived.  This  circumstance  began 
now  to  make  us  all  uneasy,  from  the  badness  of  the  road 
he  had  to  pass,  its  nearness  to  the  river,  and  the  extreme 
darkness  of  the  night.  As  soon  as  it  was  light  we  de- 
spatched a  postilion  to  look  for  him  :  the  postilion  returned 
about  eight,  and  relieved  us ;  he  had  found  the  cabriolet 
and  Peter.  The  night  had  been  so  dark  that  the  driver 
would  not  go  on,  and  they  had  stopped  at  some  little 
auberge.  About  nine  the  cabriolet  arrived,  but  why  the 
driver  would  not  start  earlier  this  morning  with  poor 
Peter,  who  was  up  at  four  o'clock,  his  entire  ignorance 
of  French  prevented  our  ever  knowing.  Vienne  is  most 
picturesque  from  the  water;  a  high  stone  quad  or  embank- 
ment to  the  river,  which  is  ascended  in  the  middle  and 
on  each  side  by  a  flight  of  steps  under  large  stone  arches. 
A  great  Gothic  cathedral,  rising  above  the  town,  and  moun- 
tains covered  with  vines  and  picturesque  buildings  rising 
again  above  that.  The  banks  of  the  Ehone  are  beautiful, 
well  peopled  from  Lyons  to  this  place,  and  yet  I  hope 
never  again  to  see  them  from  the  water.  St.  Vallier 
Tain  is  a  little  village  close  upon  the  Ehone,  with  the 
far-famed  hill  giving  its  name  to  the  Yin  de  rHermitage 
rising  close  behind  it ;  on  the  top  of  the  hill  is  a  small 
building  which  was  a  hermitage.  Opposite  Tain  is  a 
much  larger  town,  Tournon,  with  a  picturesque  old 
chateau  belonging  to  the  Prince  de  Soubise,*  and  now 
a  barrack  for  soldiers,  and  another  very  large  building, 
formerly  a  college  of  Jesuits,f  and  now  a  place  of  edu- 
cation, where  they  pay  about  40/.  a  year  (according  to 
the  information  of  our  boatmen).  Soon  after  we  landed 

*  The  old  castle  of  the  Counts  of  Tournon  and  Dues  de  Soubise  is  now 
converted  into  the  purposes  of  a  mairie,  tribunal,  and  a  prison. 

t  The  College  Royal,  originally  founded  by  the  Cardinal  de  Tournon,  a 
favourite  of  Francis  I.,  1542,  and  a  few  years  afterwards,  1561,  delivered 
over  to  the  Jesuits,  in  order  to  extirpate  the  seeds  of  Protestantism.  They 
maintained  their  post  here,  until  the  suppression  of  the  order  in  1766.  It 
next  became  an  6cole  militaire, — See  Murray's  Handbook. 

p2 


212  MISS  BEKRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1802 

at  Tain  it  blew  a  hurricane  from  the  south  and  rained 
most  part  of  the  night. 

Sunday,  21st — Up  early,  hoping  to  have  got  to  the 
Pont  St.  Esprit  to-night.  At  our  vilest  of  all  auberges 
the  people  of  the  house  squabbled  with  our  stupidest  of 
all  couriers  about  his  bed,  and  they  all  went  together  by 
the  ears  in  the  kitchen  below  with  a  noise  enough  to 
deafen  one,  which  prevented  our  going  to  bed  for  an 
hour,  and  recommenced  at  four  o'clock  in  the  morning. 
At  six  o'clock,  when  we  were  hoping  to  be  off,  the  wind 
and  rain  continued  so  violently  that  our  boatmen  said  it 
was  impossible.  We  felt  it  was  impossible  to  stay  where 
we  were,  and  therefore  set  out  to  reconnoitre  the  other 
inns.  The  Hotel  de  1' Assurance  had  been  the  house  of 
the  seigneur  of  the  village,  and  to  this  the  boatman 
objected,  saying  the  host  was  un  coquin,  and  qu'il  ne 
fallait  pas  aller  la.  It  was  a  large  melancholy  degarnie 
looking  house,  the  worse  for  the  signs  of  having  seen 
better  days,  and  a  very  bad-looking  host,  with  two  young 
girls  (his  daughters),  and  a  strange  ill-looking  man  who 
officiated  as  cook,  were  its  only  inhabitants.  But,  as  we 
found  an  apartment  of  three  rooms  opening  into  each 
other  and  shut  under  one  door,  we  ventured  to  remain 
there,  hoping  to  go  on  before  night.  But  the  wind  con- 
tinued high  in  our  teeth,  and  torrents  of  rain  fell,  so  that 
not  only  proceeding  further  was  out  of  the  question,  but 
we  literally  could  not  stir  out  of  our  melancholy  abode. 
We  opened  the  windows,  and,  when  the  rain  allowed  us 
to  see  anything,  sketched  the  Montagne  de  I'Hermitage 
from  our  windows.  At  night  I  made  Peter  sleep  in  my 
father's  room  with  his  pistols,  and  we  met  with  no  dis- 
turbance. The  beds  and  scanty  furniture  were  wretched. 

Monday,  22rcdL — At  last  we  left  Tain  at  seven  o'clock  in 
the  morning.  We  heard  with  regret  that  the  Duchess 
of  Cumberland's  boat  had  passed  us  about  half  an  hour 
before  we  set  out.  Thus  what  I  had  been  so  particularly 


1802]  AVIGNON.  213 

anxious  to  avoid,  knowing  the  inconvenience  it  would 
occasion  us,  these  delays,  and  the  roguery  of  our  boat- 
men's master,  who,  I  believe,  desired  them  not  to  get  be- 
fore the  boat  in  which  he  was  himself,  brought  to  pass  ; 
we  did  not  succeed  in  getting  to  the  Pont  St.  Esprit,  with 
good  light,  which  is  necessary  there  from  the  rapidity 
of  the  stream  under  its  arches.  Stopped,  therefore,  at 
Bourg  St.  Andiol,  a  little  village  on  the  same  side  of  the 
river,  about  four  o'clock ;  bad  as  the  inn  was,  we  were 
certainly  more  comfortable  than  at  Tain.  At  this  and  at 
all  these  little  towns  and  villages  upon  the  banks  of  the 
Ehone,  I  have  observed  a  large  cap  of  liberty  hoisted 
upon  the  end  of  a  high  Maypole,  or  on  a  church  steeple, 
or  some  other  height. 

Tuesday,  23rd. — The  banks  of  the  river  near  St.  Andiol 
low  and  not  interesting ;  the  Pont  St.  Esprit  and  its  town 
most  picturesque  from  the  water,  and  a  charming  view  of 
both  and  of  an  old  ruined  fortress  upon  a  hill.  On  each 
side  of  the  river,  between  the  Pont  St.  Esprit  and  Avignon, 
there  are  a  number  of  most  picturesque  ruined  castles,  and 
near  the  edge  of  the  water  some  fine  trees.  Arrived  at 
Avignon  :  a  fine  warm  November  day.  The  Duchess  of 
Cumberland's  boat  had  arrived  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour 
before  us.  and  she  had  not  yet  disembarked. 

Wednesday,  24£/i. — Walked  about  the  town :  it  looks 
much  the  worse  for  the  Eevolution.  The  people  look 
poorer,  the  shops  worse,  and  the  great  houses  shabby.  A 
most  beautiful  view  from  a  rock  in  the  middle  of  the 
town,  which  rises  abruptly  from  the  Ehone,  and  on  which 
was  situated  the  Legate's  palace,*  the  cathedral,f  and  the 
prison.  The  palace  is  totally  gutted,  the  cathedral  made 

*  Besides  what  it  suffered  at  the  Revolution,  this  edifice  was,  in  1814, 
made  the  receptacle  for  some  hundred  Spanish  prisoners.  It  has  lately 
undergone  repairs,  and  has  been  modernised  with  bad  effect. — See  Murray's 
Ilttntfbook. 

t  The  palace  of  the  Popes  is  now  degraded  into  a  barrack. 


214  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [iso-2 

a  ruin  (a  most  picturesque  one  it  is) ;  the  prison  remains, 
and  is  probably  more  inhabited  than  ever.  From  this 
height  is  to  be  seen  the  whole  town  below,  the  Ehone, 
and  the  Durance,  winding  for  many  miles  through  a  rich 
and  well-wooded  valley  bounded  by  fine  mountains  ;  the 
broken  bridge  of  Avignon,  and  the  fine  castle,  which  was 
a  convent  of  Benedictines,  upon  an  eminence  at  Villerieuve, 
on  the  opposite  bank  of  the  Ehone. 

Thursday,  2oth. — Finding  the  Durance  (a  post  and 
three-quarters  from  hence)  was  not  passable,  that  is  to 
say,  the  trail  (the  rope  and  pulley  from  two  poles)  was  not 
re-established,  and  the  sky  threatening  more  rain,  we  de- 
termined to  go  the  same  way  the  Duchess  of  Cumberland 
had  taken  the  day  before,  though  it  makes  a  difference 
of  no  less  than  five  posts  in  going  from  Avignon  to  Aix. 

Crossed  the  two  branches  of  the  Ehone  a  la  trail  with- 
out any  difficulty.  There  is  a  low  island  between  them, 
much  covered  with  trees,  which  had  been  all  under  water 
two  or  three  days  before,  and  consequently  this  passage 
of  the  Ehone  could  not  then  have  been  passable.  There 
is  a  rough  paved  road  across  the  island  from  the  one  boat 
to  the  other ;  a  high  montee  after  passing  Villeneuve,  all 
covered  with  olives  (the  first  we  have  seen),  and  from 
whence  there  is  a  fine  extensive  view.  It  is  well  for  us 
we  had  crossed  the  river,  for  it  rained  more  or  less  the 
whole  way  to  La  Foux  (the  little  village  opposite  Eemou- 
lin).  Determined  to  go  round  by  the  Pont  du  Orard, 
though  a  little  out  of  the  way,  but  well  worth  while,  for 
I  know  no  ruin  more  imposing  and  more  beautiful. 

Friday,  2Qth. — Left  La  Foux  at  seven  ;  they  would  not 
start  sooner,  pretending  the  roads  were  so  bad  they  must 
wait  for  daylight,  but  in  fact  because  the  posts  upon  this 
road  are  so  badly  served  that  there  are  only  horses  and 
men  enough  to  carry  the  mail,  and  that  travellers  can 
never  be  sure  of  getting  the  number  wanted.  For  about 
a  league,  near  the  banks  of  the  Ehone,  the  road  had  been 


1802]  FROM   BEAUCAIRE   TO   ORGOX.  215 

three  or  four  feet  deep  in  water  two  days  before,  and  had 
deposited  such  oceans  of  mud  and  water  and  sand,  that  in 
some  places  it  was  almost  up  to  the  naves  of  the  wheels. 
From  Beaucaire  to  Tarascon  the  Eh  one  is  crossed  over  a 
bridge  of  boats,  which  leads  to  a  causeway,  and  then  over 
another  bridge  of  boats,  all  of  which  are  dreadfully 
jumbling,  without  any  sort  of  railing,  and  would  be  posi- 
tively dangerous  in  the  dark.  At  Tarascon  we  arrived  by 
ten  o'clock.  Here  again  found  no  horses ;  they  were  to 
be  back  by  twelve  o'clock  :  we  waited  till  twelve,  till  one, 
till  past  two  before  they  came,  and  it  was  three  before 
they  were  ready  to  set  off  with  us.  When  we  saw  the 
road  we  could  not  wonder  at  the  delay :  for  the  first  hour 
we  went  continually  through  water,  sometimes  up  to  the 
horses'  knees,  sometimes  up  to  their  fetlocks,  but  con- 
tinually walking  through  water — the  road  and  the  whole 
flat  country  near  it  on  both  sides  had  been  overflowed  by 
the  Ehone.  Arrived  at  St.  Eemy  with  the  last  rays  of 
light  :  it  is  a  good-looking  open  village,  with  large 
trees  in  the  street,  which,  after  the  little  stinking  walled 
towns  of  this  country,  is  remarkable. 

Saturday,  27th. — Orgon  is  a  walled  village,  beautifully 
situated  on  a  rock,  at  the  bottom  of  which  there  is  a  rich 
valley  watered  by  the  Durance.  The  road  here  bore 
ma^ks  of  having  been  overflowed,  as  well  as  all  the 
adjacent  fields,  by  the  river,  which  the  people  of  the 
country  call  tres  mediant,  as  it  loads  their  fields  with 
nothing  but  gravel  and  stones,  while  the  Ehone  often 
fattens  them  with  mud.  The  whole  country  hereabout 
js  undone  with  the  quantity  of  rain  they  have  had  within 
this  last  month,  after  a  long  drought  of  nearly  seven 
months.  Between  Orgon  and  Pontroyal  the  road  is 
scarcely  passable  at  a  footpace,  and  portions  of  the  road 
entirely  impassable  between  Pontroyal  and  St.  Canat. 
At  this  place  the  postilions  are  obliged  to  drive  out  of 
the  road  into  the  fields ;  and  a  great  deal  of  rain  having 


216  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1802 

fallen  just  before  we  passed,  in  one  of  these  drivings  off 
and  on  the  road,  our  carriage  stuck  entirely  fast  up  to  the 
nave  of  the  wheels  in  stiff  mud,  the  middle  having  hit 
upon  the  root  of  an  olive  tree.  We  all  got  out,  and  we 
soon  found  it  was  vain  for  the  postilions  and  their  horses 
to  endeavour  to  move  it :  in  the  first  attempt  they  made 
they  cracked  the  pole.  Agnes  and  I  therefore  trotted 
away  as  hard  as  we  could  to  the  village,  luckily  not  above 
a  mile  and  a  quarter  off,  for  the  road  was  monstrously 
muddy,  and  it  rained  hard  before  we  got  half  way  there. 
We  immediately  took  possession  of  a  very  miserable  little 
inn,  sending  fresh  post-horses  back  to  the  carriage  to  help 
it  out  of  its  scrape  ;  in  the  meantime  a  muleteer  passing 
with  a  couple  of  mules  had  done  the  business.  The 
carriage  arrived  an  hour  after  ourselves :  the  cracked  pole 
had  to  be  mended.  It  rained  hard,  and  we  determined 
to  stay  here  at  St.  Carnal  all  night. 

Sunday,  28th. — Arrived  at  Aix ;  the  road  so  bad  that 
we  were  obliged  to  walk  the  horses  the  whole  way. 
Country  very  pretty.  Aix,  like  all  the  rest  in  the  southern 
part  of  France,  bears  melancholy  marks  of  the  neglect 
and  poverty  into  which  it  has  fallen  during  the  Eevolu- 
tion  :  the  pavement  is  so  neglected  that  a  carriage  would 
with  difficulty  get  along  some  of  the  narrow  streets ;  many 
of  the  handsome  houses  are  quite  untenanted,  and  others 
look  quite  neglected,  their  proprietors  (where  they  still 
exist)  living  only  in  a  corner  of  them.  We  had  a  letter  to 
M.  d'Albertas,  possessing  one  of  these  houses,  and  who,  not 
having  emigrated,  still  possesses  all  they  have  chosen  to 
leave  him  of  his  fortune.  His  account  of  the  situation  of 
all  the  upper  order  of  people  in  the  provincial  towns  most 
melancholy :  they  live  chacun  de  son  cote  as  they  can, 
but  sociability  and  comfort  seem  banished  from  among 
them.  The  prefets  and  sous-prefets  who  are  appointed 
to  the  governments  of  the  departments  are  for  the  most 
part  low,  and  all  of  them  poor,  and  think  of  nothing  but 


1802]  FROM  AIX   TO   TOURVES.  217 

enriching  themselves  while  they  can,  and  neglect  in  the 
most  shameful  manner  the  districts  they  are  appointed  to 
look  after ;  thus  roads  and  bridges  and  towns  are  all 
degraded,  and  nothing  done  to  repair  the  neglect  and  the 
ravages  of  ten  years'  Vandalism. 

Monday,  2$th. — We  heard  so  bad  an  account  of  the 
roads  to  Nice,  that  we  sent  our  trunks  by  a  carrier  to 
lighten  the  stress  upon  the  carriage. 

Tuesday,  30th. — The  road  from  Aix  to  La  Grande 
Pugere  very  picturesque  and  beautiful ;  but  from  thence 
to  Tourves  (two  posts  and  a  half)  so  excessively  bad  in 
the  way  of  mud,  of  stones,  and  of  holes,  that  we  walked 
above  half  the  way ;  and,  I  believe,  the  carriage  would 
never  have  passed  some  of  the  mauvais  pas  but  for  the 
aid  of  soldiers,  who,  being  quartered  all  over  the  country 
for  the  surety  of  the  roads,  accompanied  us  from  one  of 
their  posts  to  another,  and  supported  the  carriage  and 
helped  it  forward  in  any  difficulty.  When  at  last  we  got 
to  Tourves*  it  was  four  o'clock,  and  beginning  to  rain. 
We  were  so  heartily  tired,  corps  et  ame,  with  the  road 
we  had  gone  through,  and  the  thoughts  of  what  remained 
to  us,  that  we  put  up  for  the  night  at  the  very  dirtiest 
Cheval  Blanc  that  I  ever  encountered,  and  where  I  was 
kept  awake  the  whole  night  by  a  storm  of  wind  and  vio- 
lent rain  beating  at  the  window,  every  drop  of  which  I 
knew  would  count  against  us  on  the  road  next  day. 

Wednesday,  December  1st. — Left  Tourves,  the  most 
miserable  village  I  have  yet  seen,  at  half  past  six.  Having 
found  how  useful  the  soldiers  were,  we  took  a  party  of 
four  with  us  from  this  place,  and  continued  so  to  do 
during  the  whole  route.  There  was  no  difficulty  in  this, 
as  we  found  them  at  every  change  of  horses,  and  they 
have  lately  been  accustomed  to  this  business,  and  are  very 

*  Tourves,  a  wretched  town  of  2,800  inhabitants  in  the  Dtipartement  de 
Var.     No  inn. — Vide  Murray's  Handbook. 


218  MISS  BEKRY'S  JOURNAL.  [iso-2 

serviceable.  When  we  arrived  at  Brignolles  by  ten  o'clock, 
the  postmaster  told  us  we  should  find  a  little  torrent 
between  that  and  Flassans,  so  swelled  by  the  last  night's 
rain  as  to  be  impassable  for  several  hours.  Perhaps  his 
advice  might  be  somewhat  influenced  by  wishing  to  detain 
us.  But  we  resolved  to  stay  here  for  the  day.  It  was 
well  we  did. 

Thursday,  2nd.  —  Left  Brignolles  at  seven  o'clock. 
Very  fine  morning.  We  had  our  side-saddle  put  on  a 
bidet  of  the  poste,  and  rode  and  walked  alternately  the 
whole  way  to  Flassans.  Being  in  the  carriage  was  out 
of  the  question,  for  after  the  first  half  league  the  road  was 
one  continued  broken-up  pavement,  or  rather  heap  of 
rocks, — how  any  carriage  gets  over  it,  I  have  no  idea. 
From  Flassans  to  Luc  we  continued  to  ride  and  walk. 
The  day  was  delicious,  the  country  beautiful,  and  had  it 
not  been  for  the  worry  of  having  a  carriage  that  one 
expected  to  see  broken  every  moment,  I  should  have 
thought  the  journey  delightful.  On  leaving  Luc  the  road 
passes  through  a  wood  of  olives,  with  a  high  mountain 
on  the  left  crowned  by  a  romantic  village  and  a  castle 
belonging  to  a  M.  de  Corbel  (or  some  such  name),  who 
possessed  a  large  estate  around  it.  The  castle  was  made 
an  entire  ruin,  and  the  property  taken  from  him,  in  the 
Eevolution.  The  postilion,  my  informer,  added  that  he 
had  returned  into  the  country,  and  had  got  back  some 
small  part  of  his  estate.  Beautiful  hills  just  before  enter- 
ing Vedauban,  covered  with  pines  and  evergreen  oaks, 
which,  in  a  sunny  day  like  this,  makes  one  entirely  forget 
winter. 

Friday,  3rd. — We  left  Vedauban  at  six,  in  a  drizzling 
rain,  continuing  more  or  less  the  whole  way  to  Muy, 
nearly  half  of  which  we  rode  and  walked.  From  Muy 
to  Frejus  the  road  had  been  described  as  very  bad  and 
difficult,  and  it  justified  its  reputation,  for  worse  to  be 
passable  at  all,  I  never  saw.  A  stone  bridge  having  been 


1802]  FREJUS.  219 

carried  away,  the  carriage  was  obliged  to  make  a  detour 
of  above  a  league  across  the  country.  We  walked  and 
rode  almost  the  whole  way  to  a  village  within  a  league 
of  Frejus,  from  whence  the  carriage  was  to  turn  off  the 
road ;  and  here,  taking  one  of  our  escort  of  soldiers  to 
show  us  the  way,  my  father,  my  sister,  myself,  and  Peter, 
by  the  advice  of  our  postilions,  proceeded  to  Frejus  on 
foot.  The  road  we  had  to  go  was,  they  said,  a  short 
league.  When  we  came  to  the  broken  bridge,  we  were 
obliged  to  leave  the  road  and  pass  along  a  bank  with 
water  on  each  side,  so  narrow  and  so  slippery  with  the 
rain,  that  it  was  with  great  difficulty,  and  with  laying 
hold  of  the  bushes  or  trees  on  one  side  of  the  bank,  that 
we  kept  our  feet  at  all ;  added  to  which,  at  certain  dis- 
tances, we  had  to  pass  over  a  sort  of  heads,  made  to  keep 
back  a  strong  stream  of  water  which  was  running  below 
our  bank  on  the  right  hand  from  flowing  into  the  fields 
on  our  left.  These  heads  were  certainly  not  more  than 
twelve  inches  wide,  and  the  water  was  on  both  sides  of 
them  !  How  I  passed  I  know  not,  except  that  I  knew  I 
could  not  remain  where  I  was,  and  that  it  rained  hard, 
and  that  we  were  wet  through  shoes  and  boots.  In  some- 
thing less  than  an  hour  we  arrived  at  Frejus,  the  inn, 
luckily,  near  the  gate  of  the  town.  We  were  soon  com- 
fortable again,  and  the  more  so,  that  the  carriage  arrived 
safe,  and  sooner  than  we  expected.  Frejus  is  a  wretched- 
looking  old  town,  with  an  old  ruined  gate  to  it,  and 
situated  about  half  a  mile  from  the  sea  as  the  bird  flies. 

Saturday,  kth. — Here  we  had  intended  to  embark  our 
carriage  to  avoid  all  further  risk  on  these  impassable 
roads ;  and  this  can  only  be  done  at  San  Eafaelle,*  a  little 
village  upon  the  edge  of  the  sea  about  a  mile  from  Frejus  ; 
but  there  were  no  tolerably-sized  vessels,  no  quay,  nor  con- 

*  Napoleon  landed  at  this  small  port  1799,  on  his  return  from  Egypt,  and 
embarked  hence,  1814,  for  Elba.   This  is  the  birthplace  of  the  Abbe"  Sieyes. 

Murray's  Handbook. 


220  MISS  BERET'S  JOURNAL.  [isoa 

venience  for  embarking  anything.  So,  finding  the  Duchess 
of  Cumberland's  two  coaches  had  safely  passed  the  moun- 
tain two  days  before,  we  determined  to  venture  also. 
Walked  to  Frejus.  Just  without  the  town  on  the  Aix  side, 
a  very  complete  ruin  of  a  Eoman  amphitheatre,*  the  upper 
rows  of  arches  only  being  entirely  destroyed.  On  the  other 
side  of  the  town  are  great  remains  of  an  aqueduct,f  which 
brought  the  water  from  the  mountains,  and  is  very  pic- 
turesque in  the  landscape.  Frejus,  like  all  the  other 
towns  in  the  South  of  France,  having  had  its  convents,  its 
seminaries,  and  its  public  buildings  destroyed  or  shut  up, 
its  pavement,  streets,  &c.,  entirely  neglected,  and  its  inha- 
bitants reduced,  exhibits  an  appearance  of  wretchedness 
unknown  in  former,  and,  perhaps,  worse  times. 

Sunday,  5th. — The  morning  threatened  rain,  but  tired 
with  the  delays  of  our  journey,  and  knowing  that  every 
drop  that  fell  would  make  the  rest  of  it  more  difficult,  we 
ventured  to  start  early.  The  road  flat  for  about  a  league 
before  ascending  the  Estrelles  Mountains.  It  has  been  a 
well-made  mountain  road,  as  it  winds  round  several  hills 
and  was  not  very  steep  ;  but  ten  years'  neglect,  and  the 
degdt  which  mountain  rains  always  make,  have  in  many 
places  rendered  it  hardly  passable.  In  some  places  no- 
thing but  having  men  to  support  the  carriage  would  have 
prevented  it  from  overturning.  The  hills  are  everywhere 
green  with  pines  and  rich  underwood  of  a  thousand  beau- 
tiful shrubs,  such  as  arbutus  loaded  with  fruit  and  flowers, 
cistus,  myrtles,  and  a  variety  of  heaths,  all  growing  per- 
fectly wild,  but  no  houses  or  huts,  or  marks  of  habita- 
tion near,  not  even  distant  villages  upon  neighbouring 

*  Outside  the  walls  of  this  small  and  dirty  town,  of  less  than  3,000  inha- 
bitants, is  the  once-celebrated  Forum  Julii,  founded  by  Caesar ;  on  the  west 
are  the  remains  of  a  small  circus,  recently  cleared  out,  far  inferior  in  size 
and  preservation  to  those  of  Nismes  and  Aries. — See  Murray1 8  Handbook. 

t  The  most  considerable  Roman  remains  here  are  those  of  an  aqueduct ; 
it  has  been  traced  for  more  than  twenty-four  miles  up  the  valley  of  the 
Ciagne,  whose  clear  water  it  conveyed  to  the  town. 


1302]  CANNES.  221 

hills.  The  post,  upon  the  descent  of  the  mountain,  is  a 
single  desolate-looking  house,  but  surrounded  by  magni- 
ficent chestnut  trees.  Everybody  avoids  sleeping  there, 
the  accommodations  are  so  wretched.  It  was  occupied 
by  the  French  soldiers — a  sergeant's  guard  of  foot  and 
three  gendarmes  on  horseback.  We  took  with  us  no  less 
than  seven  men  and  a  corporal  to  help  us  on  the  road, 
and,  Heaven  knows  !  they  were  no  more  than  necessary  at 
the  broken  bridges.  The  descent  of  the  Estrelle,  I  under- 
stand, was  always  rough ;  it  is  now  nothing  better  than 
a  heap  of  rocks,  over  which  by  habit  the  horses  pass,  and 
by  chance  may  pull  a  light  carriage  after  them  without 
breaking  it,  and  this  was  luckily  the  case  with  ours ;  but  in 
many  parts  we  could  not  even  ride,  but  got  off  and  led  or 
drove  on  our  horses.  On  reaching  the  bottom  of  the  hill 
we  got  into  a  sort  of  marshy  bed  of  a  small  river,  which, 
like  all  the  rest,  has  overrun.  Arrived  at  Cannes,*  a  town, 
or  rather  open  village,  prettily  situated  upon  the  sea-shore, 
with  fine  wooded  hills  rising  behind  it.  The  inn,  a  little 
new-built  place,  so  immediately  upon  the  sea  that  its  noise 
kept  me  awake.  L'Isle  de  St.  Marguerite,f  to  be  seen  from 
the  descent  of  the  Estrelles,  seems  here  close  by,  and  is, 
I  believe,  not  above  a  league  and  a  half  from  the  nearest 
part  of  the  shore.  It  is  a  picturesque  object  with  its  castle 
and  a  number  of  flat-topped  pines,  which  look  actually 
growing  out  of  the  sea.  In  spite  of  being  a  good  deal 
tired  with  our  day's  journey,  and  our  little  inn  chimney 
smoking  abominably,  I  could  enjoy  from  the  window  a 
brilliant  red  sun,  setting  in  the  Mediterranean  and  colour- 
ing all  the  objects  near  the  horizon  with  that  purple  and 
blue  peculiar  to  the  South  of  France. 

*  Napoleon  landed  from  Elba  1£  miles  east  of  Cannes,  in  March  1815, 
with  an  army  of  500  grenadier  guards,  200  dragoons,  and  100  lancers  with- 
out horses. — Murray's  Handbook. 

t  In  one  of  the  group  of  two  isles  called  Le"rins,  is  a  fort,  once  a  state 
prison,  where  the 'Man  in  the  Iron  Mask'  was  imprisoned  (1686-1698). 
The  dungeon  in  which  he  was  confined  is  still  pointed  out. — Ibid. 


222  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1802 

Monday ',  5#A. — Left  Cannes  very  early.  The  road, 
though  good  through  the  village  along  the  coast,  when 
flat  and  sandy  and  requiring  no  repair,  soon  became  too 
bad  to  remain  in  the  carriage.  At  every  little  ascent  from 
the  level  of  the  sea,  the  rain  had  made  gullies  that  had 
as  usual  carried  away  half  the  road,  and  in  other  places 
it  passed  over  rocks  ;  but  while  I  live  I  never  can  forget 
the  charm  of  my  walk  about  seven  o'clock  this  morning, 
with  the  same  clear,  glorious  sun  of  the  night  before 
rising  again  out  of  the  sea,  giving  the  most  vivid  colours 
to  the  beautiful  vegetation  covering  the  rocks  on  which  we 
were  walking,  and  lighting  up  with  the  most  exquisite 
roseate  hue  the  sunny  side  of  the  distant  snow-covered 
mountains  of  the  Col  de  Tende.  This  scene,  the  freshness 
of  the  morning,  the  beauty  of  the  plants,  the  colour  and 
sound  of  the  Mediterranean,  gently  lashing  against  the 
rocks  below  me — however  ill  I  describe  it — will  remain 
for  ever  on  my  mind,  and  has  added  one  to  my,  alas ! 
too  small  stock  of  agreeable  recollections.  The  whole 
road  from  Cannes  to  Antibes  is  charming.  On  descend- 
ing an  eminence  towards  Antibes,  one  sees,  at  the  same 
time,  Nice  on  the  other  side  of  a  beautiful  bay,  backed 
by  its  wooded  hills,  white  villas,  and  high  mountains. 
Antibes  is  a  regular  fortified  town  upon  a  promontory 
which  forms  one  side  of  the  bay.  The  inside  of  the  town, 
like  the  others — narrow  streets,  with  all  the  best  houses 
ruined.  As  it  is  no  longer  a  frontier  town,  there  are  few 
soldiers  here.  From  Antibes  to  Nice  is  four  posts  round 
this  beautiful  bay.  The  road  for  the  most  part  flat,  and 
fortunately  not  requiring  much  attention,  for  it  has  been 
just  as  much  neglected  as  ah1  the  rest.  About  a  league 
from  Nice  is  the  wide  and  stony  bed  of  the  Var,  a  great 
mountain  torrent  running  in  I  know  not  how  many 
streams  to  the  sea.  At  the  beginning  of  the  Eevolution, 
the  French  built  a  wooden  bridge  over  this  to  facilitate 
the  passage  of  their  troops.  It  was  a  work  of  no  great 


1802]  FROM   ANTIBES   TO   NICE.  223 

difficulty,  and  certainly  of  great  use,  but  it  was  done  in  a 
prodigious  hurry,  with  wood  cut  down  in  a  forest  close 
by,  and  used  immediately.  Little  wonder,  therefore,  that 
the  violent  rains  of  this  last  month,  and  the  very  violent 
storm  of  wind  and  rain  (which  detained  us  on  the  Khone 
the  21st  of  November),  broke  it  down  in  two  or  three 
places.  Eepairing  it,  or  anything  else,  is  now  out  of  the 
question,  though  this  is  talked  of,  which  is  more  than  can 
be  said  of  the  roads.  Within  this  week  three  planks  have 
been  laid  over  the  broken  places,  upon  which  foot  passen- 
gers, with  steady  heads  (for  there  is  no  sort  of  rail  or 
guard  to  them)  may  pass,  and  upon  which  we  all  did 
pass,  each  taking  hold  of  a  man's  arm.  The  carriage  was 
obliged  to  go  down  nearer  the  sea  to  pass  where  the  cur- 
rents were  more  spread  and  shallow,  and  then  to  be 
dragged  over  loose  stones  and  shingles.  The  view  of 
Nice,  the  high  abrupt  rock  round  which  it  is  in  a  manner 
built,  its  long  faubourg  stretched  out  along  the  bank 
of  the  sea,  and  the  wooded  hills  behind  it,  looked  beauti- 
ful. At  last  the  carriage  arrived,  and  with  it  above  half- 
a-dozen  men,  with  poles  in  their  hands  and  barefooted. 
They  had  helped  to  pass  it  across  the  river,  and  not 
being  satisfied  with  the  courier's  offers  of  payment,  fol- 
lowed him  to  demand  more,  and  at  last  took  what  we 
offered.  We  continued  our  journey.  Entered  Nice  by 
tnis  long  scattered  faubourg  on  one  of  the  finest  days 
I  ever  saw.  Lodged  at  the  Hotel  de  York,  in  the  Place 
St.  Dominique. 

The  deep  impression  made  on  Miss  Berry's  mind  by  the 
walk  of  this  morning  and  the  wretched  night  at  Tourves, 
is  thus  spoken  of  by  her  many  years  afterwards  : — 

When  we  look  back  to  the  disagreeable  circumstance  in 
which  we  have  often  been  placed,  and  the  painful  sensa- 
tions to  which  we  have  often  been  exposed,  and  then  recol- 
lect how  many  comfortable  or,  at  least,  easy  hours  we 


224  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURXAL.  [1302 

have  passed  since,  when  the  memory  of  these  painful 
moments  have  been  entirely  obliterated,  it  ought  to 
be  a  great  motive  of  fortitude  and  patience  in  those  to 
come.  I  can  call  to  mind  a  night  passed  at  Tourves,  a 
miserable  village  between  Aix  and  Nice,  in  the  worst  inn 
I  ever  inhabited,  after  a  day  of  much  fatigue  on  the  worst 
road  I  ever  passed,  and  when  I  expected  every  minute  to 
see  our  carriage  broken  to  pieces ; — my  companions  both 
sadly  out  of  sorts  and  depressed  by  the  prospect  before 
them ;  myself  necessarily  uncertain  how  the  journey, 
when  once  accomplished,  would  turn  out  to  any  of  us.  I 
can  never  forget  arriving  at  this  wretched  inn,  in  a  still 
more  wretched  village,  on  a  melancholy  rainy  evening, 
the  30th  of  November  1802,  and  actually  lying  awake 
ah1  night,  in  spite  of  my  fatigue,  from  mere  vexation 
of  mind.  This  was  not  quieted  by  the  rain  beating  in  at 
my  window,  every  drop  of  which  I  knew  would  count 
against  us  in  our  next  day's  journey.  I  could  think  of 
nothing  cheerful,  nor  fancy  any  future  pleasure  ;  and  yet 
three  days  afterwards,  on  the  same  journey,  the  charms  of 
an  early  morning  walk,  between  seven  and  eight  o'clock, 
upon  the  rocky  edge  of  the  Mediterranean  between  Cannes 
and  Antibes, — the  sun  rising  unclouded  from  that  glorious 
sea,  and  tinging  the  distant  snowy  mountains  with  the 
most  beautiful  roseate  hue, — the  vivid  green  of  the  pines 
on  the  nearer  hills,  the  beauty  and  variety  of  the  vegetation 
immediately  above  me,  the  mild  freshness  of  the  morning 
air  in  the  middle  of  winter, — made  an  impression  on  my 
mind,  which  at  the  time  totally  obliterated,  and  is  certainly 
now  much  oftener  recalled  than,  the  remembrance  of  the 
night  passed  at  the  miserable  Cheval  Blanc  at  Tourves. 

NICE. 

Thursday,  Sth. — Saw  a  sort  of  bustle  in  the  Place  St. 
Dominique   from  our  windows,  and   three  coaches,  all 


1802]  NICE.  225 

voitures  de  remises,  came  out  of  our  inn,  and  drove  into 
the  Place ;  and  after  making  some  short  tour  in  the  town, 
the  first  coach,  with  two  gendarmes  on  horseback  trotting 
in  advance,  then  stopped  at  a  house  in  the  Place.  I 
enquired  what  this  might  mean,  and  found  that  the  house 
at  which  the  carriages  stopped  was  the  Mairie  ;  that  the 
mayor's  wife  had  lain  in,  and  that  the  carriage  preceded 
by  the  two  gendarmes  contained  the  prefet,  who  was 
going  to  stand  godfather  to  the  child.  I  saw  him  get  out 
in  his  prefet's  embroidered  coat,  and  he  was  shortly  after 
followed  into  the  house  by  a  number  of  trays  carried  by 
traiteurs,  which,  I  suppose,  contained  the  collation  that 
was  given  him.  This  was  between  four  and  five  o'clock. 
Before  six  o'clock,  the  same  three  carriages  proceeded  up 
another  street  to  some  church.  There  were  a  number  of 
little  ragged  boys  about  the  door,  who  shouted  when  the 
carriage  drove  off,  because  some  money  was  thrown  to 
them.  These  little  polissons,  a  few  idle  people  who  hap- 
pened to  be  upon  the  Place,  and  a  few  soldiers  from  the 
caserne  which  is  next  door,  were  the  only  spectators  of 
this  no  show.  And  this  was  all  the  ceremony  of  the  ma- 
gistrate of  one  of  their  principal  towns  going  in  state  to 
the  second  magistrate  !  This  will  not  do  :  oppressed  as 
the  towns  are,  more  than  ever  with  taxes,  their  public 
concerns  and  conveniences,  such  as  roads,  bridges,  and 
buildings  shamefully  neglected,  and  their  church  and  their 
nobles  having  nothing  to  assist  them,  they  have  not  even 
the  amusement  of  those  shows,  and  that  sort  of  public 
pomp,  of  which  everyone,  when  its  cost  did  not  fall 
immediately  upon  himself,  felt  proud,  and  which  served 
to  amuse  and  gratify  an  idle  people.  They  are  now  with- 
out their  old  amusements,  and  with  no  new  industry,  ten 
times  idler  than  ever. 

Tuesday,  14^. — Took  possession  of  our  house  in  the 
faubourg.  It  had  been  furnished  and  inhabited  by 
General  Morgan,  who  gave  it  up  to  us  on  our  paying  the 

VOL.  II.  Q 


226  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isoa 

rent  which  he  had  agreed  for,  viz.,  90Z.  till  the  1st  of  May. 
The  rent  was  enormous,  considering  the  house,  the  style 
of  its  furniture,  &c. 

The  following  letter,  addressed  to  Mrs.  Darner,  gives 
a  somewhat  more  detailed  account  of  the  Miss  Berrys' 
first  settling  at  Nice  for  the  winter. 

Nice,  Thursday,  16  Dec.,  1802. 

I  remember  your  telling  me  that  you  thought  you  should 
feel  comfortable  and  pleased  at  Strawberry  if  you  could  fancy 
me  quietly  settled,  or  taking  a  quiet  walk  at  Nice.  Be  comfort- 
able and  be  pleased  then,  dear  soul !  car  enfin  m*y  void.  After 
all  our  scruples  and  regrets  about  the  901. — and  mine,  I  assure 
you,  were  many, — we  have  been  obliged  to  give  it.  We  found 
we  were  eating  up  our  heads  (as  they  say  of  horses)  at  the 
hotel.  .  .  .  Everything  here  in  the  house  way  is  unfur- 
nished ;  the  people  always  offer  to  furnish  them  for  you,  but 
they  do  it  very  badly,  plague  you  to  death,  and  'tis  weeks  before 
you  can  get  into  them.  This  Gen1  and  Mrs.  Morgan  were  still 
willing  to  let  us  have  their  house.  .  .  .  Graces  a  ses  soins, 
this  is  much  better  furnished  than  any  other  house  here. 
Mrs.  M.'s  idea  was  to  make  it  as  like  an  uncomfortable 
English  house  as  she  could,  and  Agnes  and  I  have  had  a  world 
of  rummaging,  and  twisting,  and  twirling  all  the  things  about  to 
make  the  sitting-room  and  the  rest  of  the  house  look  comfort- 
able, and  I  think  at  last  we  are  very  well  lodged.  .  .  . 
The  Chev1  de  Chateauneuf,  to  whom  the  Dss  of  Devonshire  gave 
me  a  note,  is  not  here,  but  as  she  likewise  gave  me  the  name  of 
his  sister,  a  Mde  de  S*  Agathe,  I  sent  a  civil  note  to  her,  with  the 
Dss's  compliments,  &c.,  which  soon  brought  her  to  the  hotel ;  and 
she  turns  out  a  prettyish,  agreeableish  sort  of  a  young  woman, 
without  affectation,  and  apparently  not  without  cleverness,  and 
she  brought  a  Mons.  Eeynardi  and  her  belle  soeur,  and  two  other 
demoiselles  ;  in  short,  nous  void  faufilees  in  any  society  there 
is  at  Nice.  But  these  poor  people  have  been  all  emigres,  are 
but  lately  returned,  have  lost  more  than  the  half  of  the  little 
they  had,  and  can  do  nothing  for  anybody.  However,  we  shall 
like  their  society  sometimes,  if  we  can  get  them  to  come  to  us, 
which  I  suppose  in  time  they  will.  I  spend  my  mornings  most 


1802]  LETTER   FROM   MISS   BERRY.  227 

agreeably ;  the  beauties  of  this  place  rise  upon  me  every  mo- 
ment. I  really  think  that  for  one's  own  eating  (as  poor  Ld 
Orf.  said)  it  is  the  very  prettiest  place  I  ever  saw.  The  weather, 
for  the  most  part,  since  we  came  has  been  delicious ;  it  is  now 
cold,  that  is  to  say  in  the  early  morngs  and  eveng8,  for  in  the 
middle  of  the  day  nothing  but  the  almanac  calling  it  Decr  could 
possibly  persuade  me  it  was  anything  but  May.  I  am  so  glad 
to  find  that  tho'  my  enthusiasm  is  gone,  I  am  still  animal 
enough  to  feel  this,  '  in  ogni  fibro  il  sangue.'  I  continue  most 
comfortably  well.  .  .  .  Would  I  could  give  half  as  good  an 
account  of  the  other  poor  sick  souls !  for  Mrs.  Ellis  *  nothing 
more  can  be  done.  If  she  recovers  it  will  be  a  miracle ;  her  in- 
flammation baffles  all  attempts  to  reduce  it,  and  she  is  now  too 
weak  to  admit  of  any.  I  sat  with  Ld  Hervey  near  an  hour  yes- 
terday ;  and  he  seems  to  have  little  or  no  hope !  The  poor  Miss 
Francis,  too,  I  think  is  going  on  very  ill.  The  D88  of  Cumberland 
is,  they  say,  well  except  being  lame.  She  is  glad  to  see  any- 
body after  two  o'clock,  and  we  shall  go  some  of  these  days,  as  I 
suppose  she  will  like  to  see  all  the  English.  The  walks  here 
are  delicious,  and  I  am  going  to  get  an  ass's  legs  to  save  my  own. 
The  worst  of  the  place  is  everything  being  abominably  dear, 
which  makes  my  father  groan  and  think  it  less  pretty  than  he 
otherwise  would.  As  for  me,  I  am  very  sorry  we  cannot  save 
money  here,  but  am  resolved  at  least  to  enjoy  it  as  much  as  I 
can,  and  trust  to  you  and  Hoper  f  letting  Strawb.  well.  The  last 
part  of  our  journey  F  Avignon  here  cost  enormously,  f*  being  so 
long  about  it  and  having  an  escort,  and  our  baggage  carried, 
&c. ;  otherwise  my  calculation  of  2501.  for  the  journey  would 
hav )  been  considerably  within  the  mark. 

*  Elizabeth  Catherine  Caroline  Hervey,  only  daughter  of  Lord  Hervey 
and  Elizabeth  Drummond  of  Quebec,  married  Charles  Rose  Ellis,  Esq. 
(afterwards  Lord  Seaford)  ;  died  1803. 

f  Mr.  Hoper  is  frequently  mentioned  in  Miss  Berry's  journals  as  the  person 
on  whom  they  relied  for  transacting  business  for  them. 


228  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL. 


JOURNAL. 
1803. 

Entry  for  1803. — Lady  Ailesbury  dies  :  we  return  to 
England,  September. 

Nice,  January  29#A. — In  the  night  of  December  31st, 
a  violent  storm  of  thunder,  lightning,  wind,  and  rain  took 
place  here ;  from  that  time  to  this,  now  above  three 
weeks,  we  have  not  had  more  than  four  or  five  days 
free  from  heavy  and  continuous  rain.  It  is  not  cold,  and 
the  few  sunny  days  which  we  have  enjoyed  were  such  as 
to  make  the  shade  agreeable.  The  night  before  last  (Janu- 
ary 23rd),  the  clouds  that  fell  in  rain  in  the  plain  fell  in 
hail  or  snow  upon  the  nearest  hills.  To  my  feelings  a 
sudden  and  extraordinary  degree  of  cold  in  the  finest  days 
always  takes  place  here  about  four  o'clock, — that  is  to 
say,  just  before  the  setting  of  the  sun. 

February  2nd. — On  January  27th  the  weather  cleared 
up,  and  we  had  then  four  or  five  dry  days. 

In  this  month  Miss  Berry  received  the  intelligence  of 
Lady  Ailesbury 's  death.  As  the  wife  of  Marshal  Conway 
and  the  mother  of  Mrs.  Darner,  her  name  is  so  familiar  to 
the  readers  of  Horace  Walpole  that  her  daughter's  touch- 
ing description  of  her  own  feelings  on  the  occasion  may 
claim  a  place  in  Miss  Berry's  correspondence. 

Tuesday  morning,  Jan.  18. 

.  .  .  My  dearest,  kindest  of  mothers  expired  yesterday 
morning  without  a  groan,  even  without  a  sigh  ;  her  countenance 
instantly  became  placid,  and  her  fine  features  made  her  beauti- 
ful in  death  !  Such,  I  am  convinced,  can  be  the  end  only  of 


1503]  SCENERY   ROUND   NICE.  229 

one  possessing  a  virtuous  mind  and  a  conscience  without 
reproach ;  and  such  a  one,  I  am  proud  to  think,  was  my 
mother !  A  scene  more  affecting,  more  impressive,  than  her 
end,  it  was  not  possible  to  see.  My  grief  is  extreme,  and  much 
as  I  ever  thought  I  should  regret  this  dear  mother,  I  find  that 
regret  deeper  and  more  painful  than  I  expected.  All  the  ar- 
rangements— every  little  improvement  at  Strawberry  Hill — this 
house — all  (sometimes  imperceptibly  at  the  moment  to  myself) 
tended  wholly  to  procure  her  amusement  and  comforts ;  and  all 
these  have  lost  their  value  to  me.  But  never  more  to  behold  that 
benign  countenance  brightening  up  at  the  sight  of  me  I  this 
does  give  me  the  feeling  of  an  almost  .broken  heart ! 

Thursday r,  IQth. — A  long  course  up  the  valley  upon  the 
mountains  above  the  prefet's  house,  with  Colonel  Smyth 
and  Baron  Trip. 

Friday,  llth. — To  St.  Andre.  The  road  beautiful  and 
picturesque,  but  such  as  none  but  those  used  to  scrambling 
and  narrow  mountain  paths  could  go.  Colonel  Smyth  and 
Baron  Trip  our  guides,  with  the  help  of  an  ass,  we  walked 
in  all  better  than  twelve  miles, 

Thursday,  2±th. — To  the  Vallee  Obscure.  It  is  a  valley 
with  a  small  stream  of  water  running  through  it,  and 
narrowed  to  a  mere  passage  of  the  water  between  the 
hills.  These  often  rise  on  each  side  more  than  a  hundred 
feet  above  the  stream,  and  in  some  places  are  not  much 
more  than  six  or  eight  feet  apart.  We  rode  on  through 
this  little  stream  about  half  a  quarter  of  a  mile,  winding 
between  the  perpendicular  hills  almost  united  at  top  by 
trees  and  brushwood.  The  intention  of  our  guide,  General 
Eeynardi,  was  to  take  us  out  at  the  other  end,  which 
opens  into  a  beautiful  riant  country  ;  but  the  peasants  of 
the  environs  said  that  the  heavy  rains  of  this  winter  had 
brought  down  such  large  masses  of  earth  and  stones  from 
the  sides  of  the  hills  that  it  was  quite  impassable.  It  is 
about  two  hours'  walk  from  Nice,  the  whole  way  beautiful, 
by  the  villa  of  the  Contessa  da  Casta  and  the  Capucins' 


230  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

Church.  The  day  was  delicious.  In  the  Vallee  Obscure, 
between  the  hills,  where  the  sun  can  never  penetrate,  the 
cold  was  striking.  Pretty  little  blue  apaticas  growing 
upon  the  sides  of  the  rock. 

Sunday,  27th. — Every  Sunday  during  Lent  there  is  a 
sort  of  fair  held  at  the  different  churches  near  Nice — it 
begins  with  Cimia.  The  road  up  to  it  was  crowded  with 
people,  and  the  Place  before  the  church  full  of  people 
selling  ah1  sorts  of  gilt  gingerbread,  figs,  raisins,  wine,  &c., 
&c.,  but  no  other  sort  of  commodity.  There  was  a  func- 
tion in  the  church,  which  was  full,  and  the  people  dis- 
persed themselves  about  in  groups  in  the  fields  and  under 
the  olive  trees,  drinking  the  wine  and  eating  the  figs, 
chestnuts,  &c.,  they  had  brought  with  them.  We  observed 
but  one  party  who  were  eating  meat,  although  there  is  a 
general  dispense  for  the  whole  country.  The  beau  monde 
of  Nice  all  take  a  walk  to  these  festins,  as  they  are  called, 
upon  the  Sundays  in  Lent,  and  generally  take  that  oppor- 
tunity of  calling  on  the  way  at  the  different  churches,  and 
upon  such  of  their  friends  as  have  country  houses.  The 
proprietors  are  always  there  at  these  times,  though 
very  seldom  at  any  other.  The  weather  delightful — but 
one  cold  or  rainy  day  from  the  llth  to  this  date,  March 
2nd. 

Sunday,  March  27th.—  These  festins  ended  to-day  with 
one  again  at  Cimia,  very  crowded,  although  the  day  was 
unpleasant.  Festins  had  been  held  at  St.  Bartlemi,  before 
the  Capucins'  Convent,  on  the  Villafranca  road  ;  and  that 
was  by  far  the  prettiest,  as  the  people  spread  themselves 
in  little  parties  all  over  the  rocky  hill  of  Mont  Alban,  and 
singularly  enlivened  the  whole  scene. 

The  weather  this  month  dry,  and  till  the  24th  warm 
and  enjoyable. 

Friday,  April  8th. — Went  to  Falicore ;  were  above  two 
hours  getting  there.  It  is  a  cleaner  little  village,  or  bourg, 
than  any  other  I  have  seen  ;  view  beautiful  on  every  side. 


1803]  LENT  AT  NICE.  231 

As  we  got  off  our  horses  and  walked  about  the  Place,  the 
whole  town  canie  out  to  look  at  us,  and  among  them  the 
three  principal  persons  of  the  place, — the  mayor,  the  cure, 
and  his  nephew,  the  avocat.  The  cure  turned  out  to  be 
an  old  acquaintance  of  General  Eeynardi's,'  who  was  with 
us  ;  and  he  insisted  so  much  upon  our  coming  into  his 
nephew's  house,  and  our  taking  a  glass  of  wine,  that  we 
were  obliged  to  comply.  The  house  was  clean  and  com- 
fortable for  this  country,  and  the  wine,  produced  in  a 
bottle  (containing  at  least  half-a-dozen  common-sized 
bottles),  most  excellent  white  Muscat.  We  stayed  with 
them  about  half  an  hour;  it  was  impossible  not  to  be 
pleased  with  their  hospitality.  It  was  Good  Friday,  so 
that  there  was  no  eating  going  on  among  them.  About 
a  mile  and  a  half  from  Falicore,  upon  the  bare  and  rocky 
side  of  the  hill  immediately  under  Mont  Can,  they  have 
lately  discovered  a  considerable  cavern  or  grotto.  One 
descends  into  it  by  a  ladder  from  the  aperture  on  the  side 
of  the  hill ;  it  is  lined  with  stalactites,  which  in  several 
places  form  little  Gothic  tabernacles,  which,  with  a  lamp 
placed  in  or  behind  them,  were  really  very  beautiful, 
though  the  colour  of  the  stalactites  was  not  very  clear- 
looking,  and  there  is  but  one  great  detached  column  ;  so 
that  I  suppose  to  those  much  accustomed  to  visit  grottos 
(which  I  am  not)  this  would  be  considered  as  but  a  mid- 
dling one.  The  proprietor,  however,  a  Piedmontese,  who 
bought  some  of  the  emigres'  land,  and  possesses  a  house 
at  the  foot  of  the  hill,  thinks  far  otherwise,  and  is  having 
stairs  cut  in  the  rock,  and  thinks,  I  believe,  that  he  is  to 
make  money  by  showing  it  to  the  strangers  who  come  to 
Nice.  Our  party  consisted  of  General  Eeynardi,  Colonel 
Smyth,  Prince  Louis  Lichtenstein,  and  ourselves. 

Saturday,  3(M. — After  uninterrupted  fair  weather  for 
eight  weeks,  a  violent  thunder-shower  fell  in  the  night  of 
the  27th.  To-day  distant  thunder  was  heard,  and  a  vast 
congregation  of  heavy  black  clouds  hanging  over  the 


232  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

mountains  seemed  to  pour  down  rain,  but  on  clearing  off 
they  left  Mont  Can  and  all  the  lower  mountains  whitened 
with  hail.  The  cold  in  the  plain  here  was  almost  as  great 
as  we  have  ever  experienced  during  the  winter. 

Tuesday r,  May  3rd. — Left  Nice.  Madame  de  St.  Agathe 
and  General  Eeynardi  accompanied  us  to  the  further  side 
of  the  Pont  du  Var.  It  is  now  passable  for  light  carriages, 
but  the  reparations  have  been  made  in  a  slight  and  slo- 
venly manner — the  gardefoux  on  the  part  that  has  been 
repaired  might  be  pushed  down  with  a  stick.  Before  we 
had  got  above  half  way  to  the  Pont  du  Var  the  two  Princes 
of  Lichtenstein*  and  Comte  Attems  joined  us.  When  we 
had  passed  the  Pont  du  Var,  Madame  de  St.  Agathe  bid  us 
adieu,  and,  I  really  believe,  with  sincere  regret.  She  is 
an  amiable,  unaffected  creature,  with  a  good  natural  un- 
derstanding, and  had  she  seen  more  of  the  world  she  would 
be  very  agreeable.  At  Antibes,  we  drove  to  the  inn, 
thinking  the  Lichtensteins  would  go  no  farther,  but  they 
kindly  proposed  accompanying  us  to  Cannes. 

At  Cannes  we  arrived  at  half-past  three.  The  road  near 
the  edge  of  the  sea,  from  which  the  view  struck  me  so 
much  in  the  winter,  I  again  made  on  foot.  The  day  was 
an  unlucky  one  for  distant  views,  and  for  a  last  look  at 
the  beauties  of  Nice ;  heavy  clouds  hung  upon  the  distant 
hills,  and  the  prospect  was  much  involved  in  mist ;  but 
still  this  part  of  the  road  charmed  me. 

At  Cannes  the  Lichtensteins  bid  us  a  most  kind  and 
hearty  farewell,  and  returned  on  their  post-horses  to  Nice, 
leaving  upon  our  minds  the  impression  of  their  being  two 
of  the  most  agreeable,  well-informed,  unaffected  young 
men  that  we  have  met  with  for  an  age,  to  say  nothing  of 
their  distinguished  military  merit  and  ah1  they  have  both 


*  Prince  Louis  died,  unmarried,  in  1833.  Prince  Maurice  died  in  1819, 
leaving  three  daughters  now  living — Princess  L.  Schwartz  enburg  and  two 
Princesses  Lobkovitz. 


1803]  MADAME   DE   STAEL'S   DELPHINE.  233 

suffered,  for  their  Emperor  and  their  country  in  the  late 
war.  They  constituted  our  constant  every-day  society 
for  the  last  fortnight  of  our  stay  at  Nice ;  for  though  they 
both  occupied  themselves  much  in  the  morning,  they  took 
long  rides  with  us  in  the  afternoon,  and  came  to  us  every 
evening.  Never  idle,  desceuvres,  or  wanting  to  get  rid  of 
time  themselves,  I  never  lived  in  intimacy  with  any  young 
men  so  never  a  charge  as  with  them.  I  quit  Nice  with 
a  regret,  with  a  feeling  of  melancholy,  which  I  hope  I 
shall  ever  experience  at  leaving  any  place  where  I  have 
spent  five  months  quietly  and  comfortably,  to  say  nothing 
of  regretting  its  exquisite  natural  beauties,  which  gained 
upon  me  the  more  I  became  acquainted  with  them.  To 
cease  to  be  in  any  place  where  one  has  been  for  five  months 
together,  always  appears  to  me  a  sort  of  death.  One's 
resurrection  in  the  next  place  to  which  one  means  to  go, 
is  uncertain  as  to  its  equal  comfort,  and  has  seldom  (ex- 
cept under  very  particular  circumstances)  the  charm,  the 
ineffable  charm,  of  intimite. 

A  few  extracts  from  Miss  Berry's  correspondence  at  this 
time  have  been  preserved.  The  two  following  are  from 
letters  addressed  to  her  friend  Mrs.  Darner,  with  Mrs.  D.'s 
reply  to  the  first  :— 

Nice,  Jan.,  1803. 

.  .  .  In  spite  of  my  headache  yesterday,  I  contrived  to  read 
nearly  three  volumes  of  Madame  deStaeTs  Del  phine.  As  I  conclude 
it  is  long  before  this  time  in  London,  I  need  not  tell  you  what  it 
is.  It  is  certainly  interesting — the  great  sine  qua  non  of  a  novel. 
It  is  well  written,  too,  and  there  is  much  nice  observation  of  the 
affections  of  the  human  heart ;  but  much  false  and  incongruous, 
and  still  more,  which  has  only  been  drawn  from,  and  only  applies 
to,  the  corrupted  and  factieux  societies  of  Paris.  What  chiefly 
diverts  me  is  the  portrait  of  herself  (of  her  character,  I  mean), 
under  that  of  Delphine,  which  she  herself,  I  dare  say  believes  is 
a  striking  likeness,  and  likely  to  do  her  immortal  honour !  The 
attempt,  nobody  who  knows  her  the  least  can  avoid  seeing ;  but 


234  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

were  it  as  like,  as  it  is  ridiculously  dissimilar  to  her  life  and 
manners,  it  would  be,  by  no  means,  I  should  think,  a  portrait  that 
one  should  choose  to  expose  of  oneself.  Such  pictures  of  the 
passions  I  think  hideous  and  fearful,  instead  of  touching.  Of 
all  the  passions,  I  consider  love  as  that  which  the  least  admits  of 
an  exaggerated  description.  It  is  itself  an  exaggeration,  and  the 
only  method  of  profoundly  interesting  Sesames  vraimentsensibles 
is  to  keep  the  expression  of  it  subdued,  and  to  leave  much  to  the 
mind  of  your  reader.  How  differently  has  Eousseau  treated  a 
great  passion,  and  a  passion  which  leaves  a  ten  times  deeper 
impression  of  its  violence  on  my  mind,  than  all  the  so-often 
repeated  struggles  of  Leonie  and  Delphine ;  while  the  perfect 
and  admirable  friendship  which  he  contrasts  with  it,  speaks  peace 
and  consolation  to  the  suffering  mind,  and  points  out  the  true 
and  only  resource  of  a  cceur  aimant  against  the  delirium  of 
passion. 

London,  Feb.  1803. 

.  .  .  You  will  see  how  much  we  agree  about  Delphine, 
and  how  much  we  have  both  thought  it  worth  occupying  a  por- 
tion of  the  alas !  small  sides  of  paper  a  letter  can  consist  of,  or 
time  be  found  to  fill  it.  Delphine  is  certainly  not  an  exact  por- 
trait of  Madame  de  Stae'l  in  all  senses ;  but  I  think  it  quite 
curious  to  see  the  soul  (as  I  think  it  here  does)  of  a  person, 
certainly  one  of  genius,  pervading  a  whole  book,  for  so  it  is,  — 
ideas,  opinions,  passions  all. 

You  do  not  know  how  much  I  admire  what  you  say  on  love, 
her  love,  I  mean.  I  have  ever  with  you  thought  such  descrip- 
tions of  that  passion  put  me  in  mind  of  the  wrong  end  of  a 
magnet  being  placed  to  the  point  of  steel.  But  Delphine  and 
Leonie  will  clatter  through  the  world  and  carry  crowds  in  their 
vortex.  The  more  they  are  abused,  the  more  they  will  be  fol- 
lowed and  studied,  and  even  admired. 

The  following  extracts  from  a  letter  of  Miss  Berry's 
very  young  correspondent,  Lord  Hartington,*  then  only 
thirteen  years  old,  will  not  be  without  interest  as  to  passing 
events  : — 

*  William  Spencer  Cavendish,  Marquess  of  Hartington,  born  1790,  suc- 
ceeded his  father  as  sixth  Duke  of  Devonshire,  1811. 


1803]  LETTER   FROM   LORD   HARTIXGTON.  235 

Devonshire  House,  Jan.  30,  1803. 

You  cannot  think,  my  dear  Miss  Berry,  how  much  pleasure 
your  letter  gave  me ;  everything  you  can  say  about  Nice  will 
be  news  to  me,  as  I  have  never  had  any  correspondent  there.  .  .  . 
I  envy  you  very  much  upon  your  tall  personable  beast  on  the 
mountains,  whilst  we  (poor  souls  !)  are  shivering  in  great  coats 
by  the  fireside.  We  are  certainly  to  go  to  Paris  this  summer. 
Perhaps  we  shall  meet  you  there  on  your  way  back.  .  .  . 
I  will,  if  you  like  it,  write  a  newspaper  for  you  every  week. 
You  can  stop  them  as  soon  as  you  like.  .  .  .  Lord  and  Lady 
Abercorn  have  had  a  play  at  the  Priory.  It  was  '  Who 's  the 
Dupe?'  and  'The  Wedding  Day.'  It  was  very  well  acted. 
Lady  Cahir  *  acted  Lady  Contest.  The  other  actors  were  Pen  f 
and  George  Lamb,}  Lawrence, §  the  two  Mr.  Maddocks, |j  Lady 
Charlotte  Lindsay,H"  Miss  Butler  and  Mrs.  Kemble.**  Mamma 
and  my  sister  were  there.  There  was  no  room  for  poor  me  :  I 
should  like  to  have  been  there  very  much. 

Andreossi  came  here  the  other  night,  and  talked  a  great  deal 
about  Bonaparte,  and  defended  his  cruelty  in  Egypt,  which  is 
mentioned  in  Wilson's  book  on  the  war  there.  He  said  that  it 
was  not  true  that  he  had  ordered  all  the  wounded  to  be  killed, 
for  they  took  away  numbers,  and  those  few  who  were  killed, 
were  past  recovery,  and  that  he  did  it  out  of  humanity.  My 
aunt  Besborough  is  to  set  out  from  Paris  the  6th  of  next  month. 
Moreau  has  been  to  see  her ;  he  makes  no  scruples  of  disap- 
pro.Ing  of  the  present  government.  My  aunt  asked  him  if  he 
was  not  afraid  of  Bonaparte  killing  him,  upon  which  he  said — 
*  Bonaparte  est  un  tyran  mais  pas  un  assassin.'  He  said  that 

*  Lady  Cahir,  afterwards  Countess  of  Glengall. 

t  Hon.  Penistone  Lamb,  son  of  Penistone,  first  Lord  Melbourne,  and 
Elizabeth  Milbanke,  daughter  of  Sir  Ralph  Milbanke  :  died  1805. 

t  Hon.  George  Lamb,  his  brother,  died  1834. 

§  Lawrence  (Sir  Thos.),  the  celebrated  artist. 

||  The  two  Mr.  Maddocks  (brothers),  Kentish  gentlemen,  well  known  in 
society  at  this  time.  The  name  is  preserved  in  North  Wales,  where,  near 
Bethgellert,  a  harbour  was  constructed  by  the  elder  brother,  called  Port 
Maddock. 

^[  Lady  Charlotte  Lindsay,  daughter  of  the  second  Earl  of  Guildford, 
eighth  Lord  North  j  married  Lieut.-Col.  the  Hon.  John  Lindsay,  1800 ; 
died  1849. 

**  Mrs.  Brereton,  daughter  of  Mr.  Hopkins,  prompter  at  Drury  Lane; 
married  to  John  Kemble,  the  great  tragedian,  1787. 


236  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

he  was  not  afraid  of  his  banishing  him,  for  he  had  the  hearts 
of  all  the  army,  and  that  he  did  not  dare.  ...  I  am  afraid 
you  will  be  sadly  tired  with  this  long  scrawl :  I  will  write  some- 
thing more  substantial  when  I  get  some  news  ;  in  the  meantime, 
I  remain  yours,  ever  affectionately, 

HARTINGTON. 

Extract  of  a  letter  from  Sir  Harry  Englefield  to  Miss  Ben^y. 

Feb.  18,  1803. 

.  .  .  I  have  lived  in  town  now  over  a  month,  as  if  I  had 
been  at  Nice  or  Pekin,  and  knowing  little  more  of  the  world 
here  than  you  do.  I  have  seen  Lady  Hertford  once,  but  heard 

very  little,  except  that  General  Andreossi  asked  Lady  Anne  B • 

who  Miss  Gribbes  was,  and  was  answered — *  C'est  la  sozur  de  loi 
du  grand  parleur.'  *  Some  good  French  is  also  told  of  the 
Duchess  of  Gordon,  f  who  is  giving  continual  balls  and  fetes  at 
Paris.  ...  I  hear  that  Lady  Palm.J  is  in  very  good  health,  and 
when  she  sees  her  friends,  which  is  but  seldom,  very  tolerably 
cheerful.  Lord  Minto  saw  her  the  other  day  at  Broadlands,§ 
which,  by-the-bye,  has  had  a  narrow  escape  from  fire.  The 
furniture  of  one  bedchamber  was  quite  burnt.  Sotheby  medi- 
tates a  religious  poem,  with  a  reasonable  spice  of  metaphysics 
in  it.  As  your  roads  are  bad,  I  shall  not  attempt  to  send  it 
except  by  sea,  and  then  I  rather  apprehend  it  may  bring  the 
ships  into  a  scrape,  like  Lord  Elgin's  brig  which  went  down  near 
the  Island  of  Cythera,  laden  with  marble  from  the  temples  of 
Minerva  and  Theseus,  and  all  the  journals  and  drawings  made  in 
the  Morea  by  these  gentlemen  who  had  surveyed  the  Thermo- 
pylea  and  Platea,  and  a  thousand  places  untrodden  by  European 
Christian  feet  for  many  centuries ;  the  event  is  really  a  calamity 
to  all  lovers  of  art  and  science.  We  Grecians  have  a  new  feast, 
however.  Aplay  of  Euripides  or  Sophocles  or  of  their  time  (really 
and  truly)  has  been  discovered  at  Moscow,  and  parts  of  it  are 

*  Miss  Gibbes  was  sister-in-law  to  the  Right  Hon.  Charles  Abbot  (after- 
wards first  Lord  Colchester),  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Commons. 

t  Jane  Maxwell,  Duchess  of  Gordon,  called  by  Horace  Walpole  one  of 
the  empresses  of  fashion. 

J  Mary,  daughter  of  Benjamin  Mee,  Esq.,  married  Henry,  second  Vis- 
count Palmerston,  1783  ;  died  1805.  Lord  Palmerston  died  1802. 

§  The  seat  of  Lord  Palmerston,  in  Hants. 


1803]  DISCOVERY   OP  ANCIENT  MSS.  237 

already  arrived  here.  Dr.  Burney  has  seen  it,  and  has  no  doubt 
qf  its  authenticity.*  Then  a  Mr.  Clarke  has  collected  most 
curious  MSS.  in  the  Levant,  and  brought  them  safe  home.  A 
Plato  of  the  ninth  century,  and  several  ancient  songs  with  their 
music.f  I  suppose  the  street  organs  -will  soon  be  playing 
Sappho's  'Lamentation,'  Anacreon's  '  Fancy,'  Tyrtaeus'  'March,' 
and  Erinna's  '  Hornpipe.'  A  propos  of  this,  I  suppose  you 
know  that  in  the  '  Mysteres  d'Isis,'  at  Paris,  there  is  an  entire 
ballet  copied  from  the  '  Obelisks  '  —  all  the  dancers  are 


You  know  how  I  respect  Agnes'  pencil.  I  am  most  happy  to 
hear  that  she  continues  to  work  ;  I  am  sure  she  will  improve, 
for  every  touch  gives  power  to  the  next.  I  wish  you  would  lay 
aside  your  chalk,  and  take  to  black-lead  ;  for  chalk  is  a  grimy 
business,  and  at  best  is  bad,  and  at  worst  is  detestable.  If  you 
would  take  pains,  you  would  do  extremely  well.  .  .  .  My 
neighbours  here  J  go  on  most  lovingly.  Their  affection  seems 
to  grow  with  their  growth,  and  fatten  with  their  fat.  He  and 


*  No  trace  of  this  play  is  to  be  found.  Whether  the  MS.  which  Dr. 
Burney  saw  proved  to  he  a  fraud  or  a  mistake  must  now  he  doubtful.  Miss 
Berry's  correspondent  was  not  likely  to  have  heen  misinformed  as  to  some 
such  supposed  MS.  having  heen  in  the  hands  of  Dr.  Burney,  with  whom 
Miss  Berry  and  her  friends  were  well  acquainted.  The  highest  authorities 
at  Oxford,  Cambridge,  and  the  British  Museum,  to  which  may  be  added  the 
name  of  Mr.  Grote  (all  powerful  on  such  subjects)  declare  that  no  such  play 
exists  to  their  knowledge,  and  no  record  of  any  such  discovery  at  Moscow. 
In  1782  an  Homeric  Hymn  to  Ceres  was  discovered  at  Moscow ;  and  a  large 
fragment  of  a  play  of  Euripides  was  found  at  Paris  by  Bekkar  in  1821 ;  but 
neither  of  these  discoveries  throws  any  light  upon  the  work  supposed  to 
have  been  sent  here  in  1803. 

t  In  a  letter  addressed  by  Dr.  Edward  Daniel  Clarke  to  the  Rev.  Robert 
Matthews,  dated  1802,  he  enumerates  the  various  MSS.  he  has  got : — '  In 
Greek  I  have  the  works  of  Plato,  the  Lexicon  of  St.  Cyril,  a  volume  of 
Greek  poems,  and  two  works  on  Ancient  Music.' — Life  of  Edward  D.  Clarke, 
by  Wm.  Otter,  p.  517.  In  a  letter  from  Dr.  Clarke  he  says,  '  Person  is 
all  rapture  and  joy  about  the  Plato  ...  he  says  it  may  be  considered  as 
equivalent  to  the  combined  authorities  of  any  two  known  MSS.' —  Ibid. 
p.  560. 

It  was  in  the  Monastery  of  St.  John,  in  the  Isle  of  Patmos,  that  these 
MSS.  were  discovered,  and  are  now  deposited  in  the  Bodleian  Library, 
Oxford. 

Prince  of  Wales  and  Mrs.  Fitzherbert. 


238  MISS  BERET'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

0}d  Q *  attended  a  lecture  the  other  day,  read  by  a  Professor 

Aldini,  on  a  hanged  house-breaker.  Galvanism  made  the  dead 
man  open  his  eyes  and  grin  extremely :  they  had  a  noble  end 
in  view,  but  alas !  the  doctor  gave  them  no  hopes.  .  .  . 

Extract  of  a  letter  from  Miss  Berry,  but  no  mention  of 
the  name  of  her  correspondent : — 

Nice,  Feb.,  1803. 

All  general  principles  of  government  of  moral  conduct,  of 
all  species  of  reciprocal  duties,  must  all  be  referable  to  the 
instincts  of  nature  and  to  moral  truth. 

These  general  principles,  immutable,  invariable  as  the  Being 
from  whom  they  emanate,  are  to  be  modified  in  their  appli- 
cation to  general  use,  or  individual  commerce.  Thus  in  govern- 
ments, or  associations  of  men,  the  safety  of  the  whole  is  to  be 
purchased  by  the  loss  or  danger  of  some  individuals — that  is  to 
say,  a  power  of  protection,  and  consequently  of  punishment  is 
to  be  placed  somewhere.  From  the  nature  of  man,  punishment 
will  be  sometimes  misplaced,  and  protection  will  be  sometimes 
abused,  but  still  the  principles  upon  which  both  act  may  be 
true,  consequently  just.  For  justice  is  nothing  else  but  moral 
truth. 

Try  all  human  institutions,  the  principle  of  all  govern- 
ments, all  commercial  regulations  by  this  rule,  and  it  is  easy 
to  convince  oneself  of  its  certainty,  not  by  what  may  ~be  built 
upon  it,  but  what  has  been  experienced,  from  it.  Try  by  this 
rule/ the  English  government,  the  former  French  government, 
the  present.  The  principle  of  the  first  (the  English  govern- 
ment), both  in  its  civil  and  criminal  administration,  will  be 
found  in  perfect  consonance  with  the  above  rule.  See  then,  in 
spite  of  the  perversity  of  human  nature,  the  incapacity  of 
ministers,  the  nullities  of  kings,  the  contagion  of  neighbouring 
corruption,  what  it  has  resisted !  how  it  has  survived  the 
general  stroke  of  Europe  !  what  powers  of  self-preservation  and 
regeneration  it  has  within  itself! 

The  former  French  government,  in  its  original  principles,  in 
its  tacit  agreement  between  the  governors  and  the  governed, 
was  in  opposition  to  every  point  of  moral  truth.  In  vain  were 

*  Duke  of  Queensborough. 


1803]  EXTRACTS   FROM   MISS   BERRY'S   LETTERS.  239 

its  natural  advantages — in  vain  the  character  of  some  few  bril- 
liant princes — the  virtues  of  many  distinguished  citizens — with 
everything  that  could,  in  fact,  contribute  to  its  natural  tout- 
puissance.  By  the  falseness  of  principle  in  all  its  institutions, 
and  in  its  whole  organisation,  its  former  history  presents  nothing 
to  the  eye  of  philosophy  but  a  wretched  combat  between 
depravity  and  folly.  Look  at  its  present  history,  that  mar- 
vellous page  now  open  under  our  eyes,  the  same  negligence  of 
moral  truth  in  all  the  various  pretended  constitutions. 

Extract  of  a  letter  from  Miss  Berry  to  a  friend. 

Nice,  March,  1803. 

I  am  reading  over  for  the  fiftieth  time,  I  believe,  the  letters 
of  Madame  de  Sevigne.  They  always  improve  on  me,  and  are 
here  particularly  interesting.  Here,  where  her  immediate 
descendants  still  remain ;  here,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  so 
many  of  her  scenes  of  action,  her  Provenpal  phrases,  and  the 
things  to  which  she  so  often  reverts.  Do  you  know  her  as  much 
by  heart  as  you  ought  to  do  ?  It  is  amazing  how  constantly  her 
dme  aimante,  and  all  the  various  expressions  it  dictates,  puts 
me  in  mind  of  yours.  It  is  the  same  manner  of  thinking  and 
feeling  for  everything  that  has  to  do  with  what  she  loves.  In 
short,  it  is  the  true  pre-occupation  and  interest  of  real  affection, 
that  first  and  best  of  sentiments  !  more  tender  than  friendship, 
more  sure,  more  composed,  more  satisfying  than  love. 

Letter  from  Miss  Berry  to  Mrs.  Oreathead  at  Paris. 

Nice,  Tuesday,  March  22,  1803. 

.  .  .  I  have  the  pleasure  of  receiving  your  letter  of  the 
llth,  which  makes  me  forget  everything  but  a  wish  to  hear  and 
see  more  of  friends  for  whom,  believe  me,  no  silence,  nor  no 
absence  can  ever  cool  our  affection,  or  even  lessen  our  interest. 

The  account  you  give  of  Paris  is  such  as  I  expected  from 
what  I  myself  saw  of  it  last  year.  Had  we  been  all  there 
together,  I  venture  to  flatter  myself,  you  would  have  liked  it 
much  better  than  either  of  us  should  separately.  As  it  is,  we 
have  given  up  all  thoughts  of  it  when  we  leave  this  place.  .  .  . 


240  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

I  am  always  desirous  to  enjoy  any  part  of  what  remains  to  me 
of  life  by  passing  it  in  the  society  of  such  friends  as  yourselves. 
Do,  then,  think  of  spending  a  part  of  the  summer  with  us  in 
Switzerland.  I  have  only  mentioned  Lausanne  or  Geneva  as 
the  two  places  we  all  best  know.  But  anywhere,  where  you 
think  you  could  be  comfortable,  I  am  sure  we  could  make  our- 
selves so.  I  think  I  may  venture  to  say  we  are  not  bad  at  this, 
and  at  lieing  that  sort  of  society,  the  only  really  enjoyable  to 
rational  people.  I  think  we  have  in  some  degree  proved  this 
here,  where  we  found  nothing  but  a  parcel  of  English,  none  of 
whom  we  knew,  never  meeting  of  an  evening,  nor  in  any  other 
way  than  in  giving  each  other  English  dinners  at  English  hours, 
and  declaring,  and  positively  believing,  there  was  no  society  of 
any  kind  to  be  had  at  Nice.  We  could  not  believe  this,  and 
soon  found  out  the  contrary ;  made  some  very  agreeable  Nice 
acquaintance ;  declared  off  from  the  very  first  the  English 
dinners,  which  my  father's  age  and  habits  of  life  enabled  us 
without  offence  to  do.  Made  a  soiree  about  once  a  week  for 
our  Nice  friends,  some  of  whom  are  musical  and  all  play  cards ; 
gave  them  a  good  supper,  and  soon  found  all  the  English  most 
willing  and  pleased  to  be  asked  to  our  parties,  which  have  cer- 
tainly been  the  best  thing  here  in  the  way  of  society,  and  have 
been  once  or  twice  gay  enough  to  end  in  a  little  impromptu 
dance. 

1  have  now  only  to  add,  that  my  health  is  so  improved  by 
the  winter  I  have  passed  here,  that  I  am  a  different  creature 
from  what  you  have  seen  me  for  the  last  two  years  in  England, 
and  am  capable  of  enjoying  not  only  society,  but  long  courses 
in  the  exquisitely  beautiful  mountains  which  surround  this 
place.  Agnes  has  been  drawing  a  great  deal.  We  long  to 
see  Bertie*  and  all  his  wonderful  works.  .  . 

To  Mrs.  Greathead,  Paris. 


*  Mr.  Bertie  Greathead  (junior)  evinced  in  boyhood  an  ardent  taste  for 
pictorial  art,  portraits,  and  historical  pieces  of  great  merit.  He  visited 
France  during  the  short  peace,  for  the  purpose  of  improving  his  judgment 
in  his  favourite  pursuit ;  and  when  others  were  made  prisoners,  Napoleon 
permitted  him  to  retire  to  Italy  ;  he  was  there  seized  with  a  fever,  and  died 
in  the  twenty-third  year  of  his  life. 


1803]  LETTER   FROM   MRS.    HOWE.  241 

Extract  of  a  letter  from  Mrs.  Howe. 

March  10, 1803. 

.  .  .  Another  very  great  death  happened  on  Tuesday  morn- 
ing— that  of  the  Duke  of  Bridgewater.  What  I  am  going  to  write 
will  show  what  an  immense  property  he  has  left  behind  him. 
He  has  given  about  30,000£.  a-year  landed  estate  to  General 
Egerton  (now  Earl  of  Bridgewater),  and  600,000£.  in  money,  all 
this  in  his  own  disposal ;  and  40,000£.  to  his  brother,  who  is,  I 
believe,  a  clergyman.  To  Lady  Louisa  Macdonald  and  Lady 
Ann  Vernon  each  10,OOQ£.  To  Lord  Grower  he  leaves  the  navi- 
gation, that  is,  the  income  of  it ;  the  management  of  the  con- 
cern being  put  in  trustees'  hands ;  his  house  in  town  all  strictly 
entailed  (but  to  him  for  his  life),  the  pictures,  library,  &c.,  as 
heir-looms,  and  then  to  his  second  and  younger  sons  suc- 
cessively, and  their  sons,  excluding  whoever  may  be  Marquis  of 
Stafford ;  his  intention  being  to  make  a  new  family,  for  who- 
ever has  it  is  to  take  the  name  of  Egerton.  Lord  Gower's  sons 
failing,  it  goes  through  a  long  specified  entail  to  the  sons  of  his 
three  nieces.  .  .  .  Besides  Lord  Carlisle's  and  Lady  Louisa's 
younger  sons,  Lady  Ann  Vernon  has  eight  or  nine.  The  navi- 
gation is  reckoned  a  clear  74,OOOZ.  a-year  ;  the  last  year  it 
produced  80,0001.,  and  is  supposed  to  be  improving. 

The  same. 

April  10, 1803. 

Lord  Gower  sells  his  present  habitation,  and  makes  the  late 
Duke  of  Bridgewater's  his  town  residence ;  first  building  a  fine 
drawing  and  eating-room,  &c.  to  the  park,  raised  to  the  height 
of  the  picture  gallery  and  library,  and  moves  the  stables  to 
Cleveland  Court;  then  over  the  coach  narrow  way  called 
Katharine-wheel  Yard  he  throws  a  bridge,  which  leads  to  his 
garden  in  the  Green  Park ;  it  will  be  a  very  complete  business 
when  finished. 

The  same. 

Thursday,  May  19,  1803. 

In  our  present  situation  with  France,  my  dear  Miss  Berry,  an 
impatience  to  run  over  the  papers  relative  to  all  that  has  passed 
between  the  two  (alas !)  adverse  kingdoms  since  the  treaty  of 
Amiens,  which  were  laid  before  the  House  of  Commons  yesterday, 

VOL.  II.  R 


242  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

is  a  natural  impulse.  ...  As  a  war  is  now  in  a  manner 
begun,  I  guess  it  may  cause  you  and  yours  to  leave  Geneva 
very  quickly,  therefore  am  unwilling  to  defer  till  next  week 
writing  my  grateful  thanks  for  your  last  finished  the  29th  of 
April ;  and  calculating  I  have  half-an-hour  to  spare,  before  I 
need  dress  for  the  Queen's  ball  (her  natural  birthday),  I  am 
glad  to  seize  it,  and  thus  make  a  beginning.  ...  Lord 
Whitworth  arrived  in  town  last  night,  and  probably  General 
Andreossi  landed  at  Calais  several  hours  ago.  The  King  was 
at  the  little  theatre  in  the  Hay  market  Tuesday  evening,  and 
was  received  in  the  most  flattering  manner  — '  God  save  the 
King,'  'Eule  Britannia,'  and  every  allusion  to  the  present 
moment  that  could  be  seized  upon,  met  the  highest  applause. 

4  o'clock,  Friday,  May  20. 

I  need  not  say  I  am  very  well,  my  dear  Miss  Berry,  when  I 
tell  you  I  was  not  in  bed  till  five  this  morning,  and  not  in  any 
manner  discomposed  or  too  much  tired ;  but  of  course  not  up  by 
cock-crow.  .  .  .  Lady  Douglas  was  at  the  ball,  but  neither 
of  her  daughters ;  no  one  below  the  rank  of  earl's  daughters  and 
peeresses  were  there,  except  myself  and  one  living  in  the  house, 
and  the  attendant  upon  the  Princess  Sophia  of  Gloucester. 


JOUENAL. 

Wednesday,  May  kth. — Left  Cannes  for  Muy.  The 
morning,  rain  fell  before  we  began  to  mount  the  Estrelles. 
The  new-fallen  rain  had  laid  the  dust,  and  refreshed  all 
the  beautiful  shrubs  with  which  the  sides  of  the  road  are 
covered ;  the  air  was  mild  and  calm,  heavy  clouds  hung 
upon  the  tops  of  all  the  mountains,  and  a  solemn  stillness 
pervaded  the  whole  landscape,  which,  together  with  the 
wild  and  uninhabited  look  of  these  hills,  gave  it  a  most 
impressive  character. 

Thursday,  5th. — At  Flassans  they  gave  us  five  miserable, 
weak  horses,  which,  on  a  hill  by  no  means  steep,  abso- 
lutely refused  to  draw.  In  vain  the  postilions  swore 
they  would  go  on  very  well ;  in  vain  they  strove  to  make 


1803]  FLASSAXS.  243 

them  move,  and,  while  they  were  half  murdering  them 
with  blows,  wished  us  to  sit  in  the  carriage.  That  was 
impossible ;  we  all  got  out,  in  one  of  the  most  pouring 
rains  I  ever  saw  or  felt.  There  was  a  wretched  peasant's 
hovel  a  little  way  off  the  road,  to  which  we  made  as  fast 
as  the  wind  and  rain  would  allow  us.  Here,  in  a  sort  of 
stable,  I  wanted  to  stay  till  the  horses  were  up  the  hill. 
They  moved  on  a  little,  and  the  postilions  hallooed  to  us 
to  get  in.  Again  the  horses  would  not  move ;  again  they 
were  assommes  de  coups ;  again  we  got  out,  and  again  we 
made  for  our  hovel,  where  we  in  vain  endeavoured  to 
make  the  peasants  lend  or  find  some  horses  to  help  us. 
They  had  none  themselves,  and  the  moment  they  knew  it 
was  the  post,  nobody  would  interfere  or  stir  a  foot.  At 
last  the  wretched  beasts  moved  up  the  hill,  and  we  were 
obliged,  dripping  wet,  to  follow  them,  the  wind  and  rain 
more  violent  than  ever.  The  people  told  us  there  was  an 
inn  on  the  top  of  the  hill ;  we  insisted  on  the  postilions 
stopping  tj?ere,  meaning  to  change  our  wet  clothes,  warm 
ourselves,  and  again  try  to  persuade  them  to  seek  other 
horses ;  but  in  none  of  these  points  did  we  succeed.  The 
inn  was  a  wretched  grenier,  with  one  fireplace,  round 
which  a  great  number  of  noisy,  strange,  low  sort  of  men 
were  sitting,  who  seemed  very  little  disposed  to  make 
room  for  us, — one  man  especially,  who  seemed  a  friend 
of  the  postilions,  was  particularly  anxious  to  assure  us  we 
could  get  nothing  there,  and  to  force  us  out  of  the  house. 
We  were  literally  wet  to  the  skin,  and  our  dripping  great 
coats  made  the  bottom  of  the  coach  so  wet  that  no  partial 
change  could  be  of  use.  The  postilions  positively  refused 
to  go  on  to  Brignolles  for  other  horses,  and  nobody  else 
would  stir,  though  we  offered  to  bribe  them  all.  At  last, 
after  losing  three-quarters  of  an  hour,  we  were  forced  to 
get  again  into  the  carriage,  with  small  hopes  of  being 
dragged  over  the  very  bad  road  before  us,  when  fortu- 
nately we  met  the  cabriolet  of  the  post,  with  which  we 


244  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

changed  horses,  and  at  last  arrived  at  Brignolles,  and  were 
not  the  least  the  worse  for  this  thorough  wetting,  and 
sitting  in  wet  clothes,  which  is  so  often  supposed  to  be  an 
unavoidable  cause  of  all  sorts  of  ills. 

Friday,  Qth. — It  rained  ah1  night,  and  continued  with 
very  short  intervals  the  whole  day.  Between  Brignolles 
and  La  Grande  Pugere  my  father  and  I  walked  a  great 
part  of  the  way.  One  part  was  the  worst  and  most  dan- 
gerous of  the  road  from  Nice  to  Aix,  not  excepting  the 
Estrelles.  Arrived  at  Aix  in  a  pouring  rain,  at  seven 
o'clock. 

Saturday,  1th. — The  incessant  pouring  rain  determined 
us  to  stay  at  Aix  all  day.  We  never  stirred  out  of  the 
hotel,  and  amused  ourselves  in  the  evening,  when  it  began 
to  grow  fair,  with  drawing  from  the  window. 

Sunday,  8th. — Left  Aix.  We  saw  a  cart  embourbe 
when  we  passed  St.  Cannat  in  the  winter,  and  we  found 
another  one  in  the  same  situation  now.  The  people  com- 
plain of  their  roads,  but  are  firmly  convinced  that  the  very 
next  week  they  are  to  be  thoroughly  repaired, — and  so 
they  were  six  months  ago.  Bonaparte's  government  is 
not  one  to  repair  roads  for  people  who  can  do  so  well 
upon  the  promise  only  of  better  ones. 

Between  the  Font-National  and  Orgon  is  a  large  hand- 
some chateau  and  park,  belonging  to  a  Mr.  du  Lubron 
(or  some  such  name).  The  park,  which  is  very  large,  has 
been  laid  open  in  the  days  of  the  Eevolution,  and  many 
fine  trees  have  been  cut  down  and  are  still  lying  there. 
The  postilion  was  anxious  to  tell  me  that  the  owner  lived 
at  another  chateau  in  the  neighbourhood,  probably  of  a 
very  different  sort  from  this,  which  is  really  a  fine  country- 
seat.  We  arrived  at  Avignon  on  a  very  fine  evening  ;  it 
was  Sunday,  and  all  the  public  walks  upon  the  outside  of 
the  walls  were  full  of  gay,  cheerful-looking  people ;  but  I 
lost  all  the  pleasure  I  should  otherwise  have  received  from 
such  a  scene,  by  Agnes  being  extremely  unwell. 


1803]  AVIGNOX.  245 

Avignon,  though  situated  in  a  plain,  presents  itself  well 
from  the  number  of  high  buildings,  towers,  &c.,  enclosed 
within  it,  and  from  the  extraordinary  beauty  of  its  walls, 
which  are  in  as  perfect  repair  and  look  as  new  as  if  they 
had  just  been  built. 

Monday^  $th. — Left  Avignon.  The  road  to  Douzere 
is  along  the  valley  of  the  Ehone,  and  often  near  its  banks, 
but  the  country  on  both  sides  looks  much  less  beautiful 
from  the  road  than  from  the  river, — and  from  the  river 
I  sincerely  hope  never  to  contemplate  its  beauties  again  ! 
There  are  no  olives  north  of  Avignon  ;  from  there  to 
Lorques  the  road  is  through  rich  pastures  and  comfort- 
able looking  villages.  On  this  great  Lyons  and  Mar- 
seilles road  I  observed  that  between  every  post  we  had 
three  stops,  one  to  change  horses  with  some  other  car- 
riage, and  two  for  the  breaking  of*  traces.  Between 
Mornas  and  La  Palisse  we  met  the  Turkish  Ambassador 
and  his  suite,  in  two  carriages  with  six  horses  each,  upon 
whom  our  postilions  in  vain  exerted  all  their  eloquence 
to  allow  t^hem  to  change  horses,  and  then  revenged  them- 
selves by  declaring  '  qu'ils  etaient  des  coquins,  des  voleurs, 
des  Turcs ; '  though  it  was  two  Frenchmen  in  the  first 
carriage,  with  the  Ambassador,  who  absolutely  refused 
changing ;  for  the  Turks,  as  may  be  supposed,  knew  nothing 
about  the  matter. 

At  Orange  we  were  detained,  and  employed  our  time 
most  agreeably  in  examining  the  Arch  of  Triumph,* 
which  stands  on  the  right-hand  side  of  the  present  road, 
just  out  of  the  town.  It  is  much  more  beautiful  than  I 
had  formerly  thought ;  and  though  it  may  have  been 
overcharged  with  ornaments,  they  are  so  beautifully 
worked,  the  Corinthian  columns  are  in  such  beautiful 
proportion,  and  the  end  which  has  not  been  built  against 

*  The  date  and  destination  of  this  arch  are  unknown;  the  received 
opinion  at  present  refers  it  to  the  reign  of  Marcus  Aurelius  and  to  his  suc- 
cesses on  the  Danube  and  in  Germany. — See  Murray's  Handbook. 


246  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

gives  such  a  high  idea  of  the  sculpture  of  the  Dacian  and 
other  captive  figures  with  which  it  was  adorned,  as  makes 
it  still  a  fine  example  of  Eoman,  or  rather  Grecian,  archi- 
tecture. 

A  part  of  the  wall  of  the  amphitheatre*  appears  on 
entering  the  town,  but  all  beauty  is  now  destroyed  by  its 
being  filled  and  built  up  with  poor  mean  houses. 

Tuesday,  Wth. — Came  in  sight  of  the  Rhone ;  continued 
for  the  most  part  along  its  bank.  At  Valence  I  thought 
I  had  remembered  the  fronton  of  a  very  fine  Gothic 
church,  and  went  in  search  of  it,  but  in  its  beauty  I  was 
quite  disappointed.  It  is  a  plain,  unornamented,  large 
Gothic  church,  with  no  fine  front;  but  in  a  side  chapel  of 
the  middle  aisle,  hung  with  black  cloth  or  paper,  all 
dropped  with  tears,  are  deposited  the  heart  and  entrails 
of  Pius  VI.,  the  poor  pope  who,  after  being  expelled  Rome 
by  the  French,  and  dragged  about  from  one  town  to 
another,  at  last  died  at  Valence,  1799.  Over  the  door  of 
the  chapel  is  written,  '  Ici  repose  le  coeur  et  les  entrailles 
du  Pape  Pie  VI.'  They  are  in  a  box  set  upon  a  high  stool 
in  the  middle  of  the  chapel,  the  whole  covered  with  black 
velvet,  and  a  triple  crown  embroidered  upon  it.  Upon 
examining  the  church  we  found  they  had  at  first  been 
placed  in  a  less  conspicuous  situation,  in  a  retired,  out-of- 
the-way  chapel,  and  in  a  sort  of  wooden  painted  sarcopha- 
gus, still  bearing  an  inscription  which  marked  what  it  had 
been :  '  Ici  sont  deposes  le  coeur  et  les  entrailles  de 
Pie  VI.' f 

As  soon  as  we  turned  off  the  great  Lyons  road  at 
Valence,  and  took  that  of  Grenoble,  the  surrounding 

*  The  interior  has  been  cleared  of  the  miserable  hovels  which  filled  it, 
and  whose  tenants  in  some  instances,  burrowing  like  moles,  had  formed 
cellars  in  the  thickness  of  the  walls,  regardless  of  the  risk  of  undermining 
it  and  of  being  buried  in  its  ruins.  The  removal  of  a  hundred  of  these 
cabins  now  enables  the  spectators  to  judge  of  the  arrangement  of  the  scene 
on  its  inner  face. — Murray's  Handbook. 

t  The  church  contains  a  bust  and  bas-relief  by  Canova,  to  the  memory  of 
Pope  Pius  VI. — See  Murray's  Handbook. 


1803]  ROMANS.  247 

country  became  much  more  beautiful.  The  cultivation 
between  Valence  and  Eomans  is  remarkable ;  the  vines 
for  the  most  part  are  on  espaliers,  round  cornfields,  and 
sometimes  in  a  double  row,  which  gives  to  every  field 
the  look  of  what  used  to  be  called  in  England  a  ferine 
ornee. 

Romans*  is  a  largish  town,  prettily  situated  on  the 
Isere,  with  a  stone  bridge.  It  has  a  great  appearance 
of  commerce,  bustle,  and  comfort.  Tanning  seems  to  be 
the  principal  trade  here.  Upon  a  small  stream  running 
into  the  Isere  live  a  whole  row  of  tanners  ;  many,  I  fancy, 
employed  in  preparing  the  skins  which  are  to  be  manu- 
factured into  gloves  at  Grenoble. 

Wednesday,  \\th. — From  St.  Marcellin  the  road  beau- 
tiful along  the  valley  of  the  Isere,  with  magnificent  and 
varied  shaped  mountains  on  each  side,  immense  walnut- 
trees  close  by  the  road  and  in  the  fields,  and. the  richest 
cultivation  throughout  the  valley  of  com  and  vines, 
everywhere  trained  upon  echalas  from  either  cherry  or 
maple  treCs,  planted  at  regular  distances,  and  allowed  to 
grow  only  to  a  certain  height. 

At  a  village  beyond,  Tullins,  close  to  a  stone  bridge,  is 
the  largest  growing  tree  I  ever  saw.  It  was  an  elm,  of 
the  sort  general  in  this  countiy,  but  not  the  same  as  that 
in  England.  Between  Tullins  and  Voreppe,  at  a  large 
village,  is  a  fine  French  garden  belonging  to  the  house  of 
a  M.  de  la  Mothe,  of  Grenoble. 

Before  I  leave  the  neighbourhood  of  Romans  I  must 
take  notice  of  an  anecdote  relative  to  its  present  manners, 
or  rather  morals,  told  me  by  the  maid  of  the  inn,  an 
active,  clean,  intelligent  peasant  woman.  There  are  always 

*  At  this  place  the  last  native  prince  of  Dauphine",  Umbert  II.,  having 
lost  his  only  son,  who  leaped  from  his  nurse's  arms  out  of  the  window  of 
the  castle  of  Mezard  into  the  Isere,  and  was  drowned,  signed  his  abdication 
1349,  by  which  he  resigned  his  domains  to  Philip  de  Valois,  on  condition 
that  they  should  be  an  appanage  of  the  heir  to  the  French  crown,  and  that 
he  should  bear  the  title  of  Dauphin. — See  Murray's  Handbook. 


248  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

a  good  many  soldiers  at  Komans,  being  in  a  plentiful 
country.  When  the  last  demi-brigade  of  a  regiment,  whose 
number  I  have  forgotten,  left  the  place  to  make  room  for 
those  we  saw  there,  no  less  than  eighty  young  women  went 
and  declared  their  pregnancy  to  the  municipality  (which 
by  the  present  laws  they  are  obliged  to  do), '  non  compris 
(as  my  informer  said)  les  femmes  qui  appartenaient  aux 
chefs  et  aux  officiers.'  One  need  no  longer  wonder  at  the 
immense  armies  of  France !  She  added  that  numbers  of 
women  accompanied  them  above  a  league  out  of  the  town, 
weeping  and  wailing  at  their  departure,  and  carrying  wine 
and  eatables  for  them. 

Thursday,  12th. — Grenoble  is  a  very  cheerful,  well- 
built,  busy-looking  town,  and  all  the  streets  that  end 
towards  the  river  seem  bouchee  by  the  mountain  which 
rises  directly  behind  the  faubourgs,  covered  with  vines, 
and  crowned  by  an  old  castle  which  formed  part  of  the 
former  fortifications  ;  the  wall  of  the  castle  was  up  the 
steepest  part  of  this  mountain.  On  the  other  side  of  the 
town,  from  the  ramparts  of  the  more  modern  walls,  is  the 
most  extensive  view,  and  is  equally  romantic  and  beau- 
tiful, bounded  by  high  mountains  of  an  endless  variety  of 
outline,  and  on  which  some  snow  always  lies,  but  finely 
wooded  and  cultivated  to  a  great  height. 

In  the  interior  of  Grenoble  considerable  improvements 
are  making ;  such  as  the  pulling  down  a  number  of  build- 
ings near  the  bishop's  residence  and  near  the  prisons  (an 
old  castle-like  building)  to  enlarge  the  spaces  around 
them.  The  intendant's  house,  now  occupied  by  the 
prefet,  faces  a  large  garden  in  the  middle  of  the  town 
open  to  the  public.  The  Palais  de  la  Justice,  formerly 
occupied  by  the  Parliament,  and  now  by  the  present 
courts  of  justice,  is  a  very  old  building  (with  a  fa9ade  of 
about  the  time  of  Francis  I.),  once  the  palace  of  the 
Dauphins,  the  ancient  sovereigns  of  the  country,  annexed 
to  the  Crown  of  France  in  1349.  Why  or  wherefore 


1803]  GRENOBLE.  249 

these  sovereigns  were  called  Dauphins,*  no  tolerably  ra- 
tional or  probable  account  is  given  :  it  is  said  that  in  the 
Middle  Ages  one  of  their  leaders,  who  had  united  and 
possessed  himself  of  several  neighbouring  little  barbarous 
baronies  or  states,  first  called  the  country  Dauphinois  and 
himself  the  Dauphin  of  it,  in  memory  of  a  wife  called 
Delphine,  whom  he  passionately  loved.  Be  this  as  it 
may,  there  are  at  present  in  the  museum  at  Grenoble  four 
or  five  curious  heads  carved  in  marble,  with  a  sort  of 
crown  or  cap  of  state  upon  them,  said  to  be  portraits  of 
the  Dauphins,  and  taken  from  the  inside  of  the  gateway 
to  their  palace. 

In  the  same  Place,  of  which  this  palace  forms  a  part,  is 
a  very  old  church,  called  their  chapel.  It  was  with 
many  others  shut  up  at  the  Eevolution,  and  has  not  been 
opened  since.  The  Eevolution,  however,  was  never 
carried  to  its  most  frightful  excesses  here.  Most  of  the 
families  who  had  emigrated  are  returned.  They  are 
much  satisfied  with  their  prefet,  and  it  is  certainly,  of  all 
the  towns,  I  have  seen  in  France,  that  which  bears  the 
least  marks  of  any  change  for  the  worse.  The  great 
commerce  of  the  place  is  gloves,  of  which  I  fancy  more 
are  made  here  than  in  all  the  rest  of  France.  There  are 
few  glove-shops,  they  being  almost  all  wholesale  dealers. 
The  one  to  whom  we  were  addressed,  however,  a  Mr. 
Morans,  had  a  great  choice  of  every  sort  and  colour  ;  in- 
deed, I  never  saw  so  many  made  gloves  together  before. 
We  paid  (and  I  suppose  we  were  treated  like  English 


*  Dauphin  was  originally  a  title  assumed  by  the  Comtes  de  Viennois, 
from  which  their  territory  was  called  Dauphine".  The  Count  who  first  bore 
the  title  was  Guigues  IV.,  who  died  1142  A..D.  It  is  conjectured  that  the 
name  arose  from  the  figure  of  a  dolphin  as  the  crest  of  his  helmet  or  device 
on  his  shield.  In  1349  Humbert  II.,  the  last  Count  Dauphin,  by  treaty 
with  Philip  VI.  of  France,  sold  his  rights  in  favour  of  Philip's  eldest 
grandson  Charles,  afterwards  Charles  V.  Charles  V.  made  his  eldest  son, 
Charles  VI.,  Dauphin,  although  there  was  no  stipulation  on  the  subject  in 
any  treaty.  His  example  was  followed  by  successive  kings  of  France. 


250  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isoa 

strangers]  33  livres  a-dozen  for  long  gloves,  white  or 
coloured,  and  18  livres  for  habit  gloves.  It  must,  I  fancy, 
be  a  good  trade.  They  give  to  the  women  who  sew  the 
gloves  (in  almost  every  house  in  Grenoble  you  see  women 
thus  employed)  half-a-crown  a  dozen.  For  long  gloves 
it  seems  very  little ;  but,  what  is  much  more  astonishing,  a 
very  good  workwoman  will  sometimes  cut  out  and  make 
six  pairs  in  a  day,  and  commonly  three  or  four  pairs. 

The  museum  at  Grenoble,  one  of  those  established  by 
Government,  is  in  the  former  convent  and  church  of  the 
Jesuits.  The  pictures  and  statues  have  been  but  lately 
brought,  and  are  all  finally  arranged.  The  library  is  that 
which  belonged  to  the  Jesuits.  It  remains  in  the  same 
room,  and  a  very  noble  one  it  is.  The  pictures  in  another 
large  room,  lighted  by  sky-lights,  are  few  of  them  good. 
Two  curious  portraits  of  Henry  IV.  and  the  Constable  de 
Lesdiguieres  and  his  son,  a  little  boy,  afterwards  killed  by 
a  kick  of  a  horse,  brought  from  Vizille*  his  chateau,  about 
three  leagues  from  Grenoble.  They  are  evidently  of  the 
day.  The  statues  are  chiefly  casts  from  the  antique  sent 
from  Paris,  as  were  likewise  most  of  the  pictures.  There 
is  another  room  fitting  up  for  natural  history,  and  another 
for  bronzes  and  antiques.  We  saw  the  museum  on  a 
day  that  it  was  open  to  all  the  world,  and  there  was  a 
number  of  common  people  and  soldiers  walking  about  ; 
and  what  entertained  me  not  a  little  was  an  invalid  soldier, 
who  was  a  sort  of  guard  in  the  room  to  prevent  children, 
&c.,  touching  things,  without  stockings,  and  in  very 
shabby  regimentals,  descanting  as  learnedly  upon  the 
pictures,  which  he  called  Kaffaelle's,  Guido's,  &c.,  as  the 
best-dressed  connoisseurs  could  have  done,  and  seemed 
to  give  perfect  satisfaction  to  his  hearers.  The  weather 
so  cold  that  we  had  fires  in  all  our  rooms. 

*  Chateau  de  Vizille  partly  destroyed  by  fire  in  1825,  was  built  between 
1611  and  1620  by  Lesdiguieres,  the  Protestant  commander  and  governor 
of  Dauphine",  under  Henri  IV. 


1803]  GRENOBLE    TO   CHAMBERY.  251 

Friday,  13th. — Left  Grenoble.  From  thence  to  Lum- 
bin.  On  the  left  is  a  finely-cultivated  bank,  which  rises 
to  the  foot  of  a  ridge  of  abrupt  mountains ;  and  on  the 
right  is  the  Isere,  winding  in  various  doubles  along  this 
rich  and  much-wooded  valley,  the  woods  ascending  about  a 
third  part  up  the  craggy  and  snow-covered  mountains  of 
the  Upper  Dauphine,  which  exhibit  the  greatest  possible 
variety  of  outline.  An  excellent  road  passes  through 
a  number  of  well-built  comfortable-looking  villages,  and 
by  a  number  of  country-houses  with  uncommonly  pretty 
gardens.  Higher  up  upon  the  bank,  and  nearer  the 
abrupt  wall  of  mountain,  is  a  continued  line  of  villages 
and  country-houses,  almost  touching  one  another,  for  a 
distance  of  two  posts  and  a  half  from  Grenoble.  The 
picturesque  cultivation  of  the  vine,  which  I  have  already 
described,  the  quantity  both  of  fruit  and  walnut  trees, 
the  great  population,  the  habitable  look  of  the  houses, 
joined  to  the  romantic  mountains,  which  everywhere 
meet  the  eye  and  bound  the  view,  makes  the  whole  way 
from  Grenoble  to  Lumbin  one  of  the  most  delightful 
succession  of  landscapes  I  remember  to  have  seen.  This 
route  from  Grenoble  to  Chambery,  has  during  the  war 
been  so  little  frequented,  except  by  persons  travelling  en 
voiturier,  that  the  postmaster  told  us  he  and  the  other 
postmasters  had  given  in  their  dismission  six  months 
before,  and  only  remained  till  they  could  do  better,  or 
see  how  matters  would  go  after  the  peace.  Between 
Lumbin  and  Chaparrillan  is  a  very  pretty  small  penta- 
gonal fort,  upon  the  former  confines  of  France  and  Savoy.* 
Throughout  Dauphine  a  number  of  new  houses  are  build- 
ing in  all  the  villages,  and  it  is  impossible  for  any  country 


*  Fort  Barreaux,  built  by  Charles  Emanuel  Duke  of  Savoy,  in  the  pre- 
sence of  a  French  army,  commanded  by  Lesdiguieres.  On  being  reproved 
by  Henri  IV.  for  allowing  this  to  happen,  he  promised  to  capture  it  when 
finished.  He  kept  his  word,  surprising  the  fort  by  moonlight,  1598.  It  was 
afterwards  strengthened  by  Vauban. — Murray's  Handbook. 


252  MISS  BEERY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

to  bear  more  evident  marks  of  thriving,  of  great  popula- 
tion, and  of  admirable  cultivation.  Chambery  seemed 
neither  the  better  nor  the  worse  for  its  '  Frenchification.' 
The  palace,  which  I  had  seen  formerly,  was  burnt  down  a 
few  years  ago  by  an  accidental  fire  (1798).  Arrived  at 
Aix-les-Bains.  The  building  of  the  baths  is  kept  up  in 
tolerable  order ;  all  inscriptions  of  how,  and  when,  and 
by  whom  it  was  erected  having  been  carefully  effaced. 
It  contains  a  number  of  separate  baths  for  the  douche, 
but  none  of  cold  water,  nor  even  the  means  of  lessening 
the  heat  of  the  natural  temperature.  The  Eomans  made 
use  of  these  waters,  and  considerable,  though  not  very 
interesting,  remains  of  their  baths  (now  subterraneous) 
are  to  be  seen  in  the  garden  and  under  the  floor  of  a 
room  in  the  house  of  a  physician  of  the  place.  These 
remains  have  been  very  lately  discovered.  They  consist 
of  a  passage  terraced  for  the  water,  and  very  neat  tile 
pipes  through  which  the  vapour  passed.  Under  the  floor 
of  the  room  enough  remains  to  prove  the  baths  had  been 
lined  with  marble. 

On  our  return  from  our  walk,  we  found  our  servants 
in  serious  council  over  the  carriage,  yet  standing  before 
the  inn  door.  They  had  found  the  axle-tree  cracked 
and  the  fore  bed  quite  split  through.  No  time  was  to  be 
lost.  A  marechal  was  sent  for.  He  examined  it  in 
presence  of,  I  believe,  the  whole  town  of  Aix ;  for  in 
France  everybody  is  willing,  indeed  insist,  upon  giving 
you  their  company  and  their  advice  upon  all  occasions. 
He  wanted,  as  usual,  to  make  a  job  for  his  neighbour,  the 
charron,  as  well  as  himself.  However,  after  much  useless 
conversation,  he  agreed  to  do  it  for  a  louis,  to  which  I 
added  a  promise  of  a  trifle  more,  if  the  carriage  was 
ready  to  set  off  at  ten  o'clock  the  next  morning. 

Aix  is  a  poor  little  town,  and  the  waters  now  little 
resorted  to.  But  I  should  think  in  peaceful  times  it  would 
be  likely  to  be  otherwise,  for  their  efficacy  is  consider- 


1803]  AIX   TO    GENEVA.  253 

able  ;  there  are  neat  public  walks  planted  with  that 
attention  which  the  old  Government  of  Sardinia  showed 
in  all  its  public  concerns. 

Saturday,  14^. — By  the  help  of  my  bribe  we  con- 
trived to  get  away  from  Aix  before  eleven  o'clock.  The 
road  to  Douey  through  a  green  enclosed  country,  with 
pasturage  very  like  England.  Beyond  Eumilly  it  is  upon 
a  fine  levee  round  the  side  of  a  steep  hill  down  to  a  bridge 
over  a  torrent,  the  whole  of  which  has  been  made  within 
late  years  by  the  French.  The  appearance  of  the  country 
of  Savoy  strikes  me  as  much  better,  and  in  an  improved 
state  of  cultivation  and  comfort  to  what  it  was  formerly. 
From  Douey  the  road  has  been  neglected,  and  in  winter 
the  postilions  said  it  was  almost  impassable  for  such  a 
carriage  as  ours.  They  are  so  little  accustomed  to  people 
travelling  post,  that  we  had  a  world  of  plague  at  every 
posthouse.  We  did  not  arrive  at  Geneva  till  ten  o'clock 
at  night. 

Sunday,  15^. — Walked  to  Sechecon.  The  situation  dis- 
appointed me,  though  with  a  garden  4own  to  the  lake ; 
but  this  end  of  the  lake  is  much  more  tame  than  the 
other. 

The  following  extracts  from  Mrs.  Darner's  letters  to 
Miss  Berry,  show  the  anxiety  now  felt  at  the  state  of 
affairs  between  England  and  France,  and  the  solicitude  of 
those  at  home  lest  communication  should  be  cut  off  from 
their  friends  abroad  : — 

From  Mrs.  Darner  to  Miss  Berry. 

London,  Saturday,  May  14,  1803. 

At  last  the  courier  is  arrived,  and  the  long  doubtful  business 
decided  which  you  will  have  known  before  this  can  reach 
you.  War  is  now  inevitable,  and  to-morrow  Andreossi  leaves 
London.  There  was  no  Parliament  sat  to-day.  I  have  seen 
many  other  wars  begin — none,  in  my  opinion,  under  such  bad 


254  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

auspices ! — remedy  there  is  none.  As  to  myself,  you  may 
depend  on  it,  that  if  I  can  come  to  you  I  will ;  I  shall  learn  by 
your  letters  where  you  are  to  be,  when  you  have  settled  your 
plans. 

Strawberry  Hill,  Monday,  16th. 

...  A  message  was  sent  to  the  Lord  Mayor  on  Saturday  to 
announce  war.  Yesterday  Andreossi  still  had  not  left  London  : 
this,  tho'  some  have  drawn  a  favourable  inference  from  it, 
means  nothing,  by  what  I  understand,  and  at  this  moment  I 
doubt  not  but  that  he  is  on  his  road.  The  communication,  they 
say,  is  to  be  made  from  the  King  to  Parliament  this  day,  and 
made  public  immediately.  I  hope  this  post,  at  least,  letters 
will  still  go  to  Calais ;  but  how  it  will  be  in  future  no  one  knows  ; 
and  I  am  sorry  to  say  that  this  difficulty  appears  to  me  very 
serious.  I  do  not  like  to  name  all  the  ports  that  will  probably 
be  shut  to  English  vessels.  You  talk  of  going  by  Holland  if  I 
come  to  you  ;  but  Holland  is  so  entirely  united  at  this  time  with 
France,  that  it  is  a  thing  understood  here,  that  when  the  French 
Ambassador  leaves  London,  the  Dutch  Minister  will  follow,  of 
course,  &c.  &c.  I  feel,  like  my  old  friend,  *  /  wish  I  was  asleep!' 
I  do  not  mean  wholly  on  the  score  of  public  matters,  for  war  is 
always  interesting,  and,  tho'  for  the  sake  of  humanity  and  for 
every  good  reason,  I  wish  it  avoided,  it  is  to  me  never  dispirit- 
ing. .  .  .  The  matter  of  letters,  I  do  fear,  will  be  a  certain  and 
immediate  evil  on  which  one  must  count.  I  mean  this  altered 
and  lengthened  course,  for  one  cannot  flatter  oneself  that  packets 
will  be  allowed  to  sail  from  Dover  to  Calais,  tho'  our  Captain 
Blake  has  such  a  thought,  and  talked  of  preparing  such  a  plan, 
if  the  two  Governments  could  agree  upon  it  for  mutual  con- 
venience ;  but  I  expect  no  such  thing. 

London,  Saturday,  May  28, 1803. 

.  .  .  Letters  positively  now  no  longer  come  by  Calais,  and  the  first 
accounts  were  true.  They,  however,  will  probably  come  before 
long  by  Hamburg,  and  I  may  hope  to  hear  from  you,  tho'  of 
later  dates,  and  more  irregularly,  I  conclude.  This  being  the 
case,  and  at  this  moment  little  chance  indeed,  by  any  inter- 
ference, of  your  obtaining  leave  to  go  by  Calais  and  Dover, 
either  at  Paris  or  here,  I  shall  not  be  sorry  to  know  that  you 
mean  quietly  to  remain  where  you  are  till  you  hear  what  turn 


1803]  LETTER   FROM    MRS.    DAMER.  255 

things  take  ;  and  by  what  passed  yesterday  in  both  Houses  con- 
cerning a  motion  of  Ld  Fitzwilliam  and  one  of  Mr.  Fox's,  do 
not  still  wholly  despair  of  peace  being  restored — in  which  case 
I  need  not  say  I  should  join  you  wherever  you  may  be.  What 
I  allude  to  is  the  very  unexpected  turn  and  tone  of  Mr.  Pitt's 
speech,  tending  to  approve  of  the  interference  of  Eussia,  and 
portending  (joined  to  other  circumstances),  if  it  portends  any- 
thing, his  coming  into  power  with  peaceable  views.  This, 
together  with  what  struck  me  this  morning  on  reading  the 
debates,  was  what  Ld  Dover  told  me  (who,  poor  man,  is  more 
than  ever  tormented  with  his  gout,  but  still  keeps  up  his  spirits), 
and  is,  as  you  may  guess,  the  receptacle  for  news,  but  it  is 
really,  in  the  political  way,  news  de  la  premiere  main,  and  I 
believe  him  very  little  prejudiced  on  either  side. 

Sunday  morning. 

To  be  sure  my  two  brothers-in-law  are  sad  cripples !  and  to 
save  the  D.  of  Eichmond,  who  so  kindly,  when  he  can,  comes 
to  me,  I  went  yesterday  and  dined  with  him ;  he  repeated  what 
I  told  you  above,  and  had  seen  Mr.  Fox  himself,  who  had  called 
upon  him ;  on  which  I  made  no  remark,  but  was  glad  to  hear 
the  Duke  spoke  in  favour  of  peace,  &c.  You  have  no  idea  of 
the  sensation  what  passed  in  Parliament  has  made ;  it  was 
wholly  unexpected,  and  has  certainly  revived  the  hopes  of  peace. 
I  wish  only  all  this  may  not  have  come  too  late.  Yet  Pitt, 
Fox,  both  nations  and  Buonaparte  for  peace,  it  will  be  hard  if 
a  useless,  cruel,  and  unjustifiable  war  should  be  continued. 
Should  this  be  the  case,  however,  and  that  you  still,  after 
proper  deliberation,  think  you  could  with  comfort  and  sufficient 
absence  of  anxiety  as  to  events  that  most  certainly  may  take 
place  in  this  country;  for  on  that  subject  there  is  but  one 
opinion,  and  it  can  be  no  secret,  I  mean  an  invasion ;  much 
as  I  dislike  a  long  sea  passage,  I  will  come  to  you,  and  with  you 
take  all  chances.  .  .  .  Since  I  wrote  this  I  have  heard  (I  know 
not  how  true)  that  letters  still  go  by  Calais,  but  that  none  are 
allowed  to  come  from  France.  ...  It  is  reported  that  all  Eng- 
lish are  stopped  and  confined  that  are  now  in  France. 


256  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

The  same. 
Strawberry  Hill,  Sunday,  June  5,  1803. 

.  . .  You  must,  in  a  very  few  days  after  the  date  of  the  last  letter, 
have  heard  that  English  are  not  all  to  be  sent  out  of  France, 
but  those  of  a  certain  description  detained  prisoners  at  war : 
this  news  was  known  here  by  the  1st  of  June.  .  .  I  regret  your 
not  having  heard  from  our  Chevalier,  who  could  certainly 
from  Paris  have  given  you  intelligence  as  to  what  was  going  on. 
I  do  not  pretend  to  say  that  events,  as  they  have  turned  out, 
could  by  any  have  been  entirely  foreseen,  but  I  think  you  have 
not  yet  seen  the  political  state  of  Europe  in  the  light  in  which 
it  will  shortly  appear  to  you — and  this  I  account  for  from  your 
having  been  so  many  months  away,  and  wholly  removed  from 
all  means  of  forming  your  own  judgment  of  things.  The  shut- 
ting up  ports  against  English  vessels  being  a  wise  and  political 
measure,  will,  you  may  depend  on  it,  be  adopted  to  the  utmost 
possible  extent  by  Bonaparte;  official  notice  to  this  effect  is 
already  come  from  Holland,  where  Mr.  Lister  is  detained  pri- 
soner, and  within  reach,  as  one  may  call  it;  at  this  moment 
only  Hamburg  remains  to  us.  This  train  of  ideas,  which  my 
mind  pursues  with  peculiar  anxiety  from  your  being  absent, 
and  the  difficulties  in  which,  though  perhaps  not  likely,  it  is 
possible  you  may  be  involved,  makes  me  earnestly  wish  you 
were  returned.  .  .  . 

The  little  remaining  shadow  of  peace  I  mentioned  has,  I  thiok, 
wholly  vanished.  Mr.  Pitt  spoke  yesterday  against  Ministry — 
thought  them  in  many  things  wrong,  but  that  the  confusion,  a 
change  by  loss  of  time  for  preparations,  &c.  &c.,  would  now 
make  war  not  advisable.  Lord  Hawkesbury  was  in  great  anger. 
Mr.  Fox  spoke — I  believe  it  was  little — and  did  not  (nor  I 
conclude  his  friends)  divide. 

London,  Sunday,  June  12, 1803. 

I  hope  you  did  not  put  your  letter,  as  you  intended,  into  the 
Gferman  post,  as  our  packets  now  do  not  go  to  Cuxhaven,  nor 
can  you,  consequently,  as  things  are,  return  that  way.  The 
French  army  is  at  Bremen,  with  an  intention,  as  it  appears,  of 
occupying  Hanover,  and  even  Hamburg,  tho'  it  is  expected 
some  other  arrangement,  at  least  as  to  the  latter,  and  the  pas- 


1803]  LETTER   FROM   MRS.    DAMER.  257 

sage  of  the  Elbe,  &c.,  will  take  place  between  France,  Prussia, 
and  Kussia ;  but  at  present  travellers  are  allowed  to  go  through 
France  by  applying  to  Paris  for  passports  (such,  of  course,  as 
do  not  come  under  the  late  restriction),  and  to  pass  from  Calais 
to  Dover.  Vessels  for  the  mails,  which  are  allowed  to  take  in 
passengers,  go  regularly  to  and  from  these  ports  with  a  flag  of 
truce.  On  this  you  may  depend,  and  take  your  measures 
accordingly,  for  this  moment ;  but  for  the  next  it  is  impossible 
to  answer.  ...  I  always  fear  you  may  be  influenced  in  your 
plans  by  a  natural  disbelief  of  what  often  must  appear  to  you 
(as  it  would  to  me)  idle  stories,  though  they  are,  may  be,  real 
and  certain  facts.  Should  you  determine  to  return,  and  through 
France,  I  think  you  ought  yourself  to  write  to  Perregaux  for  a 
passport,  and  the  moment  I  know  you  have  made  this  determi- 
nation I  shall  take  care  that  he  shall  also  be  written  to  from 
hence,  to  back  your  request  and  take  every  precaution  for  you 
in  my  power.  I  think,  also,  in  this  case  you  would  do  well  to 
write  to  Mdme.  Visconti,  who  was  so  kind  and  obliging  to  us ; 
she  very  probably  might  assist  you,  were  there  any  difficulty, 
and  I  am  persuaded  would  do  it  with  pleasure 

Tuesday,  June  14. 

Events  crowd  on  faster  even  than  I  expected,  and  I  grow 
seriously  uneasy  about  your  not  being  here.  Hanover  is  taken, 
without  resistance,  and  the  Elbe  shut  up.  This  intelligence 
came  yesterday,  by  the  first  consul's  own  particular  courier 
(called  Moustache),  who  also  announced  that  the  communi- 
cation by  Calais  was  to  end  on  the  28th  of  this  month.  This 
is  not  newspaper  intelligence — it  was  told  me  last  night  by  the 
Duchess  of  Devonshire,  who,  either  herself  or  Lady  Elizabeth, 
had  seen  Lord  Hervey.  The  Duchess  says  that  a  voiturier 
comes  in  eight  days  from  Geneva  to  Calais;  this,  could  you  be 
in  time,  and  have  your  passports  from  Paris,  would  be  very 
easy,  as  you  are  only  two  perfectly  unexceptionable  women  in 
every  way,  and  your  father  above  sixty ;  and  to  return  home  I 
could  certainly  obtain  a  passport  for  Dover  here  for  you.  What 
other  intelligence  the  courier  brought  it  is  not  known — possibly 
some  propositions  of  arrangement,  but  nothing  has  transpired. 
The  King  came  to  town,  and  there  was  a  council  in  consequence 
of  the  arrival  of  this  courier. 
VOL.  II.  S 


258  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

I  wish  to  (rod  you  may  have  taken  the  advice  I  sent  you  in 
my  letter  immediately  after  I  saw  Edwards,  and  now  be  on 
your  way  through  France  ;  but  this  I  no  way  expect,  and  now 
things  change,  and  may  change  so  rapidly,  there  is  no  giving 
advice  but  in  a  general  way.  Would  your  reluctance  to  return- 
ing to  England  had  not  been  so  great ! — not  but  that  this  reflec- 
tion is  suggested,  I  fairly  allow,  by  events  I  perfectly  knew 
you  could  not  foresee — nor  could  I.  ...  Do  not  trust  this 
or  that  person,  but  write  yourself  to  the  persons  I  mentioned 
above,  to  Paris,  and  any  others  there  you  think  of,  and  take 
notice  that  neutral  powers  may  not  long  continue  so.  ... 

Supposing  the  passage  from  Calais  to  be  actually  shut  for 
English  vessels  by  the  28th,  I  cannot  see  at  all  which  way  you 
can  return.  For  Heaven's  sake,  take  the  very  best  and  surest 
advice,  and  do  not  either  hurry  or  delay,  but  act  as  prudence 
may  direct. 


JOUENAL. 

Saturday,  May  28th. — Left  Geneva  by  half-past  eight,  in 
a  hired  carriage  with  three  horses,  leaving  Gibaud  behind 
to  get  our  coach  from  the  coachniaker's,  our  clothes 
from  the  washerwoman,  and  our  gowns  from  the  mantua- 
maker's,  and  to  wait  till  he  received  orders  to  follow  with 
them  to  Lausanne.  At  past  twelve  o'clock,  the  night 
before,  when  we  were  all  in  bed  and  asleep,  we  had  been 
waked  by  Lord  John  Campbell  *  to  communicate  intel- 
ligence he  had  received  from  some  of  the  English  at 
Secheron,  viz.,  that  by  a  letter  which  Lady  Donegal  f 
(who  lodged  there)  had  received  from  Lyons,  they  learnt 
that  the  English  were  arrested  there,  and  it  was  believed 
the  same  order  was  to  be  received  by  the  post  the  next 
morning  at  Geneva,  in  consequence  of  which  he,  Lord 
John,  and  his  companion  Mr.  Eobertson,  meant  to  leave 

*  Lord  John  Campbell,  second  son  of  John  Duke  of  Argyll,  born  1777 ; 
succeeded  his  brother  George  William,  sixth  duke,  1839  ;  died  1847. 
t  Barbara,  daughter  of  Dr.  Godfrey,  born  1790;  died  1829. 


18C3]  GENEVA  TO   LAUSANNE.  259 

Geneva,  and  the  rest  of  the  English  Secheron,  before  the 
arrival  of  the  post,  that  is  to  say,  before  eight  o'clock  the 
next  morning.  I  own,  when  my  sister  came  up  and  woke 
me,  I  was  little  inclined  to  credit  intelligence  coming  in 
so  roundabout  a  manner,  and  advised  her,  without  waking 
iny  father,  to  return  quietly  to  bed  and  let  us  talk  of  it 
next  morning ;  to  which  she  unwillingly  consented,  but 
went  to  my  father  early  the  next  morning,  when  she  com- 
municated it  to  him ;  she  was  so  uneasy  and  anxious  to 
be  gone,  that  soon  after  six  she  was  a^ain  with  me.  We 

o  *  <— t 

directly  sent  up  for  the  master  of  the  house,  told  him 
de  quoi  il  s'agissait,  begged  him  immediately  to  get  us  a 
carriage  (for  there  was  no  time  to  enquire  if  ours  was 
finished),  made  our  maid  stuff  what  things  she  could  into 
one  of  the  trunks,  and  with  much  hurry  and  much  un- 
comfortable bustle  got  off  at  half-past  eight  from  the 
door  of  the  Balances,  not  indeed  before  the  post  had 
arrived,  but  before   any  order  it  had  brought   to   the 
Prefet  was  communicated  to  the  sentinels  at  the  gates, 
so  that  we  passed  without  interruption  of  any  sort,  either 
at  Geneva  or  at  Versay,  the  limits  of  tte  French  territory, 
about  a  league  and  a  half  from  the  town,  where  there  is 
a  barriere  and  a  douane,  although  in  the  hurry  of  setting 
out  the  servants  left  my  letter- case  behind,  in  which  was 
our  passport.     We  stopped  at  Eolle  from  twelve  o'clock 
till  three,  and  arrived  at  Lausanne  by  six  o'clock.     As  no 
less   than   three   English  families  had  left  Geneva  and 
Secheron  on  the  same  day,  and  upon  the  same  account 
as  ourselves,  we  found  all  the  inns  full,  and  got  very 
bad  rooms  on  the  third  story  of  the  least  good  of  the 
two  bad  ones  at  Lausanne.     I  had  a  violent  headache  by 
the  time  I  arrived,  whioh  was  perhaps  lucky,  as  it  took 
from  me  almost  the  power  of  every  other  thought  but 
that  of  getting  a  room  and  to  bed  as  fast  as  I  could, 
instead  of  the  melancholy  retour  one  should  necessarily 
have  made  upon  oneself  returning  to  a  town  after  an 

82 


260  MISS  BERET'S  JOUEXAL.  [isos 

absence  of  nearly  nineteen  years,  which  one  had  left  in 
the  heyday  of  life,  with  a  thousand  brilliant  prospects, 
hopes,  and  ideas  before  one,  all  cruelly  failed  in  a  man- 
que ed  existence,  and  which  at  sober  forty  can  never  be 
renewed ! 

Our  old  friend  Miss  Cerjat  came  to  see  us  the  instant 
she  knew  of  our  arrival.  Seeing  her  was  a  relief  to  me 
from  finding  her  so  much  less  changed  than  I  had  been 
led  to  expect  from  the  various  family  distresses  in  which 
she  has  been  lately  involved. 

Wednesday,  July  6th. — Went  to  the  library  of  Mr. 
Gibbon  ;*  it  still  remains  here,  though  bought  seven  years 
ago  by  Mr.  Beckford,  of  Fonthill,  for  950/.  It  consists 
of  near  10,000  volumes,  and,  as  far  as  I  could  judge  by 
a  cursory  and  (from  its  present  situation)  a  very  incon- 
venient examination  of  it,  it  is,  of  all  the  libraries  I  ever 
saw,  that  of  which  I  should  most  covet  the  possession — 
that  which  seems  exactly  everything  that  any  gentleman 
or  gentlewoman  fond  of  letters  could  wish.  Although  it 
is  in  no  particular  walk  of  literature  a  perfect  collection, 
in  the  classical  part  perhaps  less  than  any  other,  and  in 
the  Greek  less  than  in  the  Latin  classics,  still  there  are 
good  editions  of  all  the  best  authors  in  both  languages. 
The  books,  though  neither  magnificent  in  their  editions  nor 
in  their  bindings,  are  all  in  good  condition,  all  clean,  all 
such  as  one  wishes  to  read,  and  could  have  no  scruple  in 
using.  They  are  under  the  care  of  Mr.  Scott,  a  physician  of 
this  place,  who  made  the  bargain  for  Mr.  Beckford  with 
Gibbon's  heirs  in  England,  and  are  placed  in  two  small 
and  inconvenient  rooms  hired  for  the  purpose,  and  filled 
with  rows  of  shelves  so  near  as  scarcelv  to  admit  of  look- 


*  The  house  of  Gibbon  and  the  garden  have  been  much  changed.  The 
wall  of  the  Hotel  Gibbon  occupies  the  site  of  his  summerhouse,  and  the 
berceau  walk  has  been  destroyed  to  make  room  for  the  garden  of  the  hotel ; 
nothing  but  the  terrace  overlooking  the  lake  and  a  few  acacias  remain.—' 
Murray^  Handbook. 


1803]  LAUSANNE.  261 

ing  at  the  books  on  the  back  side  of  them.  Mr.  Beckford, 
when  last  here  in  17  9-,  packed  up  about  2,500  vols.  of 
what  he  considered  as  the  choicest  of  them,  in  two  cases, 
which  he  then  proposed  sendipg  to  England  directly,  but 
which  still  remain  in  their  cases  with  the  others. 

\\tti. — Mr.  Glayre  had  a  good  house  in  Lausanne, 
with  a  beautiful  view,  a  good  house  in  the  country  at 
Eomain-Motier,  about  twenty  miles  from  Lausanne,  both 
well  furnished  according  to  the  ideas  of  the  country,  had 
frequent  company  to  dinner  in  Lausanne,  besides  evening 
parties,  and  very  often  people  staying  at  his  house  in  the 
country  for  weeks  together;  gave  foreign  wine  at  his 
table  whenever  he  had  company,  lived  in  every  respect 
well  and  at  ease,  kept  four  carriage  horses  (occasionally 
working  on  his  farm),  having  a  library,  buying  some 
books  every  year,  denying  himself  no  reasonable  fancy, 
and  having  a  wife  and  two  young  children.  He  spent 
800/.  sterling  a  year ! 

N.B. — To  this  must  be  added  the  taxes  to  be  imposed 
by  the  new  Government  since  the  independence  of  the 
Pays  de  Vaud  from  Berne,  which  cannot  make  a  differ- 
ence of  30/.  a  year. 

This  independent  canton  of  Vaud,  thinking  itself  so 
happy  to  have  escaped  from  what  some  silly  heads  of  it 
were  pleased  to  call  the  tyranny  of  the  canton  of  Berne, 
will,  I  feel  convinced,  in  a  very  short  time,  be  united  to 
France  by  the  general  consent  and  desire  of  the  rational 
and  thinking  part  of  the  community,  and  I  think  they 
will  do  well  for  the  real  happiness  and  prosperity  of  their 
country  in  desiring  such  union.  The  peasants,  I  believe, 
have  really  gained  by  the  abolition  of  the  feudal  and 
seigneurial  rights  ;  in  short,  by  their  revolution,  made  ex- 
actly upon  the  model  of  the  French  as  to  putting  down 
arms,  burning  family  papers,  abolishing  titles,  liveries, 
&c.  &c.  But  the  inhabitants  of  the  towns,  who  were 
formerly  an  industrious,  sober,  and  (for  the  age  they 


262  MISS   BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1803 

lived  in)  simple  set  of  people,  are  grown  at  once  idle, 
insolent,  and  corrupted,  which  sits  infinitely  worse  upon 
the  dull  grassier  ete  of  the  Swiss  character  than  upon  the 
pert  legerete  of  the  French.  The  men,  instead  of  thinking 
of  their  trade,  are  hardly  ever  in  their  shops,  but  loitering 
about  in  groups,  talking  the  politics  of  their  country,  and 
all  looking  after  some  place  or  some  participation  in  their 
government,  for  which  their  former  lives  have  not  qua- 
lified them,  and  which  their  present  duties,  unless 
neglected,  must  prevent  their  fulfilling.  The  women 
consider  liberty  and  equality  as  an  equal  right  for  every- 
one to  read  novels  from  morning  till  night,  which  they  do, 
from  the  lowest  servants  to  the  first  citoyenne  in  the 
town.  If  ever  anything  could  persuade  one  to  consider 
being  taught  to  read  as  a  disadvantage  to  the  lower  order 
of  people,  it  would  be  here,  from  the  often  vile,  and  always 
absurd,  use  which  is  made  of  it.  The  frequent  passage 
and  residence  of  French  troops  in  their  towns  have  in- 
troduced much  profligacy  in  their  manners ;  and  as  they 
have  looked  up  to  the  French  as  their  models  in  every- 
thing, so  like  them  they  seem  to  expect  the  monstrous 
and  impossible  combination  of  well-ordered  liberty  in 
government  and  idle  profligacy  in  manners. 

Their  commerce,  which  was  formerly  considerable  in 
books,  is  falling  to  nothing,  in  spite  of  every  living  soul 
in  the  town  reading.  They  no  longer  print  any  good 
works  here,  but  draw  their  books  from  Paris,  which, 
greatly  increasing  the  price,  and  everybody  but  the  pea- 
sants being  impoverished  by  their  revolution,  nobody 
buys,  the  novels  go  from  hand  to  hand  from  the  circula- 
ting library  with  almost  as  little  advantage  to  those  who 
let  as  to  those  who  hire  them.  All  the  tradespeople 
complain  of  having  little  to  do,  and  yet  they  are  neglect- 
ful and  dilatory  in  executing  the  smallest  commission,  and 
have  lost  entirely  all  that  prevenance  of  manner  and  wish 
to  oblige  which  most  commonly  exists  where  trade  really 


1803]  LAUiJANNE.  263 

r 

flourishes  or  is  increasing.  Everyone  being  a  burgess  of 
the  town,  he  has  certain  pecuniary  rights,  amounting  to 
about  five  or  six  pounds  sterling  a  year,  such  as  so  many 
loads  of  wood  furnished  to  them  from  the  estates  of  the 
town,  which  are  considerable — about  five  thousand  pounds 
a  year,  and  what  was  called  la  bourse  des  Pauvres^  about 
1,400/. ;  and  when  old  or  incapable  of  working,  being  pro- 
vided for  by  the  town  (that  is  to  say,  placed  at  its  ex- 
pense in  the  hospital,  or  receiving  their  sustenance,  fuel, 
clothes,  &c.,  from  the  town  in  their  own  houses),  they 
count  too  much  upon  this  resource,  and  probably  are 
more  anxious  about  the  direction  of  their  public  estate 
than  their  private  affairs. 

Their  criminal  justice  was  formerly  administered  by 
the  Supreme  Council  at  Berne,  and  from  the  infrequency 
of  crimes  and  the  emptiness  of  their  prisons,  one  may 
justly  suppose  was  well  administered.  Now  that  their 
justice  is  in  their  own  hands,  their  prisons  are  full. 
Nobody,  indeed,  is  punished,  because  means  are  always 
found  to  let  the  malefactors,  whatever  their  crimes,  escape 
out  of  prison  by  the  command  of  then  friendly  judges. 
Their  civil  justice  must  grow  still  worse,  and  the  degree 
of  partiality  which  was  formerly  supposed  to  interfere  HI 
causes  where  anything  Bernois  was  a  party,  must  have 
been  nothing  in  comparison  to  what  must  take  place  now, 
when  Jacques  judges  Jean,  with  all  the  little  partialities, 
little  prejudices,  and  little  piques,  which  it  is  not  in  the 
nature  of  man  to  avoid  in  a  small  society  of  which  he 
himself  forms  a  part.  Add  to  this  that  the  Government 
of  Berne  was  rich,  and  assisted  its  subjects  in  a  variety  of 
ways  (such  as  lending  money  to  individuals  for  any  con- 
siderable undertaking,  at  one,  one  and  a  half,  and  two  per 
cent. ;  having  their  granaries  always  full  of  salt  and  of 
corn,  which  in  case  of  scarcity  were  retailed  at  a  moderate 
price,  &c.),  while  the  Government  of  the  Eepublique 
Vaudoise,  having  nothing,  can  have  neither  public  muni- 


264  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1303 

ficence  nor  private  charities,  and  consequently  the  number 
of  poor,  of  real  mendicants,  I  mean,  among  the  labouring 
classes,  both  in  the  towns  and  the  country,  is  unexampled 
in  their  former  history.  All  these  inconveniences,  which 
time  seems  more  likely  to  increase  than  to  diminish,  con- 
vince me  that  Buonaparte's  moderation  with  respect  to 
this  country  (I  mean  the  Pays  de  Vaud  in  particular)  has 
been  merely  giving  them  rope  enough  to  hang  themselves. 
The  inhabitants  of  the  towns  will  rapidly  fall  into  decay, 
if  not  into  discord,  and  there  not  being  territory  enough 
for  them  all  to  become  cultivators  (to  say  nothing  of  con- 
trary habits),  the  wisest  among  them  will  find  it  best 
to  associate  themselves  to  a  country  more  fertile  in  re- 
sources than  their  own,  and  to  give  up  their  troublesome 
independence  for  leave  to  participate  in  the  brilliant 
prospects  of  France.  Nor,  indeed,  do  I  believe  it  possible 
in  the  present  age,  in  the  present  political  order  of  things, 
and  with  the  present  habits,  wants,  and  wishes  of  man- 
kind, to  establish  a  small  independent  government  without 
any  other  means  of  aggrandisement  than  the  progression 
of  national  industry,  particularly  in  a  country  like  this, 
close  to  France,  and  not  locally  separated  from  the  con- 
tagion of  its  manners,  its  errors,  and  its  corruption,  like 
the  little  mountainous  cantons  of  Switzerland,  whose 
various  democracies  were  all  settled  in  an  age  when  a 
total  absence  of  the  occupations  of  foreign  commerce  and 
foreign  relations,  and  the  simplicity  and  paucity  of  their 
own  wants,  made  it  no  very  difficult  matter  to  be  at  once 
a  judge,  a  soldier,  and  a  farmer,  to  have  wit  enough  to 
settle  such  differences  as  were  likely  to  occur,  strength 
enough  to  till  the  field,  and  valour  to  defend  it. 

Saturday,  23rd. — Went  to  see  the  cathedral — a  very 
handsome  large  Gothic  church,  much  enriched  with 
figures  of  no  very  good  sculpture,  but  as  perfect  as  the 
day  they  were  put  up.  The  middle  aisle  of  this  church 
is  deformed  with  pews.  Behind  the  choir  are  several  old 


1803]  LAUSANNE   CATHEDRAL.  265 

monuments  of  their  Catholic  bishops,  and  one  only  of  a 
chevalier  in  a  shirt  of  mail.*  There  are  besides  several 
modern  monuments  to  strangers  who  have  died  at  Lau- 
sanne. A  handsome  sarcophagus  to  the  Princesse  d'OrlofF, 
a  simple  tablet  to  the  memory  of  poor  William  Legge, 
and  another  to  that  of  Mr.  Ellison,  who  died  when 
we  were  first  at  Lausanne  in  1785.  A  monument,  in- 
tended, judging  by  the  pedestal,  to  have  been  very 
magnificent,  to  the  memory  of  the  first  wife  of  Comte 
Walmoden ;  but  before  the  monument  was  finished, 
he  married  again,  and  it  has  never  been  put  up  at  all. 
There  are,  besides  these  monuments,  simple  tablets, 
with  arms,  to  many  families  of  the  Pays  de  Vaud.  At 
the  time  of  their  revolution,  in  their  ridiculous  Patriotic 
Society,  as  it  was  called,  the  servile  and  contemptible 
ape  of  all  revolutionary  follies  of  the  French,  they  more 
than  once  proposed  destroying  these  monuments.  They, 
however,  escaped  everything  but  the  rapacity  of  the 
French  soldiers,  who,  in  some  of  their  visits  to  Lausanne, 
took  away  all  the  copper-gilt  letters  of  which  some  of  the 
inscriptions  were  made. 

Sunday,  24th. — Left  Lausanne  without  the  regret  that 
I  could  wish  to  have  experienced  at  leaving  so  beautiful 
a  country,  in  which  I  had  formerly  spent  many  cheerful 
days.  But  the  disagreeable  uncertainty  in  which  we 
have  been  living  here  for  these  last  two  months  has 
been  such,  that  I  felt  rather  glad  it  should  come  to  an 
end,  even  by  the  alternative  of  a  long  and  tiresome 
journey.  The  road  between  Lausanne  and  Meudon  is  a 
continued  ascent  up  the  Jura. 

Monday,  25/A. — Eoad  from  Payerne  to  Avenches,  along 
a  pleasant  cultivated  valley.  Avenches  is  an  old  walled 
town.  A  Roman  marble  column,  with  a  part  of  its  base 

*  Otho  of  Gransom,  whose  ancestor,  Otto  de  Grandeson,  held  several  im- 
portant offices  in  England,  under  Henry  III.  and  Edward  I. — Murray's 
Handbook. 


266  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

and  entablature,  remains  in  a  garden  on  the  right  side  of 
the  road.*  No  other  Roman  remains  appear,  but  the 
books  say  there  are  several.  There  is  a  pretty  view  of 
the  Lake  of  Morat  before  coming  to  Avenches.  Morat, 
situated  on  an  eminence,  is  a  good-looking  old  town,  with 
arcades  in  the  streets  like  Berne.  On  the  side  of  the  road 
formerly  stood  the  nobly  simple  monument,  erected  to 
the  bravery  of  the  Swiss  in  the  defeat  of  the  Bourguignons 
[1476]  ;  but  the  French  regiment  de  la  Cote  d'Or  being 
unfortunately  quartered  at  Morat  in  the  year  1798,  nobly 
destroyed  it  entirely,  instead  of,  like  real  heroes,  respect- 
ing valour  of  every  country.  Nothing  remains  but  a  few 
scattered  bones  among  the  weeds  which  mark  the  place 
of  the  former  enclosure.  The  approach  to  Berne  is 
marked  by  innumerable  farm  and  country  houses,  scat- 
tered over  the  hills,  many  guinguettes  and  gardens  near 
the  roadside,  and  long  avenues  of  trees  up  to  the  gates. 
Our  passport  here  was  left  in  the  hands  of  the  police. 
There  seemed  to  be  no  French  soldiers  at  the  gates. 

Tuesday.,  26th. — Went  to  the  cathedral.  A  very  fine 
Gothic  building.  Of  the  four  windows  of  the  tower, 
three  are  of  beautiful  painted  glass  in  mosaic  patterns. 
The  fourth  was  destroyed  by  lightning  about  150  years 
ago,  and  has  been  replaced  by  plain  glazing.  Monuments 
there  are  none  whatsoever.  There  is  an  immense  organ, 
loaded  with  gilt  ornaments  in  the  very  worst  taste,  put 
up  in  a  circular  gallery  of  Grecian  architecture  at  the 
west  end  of  the  church,  which  takes  off  considerably  from 
its  length.  From  the  terrace,  of  which  the  cathedral 
forms  the  boundary,  on  one  side  there  is  a  fine  view  of 
the  river  running  almost  immediately  under  it,  the  well- 
wooded  and  cultivated  hills  of  the  environs,  all  dotted 
over  with  villages  and  single  houses,  and  beyond  them 
Alps  on  Alps  rising  in  the  distance.  I  cannot  say  how 

*  Corinthian  column  37  feet  high,  on  which  the  storks  now  build. 


1803]  BERNE.  267 

much  I  was  struck  with  the  appearance  of  the  streets 
and  buildings  of  Berne.  Everything  that  belongs  to  the 
public  is  well  executed  and  well  kept ;  and  all  the  private 
houses  in  the  principal  streets  are  handsome.  The  pecu- 
liar beauty  of  the  stone  walls  with  which  the  whole  town 
is  built  adds  to  this  effect,  as  certainly  do  the  arcades 
under  the  houses.  The  piers  also  sloping  outwards  give 
an  appearance  of  regularity  and  solidity  extremely  pleas- 
ing, while  the  superstructures  are  sufficiently  varied  in 
their  forms  and  ornaments  to  prevent  sameness. 

On  leaving  the  town,  after  crossing  the  bridge  over  the 
Aar,a  long  ascent  from  the  other  side  is  protected  with  head- 
stone parapets,  executed  in  the  most  solid  manner  by  the 
Government  between  the  years  1750  and  1758,  as  a  sort 
of  stone  monument  upon  the  top  of  the  hill  records.  The 
view  from  hence  beautiful,  and  the  Aar  is  seen  winding 
almost  entirely  round  the  town,  and  placing  it  on  a  penin- 
sula. This  happened  to  be  market  day  at  Berne,  and 
the  great  street  in  which  the  Faucon  is  situated  was, 
from  before  six  in  the  morning,  a  perfect  fair,  with  a  row 
of  booths  completely  down  both  sides  outside  the  arcades, 
besides  the  herb  and  fruit  market,  which  began  the  busi- 
ness of  the  day.  The  booths  were  shops  of  all  sorts,  but 
principally  of  wearing  apparel,  many  with  all  the  ribbons 
and  velvets,  and  bits  of  embroidery,  which  enter  into  the 
composition  of  a  Bernoise  dress.  Nothing,  indeed,  can 
be  more  picturesque  than  the  variety  of  female  dresses 
from  the  different  cantons  and  districts  of  Switzerland,  to 
be  seen  in  this  market — more  of  them  odd  than  graceful, 
but  all  serving  to  make  that  interesting  variety,  the 
absence  of  which  one  regrets  in  the  appearance  of  a 
people  where  there  are  no  regular  dresses  for  different 
classes.  Left  Berne.  The  road  through  a  cultivated 
country  with  fine  woods.  The  houses  all  constructed  a 
la  Bernoise,  which  gives  a  great  idea  of  comfort  to  a 
farm-house. 


268  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURXAL.  [isos 

Tuesday,  26 th. — Arrived  at  Soleure  in  the  afternoon. 
Our  passport  was  taken  at  the  gate  by  the  French  troops 
upon  guard  there,  with  a  promise  to  bring  it  to  us  that 
evening.  I  wished  to  send  for  it,  fearing  any  delay  next 
morning,  but  the  waiter  assured  me  no  mistake  could  be 
made,  that  the  son  of  the  landlord  was  one  of  the  muni- 
cipal officers  who  would  viser  the  passport  and  send  it. 
Still  the  passport  did  not  arrive,  and  in  spite  of  the 
waiter's  assurances  I  began  to  be  uneasy.  I  had  seen  in 
our  walk  about  the  town  more  French  soldiers,  hussars, 
and  infantry,  than  in  all  the  rest  of  Switzerland  beside, 
and  I  began  to  suspect  that  their  will,  whatever  that 
might  be,  would  here  be  law.  About  nine  o'clock,  when 
my  father  had  already  retired  to  his  room,  the  municipal 
officer  begged  to  speak  to  me  upon  the  subject  of  our  pass- 
port ;  it  had  never  been  brought  by  the  soldiers  to  his  office, 
but  had  been  carried  to  the  French  commandant ;  that  we 
were  entirely  in  the  power  of  the  French  military,  who, 
he  added,  were  unfortunately  his  masters  as  well  as  ours. 
Upon  this  I  desired  immediately  to  speak  to  the  com- 
mandant de  la  place,  who  luckily  happened  to  be  at 
supper  in  the  house,  and  I  prevented  my  father  from 
going  to  bed,  as  his  presence  would  be  necessary  to  con- 
stater  his  age.  At  last  the  commandant  made  his  appear- 
ance. He  was  a  young  man  of  about  twenty-six  or 
seven,  with  a  mild,  gentlemanlike  countenance,  and 
quiet  composed  manners.  But  never  did  I  see  such  a 
thorough  concentrated  hatred,  such  a  deep  settled  desire 
of  revenge,  expressed  with  such  perfectly  undisturbed 
calmness,  and  by  an  apparently  cold  character,  as  by  this 
man  against  England.  For  once  in  my  life  I  rejoiced  at 
the  helplessness  of  my  sex ;  for  the  calm  composure  of 
this  young  man  in  uttering  the  most  abominable  lies 
about  his  treatment  in  England  did  so  make  my  blood 
boil  in  my  veins,  that  nothing  but  my  sex  could  have  pre- 
vented me  being  guilty  of  the  signal  folly  of  chastising  him 


1803]  SOLEURE   TO   BASLE.  269 

as  he  deserved,  and  consequently  of  making  myself  the 
aggressor.  The  scene  ended  with  his  first  accompanying 
my  father  to  the  French  general  (Eppler),  with  whom 
he  said  he  must  se  combiner  about  the  passport,  and  then 
signing  and  sealing  it  himself,  which,  indeed,  I  believe, 
neither  he  nor  the  general  could  avoid  doing  (though 
they  said  otherwise),  as  my  father  was  non  compris  in  the 
decree  of  arrestation  in  France. 

Wednesday,  27th. — We  left  Soleure  at  five  o'clock  in 
the  morning,  too  happy  to  get  out  of  the  hands  of 
General  Eppler  and  his  commandant  de  la  place.  After 
leaving  Soleure,  the  country  is  less  interesting  and  less  well 
cultivated  than  any  part  of  Switzerland  I  have  yet  seen. 
The  town  of  Soleure  has  always  been  more  montee  a  la 
Franqaise  than  any  other  in  Switzerland.  The  houses 
and  the  people,  particularly  of  the  better  sort,  have  more  a 
French  than  a  Swiss  air.  It  was  always  the  residence  of 
the  French  ambassador,  the  only  ambassador  with  which 
the  cantons  were  honoured.  It  is  now  the  depot  of  all 
the  French  military  in  Switzerland,  amounting  to  seven 
or  eight  hundred.  From  here,  as  the  centre  of  the 
country,  they  can  send  out  bands  to  dictate  to  any  other 
part.  Indeed,  here  they  seem  to  have  established  them- 
selves, and  I  believe  it  will  be  long  before  the  poor  Swiss 
will  be  able  to  unkennel  them  from  this  burrow.  They 
will  always  find  some  reason  for  keeping  here  a  body  of 
troops,  and  till  such  troops  be  removed,  the  Swiss  will 
never  be  able  to  call  those  reasons  bad.  Upon  a  prominent 
rock,  in  the  narrowest  part  of  the  valley,  and  just  above 
a  village,*  is  a  very  picturesque  old  ruined  castle,  which 
probably  in  former  daysN commanded  the  country  on  both 
sides.  The  approach  to  Basle  is  through  a  long  avenue 
of  poplars.  After  taking  possession  of  our  apartment, 


*  Aussere  Klus.  Above  it  rises  the  ruined  castle  of  Bipp  (Castrum  Pepini), 
built  by  Pepin,  Maire  du  Palais. 


270  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

we  were  much  pleased  to  see  Peter  enter  the  room.  He 
had  arrived  from  Neufchatel,  sent  by  Mr.  MacCulloch 
with  a  voiturier  on  a  char-a-banc.  He  had  put  on  the 
man's  clothes,  and  had  slept  at  Soleure  the  night  before, 
as  well  as  ourselves,  but  at  another  inn,  and  had  luckily 
known  nothing  of  our  being  there ;  for  most  assuredly, 
had  the  vindictive  commandant  known  of  him  as  an 
Englishman,  or  as  one  of  our  party,  he  would  have  been 
stopped  as  a  good  exchange  for  a  French  grenadier. 

Thursday,  28th. — The  weather  was  now  excessively 
hot,  and  admitted  of  very  little  exercise.  Determined  to 
stay  at  Basle  till  the  next  morning. 

Went  to  the  principal  bookseller — a  very  good  one  ;  to 
Michel's  great  print  warehouse,  always  entertaining ;  to 
the  cathedral,  a  large  handsome  Gothic  building,  con- 
taining the  tomb  of  Erasmus,  who  died  here — a  plain 
marble  tablet,  with  an  inscription  in  gilt  letters.  It  is  of 
a  nasty  reddish  coloured  stone,  which  much  diminishes 
its  effect. 

After  dinner,  in  spite  of  the  heat,  we  went  to  the  public 
library,  where,  in  several  rooms  under  those  containing 
the  books,  are  preserved  a  number  of  fine  drawings  and 
some  admirable  pictures  of  Holbein.  A  portrait  of 
Erasmus,  and  another  of  his  friend  Amerbach  (a  juris- 
consult of  this  place),  to  whom  a  large  volume  of  Eras- 
mus's MS.  letters  have  been  preserved ;  a  portrait  of  a 
Swiss  merchant  in  London,  which,  after  being  in  various 
different  hands,  has  returned  to  the  native  country  both 
of  the  painter  and  of  the  person  represented  ;  a  portrait 
of  his  own  wife  and  two  children — admirable.  Among 
other  valuables  are  some  very  fine  cinque-cento  editions : 
a  book  of  devotion  of  Fust  in  the  year  1464  ;  of  Cicero's 
Epistles,  without  name  of  printer,  in  1469 ;  Erasmus's  seal, 
device,  and  many  little  remembrances  of  him  are  here 
preserved  together  with  the  letters  I  have  before  men- 
tioned, and  a  MS.  of  the  '  Moria  Encomia  '  with  Holbein's 


1803]  LETTER   FEOM   MRS.   HOWE.  271 

drawings  upon  the  margin  in  pen  and  ink.  An  edition 
of  this  has  been  published,  with  the  drawings  on  wooden 
plates,  which  give  a  very  poor  idea  of  the  spirit  of  the 
originals. 

Friday,  29th. — Left  Basle.  In  spite  of  the  assurances 
of  our  commandant  at  Soleure,  that  without  his  permis- 
sion we  should  not  be  allowed  to  pass  from  Basle,  not  a 
question  was  asked  us,  either  on  entering  or  on  leaving  it ; 
nor,  indeed,  on  the  German  side,  did  I  see  a  creature  to 
ask  it,  except  a  few  poor-looking  Invalides,  whom  we  over- 
took in  the  street,  going  to  take  possession  of  the  gate. 
French  troops  and  a  French  officer  there  certainly  are  in 
Basle,  but  they  are  few,  and  take  no  direction  of,  or  inter- 
fere with,  the  municipality.  Freyburg,  the  capital  of  the 
Breisgau  (the  country  by  the  late  arrangements  ceded 
to  Modena),  is  a  small  town,  like  most  German  towns, 
with  very  wide  streets,  which  sounds  better  than  it  looks. 
The  heat  was  so  excessive  that  we  were  glad  to  pass 
the  rest  of  the  day  in  the  inn. 

The  following  extract  of  a  letter  from  Mrs.  Howe 
belongs  to  this  period,  though  it  is  not  said  at  what  place 
Miss  Berry  was  able  to  receive  her  letters  during  their 
homeward  journey : — 

July  11,  1803. 

.  .  .  Many  fine  folks  have  left  town,  but  hitherto  there  has 
not  been  a  dearth  of  grand  meetings ;  and  the  three  or  four 
balls  at  Devonshire  House  have  kept  the  young  people  in 
motion ;  there  have  been,  also,  there  several  morning  dances, 
followed  by  a  breakfast,  by  way  of  practising  quadrilles.  Lady 
Elizth  Foster  brought  some  pretty  music  from  Paris,  and  some 
of  the  young  ladies  just  come  forth  proved  themselves  excel- 
lent dancers.  The  two  Miss  Monks  *  are  counted  the  first 


*  Two  daughters  of  Mr.  and  Lady  Elizabeth  Monk,  the  one  afterwards 
married  to  Sir  Charles  Paget,  the  other  to  Lord  Oranmore. 


272  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

performers ;  and  Caroline  St.  Jules,*  though  not  quite  such  a 
neat  figure,  is  one  of  the  best ;  these  three  all  got  some  lessons 
at  Paris.  Lady  Constance  Maria  Stanhope,f  Lady  Georgiana 
Cecil,$  the  two  Miss  Lowthers.§  Lady  something  Saville,||  Miss 
Fitzroy,1F  Lady  Maria  Fitzroy,**  and  Miss  Conyers,  all  belong 
to  the  set,  and  some  more,  whom  I  have  forgot. 

I  trust  your  next  letter  will  tell  us  what  expectations  you 
have  of  returning  to  England :  if  you  can  procure  passports 
from  Paris  to  bring  you  through  France,  it  would  be  welcome 
news  indeed.  I  doubt  that  is  not  a  reasonable  supposition, 
especially  during  the  absence  of  the  First  Consul. 

Saturday,  30th. — Left  Freyburg  between  four  and  five, 
to  avoid  the  excessive  heat.  The  country  to  Emendingen 
is  more  interesting,  and  Emendingen  is  a  gay-looking 
little  open  town.  Near  Fresenheim  is  to  be  seen  an 
immense  large  building,  a  convent  of  Benedictines  given 
by  France  in  the  late  arrangements  to  the  order  of  Malta ; 
but  the  Emperor,  it  seems,  disputes  the  gift,  and  the  right 
of  giving.  Offenberg  is  a  large  bourg,  quite  as  uninterest- 
ing as  the  country  in  which  it  is  situated.  One  is  taken 
to  the  churchyard  to  see  an  immense  distant  view  of  the 
plain  of  the  Ehine,  and  in  it  a  spot  which  they  tell  you 
is  the  Cathedral  of  Strasburg,  just  as  I  have  seen  a  York- 
shire squire  show  you  with  pride  and  delight  the  plain  of 
York,  and  assure  you  that  in  such  a  part  of  the  cloudy 
atmosphere  which  overhangs  the  whole  he  can  discern 
York  Minster.  On  the  outside  of  the  walls — for  all  these 
little  towns  in  Germany  have  walls — we  found  a  very 
pleasant  grass- walk,  with  little  gardens  coming  down  on 


*  Married  to  the  Hon.  George  Lamb. 

t  Daughter  of  the  Earl  of  Harrington,  married  to  the  late  Duke  of  Bedford. 
J  Daughter  of  the  Marquis  of  Salisbury,  married  to  the  late  Lord  Cowley. 
§  Daughters  of  Lord  Lonsdale. 

||  Daughter  of  the  Earl  of  Mexborough,  married  first  to  Lord  Monson, 
secondly  to  Lord  Warwick. 
11  Miss  Fitzroy.  (?) 
**  Daughter  of  the  Duke  of  Graft  on,  married  to  Sir  William  Oglander. 


1803]  OFFENBERG    TO    RASTADT.  273 

each  side,  very  refreshing  in  the  evening  of  a  hot  sum- 
mer's day. 

During  the  late  war,  OfFenberg  was  sometimes  in 
possession  of  the  French,  sometimes  of  the  Austrians. 
Sometimes  one  was  posted  at  one  end  of  the  place,  and 
the  other  at  the  other,  and  they  more  than  once  fought 
in  the  streets. 

Sunday,  31st — From  Oflenberg  to  Eastadt  the  same 
sort  of  flat  uninteresting  country,  rich  in  corn  and  vines. 
The  numerous  villages,  one  and  all,  abominably  paved, 
looking  neither  comfortable  nor  picturesque.  We  arrived 
at  Rastadt  by  half-past  ten  in  the  morning,  for  the  heat 
was  now  so  excessive  that  it  was  impossible  to  travel 
above  two  hours  after  the  sun  was  fairly  up. 

Eastadt  is  a  small  deserted  town  in  a  great  plain,  with 
an  immense  palace,  to  which  the  town  seems  merely  an 
appendage  ;  and  how  or  why  anybody  placed  an  immense 
palace  in  such  a  situation  without  the  previous  induce- 
ment of  a  great  town,  is  difficult  to  imagine.*  As  the 
palace  is  no  longer  inhabited  (the  Elector  of  Baden 
residing  at  Carlsruhe),  it  is  not  much  furnished ;  indeed, 
in  the  many  visits  paid  by  the  French  in  the  course  of 
the  war,  they  took  away  almost  everything  that  was 
takable,  so  that  when  the  French  deputies  and  those  of 
the  Elector  of  Mentz  were  lodged  there  at  the  time  of 
the  Congress,  furniture  was  sent  from  Carlsruhe.  There 
is  some  good  tapestry  from  Flemish  pictures,  and  the 
room  remains  untouched  which  contains  in  glass  cases 
the  Turkish  spoils  (saddles,  daggers,  scymitars,  &c.  &c.) 
taken  by  Prince  Louis  of  Baden  from  the  Turks. 


*  It  was  built  by  the  eccentric  Margravine  Sybilla,  wife  of  the  heavy  Louis 
of  Baden,  who  fought  against  the  Turks  along  with  Prince  Eugene.  Two 
congresses  have  been  held  under  its  roof:  one  in  1714,  when  Marshal  Villars 
and  Prince  Eugene  signed  a  treaty  of  peace ;  and  the  other  1798-99,  termi- 
nated abruptly  by  the  murder  of  the  French  envoys. — Murray's  Handbook. 

VOL.  II.  T 


274  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

There  are,  besides,  in  a  gallery,  and  scattered  over  all 
the  apartments,  a  number  of  portraits  of  margraves  and 
margravines,  to  me  excessively  entertaining  as  the  per- 
fection of  bad  taste.  Among  other  happy  conceits  of 
some  court  painter,  is  that  of  representing  some  mar- 
grave's family  under  the  figures  and  composition  of  Le 
Brun's  '  Tent  of  Darius.'  One  must  have  seen  the  picture 
to  conceive  its  ludicrous  effect,  or  the  taste  of  the  prince 
who  could  order,  or  of  the  painter  who  could  execute, 
such  comical  ideas.  The  entrance  to  this  neglected  palace 
is  guarded  by  a  few  soldiers,  and  the  apartments  are 
shown  by  a  housekeeper  whose  dress  and  appearance  is 
more  old-fashioned  than  her  palace. 

Walked  to  a  manufactory  of  carriages,  where  one  of 
the  partners  spoke  perfectly  good  English,  although  he 
had  not  been  in  England  for  thirty  years.  The  carriages 
were  neatly  made  as  to  the  iron  and  wood  work ;  but  the 
springs  awkward,  the  coupe  bad,  and  taste  entirely  want- 
ing ;  the  price  about  half  ours  in  England. 

The  yet  unexplained  and  inconceivable  murder  of  the 
two  French  deputies,*  sent  to  the  Congress  in  1798,  took 
place  within  a  quarter  of  a  mile  of  the  town,  just  at  the 
entrance  into  a  wood  through  which  the  road  to  Stras- 
bourg lies.  The  exact  spot  was  shown  to  us  from  a  ^sort 
of  look-out  at  the  top  of  the  palace. 

Monday,  Aug.  1st — We  got  to  Carlsruhe  before  nine 
o'clock  in  the  morning,  from  Eastadt,  three  German  miles. 
The  road  is  bordered  the  whole  way  with  Lombardy 
poplars,  one  of  the  most  fatiguing  and  tiresome  pieces  of 


*  At  the  end  of  April,  1799,  Bonnier,  Jean  Debry,  and  Roberjot  left 
Rastadt  for  Strasbourg.  A  snort  distance  from  Rastadt,  they  were  sur- 
rounded, attacked,  and  dragged  from  their  carriage.  Bonnier  and  Roberjot 
were  murdered,  Jean  Debry  escaped  slightly  wounded.  All  the  papers 
relating  to  their  mission  were  seized  by  the  assassins,  who  were  suspected 
to  be  the  very  hussars  sent  as  their  escort ;  but  the  affair  is  wrapt  in  mystery 
to  this  day. 


1803]  CARLSRUHE.  275 

German  pomp  that  I  know,  and  which  rather  adds  to  than 
amends  the  insipidity  of  a  flat  country.  About  a  league 
and  a  half  from  Eastadt,  the  road  in  the  poplar  avenue 
being  very  sandy,  the  postilion  left  it  and  went  across 
fields.  This,  in  winter,  would  not  have  been  practicable. 
Carlsruhe  is  a  pretty  clean-looking  town,  with  many  new 
buildings  going  on.  Like  all  German  towns  (in  this  part 
of  the  world),  the  houses  are  low  and  the  streets  wide^ 
and  they  almost  all  have  a  reference  to  the  Chateau,  for 
Carlsruhe  is  said  to  be  in  the  shape  of  a  fan,  the  Chateau 
being  at  the  point  where  the  sticks  unite — the  sticks  the 
garden  before  the  palace,,  the  building  in. the  Place  opposite- 
the  edge  of  the  mount,  and  the  streets  the  different  folds 
of  the  mount.  The  Place  is  formed  by  a  circular  facade 
of  buildings  supporting  a  colonnade,  and  the  space  between 
is  occupied  by  a  parterre  divided  by  high  cut  hedges, 
making  alleys  wide  enough  for  a  carriage,  the  largest  alley 
exactly  opposite  the  centre  of  the  palace.  The  apart- 
ments are  handsome.  Pictures  there  are  none  but  family 
portraits,  much  in  the  Eastadt  style.  From  the  top  of 
the  tower,  which  the  man  who  shows  the  apartments  will 
by  no  means  allow  you  to  escape,  is  to  be  seen  the  forest 
behind  the  garden,  cut  into  thirty  avenues,  all  a  perte  de 
vue,  and  all  diverging  from  the  palace  as  their  centre. 
The  garden  is  pretty,  in  the  English  style,  and  is  open  to 
the  public  ;  in  a  little  low  sort  of  pavilion  at  the  edge  of 
the  wood  there  is  a  polisher  of  agates  and  other  hard 
stones,  established  under  the  immediate  protection  of  the 
court.  Strangers  are  carried  there ;  the  agates  (which, 
I  believe,  come  from  Bohemia)  are  really  beautiful.  We 
saw  many  good-looking  carriages  in  the  streets,  attended 
by  clean  servants  in  handsome  liveries,  and  were  sorry 
that  our  impatience  to  get  to  Frankfort  prevented  us  from 
staying  longer,  delivering  our  letter  to  Madame  d'Edels- 
heim,  the  minister's  wife,  and  seeing  the  monture  of  a 

T   2 


276  MISS  BERET'S  JOUEXAL.  [isos 

German  court,  which  is  allowed  on  ah1  hands  to  be  one 
of  the  most  agreeable  of  its  sort. 

Tuesday,  2nd. — The  road  to  Durlach,  for  three  English 
miles,  is  one  uninterrupted  line  of  poplars.  Bruchsal  is  a 
large  thriving  town,  with  an  immense  palace,  now  belong- 
ing to  the  Elector  of  Baden,  but  formerly  to,  and  (I  believe) 
the  residence  of,  the  Bishop  of  Spire.*  The  country  from 
hence  has  much  corn  and  vines,  with  pretty  wooded  hills  on 
the  right  hand,  while  the  great  flat  valley  of  the  Ehine 
continues  on  the  left.  From  Weisloch  to  Heidelberg  the 
country  begins  to  be  less  uninteresting.  Heidelberg  is 
the  only  .finely-situated  town  I  have  yet  seen  in  Germany 
upon  this  route.  The  Neckar,  a  pretty  clear  rocky  stream, 
runs  through  it,  and  the  ground  rises  both  immediately 
behind  the  .town  and  upon  the  other  side  of  the  river  ;  the 
lower  part -of  the  hills  clothed  with  vines,  the  higher  with, 
extensive  woods. 

The  old  castle,  the  residence  of  the  Electors  Palatine,  is 
in  every  point  of  view  remarkably  picturesque.  Some 
arched  substructures  supporting  terraces  give  it  at  a  dis- 
tance the  appearance  of  a  Eoman  ruin.  But  it  is  in  fact 
a  building  of  the  sixteenth  or  beginning  of  the  seventeenth 
century,  and  many  parts  of  it  more  modern.  The  whole 
is  now  in  ruins,  and  without  roof  or  windows,  except  the 
chapel,  which  is  still  used  for  service.  This  magnificent 
palace,  which  was  added  by  different  electors  to  the  old 
fortress  that  crowned  the  rock  above  the  town,  is  certainly 
one  of  the  finest  situations  I  ever  saw.  From  a  stone  ter- 
race before  the  principal  front,  you  look  down  to  the  beau- 
tiful near  ground  and  to  the  valley  of  the  Ehine  towards 
the  left ;  from  another  front  you  look  up  the  winding 
course  of  the  Neckar.  The  masses  of  building  are  curious 
and  elaborate  in  their  external  ornaments.  That  on  the 

*  This  inanimate  town  of  7,200  inhabitants  formerly  belonged  to  the 
Prince  Archbishop  of  Spire,  whose  vast  palace,  now  empty,  stands  near  the 
gate  leading  to  Frankfort. 


1803]  HEIDELBERG.  277 

front  towards  the  court  is  covered  with  the  sort  of 
pilasters,  friezes,  and  flat-worked  ornaments  of  the  age  of 
our  James  L,  and  indeed  was  not  unlike  what  I  remem- 
ber of  old  Somerset  House.  The  other,  which  faces  the 
town,  has  the  same  style  of  ornament,  but  in  the  piers 
between  each  window  is  a  large  niche  containing  a  whole- 
length  figure  in  stone  of  the  different  Electors  Palatine, 
with  their  names  and  dates  on  a  tablet  underneath.  The 
execution  of  some  of  these  statues  is  excellent.  They 
are  portraits  not  only  of  the  persons,  but  of  the  dress  of 
their  time,  and  are  as  such  extremely  curious.  One  part 
of  the  building  joins  on  to  a  fine  octagon  tower  of  the  old 
fortress,  which  has  been  twice  struck  and  is  half  destroyed 
by  lightning,  together  with  a  large  portion  of  the  more 
modern  building  attached  to  it. 

In  a  cellar  of  this  chateau  is  the  far-famed  tun  of 
Heidelberg,  constructed  by  the  Elector  Charles  Theodore; 
the  initials  of  his  name  are  in  gold  letters  upon  an  es- 
cutcheon on  each  end  of  it — for  what  purpose  one  can 
hardly  conceive.  It  was  never  full  but  once,  has  long 
been  quite  empty,  and  will  in  all  probability  never  contain 
anything  again,  as  it  is  out  of  repair,  and  would  cost  I 
forget  how  many  thousand  florins  to  mend.  When  the 
great  King  of  Prussia  once  visited  it,  they  put  a  small 
cask  of  exquisite  hock  within,  and  piercing  the  great 
tun  drew  out  the  wine,  pretending  the  whole  filled  with 
the  same.  There  is  a  railing  round  the  upper  part  of  it, 
within  which  twelve  persons  have  dined.  From  its  im- 
mensity, and  its  not  being  hooped,  but  ribbed  like  a  ship, 
it  gives  one  no  idea  of  a  barrel,  and  is  more  like  the 
bottom  and  stern  of  a  vessel.  Heidelberg,  and  the  coun- 
try immediately  about  it,  was  the  scene  of  some  of  the 
hottest  actions  between  the  French  and  Austrians  during 
the  last  war.  At  different  epochs  they  alternately  occu- 
pied the  town  and  disputed  the  possession  of  the  stone 
bridge  over  the  Neckar.  The  gate  which  opens  upon 


278  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

this  bridge,  its  two  towers,  the  statue  of  the  Elector  upon 
the  bridge,  and  every  part  of  its  balustrades,  &c.  &c., 
nearest  the  town,  are  still  covered  with  the  marks  of 
bullets  for  the  most  part  at  the  distance  of  a  very  few 
inches.  It  was  upon  this  bridge  that  Prince  Maurice  of 
Lichtenstein  was  wounded,  and  his  faithful  dog  Diane 
wounded  and  lost.  Heidelberg  is  a  populous  town  with 
a  number  of  good-looking  shops.  The  great  church,  used 
now  both  by  Protestants  and  Catholics  alternately,  is  quite 
bare.  The  quantity  of  grapes  upon  all  the  vines  in  this 
neighbourhood,  and  indeed  in  all  the  wine  country  through 
which  we  have  passed,  is  something  wonderful,  and  far 
exceeds  any  remembered  year  of  plenty. 

Wednesday,  3rd. — Left  Heidelberg  at  four  o'clock ; 
reached  Darmstadt  soon  after  eleven,  even  then  overcome 
by  the  excessive  heat  and  dust.  The  inn  afforded  us  but 
little  relief,  with  the  sun  basking  upon  it — no  shutters, 
no  blinds,  no  anything  but  a  white  linen  curtain  to  .defend 
us  from  its  power.  Here  we  sat  panting  till  the  evening, 
when  we  sallied  forth  with  a  guide,  who,  as  usual,  could 
speak  nothing  but  German,  and  our  interpreter,  to  walk 
about  the  town.  The  residence  of  the  Landgrave  is  a 
large  old  ugly  melancholy-looking  building,  with  a  small 
irregular  court,  and  a  large  clumsy  body  of  modern 
buildings,  not  finished,  but  left  in  that  most  dismal  of  all 
states,  which,  without  appearance  of  habitation  or  com- 
fort, does  not  even  promise  to  become  a  picturesque  ruin, 
but  remains  with  all  its  windows  boarded  up,  a  sad  monu- 
ment of  the  palace-building  mania  of  German  princes. 
They  do  not  show  the  apartments  inhabited  by  the  Prince, 
therefore  I  conclude  they  are  not  worth  seeing.  Every- 
where in  the  town  are  to  be  seen  a  number  of  clean  well- 
dressed  troops.  They  are  the  principal  trade,  if  not  of  the 

town  at  least  of  the  Landgrave,  with  whom  as  well  as  with 

• 
his  cousin  of  Cassel,  we  have  had  many  subsidiary  treaties. 

The  garden  of  the  palace  is  public  ;  it  is  laid  out  a  I' An- 


1803]  DARMSTADT  TO   FRANKFORT.  279 

glaise,  with  a  shrubbery  here,  a  winding  walk  there,  and 
a  temple  at  every  turn.  I  never  saw  a  cut  walk  and  a 
parterre  I  should  not  have  preferred  to  it.  The  theatre 
of  the  court  opens  into  it,  and  the  interior  of  this  is  really 
pretty ;  and  there  are  besides  several  rooms  lately  fitted 
up  with  much  simple  elegance,  used  for  suppers  and 
cards,  &c.  &c.,  when  the  theatre  is  turned  into  a  ball  or 
concert  room.  There  is  a  French  bookseller  here,  with  a 
very  good  collection  of  French  books.  At  Carlsruhe 
the  principal  bookseller  had  very  few  but  German  and 
the  classics. 

Thursday,  4th.  —  Left  Darmstadt,  passing  through 
a  number  of  large  farming  villages,  which  looked  neither 
clean  nor  comfortable.  They  are  all  execrably  paved, 
have  generally  a  dirty  green  standing  pool,  or  some  stream 
of  water  not  confined  within  proper  bounds,  and  are 
always  the  worst  bits  of  road  the  carriage  has  to  go  over. 
The  roads  within  the  domain  of  the  Landgrave  of  Darm- 
stadt are  excellent,  the  barriers  very  frequent,  but  they 
are  cheerfully  paid  by  all  distant  travellers.  It  is  to  be 
observed  that  from  Basle  to  Frankfort  one  does  not  pass 
one  single  chateau  or  gentleman's  country-house  of  any 
sort  or  kind,  or  any  country  habitation  in  any  of  the 
villages  above  that  of  a  common  farmer ;  this  could  not 
be  the  case  in  any  route  in  France,  Italy,  or  Switzerland, 
and  very  much  takes  away  both  from  the  beauty  and 
interest  of  the  country — open,  flat,  and  generally  sandy 
roads  through  oceans  of  corn,  often  as  far  as  the  eye  could 
reach,  diversified  only  by  the  culture  of  hemp,  and  near 
the  villages,  with  plantations  of  poppies,  compose  no  very 
charming  prospects,  and  supply  no  very  interesting  recol- 
lections to  eyes  and  minds  fresh  from  the  beauties  of  Nice 
and  of  Switzerland.  Frankfort  is  a  large  populous  Ger- 
man town,  with  wide  streets,  and  large  houses  having 
often  twelve  and  fourteen  windows  in  front.  The  street 
in  which  are  the  two  great  inns,  the  Maison  Eouge  and 


280  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

the  Empereur,  may  really  be  called  magnificent  from  its 
length,  its  breadth,  and  its  being  entirely  composed  of 
large  houses,  one  or  two  of  which,  recently  built  by  rich 
merchants,  have  handsome  architectural  fronts  ;  the  older 
houses  have  in  general  heavy  grotesque  ornaments  about 
the  door  (generally  a  porte  cochere],  and  finely-flourished 
and  ornamented  water-spouts  projecting  far  into  the  street, 
sometimes  in  the  shape  of  dragons,  lions,  &c. ;  for  instead 
of  concealing  this  necessary  appendage  to  the  roof,  they 
seem  to  consider  it  as  a  happy  occasion  for  enriching  and 
distinguishing  the  front.  In  other  parts  of  the  town  there 
still  remain  many  old  houses,  with  their  first  stories  pro- 
jecting over  the  ground  floor,  and  painted  on  the  outside 
so  as  to  conceal  their  being  constructed  only  of  what  is 
called  in  England  post  and  pan. 

Frankfort  is  a  regularly  fortified  town,  with  a  broad 
ditch  full  of  nasty  stagnant  water.  Immediately  without 
the  fortifications  is  a  road  for  carriages  planted  with  trees 
on  one  side,  and  on  the  other  side  bordered  with  country- 
houses  of  all  sorts  and  sizes,  many  guinguettes,  &c.  &c.,  just 
about  as  rural,  as  picturesque,  and  in  as  good  taste  as 
the  environs  of  Islington  ;  this  road  is  full  every  evening 
of  people  airing  in  carriages  and  on  horseback.  Frank- 
fort has  every  appearance  of  an  opulent  place. 

The  banker  Betteman  has  a  very  pretty  country-house, 
with  a  large  garden,  outside  one  of  the  gates.  Here  we 
were  invited  two  days  after  our  arrival  at  Frankfort  to 
pass  the  evening.  We  went  about  eight  o'clock,  and 
found  between  thirty  and  forty  people  assembled  in  the 
garden.  The  women  were,  for  the  most  part,  great  fat 
heavy-looking  persons,  much  overdressed,  civil  in  their  man- 
ners, but  not  particularly  accueillante  to  strangers.  The 
men,  too,  smacked  prodigiously  of  a  trading  city ;  and  as 
their  conversation,  when  not  addressed  to  us,  was  always 
in  German,  we  were  not  much  the  better  for  it.  In 
about  an  hour's  time,  most  of  the  people  retreated  from 


1803]  FRANKFORT   TO    CASSEL.  281 

i 

the  garden  into  the  house.  The  principal  apartment  was 
lighted  up.  Before  we  went  away,  between  ten  and 
eleven,  we  walked  over  the  house,  and  found  I  know  net 
how  many  rooms  elegantly  furnished,  and  quite  full  of 
card  tables.  This  house  is  the  first  in  Frankfort.  Young 
Betteman  himself  has  the  air  of  a  grand  seigneur,  giving 
dinners  and  suppers  to  all  the  foreign  princes  and  foreigners 
of  distinction  passing  through  Frankfort. 

Sunday,  7th. — Called  upon  Comtesse  Degenfelt,to  whose 
husband  we  had  a  letter  from  Prince  Maurice  of  Lichten- 
stein.  He  is  a  very  gentlemanlike,  good-humoured  young 
man,  at  the  head  of  the  military  in  the  Emperor's  service 
at  Frankfort,  for  the  purpose  of  recruiting,  which  both 
the  Emperor  and  the  King  of  Prussia  have  the  right  of 
doing  in  this  free  imperial  city,  which  is  guarded  by 
troops  of  its  own — very  clean,  well-clothed  men  in  a 
uniform  of  blue,  faced  with  white.  With  Comte  and 
Comtesse  Degenfelt  we  took  a  drive  along  the  bank  of  the 
river,  bordered  the  whole  way  with  country-houses. 

Monday,  Sth. — The  heat  was  so  excessive  in  our  Hotel 
de  1'Empereur.  The  noise  so  great,  being  at  the  corner 
of  a  street,  we  changed  our  apartments  to  a  quieter 
situation,  and  close  to  the  principal  bookseller's  (Es- 
linger). 

Thursday,  ~Llth. — Finding  it  impossible  to  get  any 
satisfactory  information  at  Frankfort  as  to  what  route  we 
were  to  take  towards  home,  and  where  we  could  cross 
the  water,  and  not  receiving  the  letters  which  we  hoped 
before  now  would  have  followed  us  from  Lausanne  with 
a  permission  to  pass  through  France,  we  most  unwillingly 
set  out  before  five  o'clock  this  morning,  to  continue  our 
pilgrimage  to  Cassel.  We  made  a  marvellous  long  day's 
journey — five  German  posts,  or  about  fifty-five  English 
miles,  in  thirteen  hours  to  Marbourg,  where  we  slept. 
It  is  for  the  most  part  chaussee,  and  the  villages  still 
more  comfortless-looking  in  Hessia  than  elsewhere.  At 


282  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

Birsbach  a  great  deal  of  black  dyeing  is  going  on,  and 
some  appearance  of  business.  Geissen  is  a  fortified  town, 
with  a  garrison  of  Hessian  troops.  About  Marbourg  the 
country  is  beautiful,  and  the  town  itself  situated  on  the 
side  of  a  hill,  the  top  of  which  is  crowned  by  a  chateau,* 
part  of  it  modern,  part  more  ancient.  There  is  here  a 
university  f  or  public  school.  The  town  consists  of  nar- 
row streets,  of  odd  old  post-and-pan  houses,  built  up-hill 
and  down,  very  picturesque  in  situation,  and  seen  at  two 
leagues'  distance  on  this  road. 

Friday,  I2th. — At  Wabern,  an  insignificant  village, 
there  is  a  country  palace  of  the  Elector  of  Hesse  for 
shooting  herons,  which  he  never  shoots,  and  where  he 
never  comes.  This  one  country-house,  like  a  hunting- 
box  in  England,  is,  however,  the  one  only  country-house 
of  any  sort  or  kind  that  we  have  seen  since  we  left  Basle. 

We  found  here  a  tolerably  clean  little  inn,  where,  as  it 
was  a  rainy  evening,  we  resolved  to  stay.  A  young 
woman,  some  relation  of  the  house,  spoke  English  by  no 
means  ill.  Her  father  had  been  a  Hessian  sergeant,  and, 
serving  in  America,  had  married  an  American.  The  inns 
in  the  little  villages  of  Germany  bear  no  proportion  to 
the  badness  of  those  in  the  great  towns. 

Saturday,  13^A. — The  road  from  Wabern  to  Cassel  is 
an  excellent  chaussee.  The  country  very  pretty.  There 
is  a  steep  ascent  before  entering  the  town  of  Cassel ;  its 
neat,  broad,  well-built  streets  and  large  Places  are  very 
striking. 

Sunday, "L4:th. — Mr.  Brook  Taylor,  the  English  Minister, 
whom  I  knew  a  little  in  London,  called  upon  us.  I  asked 
his  advice  about  sending  a  messenger  to  Hanover,  to  beg 

*  The  ancient  caatle  of  the  Landgraves  of  Hesse,  a  structure  of  the  chival- 
rous ages,  now  a  prison,  commanding  a  fine  prospect. — See  Mun-ay's  Hand- 
book. 

t  The  University  was  the  first  founded  in  Germany  after  the  Reformation, 
1527. 


1803]  CASSEL.  283 

permission  from  General  Mortier*  to  pass  through  that 
country  to  Hamburg,  from  which  Mr.  Taylor  rather 
wished  to  dissuade  me ;  but  finding  he  had  no  other 
reason  for  so  doing  but  the  dislike  to  ask  anything  of  a 
Frenchman,  I  resolved  to  despatch  our  courier  the  next 
day  with  a  letter  I  had  already  written. 

Monday,  15^. — Went  to  the  parade  between  nine  and 
ten  o'clock.  In  the  summer  it  is  always  in  the  park 
behind  the  Orangerie,  and  the  Elector  comes  there  him- 
self every  Monday,  and  often  twice  a  week.  This  morn- 
ing he  reviewed  the  1st  and  2nd  Eegiments  of  Guards. 
Nothing  can  exceed  the  clockwork  regularity  of  their 
movements ;  no  firing  is  ever  allowed  except  at  the  great 
reviews  for  about  a  fortnight  in  the  spring,  when  all  the 
military  are  collected  from  the  different  small  towns  in 
Hessia,  in  which  they  are  usually  quartered.  Their 
regimentals  are  very  handsome  (blue,  with  red  facings  and 
with  orange  facings  and  silver  Brandenbourgs),  and  their 
whole  appearance  very  clean  and  military.  In  short, 
their  Prince  does  nothing  else,  and  thinks  of  nothing  else, 
and  is,  I  believe,  one  of  the  greatest  adepts  in  every 
branch  of  the  art  of  what  is  called  '  German  discipline.' 
Nothing  can  exceed  the  fitness  of  the  locale  for  such  a 
parade ;  a  large  plain  of  fine  short  grass,  bounded  by  a 
high  wood  at  one  end,  and  by  the  gay  buildings  of  the 
Orangerie  at  the  other :  it  really  is  one  of  the  prettiest 
military  scenes  that  can  be  seen.  The  Elector  himself 

*  Edouard  Adolphe  Casimir  Joseph  Mortier,  Due  de  Trevise,  born  at 
Cambray  17G8.  He  took  part  in  the  wars  of  the  Revolution  in  1791 ;  he 
accompanied  General  Marceau  in  the  passage  at  Neuwied,  in  the  campaign  of 
179C,  and  continued  to  serve  with  distinction  throughout  the  whole  reign 
of  Napoleon.  In  1803  he  was  sent  to  Hanover,  to  command  the  French 
army  against  that  of  England — an  expedition  which  ended  so  unfortunately 
to  the  arms  of  England,  and  placed  Hanover  into  the  hands  of  France.  In 
1814  he  gave  in  his  adherence  to  the  Bourbons.  In  1815  he  was  named  by 
Napoleon  one  of  the  newly  created  peers ;  and  on  the  second  Bourbon 
restoration  he  was  excluded  from  the  Chamber  of  Peers,  but  reinstated  in 
1819. 


284  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

was  on  foot  the  whole  time,  and  in  every  part  of  the  line 
followed  by  one  or  two  aides-de-camp  and  one  garde-du- 
corps  in  an  odd  buff  uniform,  made  something  like  what 
we  call  '  an  old  English  dress,'  The  Elector  is  a  short 
stumpy  man  of  nearly  sixty  years  old,  with  a  veiy  hard 
ungracious  countenance.  In  the  evening  drank  tea  with 
Madame  Butlar,  wife  to  the  Electress's  charnbellan,  to 
whom  we  had  a  letter  from  the  Comtesse  L.  de  Werthem, 
Madame  Butlar  being  a  Saxon.  We  afterwards  walked 
with  her  in  the  park  and  through  the  Orangerie,  built  by 
the  present  Elector's  father.  It  is  never  now  inhabited 
by  the  large  orange-trees  (which  are  placed  on  the 
terrace),  but  is  used  as  a  sort  of  summer  palace,  some- 
times by  the  Elector,  and  at  present  by  the  Electress. 
The  Orangerie  consists  of  two  enormous  galleries  suited 
to  the  purpose  for  which  it  was  built,  with  a  high  arched 
passage  forming  a  sort  of  hall  in  the  centre,  and  &  pavilion 
in  which  are  bedrooms  at  each  end.  One  of  the  long 
galleries  is  divided  at  present  by  large  screens,  making  the 
dining  room  and  the  salon.  Balls,  too,  are  often  given 
in  one  of  these  galleries,  and  supper  in  the  other. 

From  hence  we  walked  to  the  garden  of  Comte 
Malke,  the  Grand  Chambellan  de  la  Cour,  a  small  slip  of 
ground  just  above  the  bank  of  the  river  Fulda,  laid  out 
in  little  serpentine  walks  and  clumps  of  flowers  a  I'Anglaise, 
pretty  enough. 

Tuesday,  IQth. — Went  to  Madame  Butlar's  in  the 
evening;  walked  with  her,  Mr.  Butlar,  and  Comte 
Stotheim  to  see  the  bain  de  marbre,  in  one  of  the  pavi- 
lions of  the  Orangerie.  It  is  magnificent  of  its  kind — a 
large  square  room  panelled  entirely  with  marble,  and  in 
each  panel  a  large  bas-relief  executed  in  white  marble. 
They  were  all  done  by  an  Italian,*  whom  the  present 
Elector's  father  brought  with  him  from  Italy.  The  bath 

*  Monnot. 


1803]  CASSEL.  285 

has  a  cupola  over  it,  supported  upon  coloured  marble 
columns — marble,  in  short,  from  beginning  to  end.  From 
hence  we  walked  up  the  steep  wooded  bank  of  the  park 
by  a  very  pretty  winding'  path,  to  Bellevue,  the  house 
inhabited  by  the  Elector  when  he  resides  in  Cassel.  It  is 
much  more  like  a  country  than  a  town  house,  with  a 
pretty  small  English  garden  and  a  beautiful  view  of  the 
park,  the  Orangerie,  and  all  the  surrounding  country. 

Wednesday,  Ylth. — In  the  morning  to  the  picture- 
gallery.  It  is  itself  a  palace ;  one  room  is  entirely  lined 
with  and  contains  a  fine  collection  of  Japan  manufacture ; 
the  rest  are  hung  with  pictures,  and  there  is  also  a  long 
gallery  hung  with  pictures  on  both  sides.  It  contains 
many  fine  pictures,  particularly  portraits  by  Eembrandt 
and  exquisite  works  by  Teniers  and  P.  Potter  ;  a  large 
picture  of  Teniers,  full  of  small  whole-length  figures — the 
reinstating  the  Magistrature  of  Antwerp  after  they  had 
got  rid  of  the  Spanish  yoke — the  most  graceful  and  in- 
teresting of  his  works  that  I  ever  saw ;  an  exquisite 
Vandeveldt,  the  Sands  at  Scheveling  at  low  water,  with 
figures,  &c.,  quite  perfect  in  its  way ;  the  finest  flower 
pieces  by  Van  Huysen  ;  an  excellent  portrait  of  a  woman 
in  white  satin,  by  Titian. 

Dined  with  Mrs.  Taylor ;  nobody  but  ourselves,  his 
secretary  Mr.  Heathcote,  and  a  Mr.  Dewer,  an  English 
gentleman  long  resident  here.  Afterwards  drove  with 
Madame  Butlar  in  the  park  ;  fine  shady  alleys  and  wind- 
ing drives  for  carriages  near  a  large  piece  of  water,  and 
from  thence  to  the  pheasantry,  where  there  are  above 
200  gold  pheasants  and  as  many  silver  ones.  It  is  said 
that  the  Elector,  who  does  not  like  that  anything  should 
be  wasted,  has  them  killed  from  time  to  time  and  sends 
them  to  market. 

Thursday,  ISth. — To  WiUiamshohe  with  Madame 
Butlar.  It  is  two  English  miles  and  a  half  from  Cassel. 
Nothing  can  be  more  magnificent  than  the  appearance  of 


286  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isoa 

the  palace,  the  Chateau  d'Eau,  with  its  pyramid  crowned 
by  the  colossal  Hercules,  upon  the  top  of  the  finely 
wooded  hill  rising  above  the  palace.  In  the  midst  of 
this  extent  of  wood  the  Lowenburg  presents  itself  as  a 
half-ruined  old  German  castle,  standing  upon  an  abrupt 
heap  of  rocks ;  it  is  approached  by  a  winding  drive 
through  the  woods.  On  one  side  of  the  small  court 
within  is  the  chapel,  and  on  the  other  the  apartments ; 
they  are,  except  two  large  round  ones  in  the  great 
tower,  little  odd-shaped  rooms,  but  all  comfortable.  The 
Elector  lived  here  while  the  palace  below  was  building, 
and  now  is  here  some  part  of  every  day  in  summer. 
The  view  from  the  windows  is  very  extensive,  looking 
over  all  Cassel  and  the  surrounding  country,  but  still  the 
Lowenburg  is  more  beautiful  to  look  to  than  to  look  from. 
The  wralk  over  these  rocks  to  the  menagerie,  and  from 
thence  to  the  palace,  is  extremely  pretty,  through  what 
they  call  an  English  garden,  and  what  we  should  call 
grounds.  The  chateau,  with  its  two  wings,  is  entirely 
built  by  the  present  Elector,  is  of  Grecian  architecture, 
the  furniture  in  modern  French  taste.  One  wing  is  in- 
habited by  the  Comtesse  Stotheim  and  her  children,  and 
the  other  contains  a  magnificent  apartment  for  the  recep- 
tion of  any  foreign  prince  when  on  a  visit  to  the  Elector; 
but  during  this  Elector's  life  there  is  little  danger  of  the 
furniture  being  sullied  by  use ;  it  has  never  been  occupied 
but  once ;  and  the  same  parsimony  which  leads  him  to 
avoid  the  expense  of  making  his  Court  attractive,  leads 
one  to  conclude  his  pavilion  for  foreign  princes  will  not 
often  be  occupied.  The  other  pavilion  is  more  fully  and 
constantly  inhabited — the  Comtesse  Stotheim  having  had 
no  less  than  fifteen  children  by  the  Elector,  four  only  of 
whom,  however,  are  alive.  Immediately  at  the  back  of 
the  chateau  and  its  wings  is  a  large  lawn  with  a  broad 
gravel  walk  for  carriages,  and  it  is  surrounded  by  a  large 
English  garden  or  grounds,  and  to  my  eye  has  the  same 


1803]  CASSEL.  287 

fault  of  rising  immediately,  like  many  of  our  bald  Eng- 
lish modern  country-houses,  from  the  grounds,  without 
sufficient  architectural  substructures  arid  approaches  to 
accompany  and  announce  the  building.  After  seeing  the 
Lowenburg  and  the  chateau,  and  sitting  under  the  trees 
of  an  open  grove,  we  were  joined  by  Mr.  Taylor,  Mr. 
Heathcote,  and  Mr.  Marescotti,  and  dined  at  the  inn 
together.  After  dinner,  Mr.  Taylor  having  obtained  per- 
mission for  the  waters  to  play,  we  made  the  tour  of  the 
grounds  to  see  them.  Carriages  and  horsemen  are 
allowed  to  go  all  over  the  grounds  at  Williamshohe, 
keeping  to  the  gravel  road ;  a  permission  that  in  England, 
I  fear,  would  be  too  much  abused  to  be  long  admissible, 
and  which  speaks  well  for  the  good  behaviour  of  Germans, 
considering  that  this  Williamshohe  is  entirely  a  public 
garden.  The  water  sets  a  playing  two  or  three  stone 
pipes  in  the  Chateau  d'Eau,  of  which  I  have  heard  much 
better  in  Italy.  The  cascatelles  falling  in  a  thousand 
little  streams,  gushing  out  from  every  part  of  a  high 
woody  bank,  formed  upon  the  idea  of  the  cascatelles  at 
Tivoli,  are  well  contrived  and  have  a  good  effect,  as  the 
scene  is  wild  and  analogous.  The  Devil's  Bridge,  a 
humble  imitation  of  that  in  the  Alps,  is  pretty  enough 
seen  at  a  distance  ;  the  broken  aqueduct  very  good,  the 
situation  well  chosen,  forming  the  only  artificial  ruin  I 
ever  saw  successful. 

Sunday,  21st — Madame  Butlar,  Mr.  Heathcote,  and 
Mr.  Marescotti  dined  with  us.  In  the  afternoon  Madame 
Butlar,  Mr.  Heathcote,  and  I,  drove  again  to  Williamshohe 
and  walked  about  parts  of  the  gardens  I  had  not  before 
seen ;  they  are  really  beautiful.  The  waters  played  as 
they  do  every  Sunday  afternoon,  and  there  were  a  good 
many  middling-looking  people  wandering  over  every  part 
of  the  grounds.  The  Comtess  Stotheim  was  in  the  gar- 
dens with  two  of  her  children,  their  governess,  and  an 
officer  with  her.  Madame  Butlar  went  up  to  her,  and  I 


288  MISS  BEKRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

had  half-an  hour's  conversation  with  her.  She  is  a  large 
good-looking  woman,  between  thirty  and  forty,  speaking 
better  English  than  French,  but  not  much  of  either,  with 
very  simple  unaffected  manners,  and  looking  heartily 
weary  of  the  wretched  metier  of  mistress  to  a  dull  prince. 
She  was  a  woman  of  no  birth,  to  whom,  at  a  very  early 
age,  the  Elector  took  a  fancy  and  to  whose  wishes  her 
parents  sacrificed  her,  with  extreme  reluctance  (it  is  said) 
on  her  part,  She  has  since  conducted  herself  well  in 
never  interfering  or  doing  mischief,  or  taking  upon  herself 
in  any  way.  During  the  residence  of  the  Elector  at  Wil- 
liamshohe,  which  is  the  whole  summer,  she  occupies 
one  of  the  pavilions;  when  he  comes  to  Bellevue  (the 
small  palace  at  Cassel),  she  has  a  house  near  it  on  the 
terrace. 

Monday ',  22nd. — One  of  the  two  yearly  fairs  at  Cassel 
began  this  day.  I  was  anxious  to  see  it.  When  we  had 
got  as  far  as  Madame  Butlar's,  I  felt  so  ih1  as  to  be  obliged 
to  return  home.  Every  symptom  of  a  high  fever  showed 
itself,  and  was  increased  in  the  course  of  the  day  by  the 
noise  in  the  streets  incidental  to  the  fair,  parties  of 
music  playing  eternally  either  before  the  door  or  in 
the  house.  Anxious  not  to  delay  our  journey,  I  beseeched 
my  sister  to  ply  me  every  quarter  of  an  hour  with  saline 
draughts,  and  though  the  fever  continued  so  high  all 
that  day  and  night  as  to  make  my  mind  wander,  yet 
the  next  morning  it  was  so  much  lowered  that  I  was 
able  to  be  put  into  the  coach  and  pursue  our  journey  by 
Gottingen  to  Hanover.  Our  courier,  whom  we  had  de- 
spatched to  General  Mortier  at  Hanover,  requesting  his 
permission  to  pass  by  that  route,  had  returned  with  a 
passport  in  full  form,  signed  by  Mortier  for  us  and  our 
servants  se  rendant  a  Hambourg.  We  went  from  Cassel 
by  Munden  to  Gottingen.  In  cultivation,  in  villages, 
and  in  the  appearance  of  the  people,  the  dominions 
of  Hanover  have  a  decided  advantage  over  every  part  of 


1803]  GOTTINGEN  TO   HAXOVER.  289 

the  north  of  Germany  that  I  have  seen.  Gottingen  is  a 
large  town,  with  straight,  wide,  uninteresting  streets.  I 
know  not  if  there  is  anything  fine  about  the  university ;  I 
was  too  ill  to  attempt  seeing  it,  but  as  all  the  young  men 
are  in  private  lodgings  in  the  town,  and  attend  the  profes- 
sors at  their  own  houses,  there  are  no  fine  architectural 
buildings  for  lodging  either  the  one  or  the  other  as  in  the 
English  universities.  In  the  principal  street  is  a  handsome 
stone  riding-house,  erected,  as  the  inscription  says,  by 
George  II.,  for  the  use  of  the  students  at  the  university. 

Wednesday,  24#A. — Eimbeck,  a  very  oddly  built  town, 
with  all  the  roofs  projecting  one  over  another,  and  orna- 
mented with  much  carved  wood.  Within  about  a  league 
of  Bruggen,  the  spokes  of  one  of  our  fore-wheels  became 
loose,  which  obliged  us  to  proceed  at  a  foot's  pace  to  the 
Post,  a  single  house  half  a  mile  from  the  village  of 
Bruggen.  Here  is  a  large  country  seat  (the  first  we  have 
seen  in  Germany),  belonging  to  M.  de  Steinberg,  who  was 
Hanoverian  Minister  in  London  for  a  few  months  before 
M.  de  Leuthe.  He  is  now  dead,  but  his  widow  inhabits 
the  chateau,  unmolested  by  the  French,  not  a  single  one 
of  whom  we  have  seen,  nor  are  to  see  (as  they  assure  us) 
till  we  reach  Hanover.  A  vast  deal  of  tobacco  is  culti- 
vated between  Cassel  and  this  place. 

Thursday,  25th. — Our  broken  wheel  detained  us  till 
two  o'clock  the  next  day.  The  two  posts  from  hence  to 
Hanover  are  quite  flat  and  good  road.  The  appearance  of 
Hanover  is  not  imposing  at  a  distance  ;  it  is  situated  in  a 
boundless  plain,  and  presents  nothing  to  the  approaching 
traveller  but  two  or  three  brick  towers  of  churches.  The 
streets  through  which  we  passed  contained  few  fine 
houses,  or  marked  buildings  of  any  sort. 

The  drive  about  the  town  in  search  of  lodging  was  the 
only  opportunity  we  had  of  seeing  anything  of  Hanover. 
It  was  dark  by  the  time  we  got  settled,  and  I  don't  know 
that  it  would  have  been  thought  prudent,  as  English' 

VOL.  II.  U 


290  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

travellers,  to  have  exhibited  ourselves  much  in  the  streets, 
full  of  French  soldiers.  At  the  gates,  surrounded  by 
French  soldiers,  not  a  question  was  asked.  The  carriage 
was  never  even  stopped,  as  is  common  in  all  German 
towns,  to  enquire  one's  name  and  whither  one  is  going. 
We  drove  into  Hanover  in  an  English  coach  as  we  should 
have  driven  into  York  or  any  other  town  in  England.  At 
the  inn  no  enquiry  for  our  passport,  no  sending  it  to  the 
municipality.  It  was  never  taken  out  of  my  letter  case 
from  the  time  we  left  Cassel  till  we  arrived  in  London.  I 
thought  it  right,  however,  to  send  a  note  to  General  Mor- 
tier  from  the  inn,  thanking  him  for  the  permission  he  had 
given  us  to  pass  through  Hanover,  and  accounting,  by  my 
illness,  for  our  not  having  used  it  sooner.  We  heard 
there  were  a  large  number  of  French  troops  ;  the  streets 
were  full  of  them,  but  the  most  exact  discipline  was  main- 
tained, and  that,  and  that  alone,  preserved  the  inhabitants 
from  ruin.  General  Mortier  was  lodged  in  the  Duke  of 
Cambridge's  house ;  Leopold  Berthier,*  the  Commissaire 
General  in  the  king's,  which,  it  seems,  nobody  but  the 
king  when  at  Hanover  ever  inhabited. 

Immediately  opposite  our  Hotel  de  Strelitz  was  a 
handsome  stone  hotel,  built  round  a  court,  which  they  oc- 
cupied as  some  public  office.  I  cannot  say  that  we  saw 
at  Hanover  any  marks  of  devastation,  of  houses  aban- 
doned, or  any  irregularities ;  and  all  the  horrible  stories  put 
into  our  papers  of  the  conduct  of  French  troops  upon  their 
first  arrival,  had  not  the  smallest  foundation  of  truth. 

Friday,  26th. — After  a  very  bad  supper  and  paying 
our  bill — the  very  highest  I  have  ever  known  in  Ger- 
many— we  left  Hanover  before  seven  o'clock  in  the  morn- 
ing, and  were  probably  the  last  English  who  passed 
through  it.  I  own  I  regretted  being  obliged  to  leave  it 

*  Victor  Leopold  Berthier,  brother  to  the  Prince  of  Neufchatel  and 
Wagram,  born  1770.  He  was  a  distinguished  officer  in  all  the  important 
campaigns  from  1793  to  1806.  He  died  at  Paris  in  1807. 


1803]  HANOVER  TO   CELLE.  291 

without  seeing  something  more  of  a  place  of  which  all 
English  people  have  heard  so  much,  which  is  connected 
with  so  many  stories  in  the  latter  part  of  our  history,  and 
which  certainly  by  its  natural  attractions  would  never 
induce  a  traveller  to  return  to  it.  All  the  French  infantry 
were  on  foot,  and  the  generate  beating  before  we  left  the 
town  to  collect  them  to  attend  the  execution  of  three 
soldiers  who  were  to  be  fusilles  that  morning,  at  eight 
o'clock  for  having  in  a  squabble  murdered  a  servant  girl 
in  the  street.  The  execution  was  to  take  place  without 
the  town,  and  we  saw  numbers  of  the  townspeople  troop- 
ing out  to  see  it. 

An  excellent  hard  chausse'e  between  a  row  of  bricks  and 
limes,  on  the  road  to  Celle,  ends  at  about  a  league  and  a 
half  from  the  town,  and  leaves  one  'in  sand  literally  more 
than  half  way  up  the  spokes  of  the  wheels.     An  avenue  of 
wretched   little  birches  is  continued  the  whole  way  to 
Schilderslage ;  but  the  postilions  avoid  the  road  as  much 
as  possible,  and  keep  on  one  side  upon  a  sort  of  black 
heath.     The  whole  road  to  Celle  is  through  the  same  un- 
fathomable land,  marked  by   two  rows  of  birch-trees, 
which  alone  distinguishes  it  from  the  rest  of  the  country ; 
and  their  white  shining  bark  must  be  very  useful  in 
winter   to  guide  wretched   travellers   on  this  immense 
plain,  for  the  most  part  deep  black  boggy  earth,  through 
which  carriages  are  always  dragged  at  a  foot's  pace,  and 
those  within  may  think  themselves  lucky  that  its  unjolting 
nature  allows  them  to  take  refuge  in  sleep  from  its  most 
tiresome  sameness  and  slowness.     About  a  league  from 
Celle  .the  bog  changes  into  a  wood ;  but  the  sand  con- 
tinues on  every  side,  and  the  road  in  a  straight  line  con- 
tinues also.     But  upon  the  road  one  never  is  for  an  in- 
stant, and  often  half  a  mile  from  it.     The  town  of  Celle 
is  approached  by  a  pretty,  gay-looking  open  faubourg  ; 
1,600  French  soldiers,  cavalry  and  infantry,  are  now  quar- 
tered there.   The.  horses  of  the  cavalry  are  in  the  manege 


292  MISS   BERET'S  JOURNAL.  [1803 

of  the  cMteau ;  and  the  officers  and  men  in  the  chateau 
and  in  all  the  private  houses.  The  chateau  is  a  more 
picturesque  and  castle-like  building  than  most  German 
palaces :  we  did  not  go  to  see  it,  as  it  was  the  head- 
quarters, and  full  of  officers.  In  the  principal  church  are 
seen  the  monuments  of  the  Dukes  of  Celle  and  of  Bruns- 
wick-Lunenburg — curious  enough,  being  whole-length 
marble  figures  of  them  and  their  duchesses,  standing 
upright  in  niches  round  the  upper  part  of  the  choir.  In 
the  vault  beneath  it,  where  are  all  their  metal  coffins,  is 
that  of  our  poor  Queen  of  Denmark,*  who  passed  the  last 
years  of  her  short  and  unfortunate  life  here.  It  is  covered 
with  crimson  velvet,  and  richly  ornamented  with  ormolu ; 
the  whole  as  fresh  as  the  day  it  was  deposited.  In  the 
public  garden  there  is  a  marble  monument  to  her  memory ; 
a  wretched  thing  both  in  idea  and  execution,  and  now, 
though  enclosed  within  a  rail,  much  degraded  ;  the  copper 
letters  of  an  inscription  on  a  shield  having  been  taken 
away,  and  the  crown  broken.  The  design  of  the  group 
is  a  figure  descending  upon  clouds,  and  embracing  an  urn, 
on  which  is  a  bas-relief  head  of  the  queen.  A  little  boy 
(her  son,  I  suppose)  is  stretching  up  to  throw  flowers 
upon  it ;  and  another  female  figure  holding  an  infant  (I 
suppose  her  daughter)  to  look  at  it — the  whole  miserably 
executed. 

Saturday,  27th. — Left  Celle ;  passed  through  Bergen 
Yille. 

Sunday,  28$. — Wille ;  Haarburg  to  Hamburg,  a  two 
hours'  passage  by  boat. 

Tuesday,  30th. — Hamburg,  Pinneburg,  Elmshorn. 

Wednesday,  3 1st — Itzehoe,  Hohenhorn,  Heide. 

Thursday,  Sept.  1st — Heide,  Friederichstadt,  Huscom. 

The  inns  are  clean,  and,  without  exception,  fit  places 
for  a  night's  lodging ;  but  tea,  coffee,  and  bread  and 
butter  are  often  the  only  things  to  be  had. 

*  Matilda,  sister  of  George  III. 


1803]  ARRIVAL  IN  LONDOX.  293 

Monday,  19^. — Left  the  'Lark'  packet  in  a  pilot- 
boat,  which  landed  us  in  about  an  hour  between  two  little 
jetties  a  mile  from  the  village  of  Southwold,  to  which  we 
walked. 

Tuesday,  20th, — Southwold  is  three  miles  off  the  great 
Yarmouth  road.  No  post-horses  nearer  than  Yoxford^ 
near  Southwold.  Appearance  of  Ipswich  very  pretty  on 
descending  towards  it. 

Wednesday,  21st. — From  Ipswich  to  London.  Eoad 
very  good  the  whole  way.  We  had  left  our  coach  on  the 
other  side  of  the  water,  and  came  up  in  two  hack  chaises. 
At  Eumford,  as  usual  near  London,  the  horses  execrable, 
and  quite  knocked  up  by  the  time  we  got  to  town. 


294:  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL. 


1804. 

THIS  year  appears  very  barren  of  either  letters  or  jour- 
nals. One  sad  entry  appears  in  the  little  diary :  '  Col. 

engaged  to  marry  Agnes.     Engagement  broken  off 

in  the  spring.  Agnes  dangerously  ill.'  The  following 
letter  from  Professor  Playfair,  addressed  to  Miss  Berry, 
belongs  to  this  year : — 

Cambridge,  Sept.  28,  1804. 

MY  DEAR  MADAM, — .  ...  I  have  been  going  about  all  day 
looking  at  the  curiosities  of  this  ancient  seat  of  literature  and 
science.  Tho'  I  have  no  great  fondness  for  English  universities 
(owing,  you  will  say,  to  my  hyperborean  prejudices),  yet  I 
cannot  approach  a  place  that  has  been  so  long  the  residence  of 
learning  and  philosophy  without  much  veneration,  and  without 
reflecting  that  I  am  now  on  one  of  those  sacred  spots,  where  the 
light  of  truth  was  kept  alive  when  it  was  nearly  extinguished 
over  the  whole  earth.  One  must,  however,  regret  that  the 
institutions  which  have  answered  so  noble  a  purpose  have  not 
kept  pace  with  the  improvement  of  knowledge,  and  do  now  not 
unfrequently  retard  the  growth  of  sciences,  which  in  their 
infancy  they  served  so  happily  to  nurse.  In  going  into  a  great 
library,  it  often  occurs  to  me  to  take  up  some  remarkable  book, 
open  it  by  chance,  and  observe  what  turns  up,  as  the  truths  that 
thus  casually  are  suggested  to  the  mind  often  live  long  in  the 
memory.  To-day,  in  the  University  library,  I  took  up  a  book 
on  the  history  of  astronomy,  called  'Theatrum  Cometicum,' 
that  is  very  scarce  and  very  famous,  and  opened  it  to  try  the 
above  experiment.  The  chapter  that  turned  up  was  '  De  Causis 
Cometarum,'  and  the  first  sentence  was,  *  Causa  cometarum 
maxime  universalis  est  Deus.'  This  truism  was  all  I  had  for 
my  pains,  and  is  the  only  piece  of  instruction  that  I  am  likely 
to  carry  away  from  Cambridge.  Some  have  perhaps  gone  away 
with  less.  Such  as  it  is  I  send  it  to  Mrs.  Darner  and  you,  who 


1804]  LETTER   FROM   PROFESSOR   PLAYFAIR.  295 

will  be  at  no  loss  to  appreciate  the  voluminous  compilation  in 
which  it  is  contained.  .  .  .  Now  that  I  am  going  far  from 
you,  and  for  a  long  time,  allow  me  to  express  to  you  the  sense 
I  have  of  my  good  fortune  in  being  permitted  to  rely  on  you  in 
the  number  of  my  friends,  and  after  so  many  and  so  long  inter- 
vals to  have  met  you  always  the  same,  or  rather  with  a  kindness 
that  time  and  distance  seemed  even  to  have  increased.  This 
certainly  is  not  fashionable  friendship,  and  it  must  be  ac- 
knowledged that  one  of  the  persons  who  has  delineated  such 
friendship  the  best,  has  practised  it  the  least.  Among  my 
obligations  to  you  I  must  not  forget  the  acquaintance  of  Mrs. 
Darner,  the  liberality  of  whose  mind,  the  good  sense  and  sound 
reason  that  dictates  her  opinions,  are  not  less  remarkable  than 
her  elegance  and  taste.  May  I  entreat  you  to  present  my 
respects  to  her. 

I  am,  my  dear  Madam, 

Yours  sincerely, 
j  •  •  JOHN  PLAYFAIR. 


296  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 


1805. 

Entry. — Went  to  Scotland  with  Mr.  Lockhart.  At  Both- 
well*  for  three  months.  Eeturn  to  London  in  December 
with  Kobert. 

It  would  appear  by  the  following  letter  addressed  to 
Mrs.  Cholmeley,  that  Miss  Berry  had  at  this  time  con- 
ceived the  idea  of  engaging  herself  in  some  regular  em- 
ployment that  from  its  very  labour  would  have  given 
repose  to  the  over-activity  of  her  mind ;  but  it  is  also 
clear  that  the  plan  did  not  receive  the  sanction  of  those 
friends  whose  opinion  she  valued,  and  that  it  was  conse- 
quently abandoned : — 

North  Audley  Street,  March,  1805. 

First  let  me  thank  you,  which  I  do  most  sincerely,  for  the 
lively  interest  you  take  in  my  happiness  and  concerns,  and  for 
the  early  consideration  you  have  given  to  my  plan.  Your  first 
objection  as  to  the  light  in  which  such  a  step  would  be  con- 
sidered by  the  world,  and  its  consequent  example  to  others,  had 
already  presented  itself  to  my  mind,  and  is,  alas!  rendered 
so  forcible  by  the  statements  both  of  Mrs.  Darner  and  yourself, 
who  see  it  exactly  in  the  same  light,  that  I  fear  I  need  not 
(which  would  be  easy)  overcome  your  other  objections.  You  do 
me  the  justice  to  believe  that  regular  and  useful  employment 
would  greatly  increase  my  happiness.  Be  assured  it  would  con- 
stitute my  happiness,  such  as  alone  at  my  sober  time  of  life  I 
can  hope  to  experience,  and  what,  if  I  may  judge  from  the 
description  of  others,  I  never  knew  when  young.  But  I  have 
neither  a  discontented  nor  a  capricious  mind.  Eegular  em- 
ployment, however  mechanical,  and  what  many  people  would 

*  The  seat  of  Lord  Douglas. 


1805]  LETTER  TO   MRS.   CHOLMELET.  297 

call  tiresome,  provided  always  that  it  left  me  time  for  the 
uncontrolled  cultivation  of  my  mind,  would  be  to  that  mind 
repose,  restoration,  and  comfort,  after  the  manner  in  which  my 
time  is  now  frittered  away  by  myself,  because  I  have  no  suffi- 
ciently strong  motive  to  oppose  to  any  intrusion  on  my  attention 
by  others,  because  everyone  seems  to  think  they  have  an  equal 
right  to  what  I  don't  appear  to  make  any  decided  use  of  myself. 
I  was  not  born  for  indecision,  and  feel  myself  capable  of  making 
an  entire  change  in  the  disposal  of  my  time  and  of  my  habits 
of  life,  provided  such  change  was  satisfactory  to  my  reason. 
Passing  day  after  day,  therefore,  between  a  garden,  which  has 
ever  been  my  favourite  and  my  undiminished  taste,  and  writing 
accounts  or  letters  of  business,  which  would  occupy  my  hands 
only;  engaged  in  the  regular  performance  of  duties,  which 
would  be  neither  difficult  nor  irksome,  and  with  a  rational 
motive  for  meeting  and  overcoming  any  inconvenience  that 
might  occasionally  occur — believe  me,  I  should  see  nothing 
either  dull  or  dreadful  in  passing  evening  after  evening  uninter- 
ruptedly, trimming  my  lamp,  and  recurring  to  and  unravelling 
the  many  pursuits  after  which  my  soul  has  thirsted,  and  of 
which,  in  fact,  I  have  never  had  but  a  hurried,  imperfect,  and 
unsatisfactory  taste.  With  this  taste  in  the  early  part  of  my 
life  I  endeavoured  to  content  myself,  because  I  felt  my  situation 
imposed  on  me  many  duties,  superior  to  learning  languages,  or 
indulging  in  an  unrestrained  love  of  reading,  because  I  hoped 
I  was  then  labouring  for  future  repose  and  comfort.  I  have 
gone  on  sacrificing  the  present  for  the  future  till  no  future 
remains  to  me.  Still  I  have  spirit  enough  left,  you  see,  to 
resolve  that  no  uncomforts  of  situation,  no  sufferings,  shall  ever 
tempt  me  to  any  step  that  should  throw  me  on  the  mercy  of 
the  world,  or  add  my  name  as  an  additional  motive  for  preaching 
up  ignorance  and  meanness  to  my  sex.  Farewell !  You  will  see, 
at  least,  by  this  letter  that  I  am  not  obstinate  in  my  own  ways  of 
thinking ;  and  if  you  could  know  how  much  my  mind  requires 
some  resting-place  in  perspective,  you  would,  perhaps,  regret 
even  this  being  taken  away  from  it. 

Among  Miss  Berry's  many  literary  friends  was  Miss 
Catherine  Fanshaw,  the  well-known  authoress  of  the 
riddle  on  the  letter  H.,  and  of  many  other  poems. 


298  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  tisos 

The  following  letter,  with  the  playful  verses  that  ac- 
companied it,  show  that  they  were  on  terms  of  intimacy 
as  early  as  the  year  1805. 

The  ode,  supposed  to  be  written  by  Miss  Berry,  was  of 
course  the  composition  of  Miss  C.  Fanshawe,*  and  the 
receipt  of  it  is  acknowledged  by  Miss  Berry  in  the  same 
spirit  in  which  it  was  written : — 

I  return  you  your  Ode,  my  dear  Miss  Berry,  with  many  thanks, 
and  with  all  due  apologies  for  having  detained  it  so  long. 
Believe  me,  I  no  longer  marvel  at  your  enthusiastic  admiration 
of  Gray,  whose  spirit  you  have  most  happily  infused  into  your 
admirable  poem.  Indeed,  his  own  works  could  never  charm  me 
so  much,  for  you  have  had  the  art  to  compress  into  a  small 
compass  his  most  valuable  passages,  and  to  give  them  an 
interest,  a  decision  and  a  dignity  of  subject  which  was  wanting. 

But  it  is  where  you  venture  to  depart  from  your  illustrious 
model  that  you  rise  to  the  highest  excellence,  and  acquire  an 
elevation  and  originality  that,  in  my  humble  opinion,  place 
your  Muse  on  a  higher  form  in  Parnassus  than  ever  his  could 
claim. 

The  '  Price  of  the  Hat '  is  a  figure  absolutely  new  in  poetry ; 
and  as  to  individual  character,  he  could  never  have  rendered  it 
with  that  truth  and  delicacy  which  we  acknowledge  in  the  por- 
traits of  yourself  and  Mrs.  Clinton.  If  in  so  splendid  a  work  I 
could  search  for  blemishes,  perhaps  one  might  be  found  in  the 
parody  of  two  lines,  which  after  all  must  ever  remain  inimit- 
able :  — 

And  they  that  creep,  and  they  that  fly, 
Shall  end  where  they  began. 

I  little  thought,  when  first  suggesting  to  you  the  idea  of  com- 
posing an  Ode  on  the  model  of  your  favourite  Gray,  or  when 

*  Catherine  Fanshawe,  co-heiress  -with  two  other  daughters  of  an 
ancient  gentleman's  family.  The  three  lived  together.  Besides  her  talent 
for  graceful  pleasantry,  whether  in  prose  or  in  verse,  admirable  as  a  letter- 
writer,  a  reader  of  Shakspeare,  and  as,a  designer  in  almost  every  style.  A 
first-rate  judge  of  art  says  her  drawings  and  etchings  are  those  of  an  artist, 
&c.  Too  few  of  her  poems  have  been  published ;  some  appearing  in  a 
volume,  consisting  of  miscellaneous  pieces  by  many  authors,  edited  by 
Joanna  Baillie. — Vide  Reminiscences  of  a  Literary  Life,  by  Miss  Mitford. 


1805]  ODE   BY   MIS§   BEKRY.  299 

you  lamented  at  the  Institution  the  delay  occasioned  by  the 
choice  of  a  new  bonnet,  I  little  thought  that  you  were  going  to 
immortalise  your  name  at  my  instigation.  This  glorious  cir- 
cumstance gives  me  a  sort  of  property  in  the  work,  by  which  I 
feel  entitled  to  request  that  you  would  show  it  sparingly  to  the 
few  who  may  be  worthy,  and  on  no  account  distribute  any  copies 
without  the  licence  and  authority  of  her  who  has  the  honour  to 
be,  with  sentiments  of  the  most  profound  admiration,  dear  madam, 
Your  obliged  and  obedient 

C.  M.  F. 

Ode,  by  Mary  Berry. 

Lo !  where  the  gaily-vestur'd  throng, 

Fair  Learning's  train,  are  seen, 
Wedg'd  in  close  ranks  her  walls  along, 

And  up  her  benches  green ! 

Unfolded  to  their  mental  eye 
Thy  awful  form,  Sublimity  ! 

The  moral  teacher  shows — 
Sublimity !  of  Silence  born, 
And  Solitude,  mid  *  caves  forlorn,' 

And  dimly-vision'd  woes. 
Or  stedfast  Worth,  that  inly  great, 
Mocks  the  malignity  of  fate. 
Whisper'd  Pleasure's  dulcet  sound 
Murmurs  the  crowded  room  around ; 
And  Wisdom,  borne  on  Fashion's  pinion, 
Exulting  hails  her  new  dominion. 
Oh !  both  on  me  your  influence  shed, — 
Dwell  in  my  heart,  and  deck  my  head ! 

Where'er  a  broader  browner  shade 

The  shaggy  Beaver  throws, 
And  with  the  ample  feather's  aid 

O'ercanopies  the  nose — 
Where'er,  with  smooth  and  silken  pile, 
Lingering  in  solemn  pause  awhile, 
The  crimson  velvet  glows — 


300  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

From  some  high  bench's  giddy  brink, 
With  me  my  Friend  begins  to  think, 

As  bolt  upright  we  sit — 
That  dress,  like  dogs,  should  have  its  day, 
That  beavers  are  too  hot  for  May, 

And  velvets  quite  unfit. 
Then  Taste  in  maxims  sweet  I  draw 

From  her  unerring  lip — 
'  How  light !  how  simple  are  the  straw ! 

How  delicate  the  chip  ! ' 

Hush'd  is  the  speaker's  powerful  voice, 

The  audience  melt  away ; 
I  fly  to  fix  my  final  choice, 

And  bless  th'  instructive  day. 

The  milliner  officious  pours 

Of  hats  and  caps  her  ready  stores, 

The  unbought  elegance  of  Spring; — 
Some  wide  disclose  the  full,  round  face ; 
Some,  shadowy,  lend  a  modest  grace, 

And  stretch  their  sheltering  wing. 

Here  clust'ring  grapes  appear  to  shed 
Their  luscious  juices  on  the  head, 

And  cheat  the  longing  eye  : 
So  round  the  Phrygian  monarch  hung 
Fair  fruits,  that  from  his  parched  tongue 

For  ever  seemed  to  fly. 

Here  early  blooms  the  summer  rose  ; 
Here  ribbons  wreathe  fantastic  bows  ; 
There  plays  gay  plumage  of  a  thousand  dyes ! 
Visions  of  beauty !  spare  my  aching  eyes  1 
Ye  cumbrous  fashions  I  crowd  not  on  my  head  ! 

Mine  be  the  chip  of  purest  white, 

Swanlike,  and  as  his  feathers  light, 
When  on  the  still  wave  spread  : 

And  let  it  wear  the  graceful  dress 

Of  unadorned  simpleness. 


1805]  ODE   BY  MISS  BERRY.  301 

Ah  frugal  wish !  ah  pleasing  thought ! 

Ah  hope  indulg'd  in  vain  ! 
Of  modest  fancy  cheaply  bought, 

A  stranger  yet  to  Payne ! 

With  undissembled  grief  I  tell 

(For  sorrow  never  comes  too  late), 
The  simplest  bonnet  in  Pall-Mall 

Is  sold  for  II.  8s. 

To  calculation's  sober  view, 

That  searches  ev'ry  plan, 
Who  keep  the  old,  or  buy  the  new, 

Shall  end  where  they  began. 

Alike  the  shabby  and  the  gay 
Must  meet  the  sun's  meridian  ray, 

The  air,  the  dust,  the  damp  : 
This  shall  the  sudden  shower  despoil, 
That  slow  decay  by  gradual  soil, 

Those  envious  boxes  cramp. 

Who  will,  their  squander'd  gold  may  pay, 

Who  will,  our  taste  deride ; 
We  '11  scorn  the  fashion  of  the  day 

With  philosophic  pride. 

Methinks  we  thus  in  accents  low 

Might  Sydney  Smith  address, — 
'Poor  moralist !  —  and  what  art  thou ? — 

Who  never  spoke  of  dress ! 
Thy  mental  Hero  never  hung 
Suspended  on  a  tailor's  tongue, 

In  agonising  doubt : 
Thy  tale  no  fluttering  female  show'd 
Who  languish'd  for  the  newest  mode, 

Yet  dared  to  live  without ! ' 

May,  1805, 


302  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

To  Miss  C.  Fanshawe. 

North  Audley  Street,  Sunday,  May  19. 

Mr  DEAR  Miss  CATHERINE, — You  should  know  how  much  I 
love  parody,  as  well  as  how  much  I  admire  Gray,  to  know  how 
much  I  am  delighted  with  my  own  Ode.  The  little  criticisms 
you  make  upon  it,  you  must  allow  me  to  say,  I  consider  as  dic- 
tated by  that  jalousie  de  metier  from  which  the  best  of  us  are 
not  entirely  exempted.  But,  however,  I  shall  be  very  anxious 
to  communicate  to  you  any  of  my  future  productions,  provided 
you  return  them  to  me  speedily  with  as  entertaining  a  comment 
as  accompanied  this  Ode. 

During  Miss  Berry's  residence  with  her  friends  at  Both- 
well  she  took  the  opportunity  of  visiting  a  cotton-mill 
established  in  the  neighbourhood.  The  following  detailed 
account,  as  showing  the  regulations  and  arrangements  in 
force  more  than  half  a  century  ago  in  such  establishments, 
may  not  be  without  its  interest;  more  particularly  as, 
through  the  courtesy  of  the  present  owner,  a  detailed 
account  of  its  present  state  (1860)  is  subjoined,  thus 
marking  the  progress  and  improvements  in  the  mode  of 
conducting  its  operations : — 

Tuesday,  November  8th. — Walked  to  the  cotton  mill 
upon  the  Clyde,  just  above  the  grounds  of  Both  well,  on 
the  opposite  side  of  the  river.  Nine  hundred  persons 
employed  about  it,  of  which  about  100  are  artificers  of 
various  sorts,  smiths,  carpenters,  &c.,  &c.,  to  keep  the 
buildings  and  machinery  in  repair.  The  remaining  800 
all  employed  in  the  various  operations  of  making  the 
cotton  ready  for  the  weaver  from  the  rough  state  in  which 
it  comes  home  in  bales.  Of  these  800,  nearly  500  are 
children  from  six  to  twelve  or  fourteen  years  old,  and  of 
the  remaining  300  there  are  many  more  women  than 
men.  The  children  are  for  the  most  part  apprentices, 
bound  to  the  manufacturer  for  six  or  seven  years  according 


1805]  COTTOX-MILL  AT  BOTHWELL.  303 

to  their  age,  for  their  food  and  clothing.     After  this  time 
is  out,  they  either  continue  on  to  receive  wages  or  go  to 
some  other  business.    I  am  sorry  I  did  not  ask  what  pro- 
portion of  them  continue  on  at  a  business  of  which  they 
must  have  had  such  a  melancholy  experience,  for  all  these 
children,  as  well  as  all  their  fellow  labourers,  are  employed 
fourteen  hours  a  day,  from  six  o'clock  in  the  morning  to 
eight  at  night,  of  which  time  they  are  allowed  an  hour 
for  breakfast,  from  nine  till  ten,  and  an  hour  for  dinner, 
from  two  till  three ;  after  which,  they  continue  uninter- 
ruptedly at  work  till  eight  at  night.     I  need  not  com- 
memorate  their  in  general  forlorn  and  squalid  looks ; 
they  are,  God  knows,  painfully  enough  impressed  on  my 
mind.      What   a  beginning,   gracious   heaven!    for  the 
dawn  of  human  animal  life  and  human  intellect !     A 
number  of  these  children  are  sent  from  the  parishes  in 
London.      They  have  just  now  thirty-six  or  forty  from 
the  parish  of  St.  Martin's-in-the-Fields.     God  help  them, 
poor  souls  !     Never  to  be  blessed  with  the  fond  endear- 
ment of  any  creature  caring  for  anything  but  their  mere 
existence  and  their  labour,  and  condemned  to  pass  the 
playful  years  of  childhood  in  a  wearisome  sameness  of 
employment,  to  which  childhood  is  so  particularly  averse. 
This  subject  has  been  so  often  enlarged  upon,  I  did  not 
mean  to  have  allowed  my  pen  a  line  upon  it ;  but  it  is 
impossible  to  have  had  it  brought  immediately  under 
one's  eyes  this  very  day,  and  not  express  one's  feelings 
somehow.     In  the  mean  time  all  such  care  is  taken  of 
these  children  as  perhaps  in  such  a  situation  is  possible. 
They  have  a  building  where  the  parish    children  and 
such  as  come  to  them  from  a  distance  are  lodged,  girls 
and  boys  separately;  they  have  porridge  of  oatmeal  at 
breakfast  and  supper,   and  broth  and  beef  for  dinner. 
They  have  a  master  to  teach  them  to  read  and  write, 
which  is  done  after  their  work  is  over  at  night,  and  they 
are  carried  to  church  of  a  Sunday.     But  what  an  idea  of 


304  MISS  BERET'S  JOUEXAL.  [isos 

that  religion  must  these  poor  souls  have,  which  coops 
them  up  in  a  church  for  three  hours  to  hear  a  (to  them) 
unintelligible  Scotch  sermon,  on  the  only  day  they  are 
allowed  the  '  common  air  and  common  use  of  their  own 
limbs.'  Oh  man,  man,  man !  what  ugly  things  in  detail 
are  most  of  thy  finest  contrivances!  The  men  and 
women  are  in  general  all  at  piecework.  The  carders  and 
reelers — I  mean  those  who  attend  the  carding  and  reeling 
(for  everything  here  is  done  by  machinery),  are  all 
women ;  they  earn  about  ten  shillings  per  week,  the  spin- 
ners from  fifteen  to  sixteen  shillings  per  week ;  these  too 
are  almost  all  women,  and  have  two  children  attending 
the  particular  machine  that  each  belongs  to. 

The  women  and  girls  that  are  at  weekly  wages,  such  as 
those  who  tie  up  and  sort  the  hanks  of  cotton  thread 
when  spun,  receive  from  six  to  seven  shillings  per  week. 
The  men  make  from  a  guinea  to  two  pounds  per  week.  I 
cannot  say  that  in  general  the  women  looked  unhealthy ; 
they  were  for  the  most  part  young  girls  about  and  under 
twenty,  and  some  of  them  good  looking.  Some,  on  the 
contrary,  objects  sadly  disfigured  by  nature.  They  all 
work,  as  in  all  manufactories,  in  large  lofts,  heated  by 
a  large  tin  tube  of  steam,  going  the  whole  length  of  the 
room,  and  giving  any  required  degree  of  warmth ;  it  was 
to-day  most  oppressive,  when  joined  to  the  smell  of  the 
cotton,  of  the  oil  of  the  machines,  and  of  the  people 
working  them.  This,  however,  might  certainly  be  avoided 
considerably  by  letting  in  fresh  air  at  the  windows  on 
both  sides,  all  of  which  open,  but  which  the  overseer 
said  they  seldom  used,  and  which  were  almost  all  shut  to- 
day, though  the  air  was  uncommonly  mild  without,  and 
most  oppressingly  hot  within.  I  have  said  that  the  whole 
operations  here  are  done  by  machinery ;  the  whole  is  moved 
by  one  great  water-wheel  18  feet  and  21  feet  in  diameter, 
which  turns  several  vast  iron  spindles,  communicating 
motion  to  all  the  endless  wheels  which  spin  six  thousand 


1805]  COTTON-MILL  AT   BOTHWELL.  305 

pounds  weight  of  cotton  thread  in  a  week.    A  fifth  part  is 
lost  in  the  manufacture ;  that  is  to  say,  to  produce  a  thou- 
sand pounds  weight  of  cotton  thread,  a  fifth  part  more  of  the 
raw  material  is  required.    Part  of  this  refuse,  however,  is 
not  perfectly  useless,  but  is  sold  to  be  used  up  in  coarse  yarn. 
The  only  operation  done  by  the  hand  is  picking  the 
cotton  as  it  comes  out  of  the  bale  quite  clean  ;  after  that 
it  is  beat,  carded,  and  spun,  all  by  machinery,  undergoing 
six  different  operations  before  it  is  ready  to  be  spun  into 
thread.     The  various  multitude  of  leather  straps  upon  all 
the  wheels  of  this  immense  machinery  costs  them  between 
three  and  four  hundred  pounds  yearly  in  leather,  and  the 
oil  and  candles  consumed  in  lighting  the  lofts  four  hundred 
pounds  a-year.   They  are  now  going  to  have  it  lighted  by 
the  new  contrivance  for  consuming  coal  smoke.     They 
likewise  at  this  manufacture  dye  cotton  of  a  most  beautiful 
colour  with  madder ;  they  say  such  is  the  demand  for  it 
that  they  could  use  twice  as  much  madder  as  they  can 
get.   The  cotton  yarn  undergoes  forty  different  operations 
before   it   is   made   ready  to   receive  the  colour.     The 
number  of  people,  which  I  have  stated  to  be  900,  em- 
ployed in  this  great  work,  together  with  their  wives  and 
children,  the  place  to  lodge  them,  and  the  persons  neces- 
sary to  feed,  clothe,  and  wash  for  them,  compose  a  little 
town — and  so  it   is,  in  fact,  becoming,  with  a  row  of 
houses,  two  or  three  shops,  &c.  &c. — the  only  real  foun- 
dation of  towns  which  the  Empress  of  Eussia,  with  all 
her  greatness,  in  vain  commanded,  and  Frederick  II., 
with  all  his  abilities,  in  vain  coaxed. 

The  factory  thus  described  is  called  Blantyre,  situated 
on  the  left  bank  of  the  Clyde,  about  four  miles  below 
Hamilton,  and  continues  to  be  worked  by  the  same  firm 
as  in  1805,  viz.  Messrs.  Henry  Monteith  &  Co. 

The  numbers  at  work  in  May,  1860,  amounted  to 
1,061;  their  ages  and  employment  as  follows : — 

VOL.  II.  X 


306 


MISS   BERRY  S   JOUBNAL. 


[1805 


Males 

Females 

Total 

under  18 

above  18 

under  18 

above  18 

Spinning-mills   .... 
Weaving  factory 
Dye  works          .... 
Mechanics  and  labourers    . 

27 
1 
18 
1 

32 
20 
133 
55 

32 
41 
42 

169 
289 
201 

260 

351 
394 
56 

47 

240 

115 

659 

1061 

The  above  numbers  include  only  twelve  children  under 
thirteen  years  of  age ;  the  employment  which  required 
so  many  of  that  class  in  1805  having  been  long  since 
discarded.  The  system  of  binding  apprentices  was  given 
up  about  1809,  and  the  services  of  that  class  expired 
altogether  about  1816  or  1817.  While  that  system  con- 
tinued it  was  observed,  when  terms  of  service  expired, 
that  females  generally  remained  in  the  factory  working  on 
wages  and  binding  themselves,  while  the  males  more 
generally  went  forth  into  the  world.  This  factory 
appears  to  be  considered  a  home  by  all  who  have  been 
employed  in  it,  for  they  are  free  to  come  and  free  to  go ; 
there  is  no  engagement  of  any  kind  on  entering ;  a 
worker  is  permitted  to  leave  without  giving  notice  of  any 
kind — he  has  only  to  state  his  wish  to  the  manager,  who 
gives  him  a  line  to  the  clerk  to  make  up  his  wages, 
which  is  paid  immediately  and  no  questions  asked. 

No  children  are  now  received  from  any  parish  work- 
house, school  of  industry,  nor  any  charitable  institution 
of  any  kind. 

The  hours  of  labour  are  now  those  prescribed  by  the 
Factory  Act,  viz.  : — 

From  6    A.M.  till  9  A.M.      3    hours 
„     9|     „     „    2  P.M.      41      „ 
„     21  P.M.     ,   6  3i 


5  days         .     10^      „ 
Saturday. 

From  6    A.M.  till  9  A.M.      3    hours 


hours 


2  P.M. 


41          

^2  )> 


60 


180 5]  COTTOX-MILL   AT   BOTIIWELL.  307 

The  buildings  in  which  the  cotton-spinning  was  carried 
on  in  the  year  1805  have  remained  very  much  as  they 
were,  but  by  this  introduction  of  improved  machinery 
the  work  in  those  buildings,  as  well  as  keeping  the 
machinery  and  buildings  in  repair,  is  now  efficiently 
carried  out  by  260  workers,  of  whom  201  are  females 
and  59  males. 

The  building  of  four  stories,  called  the  picking-house, 
which  existed  in  1805,  was  destroyed  by  fire  and  has 
been  replaced  by  one  not  so  high  for  other  purposes,  as 
picking  by  hand  has  long  been  discontinued.  The  clean- 
ing of  cotton  is  now  all  done  by  machinery.  The  build- 
ings in  which  the  apprentices  of  former  days  were  lodged 
are  now  converted  into  warehouse  stores,  counting  house, 
and  an  armoury  for  the  rifle-corps. 

In  1809-10  a  large  building  was  added,  capable  of 
holding  350  power-looms. 

A  gas-making  apparatus  was  erected  in  1814,  by  which 
all  the  works  are  lighted  ;  and  since  1843,  all  the  dwell- 
ing houses  in  the  village,  as  well  as  the  streets,  have  also 
been  lighted  with  gas. 

In  1845  mechanics'  shops  and  stores  were  erected. 

A  good  school-house  is  kept  up  and  efficient  teachers 
provided ;  nearly  two-thirds  of  the  expense  defrayed  by 
the  company,  and  the  remainder  by  the  children  in  school 
pence.  Parents  not  connected  with  the  works  send  their 
children  that  they  may  participate  in  the  advantages  of 
this  school. 

The  children  are  taken  to  church  by  their  parents  to 
whatever  church  they  please.  There  are  two  Established 
churches,  two  Free  churches,  one  United  Presbyterian 
within  twenty  minutes'  walk  of  the  village  ;  besides  which 
the  Methodists  meet  in  the  village  school,  and  one  of  the 
Free  Church  ministers  delivers  a  sermon  every  Sabbatli  in 
the  school-house,  and  from  five  to  seven  o'clock  the 
schoolmasters,  assisted  by  the  heads  of  families  and  others 

x  2 


308  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

as  monitors  conduct  a  Sabbath  evening  school  in  the  school- 
house,  which  is  attended  by  180  to  190  children.  About 
two-thirds  of  the  inhabitants  attend  the  Free  and  United 
Presbyterian  churches,  the  remainder  are  divided  betwixt 
the  Established  Church,  Eoman  Catholics,  and  Methodists. 

The  village  belonging  to  the  works  in  1851  contained 
a  population  of  1,280  ;  there  are  now  about  1,400,  every 
available  house  being  occupied ;  and  were  there  a  fourth 
more  houses  added,  they  would  be  occupied  as  fast  as 
they  could  be  built. 

A  considerable  number  of  the  workers  come  from 
Both  well,  High  Blantyre,  and  other  adjacent  places ;  they 
come  in  the  morning  and  return  again  in  the  evening. 
There  are  also  a  large  proportion  who  come  from  aU  the 
coal  and  iron  works,  but  at  a  greater  distance.  They 
lodge  in  the  village  during  the  week,  going  home  upon 
Saturday,  and  returning  again  upon  Sabbath  evening. 

There  are  occasionally  a  few  who  having  natural  physi- 
cal defects  could  not  otherwise  gain  a  livelihood,  can  do 
the  light  work  of  the  mill  very  well. 


isoG]  LORD  NELSON'S  FUNERAL.  309 


1806. 
EXTEACTS    FKOM    JOURNAL. 

Jan.  13#A. — I  had  determined  immediately  after  seeing 
it,  to  mark  down  the  effect  Lord  Nelson's  funeral  should 
have  on  my  mind,  and  that  of  the  people  about  me.  I  had 
certainly  hopes  that  it  would  have  been  more  considerable 
than  it  was,  although  I  had  little  hope  of  its  being  con- 
ducted with  any  real  taste  or  solemn  effect,  knowing  that  its 
conduct  had  not  been  entrusted  to  any  persons  of  approved 
taste  themselves,  or  who  would  have  summoned  artists 
to  their  assistance.  On  the  water  it  was  a  crowd  of 
boats,  in  which  the  immense  city  barges  only  were  con- 
spicuous. It  is  much  easier  to  set  down  upon  paper  the 
regulations  of  a  ceremony,  such  as  that  the  boats  of 
the  river  fencibles  are  to  line  each  side  of  the  procession, 
&c.,  than  to  give  the  effect  of  a  procession  so  lined  on  the 
water  in  the  foggy  atmosphere  of  the  Thames.  The 
distance  of  time  between  the  minute  guns  fired  by  these 
river  fencibles  was  too  long  to  command  continued  atten- 
tion, and  therefore,  I  think,  failed  in  their  effect.  The 
music,  too,  was  not  sufficiently  loud  to  have  any  effect  at 
all ;  and  the  barge  which  contained  his  honoured  remains 
was  neither  sufficiently  large  nor  sufficiently  distinguished 
to  command  the  eye  and  the  attention  of  every  spectator, 
which  by  some  means  or  other  it  ought  to  have  done.  I 
was  looking  over  the  wall  of  Lord  Fife's  garden,  which 
forms  one  side  of  Whitehall  Stairs,  so  that  I  saw  the 
coffin  in  the  very  act  of  being  landed ;  saw  it  placed  on 
the  bier  on  which  it  was  borne  to  the  Admiralty.  The 


310  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURXAL.  [ISOG 

only  really  impressive  moment  was  that  in  which  the 
coffin  first  touched  the  ground.  At  that  instant  the  sky, 
which  but  a  few  minutes  before  had  been  clear,  poured 
down  at  once  a  torrent  of  rain  and  hail,  and  a  sudden 
gust  of  wind  arose,  the  violence  of  which  was  not  less  re- 
markable than  the  moment  at  which  it  took  place.  In  an- 
cient Eome,  or  in  later  days  of  modern  superstition,  such  a 
circumstance  would  have  been  recorded  as  the  moment  in 
which  his  spirit  sought  its  native  sky,  or  as  an  omen  of 
future  bad  luck,  from  the  instant  his  last  remains  quitted 
that  element  on  which  he  had  so  often  triumphed. 

On  shore  the  whole  ceremony  was  still  less  calculated 
to  gratify  the  feelings  it  naturally  inspired,  and  in  which 
(to  do  them  justice),  not  one  of  the  thousands  collected  as 
spectators  but  seemed  to  participate.  Never  was  there  so 
decent,  so  quiet,  so  serious,  so  respectful  a  mob.  Instead 
of  presenting  to  their  eager  eyes  the  surviving  heroes  of 
Trafalgar,  following  the  corpse  of  their  illustrious  leader, 
the  naval  officers  were  all  put  into  mourning  coaches, 
which  immediately  became  equally  uninteresting  to  the 
spectators,  whether  they  contained  a  vice-admiral  or  a 
herald;  indeed  the  heralds,  from  their  dress,  were  the 
only  conspicuous  persons.  The  sailors,  too,  of  the  '  Victory,' 
the  immediate  witnesses  of  their  Nelson's  glory,  who  had 
indignantly  opposed  the  idea  of  transferring  his  corpse  to 
a  frigate,  and  who  had  insisted  on  its  remaining  with 
them  in  the  ship,  on  whose  deck  they  had  seen  him  fall 
— these  sailors,  instead  of  being  allowed  to  surround  the 
coffin  from  which  they  had  proved  themselves  so  unwilling 
to  separate,  were  marshalled  by  themselves  in  another 
part  of  the  procession,  without  music,  without  officers, 
without  any  naval  accompaniments  whatsoever.  Although 
few  in  number,  and  thus  separated  from  everything  that 
would  have  added  consequence  to  their  appearance,  such 
was  the  impression  that  their  serious,  quiet,  decent  de- 
portment made  on  the  multitude,  that  they  were  repeat- 


1806]  DEATH   OF   MR.    PITT.  311 

edly  and  almost  continually  cheered  as  they  passed 
along.  What  a  deep  and  lasting  impression  would  the 
whole  of  this  ceremony  have  made  on  the  minds  of  the 
spectators,  had  the  naval  part  of  the  procession,  as  well  as 
the  military,  been  conducted  on  foot ;  had  the  com- 
panions of  his  glory  and  his  danger,  exposed  to  the 
regards  of  their  grateful  and  admiring  country,  immedi- 
ately surrounded  the  car  which  bore  his  remains ;  had 
the  whole  been  accompanied  by  appropriate  music — one 
band  taking  up  the  melancholy  strain  when  another 
dropped  it ;  and  had  the  passage  of  the  procession  been 
marked  by  the  solemn  tolling  of  the  different  bells.  I 
will  not  talk  of  the  disproportions  and  perfect  bad  taste 
of  the  funeral  car,  because  good  taste  in  forms  I  never 
expect  here ;  but  I  did  expect  sufficient  good  taste  in 
moral  feeling,  not  to  have  entrusted  the  conduct  of  such  a 
ceremony,  the  tribute  of  such  a  nation  to  such  a  chief, 
as  a  job  to  the  Heralds'  office  and  their  hireling  under- 
takers !  The  only  moment  in  which  the  mind  the  most 
disposed  to  enthusiasm,  could  for  a  moment  indulge 
it  (I  speak  not  of  the  ceremony  in  St.  Paul's,  which  I 
did  not  see),  was  that  in  which  the  funeral  car  passed 
Charing  Cross.  Here  nothing  could  be  seen  on  every 
side  but  pyramids  of  heads,  and  every  head  uncovered, 
from  respect  to  the  object,  on  which  every  eye  was 
entirely  bent.  One  general  feeling  pervading  a  great 
multitude  must  ever  tend  to  the  sublime. 

Thursday,  Jan.  23rd. — It  was  universally  believed 
that  Mr.  Pitt  had  died  to-day,  and  everybody  was  talking 
and  reasoning  upon  his  death  as  a  fact.  At  seven  o'clock 
in  the  evening  I  stopped  at  Dr.  Baillie's  door  to  enquire  if 
he  was  returned  from  Wimbledon.  He  had  left  Mr.  Pitt 
there  between  three  and  four  still  alive,  and  Dr.  Eeynolds 
was  to  return  there  to-night.  Baillie  having  left  him, 
proved  to  me  that  he  thought  the  case  past  all  hope. 


312  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [iso6 

Friday,  Jan.  2±th. — Mr.  Pitt  died  this  morning  at  four 
o'clock.     This  is  certainly  a  great  event  for  the  country  in 
the  present  posture  of  affairs.    Much  curiosity  and  anxiety 
was  excited  to-day  and  yesterday  to  ascertain  the  fact — 
more,  I  think,  than  what  may  be  called  tender  concern  or 
great  regret  for  his  loss.    And  yet  I  know  not  what  politics, 
or  what  party,  can  justify  the  not  regretting  the  loss  of 
such   a   superior  intellect,  and   such    great   talents,   for 
superior  and  great  they  were,  although  on  the  important 
subjects  to  which  they  were  applied  it  was  not  always 
possible  to  approve  either  his  principles  or  his  conduct. 
Perhaps  his  greatest  errors  originated  from  his  early  and 
constant  immersion  in  public  business,  and  from  his  having 
been  always  an  actor,  never  a  spectator  of  affairs.     This, 
perhaps,  prevented  his  sufficiently  recurring  in  his  plans 
and  in  his  measures  to  those  great  first  principles  never 
to  be  lost  sight  of  by  a  really  great  statesman,  and  to  be 
deviated  from    as    little   as  possible ;    expediency   and 
necessity  will  always  make  that  little  enough. 

In  Miss  Berry's  work  on  '  England  and  France  '  will  be 
found  a  far  more  detailed  review  of  her  opinion  respect- 
ing the  character  of  Mr.  Pitt  and  of  the  influence  he 
exercised  on  the  politics  of  his  country  and  the  pur- 
suits of  his  contemporaries. 

The  following  extracts  from  Miss  Berry's  MSS.  show 
how  strongly  she  felt  the  disadvantage  of  the  light  and 
frivolous  education  she  saw  bestowed  upon  the  youth  of 
her  own  sex,  and  with  what  bitter  regret  she  witnessed 
the  mortifying  discouragement  which  then,  far  more  than 
now,  appears  to  have  been  given  to  all  intellectual  exer- 
tions in  women,  whose  leisure  and  abilities  afforded  them 
the  opportunity  and  means  of  mental  cultivation  and  of 
literary  occupation  and  distinction. 


1806]  LETTER   TO   A   FRIEND.  313 

Extract  from  a  Letter  to  a  Friend. 

London :  Dec.  1806. 

Desultory  and  heterogeneous  reading  is  the  great  evil  of  all 
young  women.  Our  education  (if  education  it  can  be  called) 
is  nearly  ended  by  the  time  that  our  minds  begin  to  open  and 
to  be  really  eager  for  information.  When  you  men  are  sent  to 
college  we  are  left  (such  of  us  as  are  not  obliged  to  gain  our 
bread,  or  to  mend  our  own  clothes)  to  positive  idleness,  without 
any  object,  end  or  aim  to  encourage  any  one  employment  of 
our  mind  more  than  another.  Our  imaginations  are  naturally 
more  lively  than  yours,  our  powers  of  steady  attention,  I  think 
less  than  yours.  What  would  you  have  us  do  ?  Entire  frivolity, 
or  any  and  every  book  that  falls  into  our  hands,  are  our  only 
resources;  and  though  nobody  is  more  aware  than  myself  that 
this  sort  of  desultory  reading  during  the  first  years  of  (mental) 
life  does  often  much  mischief,  and  is  attended  always  with  a 
great  waste  of  time,  yet  it  has  at  least  this  good  effect,  et  scio 
quod  loquor,  that  a  love  of  reading  thus  natural  and  thus  in- 
dulged is  often  a  happy  preventive  in  future  life,  against  more 
serious  follies,  more  pernicious  idleness,  and  it  is  to  be  hoped 
may  be  counted  upon  as  a  real  resource  in  those  days  when  the 
attractions  of  the  world  and  of  society  fade  as  much  in  our  eyes, 
as  our  attractions  fade  in  theirs. 

EXTRACTS. 

Considering  the  education  given  to  women,  and  (according  to 
the  present  system)  the  subsequent  and  almost  necessary  idle- 
ness both  of  mind  and  body,  I  am  only  astonished  that  they 
are  not  more  ignorant,  weaker,  and  more  perverse  than  they  are. 

All  English  women  think  it  necessary  to  profess  loving  the 
country,  and  to  long  to  be  in  the  country,  altho'  their  minds  are 
often  neither  sufficiently  opened,  nor  their  pursuits  sufficiently 
interesting,  to  make  such  a  taste  rational. 

A  woman  who  is  proud  of  being  what  is  generally  called  a 
woman  of  business  is  proud  of  endowments  that  would  not 
distinguish  a  banker's  clerk.  They  are  what  every  woman 


314  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isoe 


should  be  ashamed  of  not  having,  because  every  woman  ^ 
have  sufficient  leisure  to  acquire  them  ;  but  of  the  possession  of 
which  an  intelligent  mind  can  no  more  be  nattered  than  with 
the  knowledge  of  the  pence  table. 

The  wrongs  or  the  neglect  which  women  of  superior  intel- 
lect almost  universally  receive  from  men,  are  revenged  by  the 
various  evils  which  men  almost  as  universally  suffer  from  the 
weakness,  the  folly,  and  the  meanness  of  those  whom  they  com- 
monly prefer  in  the  characters  of  their  wives  and  friends. 

On  Imagination. 

0  for  the  power  of  involving  myself  in  fiction  and  throw- 
ing aside  (for  the  time  at  least)  all  the  dull  realities  of  life  ! 
0  for  the  power  of  creating  to  myself  a  society  of  fancied 
beings,  with  and  for  whom  my  soul  might  exert  all  its  energies, 
and  indulge  in  all  its  enthusiastic  affections.  0  for  the  power 
of  surrounding  myself  with  faultless  friends,  faithful  lovers,  in- 
formed minds,  and  elegant  manners  !  Rousseau  possessed  this  .• 
power,  felt  this  desire,  and  it  produced  his  Heloise.  —  To  purchase 
it  at  the  price  of  his  morbid  feelings  on  every  subject  connected 
with  social  life,  would  be  paying  too  dear  for  it.  But  to  what 
delicate  mind  would  it  not  be  a  treasure  when  separated  from 
the  few,  on  whom  it  depends  for  comfort  and  support  ? 


1807]  EEFLECTIONS.  315 


1807. 

Little  Strawberry,  April  29,  1807. 

WHY  do  I  feel  a  desire  to  register  my  feelings  while 
sitting  quite  alone  in  a  deliciously  warm  sunny  spring- 
day,  at  the  window  of  our  drawing-room,  looking  up  the 
beautiful  reach  of  the  Thames  which  it  commands,  while 
all  nature  is  bursting  into  life  around  me,  and  the  whole 
landscape  is  becoming  more  and  more  vividly  green  every 
hour  ?  I  admire  this  lovely  season  as  much  as  ever — I 
enjoy  it  perhaps  more.  But  how  different  are  the  feelings 
it  generates,  the  thoughts  it  induces,  the  ideas  it  inspires, 
from  those  which  the  same  scene,  the  same  window,  the 
same  season,  produced  ten  years  ago.  It  is  not  that  I 
regret  them  as  more  happy.  On  the  contrary,  my  mind 
at  present  enjoys  a  degree  of  calm  (the  first  ingredient  of 
happiness)  to  which  it  was  then  a  stranger.  But  it  is  a 
calm  purchased  at  the  price  of  every  animating  hope,  of 
every  desire  of  exertion,  and  it  is  secured  by  expecting 
nothing  from  the  future,  and  remembering  much  of  the 
past.  What  frustrated  hopes,  what  unavailing  exertions, 
what  fruitless  sufferings,  does  that  past  recall !  Unembel- 
lished  even  by  any  of  those  gay  thoughtless  moments 
of  youth,  which,  though  often  severely  paid  for,  yet, 
when  viewed  through  the  medium  of  distance,  become 
agreeable  remembrances  ;  their  folly  or  imprudence  duly 
expiated,  their  gaiety  and  the  energy  they  excited  re- 
main to  cheer  and  animate  the  sober  dulness  of  advanc- 
ing life.  But  to  me  these  moments  never  existed ;  to 
me  all  was  continued  and  never-ceasing  exertion.  Still 


316  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [iso7 

I  laboured  on,  still  every  returning  spring  found  me  with 
some  plan  of  present  exertion,  or  (still  more  difficult)  of 
present  patient  endurance,  for  the  hope  of  securing  future 
comfort,  future  independence,  future  repose.  But  no 
future  exists  to  me  now.  I  may  idle  away  whole  summer 
suns,  as  I  have  done  this,  in  reverie,  without  neglecting 
any  duty,  overlooking  any  pleasure,  or  foregoing  any 
advantage. 

JOUKNAL. 

Monday,  August  10th.  —  Went  from  Guy's  Cliff  to 
see  Warwick  Castle,  distance  a  mile  and  a  half ;  entrance 
through  a  new  low  Gothic  gate  in  the  outer  wall ;  from 
thence  to  the  castle,  the  road  winds  through  the  solid 
rock,  making  a  wall  on  both  sides,  overhung  with  trees 
and  shrubs  ;  the  inner  enclosure  of  the  castle  bursts  upon 
one,  beautifully  presenting  a  double  gateway  (the  real  old 
one)  and  two  towers.  That  called  Guy's  Tower  is,  both 
as  to  proportion,  form,  and  colour  of  stone,  one  of  the 
handsomest  I  ever  saw.  It  is  a  duodecagon,  but  the 
angles  so  obtuse  as  not  to  be  striking  till  near  obser- 
vation. The  other  tower  upon  the  bank  of  the  Avon  is 
singularly  picturesque  from  the  odd  irregularities  of  its 
construction,  being  part  of  it  angular,  part  of  it  seg- 
ments of  circles  in  scallops,  with  strange  projections  on 
the  battlements,  above  which  a  part  of  the  tower  rises 
considerably.  The  ground  about  the  walls  and  towers, 
and  the  space  between  the  outer  and  inner  court,  is  left 
rough  with  broom  and  other  wild  plants,  making  an 
exceUent  foreground  to  such  a  building.  In  the  inner 
court  all  is  smooth  turf.  The  hall  is  magnificent  in  size, 
but  the  panelling,  newly  painted  like  boxwood,  in  bad 
taste.  A  fine  suite  of  rooms,  the  whole  length  of  the 
castle  towards  the  river ;  a  number  of  very  fine  pictures, 
chiefly  portraits  by  Vandyke,  Rubens,  and  Kembrandt. 


1807]  VISIT  TO   WARWICK   CASTLE.  317 

The  furniture  extremely  massive,  and  appropriate  to  the 
place ;  many  old  cabinets  and  tables  of  pietra  dura  and 
other  precious  materials,  besides  the  greatest  quantity  of 
boule  in  all  sorts  of  commodes,  cabinets,  candelabra, 
tables,  &c.  &c.,  that  I  ever  saw  collected  together ;  the 
chimney-pieces  are  all  modern,  all  expensive  high  marble, 
in  the  worst  taste,  of  about  thirty  years  ago.  The  win- 
dows are  large  recesses,  admitting  a  vast  deal  of  light ; 
an  armoury  is  fitted  up  with  a  vast  number  of  old  and 
curious  arms  of  all  nations,  and  all  times,  very  hand- 
somely and  well  arranged.  There  is  a  broad  walk  round 
the  walls,  still  very  passable,  and  a  good  staircase  in 
Guy's  Tower.  I  am  to  visit  Caesar's  Tower  another 
day,  as  we  had  already  spent  nearly  five  hours,  poking 
into  every  creek  and  cranny  of  the  rest  of  this  noble 
castle.  The  Avon  flows  immediately  under  its  walls ;  the 
walls  connect  with  the  mill  belonging  to  the  castle,  and 
in  the  same  style  of  building  with  itself ;  this  has  a  weir 
upon  the  river,  forming  a  pretty  though  too  regular  a 
cascade.  Immediately  above  are  the  picturesque  remains 
of  an  ancient  Gothic  bridge,  the  middle  arch  entirely 
carried  away,  and  the  side  ones  remaining  overhung  with 
shrubs,  furze,  and  other  vegetation.  About  a  quarter  of 
a  mile's  distance  the  river  is  crossed  by  a  new  Grecian 
bridge  of  one  arch,  which,  though  not  ugly  in  itself,  is 
misplaced,  and  destroys  the  harmony  of  the  scene. 

I  see  no  place  in  this  country  of  which  the  scenery 
is  to  be  compared  with  that  of  Guy's  Cliff.  Guy's  Cliff 
is  so  odd,  so  romantic,  so  cheerful,  so  enjoyable !  The 
singular  appearance  of  the  various  arches,  caves,  and 
apertures  of  all  sorts  and  sizes,  in  the  perpendicular  wall 
of  rock  which  forms  the  courtyard  and  faces  the  entrance, 
contrasts  so  well  with  the  open  cheerful  scene  from  the 
drawing-room.  The  flowing  Avon  winds  round  a  turfy 
peninsula  immediately  below,  while  its  course  lower 
down  is  bordered  with  alders  and  overhung  by  a  group 


318  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [iso? 

of  picturesque  ash-trees,  and  higher  up  the  stream  is  ar- 
rested by  a  mill,  and  forms  a  cascade ;  there  the  three 
arches  of  the  wheels  peep  out  from  under  weeping  wil- 
lows and  occidental  planes ;  one  fine  poplar  towers 
above  the  rest,  and  marks  the  farthest  projection  of  the 
stonework  into  the  river ;  and  a  foot-bridge  over  the  water 
to  another  group  of  trees,  finishes  the  landscape,  and  gives 
it  all  the  charm  of  a  beautiful  foreground.  Behind,  the 
country  is  seen  rising  into  sloping  fields,  and  tufts  of 
wood,  and  a  most  happily-placed  country  church  backed 
by  one  of  these  tufts,  forms  the  horizon  of  a  lovely 
tranquil  scene,  and  one  most  characteristically  English. 

Tuesday,  ~\&th. — I  am  going  in  future  to  write  a 
journal — the  entertainment  I  have  received  from  those 
of  my  friend  here  *  has  set  me  upon  it.  And  yet  why 
begin  a  journal  when  more,  much  more,  than  half  one's 
probable  life  is  past,  '  and  all  the  life  of  life '  certainly 
gone  for  ever!  I  have  hitherto  avoided  it,  because  I 
felt  ashamed  of  the  use,  or  rather  the  no-use,  I  made  of 
my  time — of  the  miserable  minute  duties  and  vexations 
which  at  once  occupied  and  corroded  my  mind — of  the 
manner  in  which  I  have  let  life  slip  by  me,  and  missed 
its  present  enjoyments,  by  always  aiming  at  and  acting  for 
some  indefinite  future. 

But  now  that  no  future  remains  to  me,  perhaps  I  may 
be  encouraged  to  make  the  most  of  the  present  by 
marking  its  rapid  passage,  and  setting  before  my  eyes 
the  folly  of  letting  a  day  escape  without  endeavouring,  at 
least,  to  make  the  best  I  can  of  it,  and,  above  all,  without 
making  impossible  attempts  to  mend  or  alter  anybody 
but  myself. 

Friday,  21st. — I  have  said  that  I  am  to  write  a  journal 
— why  not  then  begin  ?  I  shall  have  to  record  few  days 
spent  more  agreeably,  more  peaceably,  more  rationally 
than  during  this  last  fortnight  with  our  friends  here,  who, 

*  Mr.  Greathead. 


1807]  VISIT   TO   WARWICK.  319 

without  fuss  or  bustle,  or  interfering  with  the  use  one 
may  wish  to  make  of  one's  time,  have  every  kind  and 
thoughtful  attention  to  the  amusement  of  their  guests  ; 
without  pomp  or  pretension,  they  have  every  comfort, 
luxury,  and  elegance  for  enjoyment;  and  their  conver- 
sation, habits,  minds,  and  manners  are  free  from  affecta- 
tion, and  not  only  please  and  satisfy,  but  attach. 

Well,  then,  to  begin.  An  effort  it  must  always  be,  and, 
therefore,  the  sooner  it  is  got  over  the  better. 

Yesterday  (Thursday,  August  20th)  I  went  with  Mr. 
Greathead  to  Warwick  Castle.  I  soon  found  my  friend 
Mrs.  Hume,  the  housekeeper,  who  was  so  much  pleased 
with  this  second  visit  that  she  left  two  other  visitors  to 
accompany  me  everywhere.  First,  she  would  show  me 
the  offices — fine  arched  vaults  in  the  solid  rock  towards 
the  river.  The  ale-cellars  require  about  500/.  worth  of 
malt  to  fill  them.  .  They  are  not  quite  empty,  but  it  is  long 
since  the  lord  of  this  castle,  from  his  various  schemes 
and  extravagancies,  has  been  able  to  live  in  any  style 
becoming  it,  or  indeed  to  live  here  at  all.  After  seeing 
the  offices  to  please  Mrs.  Hume,  I  went  through  the 
dungeon  at  the  bottom,  to  the  leads  at  the  top,  of  Caesar's 
Tower,  to  please  myself. 

This  singularly  irregular  and  odd-shaped  tower  is  un- 
questionably the  oldest  part  of  the  castle  ;  it  is  that  which 
must  have  guarded  the  passage  of  the  river.  There  is 
an  excellent  stone  winding  staircase  from  the  bottom  to 
the  top,  besides  a  smaller  one,  which  goes  up  to  the 
battlements  only.  Below  the  battlements,  the  tower  con- 
tains two  rooms  and  two  closets,  with  windows  upon  each 
floor,  and  above  the  battlements  is  one  large  round  arched 
room,  with  four  windows  in  it.  The  view  from  here  is 
very  extensive.  Lord  Warwick  wishes  it  fitted  up  as  a 
morning  sitting-room  for  himself,  and  indeed,  save  the 
number  of  steps,  he  could  not  have  one  more  agreeable. 
A  few  stone  steps  lead  from  it  to  the  leaded  top  of  the 


320  MISS  BEERY'S  JOURNAL.  [1307 

odd  little  scalloped  tower,  which  grows  out  of  one 
side  of  the  large  tower,  and  divides  its  angular  from  its 
developed  side — for  so  it  literally  is — though  nothing  but 
a  drawing  can  give  any  idea  of  it. 

I  went  all  over  the  leads  of  the  double  gateway.  The 
two  towers  contain  eighteen  rooms.  By  this  time  Mr.  G. 
joined  me,  and  we  walked  through  a  gate  to  look  at  the 
face  towards  the  river,  which  is  beautiful,  the  lower  part 
being  all  native  rock,  overgrown  with  vegetation  of  various 
sorts.  Then  went  up  the  mount  to  what  is  called  the  keep  ; 
but  it  is,  in  fact,  nothing  but  the  outer  wall  of  the  castle, 
carried  over  a  high  artificial  mound  of  earth,  made  by 
the  scooping  out  the  ditch  with  two  small  watch-towers 
at  the  top. 

The  real  keep  of  this  castle  must  have  been  Caesar's 
Tower.  After  going  up  and  down  so  many  stairs,  we 
enjoyed  sitting  in  the  porch  of  the  castle,  and  eating  some 
excellent  fruit  sent  by  our  friend  the  housekeeper,  who 
with  much  difficulty  was  induced  to  accept  the  accustomed 
fee  at  this  place. 

After  dinner  strolled  with  Mrs.  Darner  by  the  river  side, 
where  the  whole  scene  is  deliciously  inducive  of  quiet, 
calmness,  and  repose. 

After  tea,  Mr.  Greathead,  at  my  request,  read  to  us  his 
translation  in  verse  of  Boccaccio's  '  Lisabetta  and  her 
Brothers.'  I  had  once  heard  it  before,  eleven  years  ago, 
at  their  house  in  Bryanstone  Street,  on  an  evening 
memorable  to  me,  for  it  was  that  on  which  I  had  at  last 
relieved  my  own  mind  and  scruples,  by  confiding  to  my 
second  father,  to  Lord  Orford,  that  in  a  few  months,  as 
I  then  thought,  I  was  to  leave  him  for  a  still  dearer 
friend  and  a  nearer  connection  ;  and  satisfied  with  hav- 
ing acted  up  to  the  most  scrupulous,  the  most  romantic 
ideas  of  the  duties  of  friendship,  I  was  indulging  myself 
in  all  the  rational  hopes  and  fair  prospects  which  seemed 
then  to  open  to  my  still  enthusiastic  mind.  Alas  !  alas  ! 


1807]  VISIT   TO   KENILWORTH.  321 

all  too  soon  cruelly  crushed,  and  since  levelled  with  the 
dust. 

But  whither  am  I  roaming  ?  from  Greathead's  tale  to 
my  own ! 

Friday,  2,1st. — Wrote  to  Agnes,  scribbled  a  little  in 
this  book,  read  a  little  of  the  '  Lamento  di  Cecco,'  which, 
liaving  often  heard  of,  I  had  never  seen  before.  It  is  a 
beautiful,  simple,  but  not  vulgar  pastoral,  in  the  Tuscan 
patois ;  but  after  the  first  three  or  four  stanzas,  not  very 
difficult  to  understand.  If  it  were,  there  are  notes,  which 
swell  a  poem  of  forty  stanzas  into  a  tolerable-sized  quarto 
volume !  Thank  heaven,  one  is  not  obliged  to  read  them, 
for  they  seem  to  me  the  very  model,  or  rather  the  cari- 
cature, of  those  voluminous  notes,  corrections,  first  read- 
ings, and  comparings  of  all  similar  passages,  in  all  possible 
authors,  which  encumber  without  enlightening  half  the 
best  books  one  knows. 

In  the  evening,  conversation  inexhaustible  between  the 
Greatheads  and  us. 

Saturday,  22nd. — Went  with  Mr.  Greathead  to  Kenil- 
worth.  I  was  resolved  to  go  there  again,  and  have 
another  look  at  the  castle  and  the  beautiful  village.  The 
village  is  above  a  mile  long,  and  I  went  in  search  of 
Charles's  *  mother,  whom  I  found  in  a  poor  little  cottage, 
her  three  children  just  returned  from  gleaning.  I 
have  a  good  opinion  of  her,  from  all  her  children  (no 
fewer  than  eleven)  being  able  to  read  and  write.  We 
went  to  the  castle  by  the  outside  of  the  village.  The 
approach  to  it  this  way  by  far  the  most  picturesque,  and 
the  best  for  a  general  view.  The  largest  rooms  in 
Leicester's  building  (those  which  Queen  Elizabeth  occu- 
pied), I  measured.  They  are  only  twenty-four  feet  by 
twenty-six  feet,  as  they  now  stand  from  wall  to  wall,  but 
must  have  been  pleasant  rooms  with  large  shallow  bay 

*  Probably  one  of  Miss  Berry's  servants. 
VOL.  II.  T 


322  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [ISOT 

windows.*  The  great  hall,  built  by  John  of  Ghent,  must 
have  been  a  magnificent  room,  with  two  fireplaces  yet 
remaining,  large  windows  in  a  recess,  with  a  step  up  to 
them,  and  a  seat  round  them ;  and  at  one  end  of  the 
room  a  large  bay  window  on  one  side,  and  a  smaller  one 
on  the  other.  The  panelling  of  stone  remaining  in  all 
the  recesses  of  the  windows  and  on  the  sides  of  the  fire- 
places is  of  very  neat  masonry. 

From  the  castle  we  returned,  through  the  village,  to  a 
manufactory  of  combs,f  which  is  here  carried  on  to  a 
considerable  extent,  and  the  refuse  of  bone,  horn,  &c., 
goes  to  a  sal-ammoniac  and  hartshorn  manufactory  in  the 
neighbourhood.^  Curious  operation  of  cutting  open  the 
horns  and  flattening  them,  by  holding  in  tongs  to  a  wood- 
fire,  and  then  putting  them  between  thick  iron  plates, 
which  are  heated  and  pressed  together,  with  the  pieces 
of  horn  between  them.  The  man  we  saw  at  this  business, 
which  is  very  hot  and  fatiguing,  will  earn  better  than  four 
shillings  per  day,  working  fourteen  or  fifteen  hours. 

The  horns  for  lanthorns  §  (after  being  cut  open  like 
the  others)  pressed  by  a  machine  worked  by  a  horse. 

*  There  are  differences  of  opinion  as  to  Queen  Elizabeth's  apartments ; 
some  which  now  bear  that  name  seem  more  like  the  apartments  of 
attendants.  At  the  southern  angle  of  the  eastern  side  of  the  banqueting 
hall,  the  oriel  window  with  its  little  fireplace  gives  the  appearance  of  a 
small  room,  and  this  is  by  some  called  Queen  Elizabeth's  boudoir.  This 
can  be  entered,  and  is  a  favourite  seat  for  the  visitors  to  the  castle.  The 
roof  of  the  cellarage  under  the  banqueting  hall  formed  the  foundation  for 
its  flooring ;  this  is  now  gone,  except  under  the  oriel  windows.  One  or 
two  of  the  old  timber  beams  are  all  that  remain  to  testify  of  floors  in  the 
other  apartments ;  there  are  a  few  wooden  stairs  in  an  inaccessible  part 
of  the  large  projecting  staircase,  and  over  some  of  the  doorways  the  remains 
of  lath  and  plaster  ;  but  this  is  all  the  woodwork  now  remaining,  except  in 
the  gate-house  or  stable. 

t  No  longer  there. 

\  The  comb  trade  is  daily  decreasing  and  has  almost  ceased  to  exist.'  An 
old  inhabitant  of  Kenilworth,  married,  to  one  of  the  most  wealthy  of  the 
traders,  can  remember  when  her  husband  paid  100/.  weekly  in  wages  to 
about  thirty  or  forty  workmen,  including  boys. 

§  The  horn  was  prepared  for  lanthorns,  but  sent  up  to  London  to  be 
made  up. 


1807]  VISIT   TO   KEXILWORTH.  323 

From  the  comb  manufactory  we  traversed  the  green 
scoop  of  a  valley,  round  which  a  great  part  of  this  ex- 
tensive village  is  built.  In  this  valley  is  situated  the 
church  and  the  remains  of  the  abbey,  which  consists  only 
of  a  much-ruined  gate-house  and  two  or  three  pieces  of 
rough  stone.* 

The  tower  and  great  door  of  the  parish  church  are  of 
the  very  oldest  Saxon  style,  and  from  the  wasted  appear- 
ance of  the  stone  in  comparison  of  the  other  ruins  of  the 
place,  must  be  very  much  older.  Indeed,  the  door  of 
the  church,  both  from  its  ornaments  and  from  the  soil 
being  raised  full  two-thirds  of  its  original  height,  must  be 
of  high  Saxon  antiquity. 

The  pastures  into  which  this  valley  is  divided  are  still 
called  the  Abbeys,  from  having  belonged  to  the  abbey,  and 
are  now  traversed  by  a  neat  gravelled  path,  and  adorned 
by  the  largest  and  most  picturesque  wych  elm  f  I  ever 
saw,  and  a  noble  ash  J  against  the  line  of  houses. 

Everything  about  this  village,  and  among  other  things 
the  alehouse  signs,  prove  its  antiquity.  The  '  Bear  and 
Eagged  Staff'  §  certainly  dates  from  the  days  of  Leicester. 
But  the  '  Two  Virgins '  is  of  much  greater  antiquity. 
The  tradition  of  the  place  says  that  the  house  always 
has  been  an  alehouse  ;  and  as  the  '  Two  Virgins  '  mean 
the  Virgin  Mary  and  her  mother  Elizabeth,  ||  we  must 
certainly  suppose  it  established  before  the  Keforrnation.^f 


*  There  are  still  some  remains  of  an  abbey,  a  very  beautifully  arched 
gateway,  and  two  strong  pieces  of  wall,  standing  in  the  Abbey  fields.  Part 
of  the  old  vaults  was  discovered  in  the  new  portion  added  to  the  church- 
yard, which  the  Bishop  of  Worcester  consecrated  as  new  ground  a  few  years 
since.  There  is  also  a  building  close  to  the  arched  gateway  supposed  to 
have  been  the  hospice  ;  and  the  handsome  west  door  of  the  parish  church 
which  is  evidently  an  insertion,  is  supposed  to  have  been  rescued  from  the 
abbey  ruin. 

t  Still  standing.  J  No  longer  there. 

||  St.  Ann.  §  Still  there. 

^1  It  has  been  supposed  that  this  sign  does  not  refer  to  St.  Ann,  but  that 
the  second  virgin  is  meant  to  represent  Queen  Elizabeth. 


324  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isor 

After  visiting  the  house  of  which  Mr.  Greathead  is  direct- 
ing the  alteration  for  Mr.  Lake,*  we  returned  to  Guy's 
Cliff. 

Sunday,  23rd. — I  remained  in  my  room  the  whole 
morning  reading  Mr.  Greathead's  Journals,  which  let  me 
more  into  their  every-day  life,  where  they  went,  and 
what  they  did  while  abroad,  than  a  month's  conversation 
could  do. 

Monday,  24$. — Took  leave  of  our  kind  friends  here, 
after  having  spent  nearly  three  weeks  with  them,  greatly 
to  my  own  satisfaction.  Before  breakfast,  I  had,  in  a 
quiet  solitary  walk  by  the  river  side,  taken  a  sort  of  leave 
of  the  tranquil  scene,  and  promised  myself  to  return  to  it 
whenever  I  could ;  but  this  indefinite  future  has  something 
solemn  in  it ;  and  ceasing  to  be  in  one  place,  and  rising 
again  in  another,  always  gives  me  the  idea  of  a  sort  of 
death. 

The  day  was  showery,  and  a  nervous  headache  pre- 
vented my  enjoying  the  set  of  postchaise  ideas  which 
always  take  possession  of  my  mind  whenever  my  body 
is  set  a-going  upon  wheels. 

The  inn  at  Woburn  dirty  and  forlorn-looking,  and  our 
sitting-room  damp  and  cold. 

Tuesday,  25th. — We  were  half  an  hour  from  the  inn 
at  Woburn  Abbey  through  the  park.  The  approach  very 
handsome.  At  a  sufficient  distance  is  a  great  body  of 
building,  low  and  like  a  pavilion,  with  two  wings,  con- 
sisting of  stables,  a  riding-house,  tennis-court,  &c.  &c. 
The  whole  appears  like  what  it  is,  the  complete  establish- 
ment of  a  great  lord  in  this  country,  without  any  osten- 
tatious display  of  ornament.  The  house  within  excellent ; 
two  complete  apartments  for  summer  and  winter,  both 
looking  equally  inhabitable,  though  the  family  were  not 
there.  Some  remarkably  fine  pictures.  Those  in  the 

*  This  house  was  afterwards  sold  to  Sir  Charles  Clifford,  and  subsequently 
to  William  Amherst,  Esq.,  since  dead. 


1807]  VISIT  TO  WOBURff.  325 

gallery  we  did  not  see,  as  the  room  was  painting.  Some 
very  fine  Teniers,  an  exquisite  Both,  an  admirable  picture 
(called  by  Keinbrandt,  though  not  at  all  in  his  usual  dark 
manner),  '  Joseph  interpreting  the  Baker's  Dream ;'  the 
'  Countess  of  Bedford,'  *  mother  to  the  beheaded  Lord 
Russell — charming  whole  length,  by  Vandyke. 

Magnificent  greenhouse.  A  space  in  the  middle,  in 
which  is  an  antique  marble  vase  of  monstrous  dimensions, 
supported  by  four  antique  marble  columns,  of  which  two 
are  beautiful  Cipollina. 

At  the  end  of  the  greenhouse,  a  cabinet,  elaborately 
lined  with  marble  and  gilding,  called  the  Temple,  and 
containing  Nollekens' |  bust  of  Mr.  Fox,  on  a  white  marble 
pedestal,  with  an  inscription,  surrounded  by  six  other 
busts  of  his  most  particular  friends  upon  brackets — Lord 
Howicke,  General  Fitzpatrick,  Lord  Lauderdale,  Lord 
Eobert  Spencer,  Lord  Holland,  and  Mr.  Hare. 

One  could  have  wished,  for  the  honour  of  their  public 
principles,  that  the  private  characters  of  some  of  them 
had  been  different.  An  inscription  over  the  door  says 
that  this  temple  to  friendship,  planned  and  begun  by  the 
last  Duke,  was  finished  at  his  dying  request  by  his  brother. 
A  covered  way  of  a  quarter  of  a  mile  in  length  leads  to 
a  Chinese  dairy,  much  ornamented  with  china.  It  is  in 
Holland's  showy  but  unchaste  taste.  Indeed,  in  most  of 
the  things  he  has  done  here,  I  discovered  the  model  of 
all  he  since  executed  upon  rather  a  smaller  scale  at  Mr. 
Whitbread's. 

We  were  above  two  hours  and  a  half  at  Woburn  with- 

*  Anne,  daughter  of  Robert  Carr  Earl  of  Somerset  and  Frances  Howard 
the  divorced  wife  of  the  Earl  of  Essex,  married  William  Lord  Russell, 
afterwards  fifth  Earl  and  first  Duke  of  Bedford,  1637.  She  died  1684, 
aged  sixty-four. 

t  Joseph  Nollekens,  born  1737.  A  sculptor  of  some  eminence,  he  was  much 
employed  in  the  '  restoration '  of  ancient  sculpture.  His  best  works  were 
his  portrait-busts — he  made  74  repetition  marble  busts  of  Pitt,  and  000 
plaster  casts.  His  bust  of  Fox  had  scarcely  inferior  success.  Died  1823. — 
Imperial  Dictionary  of  Universal  Biography. 


.326  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isor 

out  seeing  what  is  called  the  pleasure  ground,  which,  in 
almost  ah1  fine  places,  I  have  long  discovered  is  the  least 
pleasing  part  of  the  whole. 

We  drove  for  about  two  miles  through  the  park  to  the 
entrance  from  the  Dunstable  Eoad,  which  is  now  build- 
ing, and  from  the  scale  on  which  it  seems  planned  pro- 
mises to  be  magnificent. 

Arrived  in  North  Audley  Street.  London  does  not 
appear  to  advantage  on  returning  from  the  country  on  a 
fine  summer's  evening.  I  had  the  comfort  of  finding 
Agnes  looking  well,  and  happy  to  get  me  back. 

Saturday,  29th. — In  the  evening  read  a  good  deal  of 
the  last  Scotch  Eeview.  What  they  say  of  Mr.  Hope,* 
though  he  lays  himself  open  to  ridicule,  is  ill-natured  and 
often  in  bad  taste.  An  excellent  criticism  upon  Cobbett's 
weekly  journal,  exposing,  in  the  clearest  manner,  his 
shameful  inconsistencies,  or  rather  direct  contradiction  of 
his  own  opinions,  both  of  men  and  measures,  within  this 
last  five  years,  and  holding  up  upon  true  Whig  prin- 
ciples our  real  defects  and  real  misconduct,  without  seek- 
ing to  palliate  or  defend  either  the  one  or  the  other,  and 
only  wishing  them  to  be  considered  as  they  are,  and  not 
confounded  with  preposterous  exaggeration  in  the  minds 
of  the  people.  But  alas !  the  people  read  Cobbett,  and 
will  never  read  the  Scotch  Eeview. 

I  have  felt  uncommonly  well  for  these  last  two  days. 
The  good  effects  this  health,  which  I  so  seldom  enjoy, 
has  upon  my  temper,  my  spirits,  and  my  views,  can  only 
be  equalled  by  my  gratitude  to  Heaven  for  it. 

Sunday,  30$. — Windhamf    extremely    admires   the 

*  Household  Furniture  and  Internal  Decorations  executed  from  Designs. 
By  Thomas  Hope.  Folio. 

t  William  Windham,  of  Felbrigg,  Norfolk,  horn  1750,  one  of  the  dis- 
tinguished statesmen  and  orators  of  his  day.  In  1788  he  was  one  of  the 
managers  of  the  impeachment  of  Warren  Hastings.  He  continued  to  act 
with  the  Whig  party  till  the  division  in  their  ranks  caused  by  the  opinions 
on  the  French  Revolution,  when  he  took  part  with  Burke.  In  1794  he 


1807]  VISIT   TO   COOMBANK.  327 

Scotch  review  of  Cobbett,  with  whom  he  says  he  is  out 
of  all  patience ;  although,  by  the  bye,  Windham  is  the 
only  one  of  his  violent  favourites  that  he  has  not  as  yet 
violently  abused.  Horner  supposed  to  be  the  author  of 
the  review.  I  don't  doubt  he  is.*  Went  at  half-past 
ten  to  Mrs.  Bouverie's.  Lord  Clifden,  arrived  from  Ire- 
land the  day  before ;  Mr.  Falkner  and  one  of  his 
daughters,  Lady  Julia  Howard,  Sir  F.  Vincent,  Mrs. 
Spencer,  and  Mr.  Eogers.  Everybody  anxious  for  news 
from  Copenhagen,  and  few  liking  entirely  to  speak  out 
their  sentiments.  My  fears  I  own  are  great. 

Monday,  31st. — Began  to  clear  out  that  Augean  stable, 
our  lumber  room.  From  the  accumulated  dust  of  fifteen 
years  I  came  out  like  a  chimney-sweeper,  and  almost 
choked  with  dust. 

Tuesday,  September  1st. — Drove  with  my  father  to 
Hogmore  Lane  to  make  enquiries  after  the  Princess  Sophia, 
upon  her  mother  the  Duchess  of  Gloucester's  death.f 

Tuesday,  8th. — Mr.  William  Eobertson  called.  He  was 
at  Lisbon  during  the  earthquake  in  June  last.  He  had 
experienced  two  before  in  the  East  Indies — this  by  far 
the  most  violent.  The  old  people  at  Lisbon  who  remem- 
bered that  of  1755  all  agreed  that  this  shock  was  as 
violent ;  but  not  being  repeated,  nor  of  long  continuance, 
did  little  damage.  No  lives  lost  but  by  those  whose 
terror  made  them  jump  out  of  windows,  &c.  &c. 

Wednesday,  9th.  —  Set  off  for  Coombank.J      Lord 


joined  the  ministry  of  Pitt,  as  Secretary  of  War,  till  1801.  la  1804  he  again 
united  with  Fox,  and  took  office  with  '  all  the  talents  '  till  their  ejection  in 
1807  ;  and  during  the  remainder  of  his  career  sat  on  the  Opposition  benches. 
Died  June  1810. 

*  It  was  Lord  Jeffrey,  and  not  Mr.  Horner,  who  wrote  the  article. 

t  Maria  Walpole,  second  natural  daughter  of  Sir  Edward  Walpole  and 
of  Mary  Clement,  married  in  1759  to  the  Earl  of  Waldegrave.  Lord  Walde- 
grave  died  1763.  Lady  Waldegrave  married  in  1766  Prince  William  Henry 
Duke  of  Gloucester,  who  died  1805. 

J  Coombank,  in  Sandrish  parish,  was  anciently  possessed  by  the  Islays, 


328  MISS  BEKKT'S  JOURNAL  [isor 

Frederick  Campbell  received  me  with  his  usual  cheerful- 
ness of  manner.  It  was  a  bad  day,  and  the  house,  in 
spite  of  the  many  good  pictures  and  other  things  in  it, 
struck  me  as  more  uncomfortable  than  ever.  Dr.  Vyse, 
the  Bishop  of  Peterborough  (who  married  his  sister)  and 
Mr.  Cayley,  a  lawyer  from  London,  dined  with  us.  In 
the  evening  came  the  Bishop's  wife  and  four  other 
women ;  good  sort  of  dressed-up  country-town  ladies,  of 
whom  in  a  single  evening  one  can  make  nothing.  So  I 
sat  and  worked  and  listened  to  the  Bishop,  who,  thougli 
by  no  means  brilliant,  amused  me  with  recounting  a  cir- 
cumstance which  happened  to  him  very  soon  after  he  took 
orders,  while  reading  the  service  before  a  large  congrega- 
tion in  Hartingfordbury  Church.  The  lesson  for  the  day 
was  the  fifteenth  chapter  of  the  first  book  of  Samuel 
where,  reproaching  Saul,  he  says, '  Wherefore  do  I  hear  this 
bleating  of  sheep  and  lowing  of  oxen  ?'  At  the  moment 
he  uttered  the  words  '  bleating  of  sheep,'  a  great  bell- 
wether began  baaing  just  below  the  pulpit,  to  the  irresis- 
tible diversion  of  his  audience.  Sheep  were  feeding  in 
the  churchyard,  and  one  of  them  had  strayed  unobserved 
into  the  church. 

Thursday,  10^. — Went  in  the  morning  to  Tunbridge 
to  call  upon  the  Bishop,  Mrs.  Madan,  &c.  at  Dr.  Vyse's 
parsonage,  a  thoroughly  comfortable  and  indeed  elegant 
house  of  the  kind,  and  appears  to  advantage  in  going  to 
it  from  Coombank,  which  I  think  unites  every  possible 
discomfort.  I  went  at  Coombank  with  the  housekeeper 

and  afterwards  by  the  Ash  family,  who,  about  fifty  or  sixty  years  since,  sold 
it  to  Colonel  John  Campbell,  afterwards  Duke  of  Argyle,  whose  third  son, 
Lord  Frederick  Campbell,  is  now  owner ;  his  father  having  given  him  this 
estate  during  his  own  lifetime.  The  house,  which  consisted  of  a  centre, 
with  square  projections  or  wings  at  each  angle,  was  partly  destroyed  by  an 
accidental  fire,  when  Lady  Frederick  Campbell  was  burnt  to  death.  Philipott 
says  that '  not  many  years  since,  in  digging  near  Come  Bank,  were  discovered 
many  Roman  arms  of  an  antique  shape  and  figure.' — Beauties  of  England 
and  Wales,  By  Edward  "Wedlake  Brayley,  vol.  viii.  p.  1319.  Published 
1808. 


1807]  ARRIVAL  AT  TUNBRIDGE   WELLS.  329 

into  the  bedroom  where  Lord  and  Lady  Frederick  slept 
before  the  horrible  catastrophe  of  the  fire.*  Nothing 
can  be  more  frightful  and  curious  than  the  aspect  it  pre- 
sents. Without  being  actually  burnt  in  any  one  part, 
except  about  three  or  four  feet  of  the  floor,  just  near  the 
dressing-room  door,  the  whole  is  perfectly  black  and 
scorched  and  shrivelled  up  with  the  effects  of  the  fire, 
the  turpentine  all  sweated  out  of  the  paint. 

The  fatal  dressing-room  must  have  been  on  fire  above 
four  hours,  but  the  flames  only  burst  through  the,  at  last, 
consumed  door  of  the  dressing-room  when  the  maid  at  a 
little  before  five  o'clock  in  the  morning  made  a  draught 
of  air  by  opening  the  door  of  the  bedchamber. 

The  miracle  of  this  poor  soul  Lady  Frederick  f  having 
been  thus  actually  burnt  to  ashes  in  a  house  of  which  one 
single  room  alone  was  destroyed,  is  only  made  the  more 
wonderful  by  examining  the  spot  and  hearing  the  report 
of  everybody  who  was  there,  and  can  only  be  accounted 
for,  by  her  having  fallen  into  a  fit  with  her  head  in  the 
candle,  and  thus  having  been  perfectly  insensible  before 
the  fire  attacked  her.  Both  her  sisters  having  died  in  fits 
makes  this  the  less  unlikely. 

Saturday,  ~L2th. — Eeturned  to  North  Audley  Street. 

Tuesday,  15^. — I  went  with  Mrs.  Darner  to  Wedge- 
wood,  where  I  had  not  been  for  three  or  four  years.  His 
blue  and  white  ware,  made  in  imitation  of  china,  better 
than  the  Colebrook  Dale  of  the  same  sort ;  the  patterns  in 
better  taste  and  the  white  clearer. 

Wednesday,  I&th. — Left  North  Audley  Street  for  Tun- 
bridge  Wells,  with  our  own  horses  ;  arrived  at  Tunbridge 
by  the  finest  of  moonlight  nights,  after  one  of  the  finest  of 

*  The  fire  took  place  the  25th  of  June  in  this  year. 

t  Lady  Frederick  Campbell  was  sister  to  the  late  Sir  William  Meredith, 
and  had  first  married  Eajl  Ferrars,  from  whom  she  was  divorced  for  ill 
usage,  and  who  was  afterwards  executed  at  Tyburn  for  the  murder  of  his 
steward. — Beauties  of  England  and  Wales.  By  E.  W.  Brayley,  vol.  viii.  p. 
1319. 


330  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURXAL.  [1807 

bright  autumn  days.  We  drove  to  our  house  under 
Mount  Zion,  and  walked  to  Lady  Donegal's.  Charles 
Moore*  there,  and  Lord  Ellenboroughf  and  his  son. 

Friday r,  18th. — I  dined  at  Lord  Ellenborough's ;  carried 
with  us  Mr.  Moore  and  Miss  Godfrey ;  J  the  party  besides, 
Lady  Donegal  and  General  and  Mrs.  Boss.§  Lord  Ellen- 
borough  quick  and  clever  in  conversation. 

Sunday,  20th. — After  dinner  strolled  on  the  common  ; 
it  is  the  charm  of  this  place  to  be  able  to  do  this  at  any 
hour  of  the  day,  without  hat  or  gloves,  and  in  any  way 
you  please,  without  observation  or  comment.  Lady 
Donegal,  Miss  Godfrey  and  C.  Moore  drank  tea  with  us. 

Monday,  (2~Lst — Drove  out  with  Miss  Godfrey  and 
Agnes  to  Bridge  Green,  and  then  walked  to  the  bank  of 
rock  just  behind  it.  It  is  a  continuation  of  the  shelf  of 
rock  which  forms  all  the  variously  denominated  rocks  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  Tunbridge,  by  peeping  above  the 
soil  in  different  places.  These  are  very  picturesque ;  they 
are  a  rabbit  warren,  with  trees  dropped  in  all  the  fissures 
of  stone,  and  a  birch  wood  at  the  top  of  the  bank. 

In  the  evening  to  a  party  at  Mrs.  Jones's  :  two  card- 
tables  of  old  women  at  play,  and  a  room  full  of  girls,  with 
a  thin  sprinkling  of  boys,  not  knowing  what  to  do.  We 
carried  Lady  Donegal  and  her  sister  with  us,  and  had  C. 
Moore  and  Lord  Ellenborough  to  talk  to.  But  my  head 
was  heavy  and  oppressed,  and  I  felt,  and  often  now 
feel,  my  former  exertions  in  society  perfectly  intolerable 
to  me. 

Thursday,  24^. — In  the  evening  a  small  party  at  the 
Horsleys.  Lord  Ellenborough's  conversation  very  lively 

*  Charles  Moore,  son  of  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury. 

f  John  Law,  born  1750 ;  Attorney -General,  1801 ;  Lord  Chief  Justice, 
and  created  Baron  Ellenborough,  1802.  He  married  in  1789,  Anne,  daugh- 
ter of  Captain  George  P.  Towey,  R.N. ;  died  1818. 

J  Sister  to  Lady  Donegal. 

,    §  Daughter    of    Sir  Robert    Gunning,    of    Horton,  co.  Northampton  5 
married,  1795,  to  Major-General  Ross. 


1807]  CARRIAGE    ACCIDENT.  331 

and  amusing  upon  law  matters ;  curious  anecdotes  on 
Lady  Strathmore's  subject. 

Friday,  October  2nd. — Drove  out  with  Lady  Ellen- 
borough,  Lord  Ellenborough  and  Lady  Donegal.  In  re- 
turning, I  saw  a  whiskey  break  down,  a  woman  fly  out  on 
one  side,  and  a  man  dragged  from  under  the  wheels,  as  I 
thought,  on  the  other.  I  mentioned  as  quietly  as  I  could, 
not  to  frighten  poor  Lady  Ellenborough  in  the  weak 
state  in  which  she  is,  that  I  thought  a  bad  accident  had 
happened,  and  that  we  had  better  stop.  She  was  in- 
stantly for  turning  about,  which  I  was  much  against, 
believing  that  she  would  certainly  see  what  might  be  too 
shocking  to  weak  nerves.  Lady  Donegal  and  I  got  out 
of  the  barouche  and  ran  as  hard  as  we  could  to  the 
broken  carriage,  about  500  yards  behind.  The  lady, 
who  was  Mrs.  Montolieu,  had  escaped  entirely  unhurt, 
and  the  young  man,  who  was  her  son  (a  cripple  both  in 
arms  and  legs),  had  only  a  cut  lip  and  a  bleeding  nose. 
He  is  at  ah1  times  incapable  of  moving  without  two  men 
to  help  him,  which  made  me  suppose  I  had  seen  him 
dragged  a  stiffened  figure  from  under  the  carriage. 
They  were  put,  after  many  refusals  and  apologies,  into 
the  barouche  with  Lady  Ellenborough  and  Lady  Donegal, 
and  Lord  Ellenborough  and  I  walked  back  to  Tunbridge 
together.  The  day  was  very  fine  and  the  walk  very 
pleasant ;  Lord  Ellenborough  has  plenty  of  conversation, 
and,  though  his  mind  is  a  coarse  one,  his  language  and 
expressions  are  sufficiently  free  from  that  fault. 

Sunday,  kth — Expected  Prince  Staremberg  to  breakfast. 
Instead  of  him  came  a  special  messenger  despatched  from 
town  at  six  in  the  morning,  to  say  that  a  courier  had 
arrived  and  he  could  not  come.  I  could  not  regret  it, 
for  my  head  was  very  unfit  for  the  sort  of  exertion  which 
his  gaiety  requires. 

Went  with  Lady  Ellenborough  and  party  to  Harrison's 
Lake,  a  very  pretty  piece  of  water,  surrounded  by  wood 


332  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [iso7 

and  having  a  sort  of  low  pavilion  in  which  are  two  good 
rooms  built  on  its  edge  for  fishing.  It  was  a  place  I  had 
never  seen  or  even  heard  of  before. 

The  weather  delicious ;  a  warm  sunny  summer  day 
from  morning  till  night. 

Wednesday,  1th. — Drove  out  to  Busthall  Common  ; 
walked  across  to  Lower  Green,  a  hamlet  of  a  few  houses, 
picturesquely  situated,  where  Agnes  and  I  drew  till  rain 
came  on. 

In  the  evening  we  went  to  Lord  Ellenborough's,  where 
were  collected  almost  all  the  company  in  the  place,  and 
among  the  rest  Lord  Erskine,*  who  had  arrived  the 
night  before  at  the  rooms.  Lady  Donegal  and  I  played 
whist  with  Lord  Ellenborough  and  Lord  Erskine.  I 
don't  know  which  of  the  four  plays  worst. 

Tuesday,  13£/i. — Went  in  the  morning  to  Stoneland 
Park,-j-  the  old  seat  of  the  Dorset  family,  and  where  the 
Duchess  J  and  Lord  Whitworth  are  now  living.  We  were 
on  a  drawing  expedition  with  Lady  Donegal. 

Wednesday,  14dh. — Went  out  again  upon  a  drawing 
expedition  with  Miss  Godfrey  on  a  fine  autumn,  or  rather 
summer,  day ;  beginning  with  a  misty  morning,  it  was 
quite  hot  at  mid-day,  and  the  beauty  of  everything  seen 
in  such  weather  quite  enchanting. 

Mr.  Amsinck,  the  master  of  the  ceremonies  here,  dined 
with  us  ;  the  only  one  of  his  kind  I  ever  saw  very  like  a 
gentleman,  and  not  at  all  a  coxcomb. 

Thursday,  \bth. — Went  again  on  a  drawing  expedition 
with  Lady  Donegal.  Went  to  Langton  Green  and  looked 
at  the  cold  bath,  where  there  are  the  remains  of  hewn 

*  The  Hon.  Thomas  Erskine,  second  son  of  Henry  David  fifth  Earl  of 
Buchan,  became  Lord  High  Chancellor  in  1806,  and  created  Baron  Erskine ; 
died  1823. 

f  The  former  name  for  Knole. 

$  Arabella  Diana,  daughter  of  Sir  J.  Cope,  Bart.,  married  the  third  Duke 
of  Dorset,  who  died  1799 ;  and  afterwards  Charles  late  Earl  of  Whitworth 
(extinct),  and  died  1825. 


1807]  KETURN   TO   LONDON.  333 

stone  steps,  and  yew  hedges  of  an  old  public  garden, 
which  this  was  in  the  days  of  Charles  II.  ;  the  cold  bath 
beautifully  clear  ;  it  is  in  a  large,  half-ruined  room  ;  a  pea- 
sant's family  now  inhabiting  what  was  the  dressing-room. 

Saturday,  ~\.lth. — In  the  morning  I  walked  with  Lady 
Donegal.  Some  serious  talk  with  her.  Whenever  she 
talks  en  tete-a-tete  upon  serious  subjects,  she  shows  an 
excellent  right-thinking  mind  and  a  kindly  affectionate 
heart,  without  any  affectation  either  of  sentiment  or 
talents,  while  in  both  she  is  far  above  the  common  order 
of  women.  Had  she  lived  more  in  intellectual  society,  she 
would  herself  have  been  superior  ;  as  it  is,  she  is  more, 
she  is  amiable  and  beloved,  and  has  the  gaiety  of  mind 
which  proceeds  from  a  consciousness  of  deserving  it. 

Monday,  \§th. — Finest  autumn  day  possible.  Left 
Tunbridge  Wells.  Lady  Donegal  and  Miss  Godfrey  sat 
with  us  at  breakfast,  walked  up  the  hill  with  us,  and 
then  took  leave  with  a  kind,  hearty,  and,  I  believe,  on  all 
sides,  sincere  farewell.  Arrived  in  North  Audley  Street ; 
our  house  looking  very  clean  and  comfortable,  and  most 
spacious  after  the  nutshell  we  have  been  living  in. 

Saturday,  24:th. — I  saw  Dr.  Baillie,  which  my  now 
long  indisposition  induced  me  to  do  before  I  left  town. 
He  is  very  rational,  kind,  and  sensible — pities  my  com- 
plaints, but  is  by  no  means  sanguine  in  his  hopes  of 
removing  them. 

Strawberry  Hill,  Tuesday,  27th.  —  Lord  and  Lady* 
Glenbervie,  Miss  Stirling,  and  Mr.  North  dined  here.  I 
began  looking  over  Madame  du  Deffand's  papers. 

Wednesday,  28th, — Went  in  the  morning  to  Eichmond.- 
Called  on  Mrs.  Dundas ;  her  daughter,  whose  foot  had 
been  cut  off  exactly  six  weeks  before,  was  sitting  cheerful 
and  happy  upon  the  sofa,  a  different  creature  both  in 

*  Catherine  Anne,  daughter  of  Frederick  second  Earl  of  Guilford  and 
eighth  Lord  North,  married,  1786,  to  Sylvester  Douglas  Lord  Glenbervie ; 
died  February,  1817. 


334  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURXAL.  [iso? 

appearance  and  in  spirits,  from  what  we  had  seen  her  in 
the  summer.  The  operation  has  been  performed  at  her 
own  earnest  request,  and  her  behaviour  was  so  heroic  as 
quite  to  overcome  Home,  the  surgeon  who  performed  it. 

Friday,  3Qth.  —  I  began  sorting  and  looking  over 
Madame  du  Deffand's  papers.  In  the  evening  began 
reading  the  '  Life  of  Clarendon.' 

Tuesday,  3rd  November. — I  worked  at  Madame  du 
Deffand's  papers  the  whole  morning,  without  walking  out. 
I  never  can  tear  myself  away  from  what  I  am  about. 

Saturday,  7th. — Sat  still  reading  Madame  du  Deffand. 

Sunday,  8th. — In  the  evening  Lady  Petre  and  Lady 
Glenbervie,  Mr.  North,  and  Miss  Sterling.  We  played 
chess  against  Eobert  in  a  laughing  manner.  Mr.  North, 
as  usual,  very  agreeable. 

Tuesday,  10th. — I  was  too  unweU  to  dine  down  stairs. 
Prince  Staremberg  dined  with  Mrs.  Darner  and  my  father. 
He  read  to  them,  for  the  first  time,  his  little  piece 
'  Melcom,'  and  another  little  piece,  a  monologue,  called 
'  Le  Parleur  Eternel,'  which  he  had  received  from  Paris. 

Wednesday,  11th. — At  Madame  du  DefFand's  letters,  and 
did  not  stir  out.  In  the  evening  I  read  aloud  '  Clarendon's 
Life.' 

Monday,  16th. — Alone  ah1  day.  Eead  '  Clarendon's 
Life '  aloud  in  the  evening. 

Thursday,  19th After  dinner  read  aloud  some  of 

Madame  du  Deffand's  letters. 

Saturday,  21st. — Went  into  Pope's  back-garden,  and 
saw  the  devastation  going  on  upon  his  quincunx  by  its 
now  possessor,  Baroness  Howe.*  The  anger  and  ill- 
humour  expressed  against  her  for  pulling  down  his  house 
and  destroying  his  grounds,  much  greater  than  one  would 
have  imagined. 

*  Sophia  Charlotte  Baroness  Howe,  of  Langar,  daughter  of  Admiral  Earl 
Howe,  widow  of  the  Hon.  Penn  Ashton  Curzon  (who  died  1797 ),  and  after- 
wards married,  1817,  to  Sir  J.  Wathen  Waller. 


1807]  PRINCE   STAREMBERG.  335 

Sunday.  22nd.  —  At  two  o'clock  Prince  Staremberg 
came.  He  came  immediately  into  my  room,  and  we  sent 
for  Mrs.  D.  We  had  not  seen  him  since  the  arrival  of 
the  messenger  from  France.  He  spoke  to  us  in  detail, 
and  in  perfect  confidence,  of  everything  that  had  been 
proposed  de  part  et  d'autre.  As  far  as  it  has  hitherto 
gone,  he  has  conducted  himself  as  well  as  possible,  and 
had  such  a  commission  been  sent  to  any  one  (whatever 
his  abilities)  less  well  acquainted  with  England  than 
himself,  he  would  be  already  gone,  and  all  hopes  over. 
If  our  Ministry  *  don't  embrace  with  openness  and  sin- 
cerity this  offer  of  negociation,  they  will  never  have 
another  made  them.  Pray  Heaven  they  may  be  suffi- 
ciently aware  of  the  state  of  Europe  to  be  convinced  of 
the  truth  of  this,  and  all  the  dreadful  consequences  that 
hinge  upon  it !  I  own  I  doubt  and  deprecate  the  extra- 
vagance of  their  demands,  so  much  have  our  brilliant 
naval  successes,  and  our  factitious  commercial  prosperity 
hitherto  blinded  all  middling  heads  as  to  our  real  situ- 
ation.f 

Monday,  23rd. — A  dismal,  rainy,  and  to  me  melan- 
choly day,  for  I  was  out  of  humour  with  myself.  A 
number  of  little  circumstances  lately  have  served  to  con- 
vince me  that  my  manner  is  often  tranchante,  my  voice 

*  The  Duke  of  Portland's  administration  was  at  this  time  in  power.  Mr. 
Canning  was  Secretary  of  State  for  Foreign  Affairs  from  March  1807  to 
October  1809.  Amongst  the  principal  members  of  the  Duke  of  Portland's 
cabinet  were  Mr.  Percival,  Lord  Eldon,  Earl  Camden,  Lord  Hawksbury, 
Lord  Castlereagh,  Lord  Mulgrave,  and  Earl  of  Westmoreland. 

t  Offers  of  mediation  on  the  part  of  Austria  had  been  made  during  this 
year ;  and  at  this  time  Prince  Staremberg  had  received  orders  to  get  the 
British  Government  to  pledge  themselves  to  a  desire  for  peace.  Early  in 
1808  he  received  instructions  to  urge  the  British  Government  to  send  two 
plenipotentiaries  immediately  to  Paris  to  arrange  the  preliminaries  of  a 
peace.  This  proposal  was,  for  various  strong  reasons,  rejected  by  Mr. 
Canning,  and  the  Prince  was  therefore  obliged  to  immediately  ask 
for  his  passports.  Prince  Paul  Esterhazy,  afterwards  for  many  yeara 
ambassador  in  England,  was  at  this  time  First  Secretary  of  Legation  in 
London. 


336  MISS  BEREY'S  JOURNAL.  [1807 

often  too  loud,  and  my  way  of  meeting  opposition  un- 
conciliating.  All  these  circumstances  are  exactly  the 
contrary  from  what  they  ought  to  be,  to  make  me  what 
I  wish,  and  what  alone  I  can  be,  at  my  time  of  life.  It 
is  odd  that  I,  who  have  been  always  thinking  of  growing 
old,  and  have  such  clear  ideas  of  what  alone  can  make  a 
woman  loved  and  amiable  after  her  youth  is  past,  what 
her  views  and  manners  should  be,  and  what  can  ensure 
her  any  degree  of  consideration — it  is  odd,  I  say,  that  I 
should  fall  into  the  very  faults  I  am  the  most  aware  of, 
and  put  myself  into  the  situation  I  have  always  depre- 
cated ;  but  it  is  not  too  late,  and  at  least  I  am  not  too 
old  to  mend. 

In  Madame  Neckar's  ridiculous  Eemains,  published  by 
her  husband,  are  some  of  the  very  best  rules  and  advice 
for  the  manners  and  conduct  of  a  woman  no  longer  young 
in  society.  I  will  read  them  again.  They  always  strike 
me  as  most  justly  conceived. 

Thursday,  2Qth. — Walked  about  the  garden  at  Little 
Strawberry  Hill.  My  greenhouse  looks  well.  Eead 
Madame  du  Defland's  letters  in  the  evening. 

Friday,  27th. — Spent  a  part  of  the  morning  at  Little 
Strawberry  Hill  in  my  greenhouse.  Eead  Madame  du 
Deffand  in  the  evening. 

Monday,  30^. — In  the  evening,  Madame  du  Defiand's 
letters. 

Tuesday,  December  1st. — Left  Strawberry  Hill,  after 
spending  five  weeks  there  very  comfortably  and  quietly. 
North  Audley  Street  for  the  first  time  felt  cold  after  the 
great  logs  and  extreme  warmth  of  Strawberry. 

Sunday,  Qth. — Prince  Esterhazy  sat  with  me  a  long 
time,  and  we  had  a  very  rational  and  interesting  con- 
versation about  Staremberg  and  his  present  situation  ; 
Esterhazy's  sentiments  always  marking  a  good  under- 
standing and  an  excellent  heart. 

Sunday,  2Qth. — Sir  Edward  Carrington,  Mr.  Turner, 


1807]  '  MESSE   DE   MIJOJIT.'  337 

and  Mr.  Churchill  called,  and  the  two  Lords  Balcarras 
and  Lady  Charlotte  Lindsay. 

Thursday,  24#A. — I  was  obliged  to  keep  our  long- 
promised  engagement  to  a  messe  de  minuit  and  a  reveillon 
at  Prince  Staremberg's.  Agnes  was  unequal  to  going ;  so 
with  a  fatigued  mind,  very  ill-disposed  towards  gaiety  of 
any  sort,  I  went  between  ten  and  eleven  with  Mrs.  Darner. 
We  found  there  of  womankind  only  Madame  de  Pompies 
and  Madame  de  Lape,  two  Frenchwomen,  whose  names  I 
have  so  often  heard  from  him,  but  whom  I  never  saw  before, 
or  have  any  great  inclination  ever  to  see  again,  though 
as  Frenchwomen  there  was  no  sort  of  awkwardness  in 
our  thus  first  meeting  and  passing  an  evening  with  them 
in  a  small  society.  Soon  after  arrived  Victorine,  dressed, 
and  looking  her  very  best,  and  soon  after  her  Catalani  * 
and  her  husband,  who  filled  up  the  time  before  the  messe 
began  with  singing  in  high  spirits  anything  that  came 
into  her  head.  The  messe  was  said  in  a  room  below,  and 
we  two  mecroyantes,  Mrs.  D.  and  I,  remained  in  the 
drawing-room  with  four  of  the  men,  who  had  not  finished 
their  party  at  whist.  Afterwards  we  had  supper,  at  which 
we  all  assisted,  to  the  number  of  about  sixteen  or  seven- 
teen, and  I  was  not  at  home  till  half-past  two. 

*  Angelica  Catalani,  born  near  Rome  1783.  Her  voice  was  remarkable 
even  at  twelve  years  old.  She  made  her  de"but  on  the  stage  at  Venice  in 
her  fifteenth  year.  Her  first  appearance  in  England  was  in  1806,  and  she 
remained  here  till  1814.  Her  last  appearance  in  England  was  1824,  and  in 
1827  she  retired  altogether.  Died  at  Florence,  1849. 


VOL.  II. 


338  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 


1808. 

Saturday,  January  9th. — In  the  evening  went  to  Drury 
Lane.  '  The  Wonder.'*  Elliston  very  poor  in  Felix,  and 
Mrs.  Jordan  bringing  out  too  often  her  oyster-woman 
notes  in  Violante,  which  destroys  all  the  effect  of  her 
otherwise  captivating  voice. 

Tuesday,  \§th. — M.  de  Starlimburg  called  to  say  that 
the  messenger  he  expected  on  Thursday  next  had  arrived 
yesterday,  having  left  Paris  only  on  Saturday — that  he 
brings  him  positive  orders  to  leave  the  country  im- 
mediately ;  that  he  sets  off  to-morrow,  and  war,  intermin- 
able war,  is  the  consequence,  f 

Wednesday  20th. — Came  home  early,  expecting  M.  de 
Staremberg,  who  had  promised  to  see  me  before  he  went, 
between  five  and  six.  He  came,  and  a  very  melancholy 
few  moments  we  passed  together.  He  is  a  good,  honest, 
honourable  man,  whom  one  cannot  know  intimately 
without  being  attached  to.  I  sent  a  little  Scotch  pebble 
ring  by  him  to  dear  Madame  de  Staremberg. 

Thursday,  2&th. — Mr.  WhitbreadJ  called  on  me.  Eead 
my  paper  while  he  sat  with  me.§  Praised  it  as  extremely 
clear  and  succinct.  We  talked  over  the  subject.  Curious 

*  '  Wonder  !  A  Woman  keeps  a  Secret.'  By  Susannah  Centlivre.  Born 
1667 ;  died  1722. 

t  Vide  note  to  Nov.  22,  1807. 

J  Samuel  Whitbread,  Esq.,  son  of  a  wealthy  "brewer ;  born  1758 ;  married 
Lady  Elizabeth,  daughter  of  the  first  Earl  Grey,  1789 ;  came  into  Par- 
liament the  following  year ;  was  a  zealous  adherent  of  Mr.  Fox,  and  continued 
a  steady  supporter  of  the  Whig  party ;  conducted  the  impeachment  of 
Lord  Melville ;  died  by  his  own  hand,  July  1815,  during  a  fit  of  mental 
derangement. — Hose's  Bioy.  Diet, 

§  To  what  paper  Miss  Berry  refers  does  not  appear. 


1808]  '  THE   WANDERER.'  339 

details  about  the  influence  of  poor  Mr.  Fox's  illness  upon 
the  latter  part  of  the  last  negociation.* 

Went  to  the  play.  '  The  Wanderer '  (the  story  of 
the  Pretender),  under  Swedish  names.  Very  interesting 
from  situations,  but  very  poorly  written. 

After  the  play,  went  to  Lady  Donegal's,  where  came 
Colonel  Eustace,  f  Lord  Hutchirison'sJ  aide-de-camp,  who 
has  been  with  him  constantly  at  the  Prussian  and  Eussian 
head-quarters  since  he  left  England,  in  November,  1806. 
Curious  details  of  the  Eussian  army — never  able  to  col- 
lect more  than  seventy  thousand  men — opposed  by  a 
hundred  and  seventy  thousand  French.  The  Eussians 
totally  without  surgeons,  hospitals,  or  drugs.  Duke  of 
Brunswick,  received  the  wound  in  his  eyes  which  killed 
him,  in  his  coach. 

Sunday,  %\st. — Eead  through  Eoscoe's  pamphlet  and 
Spence's  §  '  England  Independent  of  Commerce.' 

Wednesday,  February  Wth. — At  past  eleven  o'clock 
went  to  Devonshire  House.  Catalani  singing  in  the  saloon, 
Sapio  accompanying.  She  had  all  her  diamonds  on,  and 
entirely  eclipsed  Lady  Harrowby,  who  was  standing  by 
her  at  the  harpsichord. 

Friday,  12^.  -—Went  to  dine  at  Mr.  Knight's, in  Soho 

*  {  In  1806  some  pacificatory  messages  were  interchanged  between  the 
French  and  English  Governments,  but  it  is  probable  that  on  neither  side 
were  they  were  very  sincere.'  Fox  died  at  Chiswick  in  September  1806. — 
Imp.  Diet,  of  Univ.  Siog. 

f  Lieutenant-Colonel  Henry  Eustace,  son  of  General  Eustace,  was  on 
Sir  Ralph  Abercrombie's  staff  and  accompanied  him  to  Holland ;  he  went 
with  Lord  Hutchinson  afterwards  to  Russia,  and  followed  the  Russian  army 
during  the  whole  of  the  campaign  of  the  French  invasion  of  Russia.  He 
was  in  constant  employment  for  many  years,  and  became  secretary  to  the 
Duke  of  York  when  commander-in-chief.  Died  at  Geneva,  1844. 

J  John  Lord  Hutchinson,  brother  of  first  Earl  of  Donoughmore,  a  distin- 
guished general  officer  in  the  army,  succeeded  Sir  Ralph  Abercrombie  in  the 
command  of  the  army  in  Egypt,  and  created  Baron  Hutchinson  for  his 
services  in  1801 ;  he  died  unmarried  in  1825. 

§  William  Spence,  author  of  a  work  on  the  '  Causes  of  the  Distress  of  the 
West  India  Planters,'  '  Agriculture  the  Source  of  the  Wealth  of  Britain,' 
1808 j  'The  Objections  to  the  Corn  Bill  refuted.' 

z  2 


340  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 


Square.*  The  party  :  Lord  and  Lady  Oxford,f  Mr. 
telton,;!;  Mr.  C.  Moore,  Mr.  Eogers,  and  Mr.  Lawrence,^ 
the  painter,  ||  and  Mrs.  Darner.  Looked  over  drawings, 
&c.  &c.  till  near  eleven  o'clock. 

Monday,  \hth.  —  Dined  at  Mr.  Angerstein's,  with  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  W.  Locke,  General  Moore,  &c.  General  Moore 
very  entertaining  in  his  account  after  dinner  of  the  Queen 
of  Naples  at  Palermo,  and  his  conversations  with  her, 
by  which  I  find  that  neither  time  nor  misfortunes  have 
altered  her  from  what  I  knew  her  twenty  years  ago. 

The  following  letter  from  Lord  Erskine  must  relate  to 
his  pamphlet,  written  in  1797,  '  On  the  Causes  and  Con- 
sequences of  the  Present  War  with  France.'  '  This  pam- 
phlet had  an  unprecedented  sale,  there  being  no  less  than 
forty-eight  editions  of  it  printed  within  a  few  months.' 
(  Watts  's  Dictionary.)  It  is  probable  that  the  recent  failure 
of  Austrian  intervention  had  produced  some  conver- 
sation between  Miss  Berry  and  Lord  Erskine,  which  gave 
rise  to  his  sending  her  a  copy  of  his  pamphlet,  with  his 
interesting  account  of  the  manner  in  which  it  was  com- 
posed. 

February  21st,  1808. 

MY  DEAR  MADAM,  —  I  send  you  the  Pamphlet  I  alluded  to 
last  night  ;  it  was  written  on  slips  of  paper  in  the  midst  of  all 
the  business  which  I  was  engaged  in  at  the  time  —  not  at  home, 
but  in  open  court  whilst  the  causes  were  trying.  When  it  was 
not  my  turn  to  examine  a  witness  or  to  speak  to  the  Jury,  then 
I  wrote  a  little  bit  ;  and  so  on  by  snatches  ;  as  there  was  not  a 
moment  to  be  lost  in  the  crisis  of  folly  which  characterised, 

*  Payne  Knight,  Esq. 

t  Edward  Harley,  fifth  Earl  of  Oxford  j  married,  1794,  Jane  Elizabeth, 
daughter  of  Rev.  James  Scott. 

J  Hon.  William  Henry  Lyttelton,  afterwards  third  baron  Lyttelton,  bom 
1783,  married  Lady  Sarah  Spencer  1813,  died  1837. 

§  Samuel  Rogers  the  poet,  author  of  (  Pleasures  of  Memory,'  '  Italy/  &c.  ; 
born  1763,  died  1855,  in  his  ninety-third  year. 

||  Afterwards  Sir  Thomas  Lawrence,  the  first  portrait-painter  of  his  time  ; 
born  1769,  died  1830. 


1808]  LORD  ERSKIXE'S  LETTER.  341 

almost  as  much  as  at  present,  our  unhappy  country.  You  will 
not  be  surprised,  therefore,  at  its  incorrectness.  I  had  not  a 
moment  to  amend  the  text,  much  less  to  correct  the  press  in 
the  different  editions ;  and  since  I  have  had  leisure  to  look  it 
over,  I  have  only  remarked  that  I  have  no  more  merit  in  my 
observations  as  a  politician,  than  would  belong  to  a  medical 
man  who  should  pronounce  that  a  person  under  an  unremitting 
course  of  a  slow  poison  would  come  by  it  infallibly  to  a  premature 
dissolution. 

I  have  the  Honor  to  be 

Your  faithful  Humble  Serv*, 
EESKINE. 


JOURNAL. 

Tuesday,  23rd. — Went  to  the  play.  '  Kair ;  or  Love 
in  the  Desert ' — perfect,  complete,  and  unintelligible  non- 
sense from  beginning  to  end,  with  some  pretty  painted 
scenes.  The  farce  was  Bannister  and  Mrs.  Jordan  in 
Jobson  and  Nell.*  Her  Nell  is  incomparable,  but  she 
was  not  in  high  spirits. 

Thursday,  March  3rd. — Dined  at  Mrs.  Blair's  with 
Mrs.  Fox,  Mr.  Eogers,  Mr.  Brougham,f  Mr.  Mercer,J 
Mrs.  Blair's  own  family,  &c. 

Agnes  and  I  went  to  Catalani's,  where  was  a  party  of 
thirty  or  forty ;  I  think,  except  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Trevor, 
Miss  Tate,  and  ourselves,  there  was  not  another  com- 
moner in  the  room.  While  the  music  was  going  on,  a 
supper  was  preparing  below  stairs,  which  we  eat  by  the 
nose,  each  separate  dish,  and  the  whole  together,  in  the 
room  above. 

Friday,  ±th. — In  the  evening  went  with  Lady  Shaftes- 

*  'Devil  to  Pay.'  t  Afterwards  Lord  Brougham. 

J  George  Mercer,  afterwards  George  Mercer  Henderson,  Esq.  of  Fordel 
iji  Fifeshire,  a  property  which  he  inherited  from  his  aunt,  the  wife  of  Sir 
Philip  Durham  Henderson. 


342  MISS  BEERY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

bury  and  Lady  B.  Ashley,*  to  Lady  Abercorn'sf — a  great 
drag-net  assembly,  twenty  women  to  one  man. 

Saturday ',  bth. — Mr.  Grell,  Mr.  Mercer,  and  Colonel 
Murray  dined  with  us.  In  the  evening  came  Mrs.  D.  and 
Sir  H.  Englefield.  We  had  a  great  deal  of  drawing, 
talking,  and  laughing. 

Sunday,  6th. — Went  after  church  to  Mrs.  Darner's. 
Found  Lord  Dorchester^  had  died  of  an  apoplectic  fit 
that  morning  at  ten  o'clock.  Went  to  Lady  Elizabeth 
Whitbread's,  where  was  a  meeting  of  a  great  many  of 
the  party. 

Tuesday,  8th. — In  the  morning  I  had  a  long  and  in- 
teresting conversation  with  Mr.  Thornton§  about  the  prin- 
ciples of  the  Methodists,  and  about  his  father  and  educa- 
tion. 

Wednesday,  $th. — I  went  in  the  evening  to  Mrs.  D. 
Eead  '  Marmion,'  just  come  out,  to  her. 

Thursday,  1(M. — Eead  some  more  of  '  Marmion.' 

Monday,  14#A. — Began  reading  the  'Odyssey'  of  Homer 
in  Pope's  translation.  Delighted  with  it. 

Friday,  ~L8th. — Breakfasted  at  nine  o'clock  with  only 
Mrs.  Benwell,  Dr.  Hind,  and  Mr.  Loveday.  Went  before 
ten,  we  three  in  our  carriage,  and  the  three  gentlemen  in 


*  Barbara,  Countess  of  Shaftesbury,  daughter  and  heiress  of  Sir  John 
Webb,  Bart.,  of  Oldstock  House,  co.  Wilts.  Lady  Barbara  Ashley, 
daughter  of  the  above  and  of  Anthony  Ashley,  fifth  Earl  of  Shaftesbury, 
married,  August  1814,  to  the  Hon.  William  F.  Spencer  Ponsonby,  third  son 
of  Frederick  third  Earl  of  Bessborough,  created  Lord  de  Mauley  in  1838  ; 
she  died  1844. 

t  John  James,  ninth  Earl  of  Abercorn,  married,  1800,  his  third  wife  Anne 
Jane,  eldest  daughter  of  Arthur  second  Earl  of  Arran  and  widow  of  Henry 
Hutton,  Esq. 

J  Sir  Guy  Carleton,  first  Lord  Dorchester,  aged  eighty-five,  a  distinguished 
general  in  the  American  war. 

§  Mr.  Henry  Thornton,  second  son  of  John  Thornton,  a  merchant,  one  of 
the  leading  characters  of  the  '  Clapham  Society ; '  for  more  than  thirty  years 
a  member  of  Parliament ;  a  voluminous  writer  on  moral,  religious,  and  po- 
litical subjects ;  a  man  of  universal  liberality  and  benevolence. — Vide  JEdin. 
Rev.,  July  1844. 


1808]  DK.  HIND   MARRIED.  343 

another,  to  St.  George's  Church.  Got  out  at  the  vestry 
door.  Here  the  ceremony  of  registering  the  marriage 
was  performed  by  the  clerk,  who  then  assisted  Mr.  Love- 
day  in  putting  on  canonicals.  We  went  immediately  into 
the  church,  where  there  was  not  another  creature  but 
ourselves  and  the  clerk.  The  ceremony  over,  we  returned 
to  North  Audley  Street,  where  a  second  breakfast,  &c. 
was  set  out  ready  for  us  in  the  back  drawing-room.  At 
Pen's  earnest  desire,  nobody  but  themselves  were  asked 
to  partake  of  it.  Soon  after  twelve  they  set  off  for  their 
own  future  habitation  at  Tendon,  in  Sussex.* 

Monday,  21st. — In  the  evening  with  Lady  Charlotte 
Campbellf  to  the  Argyll  Eooms.  Got  there  near  twelve. 
The  concert  was  just  over.  Dancing  soon  after  took 
place  in  the  long  room,  fitted  up  with  boxes  at  the  end, 
and  meant  to  be  used  as  a  theatre.  All  the  rooms  prettily 
fitted  up.  A  long  debate  in  both  Houses  made  a  great 
scarcity  of  men.  The  supper,  upon  tables  for  about  eight 
people  each,  in  a  large  low  room  below  stairs. 

Wednesday,  23rd. — In  the  evening,  a  large  party  at 
home.  Gow,  the  Scotch  fiddler,  a  second  fiddle,  and  a 
harp,  came  to  us  at  half-past  nine,  and  played  some  Scotch 
airs  to  my  father.  Afterwards,  when  more  people  came, 
I  proposed  a  reel  to  Lady  Charlotte  Campbell,  and  began 
with  her  myself,  to  set  the  others  a-going,  and  then,  in 
the  same  way,  a  country  dance  ;  but  the  English  people, 
as  usual,  were  shy,  though  there  were  four  or  five 
excellent  couples  standing  by.  Fifty  people — nineteen 
women  and  thirty-one  men — came ;  twelve  supped  in  the 
back  room,  and  six  or  eight  in  the  front  room ;  everybody 
seemed  pleased,  and  some  men  who  came  late  were  not 

*  The  bride  was  Mrs.  Benwell ;  the  bridegroom  Dr.  Hind. 

t  Charlotte  Susan  Maria,  daughter  of  John  fifth  Duke  of  Argyll ;  mar- 
ried, first,  Colonel  John  Campbell ;  secondly,  Rev.  Edward  Bury.  Lady 
Charlotte  Campbell  was  attached  to  the  household  of  the  Princess  of 
Wales,  and  is  known  to  the  literary  world  as  the  author  of  several  works  of 
fiction.  Died,  1861. 


344  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

gone  at  two  o'clock  in  the  morning.  Gow's  music  cost  me 
three  guineas. 

Saturday,  26th. — Dined  at  Mr.  Samuel  Turner's  with 
Mr.  Alexander  Baring  *  (the  author  of  the  pamphlet  on  the 
Orders  in  Council),  Mr.  Sharpe  the  M.P.  and  twelve  other 
people.  I  sat  between  Mr.  Baring  and  Mr.  Sharpe.  Mr. 
Baring  is  rather  a  heavy-looking  young  man,  with  a  hesi- 
tating manner ;  but  seems  very  clear  in  his  ideas  and  un- 
assuming in  his  manners.  Mr.  Sharpe  I  have  often  seen 
before ;  he  is  clever,  but  I  should  suspect  of  little  real 
depth  of  intellect. 

Sunday,  21th. — Went  in  the  morning  after  church  to 
Mr.  Gell'sf  house  in  Chapel  Street.  Found  there  Mr. 
Morritt,  Sir  J.  Hall,J  and  Lord  Selkirk. §  Looked  over 
some  of  his  drawings  and  plans  of  the  Parthenon.  All 
went  together  to  Lord  Elgin's  Marbles.  A  second  view 
delights  one  still  more  than  the  first,  but  the  cold  exces- 
sive. 

Thursday,  31st. — Went  in  the  morning  to  the  British 
Museum  with  Lord  Frederick  Campbeh1  and  Mrs.  D.  to 

*  Alexander  Baring,  born  1774,  second  son  of  Sir  Francis  Baring,  suc- 
ceeded his  father  as  head  of  the  great  commercial  house  in  the  city ;  created 
Baron  Ashburton,  April  10,  1835  ;  died  1848. 

t  Afterward,  Sir  William  Gell,  a  -well-known  archaeologist,  born  1777. 
He  was  sent  on  a  mission  to  the  Ionian  islands  in  the  beginning  of  the  cen- 
tury, and  knighted  on  his  return  in  1803.  His  first  work  was  the  '  Topo- 
graphy of  Troy,'  published  in  1803 ;  his  next,  '  Geography  and  Antiquities 
of  Ithaca,'  in  1807  j  and  in  1810,  '  The  Itinerary  of  Greece,  with  a  Commen- 
tary on  Pausanias  and  Strabo.'  Sir  William  Gell  accompanied  the  Princess 
of  Wales,  as  one  of  her  chamberlains,  when  she  left  England  in  1814 ;  he 
quitted  her  service  on  account  of  his  frequent  attacks  of  gout,  as  he  alleged 
when  examined  as  a  witness  on  her  behalf  in  the  House  of  Lords  in  1820, 
but  continued  to  reside  in  Italy.  His  other  works  were  the  '  Itinerary  of 
the  Morea,'  '  Pompeiana :  the  Topography,  Edifices,  and  Ornaments  of 
Pompeii ; '  in  1823,  the  '  Narrative  of  his  Journey  in  the  Morea ;'  and  lastly, 
in  1834,  '  The  Topography  of  Eome.'  He  died  at  Naples,  1836. 

J  Sir  James  Hall,  Bart.,  of  Douglas,  born  1761 ;  married  a  sister  of  the 
Earl  of  Selkirk ;  wrote  a  work  on  '  Gothic  Architecture  ; '  rendered  great 
services  to  geological  science.  Died  1832. 

§  Thomas  fifth  Earl  of  Selkirk,  born  1771,  died  1820. 


1808]  THE   TOWNLEY  MARBLES.  345 

see  the  new  wing  and  the  disposition  of  Mr.  Townley's 
Marbles,*  and  the  things  taken  by  our  army  in  Egypt.  I 
think  them,  on  the  whole,  well  placed ;  some  of  Mr. 
Townley's  are  exquisitely  beautiful,  though  much  less 
wonderful  and  imposing  than  the  battered  remains  at 
Lord  Elgin's.  The  sarcophagus  brought  from  Alexandria, 
and  covered  outside  and  inside  with  figures  and  hierogly- 
phics, called,  I  know  not  why,  the,  '  Tomb  of  Alexander,' 
by  far  the  most  beautiful  and  stupendous  piece  of  Brescia 
I  ever  saw,  with  the  most  vivid  colours  in  the  largest 
pieces,  f 

Dined  at  Sir  P.  Francis',  J  with  Lord  §  and  Lady  Keith,  || 
Miss  Elphinstone,^"  Mr.  Elliot,  Mr.  Trevor,  &c. 

In  the  evening  Miss  Tate  and  Catherine  Frances  sung 
two  or  three  songs  beautifully. 

Friday,  April  1st. — Went  to  Mr.  Knight's  and  Naldi 
Libboni,  the  Chevalier,  and  some  of  the  Cornewalls,**  sang, 
and  admirably  well.  A  much  larger  party  than  usual, 
but  it  is  impossible  to  warm  that  room,  with  its  iron  roof 
and  skylights. 

Saturday,  2nd. — Took  a  long  walk.  Met  Mr.  Windham, 
who  accompanied  me,  and  was  very  agreeable.  In  the 
evening  at  a  pleasant  party  at  Lady  Donegal's.  Anacreon 
Moore  sang  a  great  deal — his  old  things,  all  the  prettiest. 

Sunday,  3rd. — At  eleven  I  went  to  Mrs.  ViHiers's,f  f 

*  Mr.  Townley's  collection  was  bought  for  the  British  Museum  in  1805 
for  the  sum  of  28,200£ — Cunningham1  s  London. 

t  Parliament  granted  35,000/.  for  the  purchase  of  the  Elgin  Marhles. 

J  Sir  P.  Francis,  the  supposed  author  of  the  Letters  of  Junius ;  born  1740, 
died  1818. 

§  Lord  Keith.  The  Hon.  George  Keith  Elphinstone,  created  Baron  and 
Viscount  Keith  for  his  distinguished  services  as  a  naval  commander,  died 
1823. 

||  Lady  Keith,  eldest  Miss  Thrale. 

1[  Afterwards  Countess  de  Flahault ;  daughter  of  Lord  Keith. 

**  Daughters  of  Sir  George  Cornewall,  Bart.,  of  Moccas  Court,  Hereford- 
shire. 

tf  Hon.  Mrs.  Villiers,  daughter  of  Admiral  and  Lady  Mary  Forbes,  mar- 
ried to  the  Hon.  J.  C.  Villiers,  afterwards  Earl  of  Clarendon. 


346  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

where  was  an  assembly  in  the  lower  apartment — like  all 
her  parties,  a  great  many  fine  ladies,  and  all  the  fine  men. 
A  man  in  boots  and  a  round  hat,  very  drunk,  walked  in 
from  the  street  to  the  middle  of  the  first  room,  and  was 
turned  out  by  the  gentlemen,  and  pushed  out  by  the  ser- 
vants from  the  hall.  At  the  street  door  he  drew  a 
sword  from  a  stick,  and  was  poking  about  with  it,  when 
Henry  Bouverie  broke  it  short  off,  and  the  watch  carried 
the  man,  whoever  he  might  be,  to  the  watch-house. 

Thursday,  7th. — I  went  to  Lady  Caroline  Lamb's.* 
An  immense  assembly.  We  came  away  at  half-past 
twelve,  and  walked  beyond  the  Admiralty  to  the  carriage. 
Many  of  the  company  were  not  away  till  near  three,  and 
the  Prince  of  Wales  and  a  very  few  persons  supped  below 
stairs  in  Lady  Melbourne's  apartment,  and  were  not  gone 
till  past  six.  Sheridan  of  the  number,  who  was  com- 
pletely drunk. 

Saturday,  9th. — Went  to  the  play, c  The  World ; '  less 
bad  than  most  modern  comedies,  because  aiming,  at  least, 
at  character,  and  EUiston  acting  admirably  a  character 
evidently  taken  from  Belfield,  in  Miss  Burney's  '  Cecilia.' 

Monday,  llth. — Went  to  Harcourt  House.  Saw  both 
Lord  and  Lady  Harcourt.f  The  latter  quite  amusing  in  her 
attempts  at  being  easy  I  In  vain ;  she  never  can,  in  spite 
of  all  her  endeavours,  for  a  moment  drop  the  hoop  and 
lappets !  The  house  an  exact  French  hotel,  but  dirty 
and  wanting  to  be  brushed  up,  and  looking  no  more 
comfortable,  than  its  inhabitants. 

Tuesday,  12th. — Went  to  Little  Strawberry. 

Wednesday,  ZQth. — It  froze  last  night  hard,  and  some 
of  the  snow  still  lies  upon  the  ground.  At  night  finished 

*  Lady  Caroline  Lamb,  daughter  of  third  Earl  of  Bessborough ;  born 
1785,  married  to  the  Hon.  William  Lamb  1805,  died  1848.  Author  of  a 
novel  called  '  Glenarvon.' 

f  George  Simon  Harcourt,  second  Earl  and  Viscount  Harcourt ;  born 
1736,  succeeded  his  father  1777;  married,  1765,  Elizabeth,  daughter  of 
George  Lord  Vernon ;  died  1809. 


1508]  ASHE'S   TKAYELS.  347 

Miss  Warren's  novel  *  by  galloping  over  half  the  pages ; 
human  patience  could  not  regularly  wade  through  a  series 
of  adventures  without  ensemble,  of  violent  situations 
without  interest  or  probability,  and  of  characters  all 
equally  pious  or  equally  profligate.  The  author  is,  I  dare 
say,  an  excellent  good  creature,  but  she  had  better  do  any- 
thing than  endeavour  to  pourtray  her  fellow-creatures. 

Thursday,  21st. — Worked  at  my  French  Letters  most  of 
the  morning.  In  the  evening  began  reading  Ashe's  f 
'Travels  in  America,'  in  the  north-western  settlements, 
behind  the  United  States. 

Friday,  22nd. — The  weather  continues  cold,  stormy, 
and  rainy.  Worked  at  the  Letters.  In  the  evening 
Ashe's  Travels  again.  They  are,  I  think,  very  entertain- 
ing in  spite  of  an  abominable  style,  which  aims  at  being 
fine  writing,  without  being  grammar  and  without  being 
English.  But  the  wonderful  country  he  describes  makes 
every  account  of  it  which  one  sees  and  feels  is  written  on 
the  spot,  very  interesting. 

Saturday,  23rd. — I  began  botching  out  some  sort  of 
preface  to  the  Letters. 

Sunday,  24:th. — Worked  at  my  preface  in  the  morning. 
A  cold  wet  day.  Not  at  church.  Sir  Thomas  Liddell  J 
called.  In  the  evening,  after  dinner,  I  read  aloud  the 
sketch  of  my  preface,  and  finished  the  evening  with 
Ashe's  Travels,  which  are  very  entertaining. 

Tuesday,  26th. — I  watched  the  gardener  sow  all  the 
annuals  in  all  the  flower-borders,  which  kept  me  out  with 
my  wheelbarrow  in  the  garden  till  past  three  o'clock ; 
then  stuck  to  my  French  Letters. 

*  'Conrade,  or  the  Gamesters.'  Novel  by  Caroline  Matilda  Warren.  Pub- 
lished 1806. 

t  Thomas  Ashe,  Esq.,  travelled  in  America  in  the  year  1806  for  the  pur- 
pose of  exploring  the  rivers  of  Alleghany,  Monongahela,  Ohio,  and  the 
Mississippi,  and  ascertaining  the  produce  and  condition  of  their  banks  ;  pub- 
lished 1808.  He  was  the  author  of  many  other  works. —  Watts's  Dictionary. 

J  Afterwards  Lord  Eavensworth, 


348  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

Wednesday,  27th. — Very  cold.  Worked  at  the  French 
Letters.  In  the  evening  Mrs.  D.,  and  Ashe's  Travels. 
Letters  as  usual. 

Sunday,  May  1st. — A  beautiful  warm  sunny  May  day. 
Went  to  P.  Staremberg's  to  see  poor  Cliff,  little  George's 
nurse,  who  remains  in  the  house.  I  know  few  things 
more  melancholy  than  to  visit  the  empty  house  of  inti- 
mate friends,  where  one  has  passed  many  many  days  in 
cheerful  company.  A  thousand  recollections  immediately 
rise  to  one's  memory,  from  which  everything  tiresome,  or 
dull,  or  disagreeable,  has  vanished  with  the  intermediate 
time,  and  nothing  but  what  is  charming  (and  consequently 
the  more  to  be  regretted)  remains,  But  recollections  of 
past  comforts  or  pleasures  may  certainly  be  reckoned, 
however  melancholy,  among  the  pleasures  of  this  life.  I 
never  shun  them. 

In  the  evening,  Ashe's  Travels  as  usual. 
Tuesday,  3rd. — Dined  at  Lady  Melbourne's.  Went  up 
to  the  top  of  the  house  with  Lady  Caroline  Lamb  to  see 
her  little  boy  asleep,  who  a  very  few  hours  after  was 
seized  with  fits  and  his  life  despaired  of.  He  is  too  big  of 
his  age — only  eight  months.* 

TJiursday,  5th. — Saw  Lady  Harriet  Cavendish.f  She 
brought  us  the  first  report  of  the  horrible  shipwreck  of 
poor  Lord  Eoyston  in  the  Baltic.^  From  that  instant  one 
could  think  of  nothing  but  Lady  Hardwicke  having 
arrived  in  town  late  the  night  before  to  meet  such  dread- 
ful intelligence,  and  perhaps  still  more  dreadful  doubt,  for 
some  doubt  there  was  of  the  names  of  all  the  persons 

*  George  Augustus  Frederick  Lamb,  only  son  of  the  late  Lord  Mel- 
bourne ;  born  August  1807 ;  died  1836. 

t  Daughter  of  the  Duke  of  Devonshire,  afterwards  Countess  Granville. 

J  Lord  Royston  was  shipwrecked  at  sea  on  the  7th  of  April  by  the 
stranding  of  the  ship  Agatha,  of  Lubeck,  in  a  storm,  not  far  from  Memel. 
Lord  Royston  would  have  been  twenty-four  years  old  had  he  lived  to  the 
7th  of  May.  He  had  been  four  years  absent  from  the  country. — Annual 
Register, 


1803]  MRS.  GEANT.  349 

that  had  perished.  I  instantly  sent  a  note  to  Lady 
Charlotte  Lindsay.  She  had  not  a  ray  of  hope.  At 
two  o'clock  I  left  town  again.  I  felt  quite  glad  to  be 
here.  Of  my  former  vivacity  and  eagerness  I  have  not  a 
tithe  part,  though  quite  enough  for  my  age  and  situation ; 
the  world,  when  one  knows  it  well,  is  a  dull  business. 
Whereas  the  dull  business  of  the  country,  particularly  at 
this  season,  has  something  quiet,  soothing,  and  at  the 
same  time  occupying,  in  it.  At  least  I  feel  it  suits  me 
more  than  ever  it  did  before. 

Friday,  6th. — Eead  my  French  Letters.  Mrs.  D.  and 
I  finished  Ashe's  Travels. 

Saturday,  1th. — I  worked  in  my  greenhouse  all  the 
morning.  Agnes  arrived  from  town.  She  had  seen 
Lady  C.  Lindsay,  and  heard  from  her  everything  that 
was  to  be  heard  of  the  poor  Hardwickes.  God  help 
them ! 

Tuesday,  "LOth. — I  began  reading  aloud  Gell's  '  Ithaca.'* 
Wednesday  ^\.\th. — In  the  evening,  Gell's  'Ithaca.' 
Saturday,  14£/i. — My  plants  moved  out  of  the  green- 
house, and  I,  as  usual,  heartily  fatigued  with  helping  to 
place  them.     Walked  in  the  evening  into  the  meadows 
by  the  river-side,  and  did  nothing  all  day  but  enjoy  the 
beauty  of  the  season. 

Sunday,  \%>th. — Another  delicious  day.  Walked  to 
church.  Called  at  Sunbury — Sir  John  Legarde's — a  re- 
markably pretty  villa,  close  upon  the  bank  of  the  river. 
Walked  round  the  shrubbery  and  garden  with  Lady 
Legarde,  and  Mrs.  Grantf  (the  writer  of '  The  Letters  from 
the  Mountains'),  who  is  at  present  their  guest.  Her 
figure  and  manners  awkward,  but  not  the  least  vulgarity 


•  Published  in  1808. 

f  Mrs.  Grant,  of  Laggan,  Inverness-shire  (her  maiden  name  was  Campbell), 
the  author  of  various  poems  and  other  works ;  '  Letters  from  the  Mountains ' 
being  the  real  correspondence  of  a  lady  between  the  years  1773  and  1803. — 
Watts 's  Dictionary. 


350  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  tisos 

in  her  manners  or  conversation.  She  had  heard  of  us 
somehow  or  other,  and  said  she  was  much  pleased  to 
make  our  acquaintance.  We  saw  Sir  John  just  before 
we  were  going  away,  in  his  wheeling-chair.  His  legs  are 
perfectly  helpless,  and  this  before  he  is  fifty  years  old ! 
He  has  a  handsome  lively  countenance.* 

Tuesday,  17th. — My  day  spent  as  usual — a  good  deal  of 
gardening  and  idling,  and  a  little  reading  of  my  French 
Letters.  Bead  in  the  '  Times '  the  confirmation  of  the 
wreck  and  positive  loss  of  Lord  Eoyston. 

Saturday,  21st. — Went  to  Eichmond.  Sat  half  an 
hour  with  Madame  de  Cambis.  She  happened  to  be  in 
good  humour,  and  I  made  her  talk  of  Madame  du 
Defland  and  old  French  times,  and  she  was  very  enter- 
taining. From  her  I  went  to  Lady  Di  Beauclerc,f 
and  carried  her  the  novel  I  promised  her.  Heard  that 
Konald  would  certainly  set  out  for  Portsmouth  that 
night.  In  the  evening  read  my  French  Letters. 

O  */ 

Sunday,  22nd. — Wrote  something  that  will  serve  either 
as  preface  or  avant-propos  to  the  Letters. 

Thursday,  26th. — Finished  Madame  du  Deffand's  vo- 
luminous correspondence  with  Lord  Orford,  having  marked 
such  letters  as  I  might  select  to  re-select  for  publication. 
From  so  many,  enough,  and  more  than  enough,  may 
certainly  be  taken  from  each  year. 

Friday,  27th. — In  the  evening  began  selecting  the  first 
year  of  the  Letters,  and  marking  passages. 

Thursday,  June  2nd. — I  began  reading  aloud  Mr.  Fox's 
historical  work,  in  the  beautiful  large-paper  copy  which 
Robert  Ferguson  has  given  me. 

Friday,  3rd. — I  continued  reading  Fox's  work.     It  is 

*  Sir  John  Legarde,  Bart.,  married,  1802,  Jane,  daughter  of  Henry 
Aston,  Esq.  Sir  John  died  two  months  after  this  visit,  and  was  succeeded 
by  his  brother. 

t  Lady  Diana  Spencer,  daughter  of  Charles  Duke  of  Marlborough, 
married  Topham  Beauclerk,  1768. 


1808]  JOANNA  BAILLIE.  351 

very  well  to  read  it  once  out ;  but  it  suggests  so  much 
thought,  and  so  many  new  views  of  things,  that  I  shall 
read  it  over  more  than  once  to  myself  in  a  very  different 
manner  from  what  I  am  now  doing. 

Thursday,  9th. — Dined  at  Lady  Donegal's  with  Agnes. 
Philippa  (Godfrey),  Charles  Moore,  and  Anacreon  Moore 
at  dinner.  I  praised  highly  the  two  poems  ('  Corruption' 
and  *  Intolerance ')  that  I  had  been  reading  in  the  morn- 
ing, before  the  author  (little  Moore),  without  knowing  it. 
After  dinner  he  owned  the  fact,  and  was  much  pleased 
with  my  unsuspicious  praise.  Moore  sang. 

Friday,  Wth — Between  eleven  and  twelve  I  walked  to 
Grosvenor  Street  to  see  Joanna  Baillie;  then  to  the 
Hardwickes.  I  saw  them  all,  literally  all,  except  little 
Charlie,  who  is  returned  to  school :  first,  Lord  Hard- 
wicke,  who  controlled  himself,  but  soon  left  me;  then 
Catherine  *  and  Caroline,  f  With  Catherine  I  was  much 
affected,  for  I  was  very  unwell,  and  unable  to  contain  my 
feelings ;  nor  was  it  necessary  with  her.  With  Lady 
Hardwicke  1  feared  it  would  ;  but  this  was  not  the  case. 
As  soon  as  I  came  up  to  her,  she  threw  herself  into  my 
arms,  and  wept  as  heartily  as  myself.  It  is  a  great  relief 
to  me  having  seen  them  all ;  but  I  left  them  with  my 
eyes  swollen  out  of  my  head,  and  quite  unfit  to  go  any- 
where but  to  Lady  G.  Morpeth,  to  whom  I  could  say 
what  I  had  been  doing. 

Saturday,  11th — In  the  evening  I  read  '  Corruption' 
and  '  Intolerance '  aloud. 

Sunday,  12th. — Drove  with  Phil.  Cayley  to  Eayman's 
Castle ;  walked  through  the  meadows,  crossed  the  Eich- 
mond  ferry,  and  straight  up  the  hill,  which  Phil.  Cayley 
had  never  seen,  and  which  has  always  new  beauties  even 
to  those  much  accustomed  to  it.  The  door  of  the  Star 
and  Garter  (now  shut  as  an  hotel),  being  open,  we 

*  Lady  Catherine  Yorke,  afterwards  Countess  of  Caledon. 
t  Lady  Caroline  Yorke,  afterwards  Countess  of  Somers. 


352  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

walked  in,  and  a  civil  quondam  servant  of  the  house 
showed  us  the  rooms.  Dismal  history  from  the  woman 
of  the  foolish  man  who  made  these  great  additions  tojthe 
former  house  ;  —  ruined  himself  and  died  in  prison;  his 
wife,  seeing  that  all  was  going  wrong,  became  insane, 
and  died  before  him. 

.  The  following  extract  of  a  letter  from  Mr.  Greathead 
to  Miss  Berry  belongs  to  this  date.  This  is  the  first 
mention  of  the  infancy  of  Leamington.  Its  present  state 
has  fully  justified  Mr.  Greathead's  sanguine  views  :  — 

Guy's  Cliff,  June  13,  1808. 

.  .  .  .  I  ought  to  tell  you  that  if  you  have  a  mind  to 
make  a  fortune  by  speculations  at  Leamington  Spa,  I  am  your 
man  :  by  the  foot,  by  the  yard,  by  the  rood,  or  by  the  acre.  I 
will  let  you  land  for  garden  ground,  sell  you  stone,  or  sell  you 
clay  ;  you  shall  have  salt  water,  or  fresh  water,  anything  you 
please  ;  for  if  we  could  but  get  you  and  Agnes  into  the  under- 
taking, what  a  place  should  we  make  of  it  !  Cheltenham  should 
expire  with  envy,  and  Bath  itself  turn  pale  .... 

Tuesday,  21s£.  —  Went  to  Lady  Shaftesbury's  ball  —  a 
very  fine  ball.  The  first  quadrille  began  soon  after 
twelve. 

Lady  B.  Ashley 
and 

<D  Mr.  Delme,  g 

•B  o 

-g 


8  S 

js3  5 

Miss  Johnston 

and 
Mr.  Keppel  Craven. 

The  ladies  were  uniformly  dressed,  and  very  prettily, 
in  white  and  silver.  They  danced  admirably,  without 
mistakes  or  boggle  whatsoever.  Lady  Barbara  really 


1808]  FETE   AT  WIHBLEDOX.  353 

danced  better  than  anybody  I  ever  saw,  either  here  or 
at  Paris.     The  second  quadrille  was  — 


Lady  M.  Lowther 
and 


The  Marquis  of  Tweedale.  w 


J2        >>  I 

"a     I  I     f 

^   —  to-    §     M 

s    n-  g-    i 

g      S  <* 

Lady  C.  Lowther  ? 

and 
The  Marquis  of  Hartington. 

It  was  less  well  danced,  but  without  mistakes.  Every 
creature  was  standing  up  upon  chairs  and  benches  to 
see  these  quadrilles.  There  was  a  most  magnificent 
supper  for  400  people  below  stairs. 

Friday,  24:th.  —  Mr.  Thornton's  breakfast  at  three 
o'clock.  The  Duchess  of  Brunswick  and  the  Duke  of 
Gloucester  there  ;  dined  with  about  eighteen  in  a  sepa- 
rate tent.  The  Duchess  of  Brunswick  not  so  like  either 
to  the  King  or  late  Duke  of  Gloucester  as  I  expected. 
They  say  the  likeness  is  more  in  her  manner  of  speaking. 

Thursday,  30th. — In  the  evening  I  read  '  Barillon's 
Letters '  in  Mr.  Fox's  Appendix. 

Saturday,  July  2nd. — Between  two  and  three  o'clock 
set  out  for  Wimbledon.  A  fine  sunny  day ;  scene  beau- 
tiful ;  all  the  London  world  there.  Dined  in  a  tent. 
Lady  Eosslyn,  Mr.  Eogers,  Lord  Erskine,  Price  (father 
and  son)  *,  and  Charles  Stuart  (Blantyre),  &c.  joined  us  ; 
Mr.  Windham  came,  and  had  a  talk  with  us. 

The  Spanish  Deputies  f  were  at  the  fete,  and  Lord 
Holland,  who  speaks  Spanish,  was  doing  the  honours  to 
them.  The  Viscount  Materosa,  on  whose  subject  our 

*  Sir  Uvedale  and  Sir  Robert  Price. 

t  In  May  1808,  deputies  were  sent  from  Spain  to  England  to  solicit  suc- 
cour, and  to  arouse  the  popular  sentiment  in  favour  of  the  Spanish  cause. — 
Art.  from  Ed.  Rev.,  p.  306. 

VOL.  II.  A  A 


354  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

newspapers  are  so  fertile,  a  little  fair,  fattish  lad.  One 
of  the  others  Don  —  de  Vega,  a  good  olive-coloured  look- 
ing Spaniard,  with  large  grave  black  eyes ;  but  none  of 
them  seem  to  have  at  all  the  tournure  of  people  of  rank. 
They  are  probably  provincial  nobles,  or  what  we  should 
call  country  gentlemen,  who  perhaps  have  never  seen 
Madrid  in  their  lives ;  but  not  the  less  enemies  to  the 
French  and  the  affronting  usurpation  of  Bonaparte. 

Sunday,  17th. — Spoke  to  General  Moore  in  Bond 
Street ;  welcomed  him  from  Sweden  *,  and  sent  my 
hearty  wishes  along  with  him  to  Spain,  whither  I  believe 
he  is  going  immediately. 

Tuesday,  ~L$th. — Arrived  at  Guy's  Cliff;  received  at 
this  prettiest  of  places  with  the  hearty  welcome  that 
particularly  belongs  to  the  owners.  I  felt  only  sorry  I 
was  going  to  quit  it  so  soon.  In  the  evening,  Frederick 
North  f,  and  with  him  Frederick  Douglas,  arrived  from 
Wroxton,  in  their  way  to  a  tour  through  Ireland. 
Frederick  North  is  always  entertaining  to  the  head,  but 
less  gratifying  to  the  heart ;  and  in  this  is  much  inferior 

«/  C-? 

to  his  sisters,  who  are  often  quite  as  agreeable  as  himself. 
Wednesday,  20th.  —  Walked  before  breakfast  alone, 
entirely  round  Guy's  Cliff,  into  every  hole  and  cranny  of 
my  last  year's  haunt,  sitting  down  several  times  near  the 
river,  and  I  admired  it  more  than  ever.  Mr.  Greathead 
was  making  the  same  round  at  the  same  time  with  F. 
North ;  but  I  avoided  them,  and  indulged  in  solitude, 
particularly  grateful  just  now  to  my  mind,  which,  either 
from  the  weakness  of  my  late  illness,  or  '  glooms  congenial' 
to  it,  is  much  depressed, —  and  I  enjoyed  the  sort  of 
tranquil  quiet  melancholy  which  crept  over  me  at  Guy's 


*  A  land  force  of  10,000  men,  under  the  command  of  Sir  John  Moore, 
was  sent  in  the  month  of  May  to  assist  Sweden  against  a  combined  attack 
from  Russia,  France,  and  Denmark.  On  the  17th  of  May  this  army  reached 
Gottenburg,  but  was  not  permitted  to  land. 

+  Frederick  North,  afterwards  fifth  Earl  of  Guildford. 


1808]  COLESHILL   HALL.  355 

Cliff.  I  left  it  this  day  with  the  very  agreeable  impression 
of  a  place  to  which  no  one  unpleasant  remembrance  is 
attached,  and  where  I  wish  to  find  myself  again. 

Mr.  Greathead  went  with  us  as  far  as  Kenilworth,  to 
show  me  Sir  J.  Lake's  house,  with  which  he  has  indeed 
done  wonders,  and  much  more  than  ever  I  expected. 
Here  we  parted.  We  continued  our  route  to  Coleshill, 
seventeen  miles  from  Warwick,  to  Mr.  Palmer's.  Their 
house  is  the  vicarage  at  the  end  of  a  large  village-town. 
Inside  it  is  comfortable,  but  horrible  red-brick  and  very 
ugly  on  the  outside. 

Thursday,  21st  — Walked  in  the  morning  with  Mr. 
Palmer  and  Miss  de  Visme  to  Coleshill  Hall,  a  very 
old  house  belonging  to  Lord  Digby.  It  came  into  the 
Digby  family  in  the  reign  of  Henry  VII.  [?  Henry  III.], 
being  part  of  the  confiscations  of  Simon  de  Montfort,  and 
was  mentioned  then  as  an  old  house.  It  has,  according 
to  the  fashion  of  those  days,  a  large  hall  on  one  side  the 
.entrance,  with  a  buttery-hatch  and  a  gallery  over  it, 
communicating  to  the  upper  part  of  the  house.  At  one 
of  the  entrances  to  the  hall  hangs,  by  a  chain,  a  large 
whetstone,  which  has  been  there  time  immemorial,  and 
certainly  proves  great  antiquity  in  that  part  of  the  house. 
The  rest  consists  of  small  uninteresting  rooms,  and  a 
gallery  of  no  imposing  dimensions,  now  entirely  falling 
to  decay,  and  uninhabitable,  though  there  are  still  some 
remnants  of  furniture.  The  park,  from  which  all  good 
timber  has  been  cut  down,  is  let  to  a  farmer  for  grazing ; 
and  Lord  Digby,  to  whom  it  belongs,  lives  entirely  at 
Sherborne  Castle,  in  Dorsetshire. 

Friday,  22nd. — Left  Mr.  Palmer's,  and  took  the  route 
of  Lancaster  and  the  Lakes.  Stopped  at  Lichfield  to  see 
the  Cathedral.  Its  front  is  fine,  with  its  two  spires,  and 
with  the  number  of  figures  and  tabernacles  for  figures 
with  which  it  is  ornamented,  and  a  very  handsome 
window  of  tracery  over  the  great  door.  The  inside  of  a 

A  A  2 


356  MISS  BEERY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

Gothic  cathedral  with  three  aisles  must  always  be  fine. 
This  is  less  beautiful  than  Lincoln,  though  about  the 
same  size,  and  has  few  old  monuments  in  it.  The  choir 
is  the  longest  I  remember  to  have  seen.  The  whole 
presents  itself  well  from  the  Close,  which  is  well  kept, 
and  has  handsome  houses  in  it. 

In  the  Cathedral  are  two  cenotaphs  exactly  alike,  and 
in  no  very  good  taste,  to  Johnson  and  to  Garrick,  with  in- 
scriptions in  gilt  letters  so  put  on  that  one  cannot  read 
them  ;  and  another,  executed  by  some  Staffordshire  lady, 
to  Lady  M.  W.  Montague,  celebrating  and  thanking  her 
for  bringing  inoculation  into  Europe. 

From  Guy's  .Cliff  to  Lichfield  is  a  very  flat  uninteresting 
country,  with  no  fine  trees  or  any  outline  of  horizon. 
After  Lichfield  it  improves,  especially  about  Wolseley 
Bridge.  Then  come  a  number  of  noblemen's  seats,  with 
woods,  which  much  ornament  the  face  of  the  country. 
The  road  winds  about  Trentham*  for  a  considerable  time. 
In  going  to  Newcastle-under-Lyme,  we  turned  a  mile  out 
of  our  road  to  see  one  of  the  great  potteries,  of  which 
this  part  of  the  country  is  the  centre.  It  was  Spode's — 
a  very  great  one — above  400  persons  employed.  We 
saw  all  the  various  operations  of  common  and  fine  porce- 
lain, and  amongst  others  that  most  curious  one  of 
stamping  on  the  blue  and  white  patterns — done  by  ap- 
plying to  them  a  print  upon  very  thin  prepared  paper, 
which,  after  it  has  left  its  impression  upon  the  cup, 
saucer,  &c.,  is  rubbed  off  entirely  with  common  water, 
without  deranging  the  impression.  The  country  from 
this  side  Wolseley  Bridge,  where  the  manufactures  com- 
mence, is  very  populous,  and  all  the  villages  and  towns 
black  with  the  coal-smoke  of  the  number  of  furnaces. 
Between  Wolseley  Bridge  and  Stone,  at  Eugeley — a  very 
pretty  neat  village  —  is  Lord  Curzon's  house,  prettily 

*  Seat  of  the  Duke  of  Sutherland. 


1808]  NEWCASTLE-UNDER-LYME   TO    PRESTON.  357 

surrounded  by  wood  * ;  and  further  on,  Lord  Anson'sf 
and  Lord  Talbot's  more  extensive  grounds  and  woods  J 
make  a  fine  appearance.  At  Sandon,  between  Stone  and 
Newcastle,  Lord  Harrowby  has  nearly  finished  a  column 
to  the  memory  of  Mr.  Pitt,  on  an  elevated  sort  of  terrace 
near  the  road.  Stone  is  a  dirty-looking  little  town. 
Newcastle  little  less  black.  The  whole  of  this  manu- 
facturing country,  and  particularly  about  the  potteries 
which  lay  between  and  about  Stone  and  Newcastle,  is 
prettily  waved  and  wooded,  dotted  all  over  with  houses, 
and  would  be  pretty,  were  it  not  disfigured  by  the  smoke 
of  the  furnaces,  and  the  ugly  shape  of  the  houses — little 
new  square  boxes  of  the  reddest  brick,  with  roofs  just 
fitting  them  like  the  lids  of  snuff-boxes.  They  are  build- 
ing  everywhere,  and  all  the  towns  and  villages  increasing. 

The  roads  through  Staffordshire  and  Cheshire,  which 
we  entered  at  Congleton,  and  left  at  Warrington,  are 
good,  and  this  part  of  Cheshire  is  a  rich  enclosed 
pasture  country,  well-wooded,  with  comfortable-looking 
villages  and  fine  cattle,  neatly-thatched  cottages  and 
well- cultivated  farms.  At  Warrington  one  again  enters 
the  manufacturing  regions  ;  and  Warrington  is  a  large, 
dirty,  black,  bustling,  narrow-streeted  town,  with  a 
number  of  canals  on  all  sides.  Wigan  and  Chorley  are 
of  the  same  description — full  of  furnaces,  cotton-mills, 
steam-engines,  and  foundries. 

Saturday,  23rd. — Left  Newcastle  in  the  morning.  The 
road  from  Warrington  to  Chorley  is  a  positive  chemin 
ferre,  paved  with  round  stones.  At  Wigan,  much  coarse 
muslin  and  much  of  the  Lancashire  sheeting  is  made.  At 
Chorley,  got  rid  of  red  brick ;  and  an  immense  number  of 
new  small  houses,  and  almost  villages,  built  and  building, 
all  stone.  Fine  views,  bounded  by  an  horizon  of  hills, 
and  intersected  by  canals.  Arrived  at  Preston. 

*  Hagley.  f  Shugborough.  t  Ingestre. 


358  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

Sunday,  25th — Preston  is  a  handsome  town,  with  a 
wide,  well-built  street  and  a  large  square  market-place,  in 
which  are  two  curious  old  houses,  one  of  wood  and  the 
other  of  stone,  both,  I  should  think,  dating  before  Eliza- 
beth. 

Preston  is  much  blackened,  like  all  the  towns  of  this 
part  of  the  country,  with  coal  smoke. 

Garstang  is  a  small  town,  and  near  it  a  number  of 
manufactures,  smoke  and  black.  The  castle  (the  fortress 
of  John  of  Ghent's  ducal  capital)  stands  nobly  on  a  height 
at  the  end  of  the  town.  The  gateway  tower  is  very  fine  ; 
the  keep  and  two  other  square  towers  remain,  and  are 
united  together  and  with  the  gateway  tower  by  modern 
buildings  in  the  same  style  of  architecture.  It  is  the 
county  gaol,  and  admirably  clean  and  well  kept.  The  ar- 
rangements made  on  Mr.  Howard's  plan — sixteen  pri- 
soners the  greatest  number  that  can  be  in  any  one  divi- 
sion, that  division  having  a  yard  to  itself,  water  in  the 
midst  of  it,  and  each  prisoner  having  a  separate  clean 
whitewashed  cell  and  bed.  No  irons  put  on  to  any,  even 
felons,  that  are  not  refractory.  There  are  in  the  prison 
now,  including  debtors  and  those  undergoing  the  punish- 
ments of  imprisonment  for  different  lengths  of  time,  no 
fewer  than  260  persons,  of  which  above  a  hundred  are 
felons,  including  eighteen  women.  Of  this  hundred, 
forty-five  are  to  take  their  trial  at  the  ensuing  assizes 
next  month.  Of  this  amazing  number  for  a  county  gaol, 
the  neighbourhood  of  Manchester  and  Liverpool  is  given 
as  a  reason,  and,  I  fear,  a  very  sufficient  one.  The  late 
riots  among  the  manufacturers  have  likewise  increased  it, 
as  six  or  seven  of  the  principal  ringleaders  are  there  for 
trial.  Still,  the  number  is  sad  for  a  single  county.*  We 
went  all  over  the  prison  with  a  very  civil,  intelligent 


*  The  number  of  prisoners  in  Lancaster  Gaol  in  May,  1860 : — Debtors, 
79 ;  untried  criminals,  none ;  tried  criminals,  58 :  making  a  total  of  137. 


1808]  KENDAL   TO    AMBLESIDE.  359 

gaoler.  Among  the  prisoners  for  trial  next  month  is  a 
merchant  worth  above  seventy  thousand  pounds,  for  the 
supposed  poisoning  of  his  housekeeper.  He  was  (by  the 
equality  of  our  laws)  in  one  of  the  above-mentioned  yards 
with  several  other  felons,  but  remains  always  within,  and 
carefully  avoids  showing  himself. 

At  Burton,  a  clean  white  village ;  it  being  Sunday,  the 
Volunteers  of  the  place  were  drawn  up  before  the  inn,  and 
very  good-looking,  clean,  stout  lads  they  were. 

Kendal  is  a  picturesque  town  of  white  rough-cast 
houses,  scattered  about  a  green  valley,  with  a  fine  horizon 
of  hills.  Took  an  evening  walk  upon  a  sort  of  quay  to 
the  stream,  from  whence  is  seen  a  view  of  the  old  castle 
situated  upon  the  top  of  a  green  knoll.  Being  Sunday, 
the  whole  scene  was  enlivened  by  groups  of  people  walk- 
ing about. 

In  the  principal  street,  all  houses  on  the  left  side  have 
large  open  entrances,  through  which  one  sees  gardens 
climbing  up  the  sides  of  a  hill,  very  like  many  small 
towns  in  Switzerland. 

Monday,  2oth. — Left  Kendal  for  Ambleside.  The  road 
winds  through  a  variety  of  highly  cultivated  valleys,  and 
a  constantly  changing  horizon  of  distant  mountains. 
About  eight  miles  from  Kendal  we  first  came  in  sight  of 
Winder-mere,  with  its  beautifully  curved  shores,  green 
cultivated  banks,  and  wooded  islands.  It  is  pretty,  ex- 
cessively pretty,  and  if  it  had  never  been  compared  to 
the  lakes  in  Switzerland  would  be  more  so.  But  this 
comparison  has  just  a  similar  effect  to  declaring  some 
well-written  modern  play  to  be  very  like  Shakespeare — 
it  recalls  all  the  sublime  perfections  of  the  model,  and  all 
the  weakness  of  the  copy.  We  passed  through  the  vil- 
lage of  Bowness,  and  continued  our  route  five  miles  along 
the  borders  of  the  lake,  sometimes  intercepted  by  trees, 
sometimes,  as  at  Lowood,  close  to  the  shore,  and  unin- 
terruptedly beautiful.  The  inn  at  Lowood  is  a  single 


360  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

house.  The  valleys  and  rides  about  Ambleside  must  be 
delightful,  and  the  mountains  at  this  end  of  the  lake  are 
much  more  considerable  than  at  the  other. 

In  the  evening  Miss  de  Visrne  and  I  took  a  little 
scrambling  walk  up  the  glen  to  a  mill  for  turning  bobbins 
for  the  manufacturers  of  Manchester,  &c. 

Tuesday,  2Qth. — Miss  de  Visme  and  I  took  advantage 
of  a  fair  gleam  to  walk  up  to  a  very  pretty  fall  of  water, 
called  Stockhill  Force.  The  glen  is  well  wooded,  and 
the  fall  is  finely  broken  into  two  streams  by  a  large  mass 
of  rock  covered  with  trees,  and  fantastic  roots  making 
their  appearance  on  every  side. 

Just  as  we  were  stepping  into  the  coach  to  go  to 
Keswick,  a  chaise  with  Mr.  Law  and  his  friend  Mr. 
Pakenham  (Lord  Longford's  brother)  drove  up  to  the 
door.  We  invited  them  to  follow  us  as  fast  as  they 
could.  At  Eydal  went  to  see  the  waterfall  near  Sir 
Daniel  Flemming's.  There,  caught  in  such  heavy  rain  that 
we  were  forced  to  seek  shelter  in  some  cottages  near  Sir 
Daniel's  gate,  and  a  more  comfortable  scene  than  the 
inside  of  all  the  cottages  exhibited  I  have  not  seen  in  this 
part  of  the  world.  The  one  we  now  entered  was  that  of 
a  mere  labourer,  with  a  young  wife  and  three  children  ; 
it  had  every  necessary  comfort.  The  good  woman  was 
making  girdle-cakes  of  oatmeal  (here  the  bread  of  the 
poor)  over  a  fire  of  fern,  by  which  we  dried  our  clothes. 
We  were  nearly  half  an  hour  in  her  house,  occupying  her 
fire  and  in  the  way  of  her  work,  and  yet  she  and  her 
sister-in-law  would  hardly  accept  a  trifle  for  their  hospi- 
tality. Here  Mr.  Law  and  Mr.  Pakenham  came  up  with 
us.  The  rain  was  unabating,  so  we  continued  our  route 
to  Keswick,  passing  round  the  side  of  Grasmere. 

I  was  more  pleased  with  Leathe's  Water,  another  small 
lake  which  had  a  singularly  quiet  and  pastoral  character. 
Perhaps  on  a  fine  sunny  day  I  might  have  preferred 
Grasmere ;  but  the  solitary  unenlivened  character  of 


1808]  KESWICK.  361 

Leathe's  Water  associated  itself  better  to  the  grey  quiet 
wet  evening  in  which  I  saw  it. 

Before  we  came  to  Leathe's  Water,  in  a  valley  under 
Helvellyn,  down  the  side  of  which  many  torrents  were 
tumbling,  one  was  so  impetuous  that  on  arriving  at  a 
little  roadside  alehouse,  we  found  the  people  all  watching 
the  violence  of  this  gill,  over  which  a  water-spout  (no 
uncommon  thing  among  these  hills)  had  burst,  and  brought 
down  such  a  quantity  of  water,  that  the  bridge,  some 
hundred  yards  off,  was  entirely  covered  by  the  torrent 
that  was  flowing  over  as  well  as  under  it,  that  the  para- 
pets were  forced  down,  and  they  knew  not  if  the  bridge 
had  not  given  way.  Here  two  travellers  in  a  whiskey 
were  already  stopped,  and  here  Mr.  Law  and  Mr.  Paken- 
ham  again  came  up  to  us.  I  did  not  think  there  was  a 
chance  of  our  passing  for  many  hours,  if  then ;  but  the 
two  men  in  the  whiskey  having  got  over,  and  the  land- 
lord and  five  or  six  other  men  promising  to  help  us,  we 
sent  the  coach  first,  and  our  three  selves  followed  in 
Mr.  Law's  hack  chaise ;  he  and  Mr.  Pakenham  wading 
through  the  water  by  us.  We  all  arrived  safely  on  the 
other  side  the  torrent,  and  reached  Keswick  soon  after 
8  o'clock  P.M. 

Wednesday,  27th. — Between  nine  and  ten  o'clock  went 
upon  the  lake  with  Mr.  Hutton,  the  guide,  in  his  boat. 
We  were  rowed  down  the  side  of  the  lake,  by  Mr.  Pock- 
lington's  house,  in  whose  ground  is  a  beautiful  cascade, 
called  the  Barrow  Fall.  The  water  falls  in  two  lengths ; 
and  as  one  can  see  it  from  below,  at  the  middle,  and  from 
above,  and  can  approach  quite  close  to  its  edge,  it  is  par- 
ticularly enjoyable. 

Mr.  Pocklington's  taste  in  architecture  is  certainly  much 
less  perfect  than  in  waterfalls.  He  has  built  no  less  than 
three  houses  on  the  borders  of  this  lake,  all,  one  uglier 
than  the  other. 

The  island  at  the  Keswick  end  of  the  lake  he  bought 


362  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

some  twenty  years  ago  for  300/.,  and  sold  within  these 
ten  or  twelve  years  for  1700/. — so  enormously  is  the 
value  of  land  raised  upon  the  borders  of  these  lakes  ;  two 
acres  of  pasture  were  sold  last  year  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  a  gentleman's  cottage  for  320/.,  and  land  in  the  same 
circumstances  is  sometimes  let  for  seven  and  eight  pounds 
an  acre. 

We  rowed  to  Lodore,  first  passing  close  to  one  of  the 
wonders  of  this  lake,  the  Floating  Islands,  which  .occasion- 
ally come  up — literally  come  up,  for  its  appearance  is 
of  two  or  three  acres  of  coarse  short  grass  which  had 
been  long  submerged.  The  surface  is  just  above  the 
water,  and  its  sides  under  water  seem  in  places  as  if  rent 
away  from  a  steep  bank  of  earth,  the  water  being  several 
fathoms  deep  immediately  at  its  edge. 

For  twenty-five  or  thirty  years  none  of  these  had 
appeared,  till  within  these  last  three  or  four  years.  The 
one  we  saw  had  come  up  only  just  a  week  before. 
They  talk  of  the  lake  being  in  great  agitation  without 
any  wind  at  the  time  of  the  production  of  these  islands, 
and  that  they  are  always  the  forerunners  of  broken  bad 
weather.  A  strong  mephitic  smell,  too,  is  said  to  issue  from 
the  ground,  if  pierced  when  it  first  makes  its  appearance. 

Lodore  is  an  occasional  torrent,  falling  between  the 
very  high  cliffs,  beautiful,  half  covered  with  wood  and 
vegetation,  and  having  deeply  worn  the  great  masses  of 
rocks  over  which  it-  falls.  We  saw  it  luckily  with  a  very 
sufficient  quantity  of  water.  It  never  falls  in  a  sheet  or 
large  body,  but  bounds  from  rock  to  rock  in  a  most 
striking  and  picturesque  manner.*  A  chaise  was  waiting 

*  Here  it  comes  sparkling, 
And  there  it  lies  darkling ; 
Now  smoking  and  frothing 
Its  tumult  and  wrath  in,     • 
Till  in  this  rapid  race 

On  which  it  is  bent, 
It  reaches  the  place 

Of  its  steep  descent. — Smdhcy'ls  Fall  of  Lodore. 


1808]  LODORE. — ULLSWATER.  363 

to  carry  us  up  Borrow  Dale,  whose  jaws,  as  the  rocky 
hills  at  its  entrance  are  called,  form  a  principal  part  of 
the  beauty  of  this  end  of  the  lake.  Borrow  Dale  is 
really  grand.  It  is  the  first  of  this  scenery  that  I  have 
thought  so.  A  very  passable  mountain  road  leads  to  the 
Bowden  Stone,  a  great  mass  of  rock,  which  at  some 
distant  period  the  frost  and  wet  have  detached  from  the 
left-hand  hill.  Here  there  is  a  cottage  or  two,  and  a  very 
fine  rugged  mountain  view  on  every  side.  Let  nobody 
who  comes  to  the  lakes  miss  Borrow  Dale,  nor  the  fine 
view  of  the  lake  with  the  background  of  Skiddaw. 

It  poured  of  rain  before  we  got  back  to  the  alehouse 
at  Lodore. 

We  continued  our  row  along  the  lake,  passing  by  the 
little  bay  which  Lord  W.  Gordon  has  beautifully  orna- 
mented, but  which  is  shut  out  from  the  rest  of  the  world. 
Nobody  is  ever  allowed  to  land,  under  all  sorts  of  penal- 
ties to  the  boatmen.  Set  off  for  Penrith. 

Thursday ,  28th. — Mr.  Law  and  Mr.  Pakenham  breakfasted 
with  us,  and  we  started  in  two  hired  chaises  for  Ullswater. 
A  boat  was  in  readiness  for  us,  and  in  about  two  hours  and 
a  half  it  carried  us  the  whole  length  of  the  lake.  Here,  at 
the  commencement  of  Patterdale,  we  found  another  little 
country  inn.  Two  carriages  were  already  before  us.  A 
neat  clean  bedroom  was  all  they  had  to  offer  us,  and  it 
was  well  we  got  possession  of  that,  for  there  arrived  after- 
wards no  less  than  four  other  carriages  full  of  people. 
Some  were  obliged  to  walk  in  the  garden,  while  others 
dined  in  the  rooms  ;  and  yet,  in  spite  of  all  this,  the  good 
woman  of  the  house  gave  us  an  excellent  dinner,  without 
hurry,  confusion,  or  ill-humour.  I  am  much  pleased  with 
what  I  have  seen  of  the  character  of  these  peasants. 
They  are  civil  and  obliging  in  their  manners,  willing  to 
enter  into  discourse,  intelligent  about  the  scenes  around 
them,  and,  I  think,  by  no  means  imposing  in  their  de- 
mands. 


364  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1808 

The  chief  beauty  of  Ullswater  is  the  abruptness  with 
which  many  of  the  fells  go  into  the  lake,  but  is  much  better 
seen  from  the  shore  than  from  the  water  itself.  We  arrived 
late  at  Penrith,  and  I  had  the  comfort  of  hearing  from 
my  sister. 

Friday,  29^. — Breakfasted  at  Carlisle,  and  arrived  at 
Moffat  between  eight  and  nine  in  the  evening. 

The  enormous  long  stage  of  twenty-one  miles  between 
Longtown  and  Lockerby  is  now  divided  into  two.  It  is 
quite  remarkable  the  great  difference  in  the  appearance, 
habits,  and  manners  of  the  people,  and  of  their  houses 
between  Carlisle  and  only  twenty  miles  from  it  in  Scot- 
land, and  this  without  any  wide  river  or  chain  of  mountains 
to  separate  them.  The  division  is  only  by  a  little  insignifi- 
cant stream  about  three  miles  from  Longtown. 

Saturday,  3(M. — Left  Moffat.  Took  the  road  to 
Lanark.  The  road  by  the  fall  of  Corra  Linn  is  three 
miles  out  of  the  straight  road  to  Lanark,  and  is  a  steep 
descent  into  the  glen,  where  runs  the  Clyde,  and  where 
stand  the  great  cotton-mills.  We  then  drove  into  very 
beautifully- wooded  grounds  along  the  high  bank  of  the 
river,  belonging  to  Lady  Eoss.  The  whole  river  pre- 
cipitates itself  into  a  rocky  sort  of  recess,  well  overgrown 
with  wood  on  all  sides,  and  is  well  worth  seeing,  though 
much  less  romantic  than  Lodore.  In  the  Glen  we  passed 
the  enormous  cotton  works,  where  above  1,500  persons 
are  employed,  and  which  of  itself,  with  the  habitations 
and  shops  necessary  for  the  workpeople,  make  a  town. 

Lanark,  about  a  mile  or  two  distant,  is  small  and  in- 
significant, with  a  large  dirty  Scotch  inn.*  The  descent 
on  leaving  Lanark,  down  to  the  bridge  over  the  Clyde, 
is  beautiful,  and  the  whole  road  for  seven  or  eight  miles 
afterwards  along  the  high  bank  of  the  river,  a  most 
charming  drive.  Lord  Grlencairn's  house  is  most  happily 

*  The  population  of  Lanark  (burgh),  is  now  calculated  at  5,305. 


1808]  HAMILTON   PALACE.  365 

placed  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  stream,  and  its  little 
turrets  and  half-Gothic  appearance  admirably  suited  to 
its  situation.  It  is  a  new  house  added  to  an  old  one, 
and  I  admired  its  effect,  illumined  with  an  evening  sun, 
throwing  light  and  shade  on  all  its  little  projections,  and 
shining  on  its  gilded  vanes.  It  was  nine  o'clock  when 
we  reached  Hamilton,  and  I  felt  impatient  to  get  on  to 
Bothwell,*  where  I  knew  I  should  be  anxiously  expected, 
though  I  hardly  nattered  myself  I  should  meet  with  so 
warm  a  reception  as  that  I  received  from  every  indi- 
vidual of  the  family. 

Friday,  August  5th. — In  the  evening,  loitered  near 
the  house,  in  admiration  of  the  moon,  most  singularly 
beautiful  at  this  place,  where  it  silvers  the  whole  reach  of 
the  Clyde,  is  again  caught  through  the  trees,  and  most 
picturesquely  reflects  on  the  towers  of  the  old  castle. 

Monday,  8th. — Went  to  Hamilton  Palace  with  Lady 
Douglas  f  and  party  to  see  the  house.  Some  of  the  por- 
traits (whole  lengths)  are  admirable,  and  this  duke  and 
his  son  have  brought  there  a  considerable  collection  of 
really  good  Italian  pictures.  Amongst  those  in  the  gal- 
lery is  one  of  the  late  Duchess  of  Argyll  J  (I  believe  by 
Gavin  Hamilton),  which,  without  being  a  good  picture, 
gives  an  exquisite  idea  of  her  beauty.  The  head  greatly 
resembles  that  of  the  Venus  de  Medici,  not  in  adjustment, 
but  in  features.  It  is,  of  all  the  ill-arranged,  awkward, 
melancholy  great  houses  I  ever  saw,  the  very  worst. 

Sunday,  l±th. — Sat  till  dinner-time  in  Lady  Douglas's 
dressing-room,  reading  old  letters  to  her  grandmother, 
the  Duchess  of  Argyll,  from  her  mother,  Mrs.  Warburton, 
and  to  Lady  Greenwich§  from  the  Duchess  of  Queensbury 

*  Seat  of  Lord  Douglas. 

t  Lady  Douglas  was  sister  to  Harry  third  Duke  of  Buccleugh;  mar- 
ried, 1783. 

t  Elizabeth,  daughter  of  John  Gunning,  Esq. 

§  Caroline,  daughter  of  John  second  Duke  of  Argyll,  created  Baronness 
of  Greenwich,  1767  ;  married,  first,  Francis,  son  of  Duke  of  Buccleugh  ; 


366  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

and  several  other  persons.  Eemarkable  form  and  ex- 
pressions of  respect  in  the  letters  of  Mrs.  Warburton  to 
her  duchess  daughter. 

Friday,  l$th. — In  the  morning,  drove  to  Douglas 
Park,  between  four  and  five  miles  from  here,  belonging 
to  a  Mrs.  Douglas,  a  young  widow.  The  place  uncom- 
monly pretty.  The  grounds  and  garden  are  a  peninsula, 
round  which  the  river  Calder,  a  mountain  stream,  runs 
over  shelves  of  rock,  and  through  high  well-wooded 
banks.  A  bowling-green,  surrounded  by  very  tall  fine 
old  limes,  which,  from  the  growth  of  trees  in  this  country, 
must  be  200  years  old.  No  remembrance  is  preserved 
of  their  being  planted.  In  the  evening  Lady  Douglas 
proposed  a  walk,  though  all  the  colours  of  the  prospect 
were  buried  in  one  twilight  tint.  When  we  came  in 
sight  of  the  cottage,  the  reason  for  our  walk  was  cleared 
up  —  its  little  pediment  was  prettily  lighted  up  with 
coloured  lamps,  among  the  fresh  green  fern-leaves  with 
which  the  front  of  the  pediment  was  tastefully  covered, 
and  joining  on  to  the  honeysuckles  which  flaunt  up  its 
pillars  and  about  its  sides.  The  inside,  too,  was  lighted 
with  pretty  little  transparent  lamps ;  upon  the  table  two 
large  flower-pots,  and  the  tea  set  out  with  the  cottage 
tea-things.  It  was  very  pretty,  and  well  suited  to  the 
place.  I  should  not  forget  that  in  the  middle  of  the  little 
pediment,  over  the  porch,  was  my  cypher,  in  a  flowery 
transparency,  which  Caroline  *  herself  had  traced. 

Colonel  Cadogan  f,  who  had  been  fishing  here  all  day, 
joined  us  at  tea.  I  regretted  for  the  young  ones  that 
there  was  not  more  company,  both  to  admire  their  taste 
and  add  to  their  gaiety  ;  but  they  seemed  not  to  want  it, 

secondly,  Charles  Townshend,  second  son  of  William  Viscount  Townshend. 
She  died  1794. 

*  Hon.  Caroline  Douglas,  daughter  of  Lord  Douglas ;  married,  1810,  to 
Captain,  afterwards  Admiral,  Sir  G.  Scott. 

t  Colonel  Cadogan,  probably  Hon.  Henry,  Lieutenant-Colonel  71st 
Foot;  born  1780;  killed  in  the" battle  of  Vittoria,  1813;  son  of  first  Earl 
of  Cadogan. 


1808]  LETTER    TO    JOAXNA   BAILLIE.  367 

and  for  myself,  I  was  as  much  pleased  and  surprised  as 
any  child  could  have  been. 

Saturday,  2Qth. — Walked  on  the  other  side  of  the 
water  to  my  little  favourite  ravine,  just  under  the  remains 
of  Blantyre  Priory ;  again  admired  its  singular  beauty, 
and  the  grandeur  of  its  parts,  though  the  whole  thing 
is  only  a  narrow  gully.  The  day  and  the  spot  were  so 
delicious  for  loitering  about,  that  I  began  cutting  my 
name  on  the  bark  of  a  tree  in  the  ravine,  while  the 
others  sat  by.  The  view  of  the  Bdthwell  ruins  from  the 
Priory  is  beautiful. 

Joanna  Baillie  was  born  at  the  Manse  at  Bothwell, 
which  explains  the  allusions  in  the  letter  addressed  to 
her  by  Miss  Berry,  dated  August  23rd,  1808  :  — 

Bothwell  Castle,  Tuesday,  23rd  August,  1808. 
DEAR  JOANNA,  —  You  and  I  have  crossed  over  and  figured 
in,  in  an  odd  way  this  last  year.  I  wish  there  had  been  any 
setting  and  footing  together,  in  the  course  of  our  jigging  about. 
—I  now  in  Scotland,  and  you  in  England  —  I  yesterday  at 
Millheugh,  and  you  perhaps  at  Little  Strawberry  Hill.  What 
a  pretty  place  Millheugh  is  !  I  walked  all  down  the  rocky  bed 
of  the  river  below  the  bridge,  and  crossed  over  the  stepping 
stones  and  back  again,  merely  for  the  pleasure  of  doing  it — 
and  then  went  all  round  the  house  at  Millheugh  and  to  the 
wooden  bridge  which  looks  at  the  little  cascade  up  the  green 
walk  by  the  side  of  the  stream.  We  saw  not  a  human  creature 
either  to  welcome  or  forbid  us  their  premises,  which  being  all 
open,  we  committed  no  trespass.  I  tried  the  echoes  with  some 
lines  of  Basil ;  but  they  were  dumb,  and  only  muttered  in 
return  for  your  name  something  about  muslin  at  Glasgow,  a 
pattern  of  a  handkerchief,  and  some  stories  of  the  poor  in  the 
village.  Your  heroic  muse  should  have  taught  them  better  in 
such  a  romantic  spot. 

I  have  been  over,  too,  at  my  own  dear  little  ravine  at 
Blantyre ;  and  if  you  go  there  again,  you  will  see  Berina  (my 
name  in  Arcadia)  cut  upon  one  of  the  largest  trees  by  my  own 
fair  hand  on  the  20th  August,  1808. 

To  J.  Baillie. 


368  MISS  BEREY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

The  following  letter  from  Miss  Berry  is  addressed  to 
her  cousin,  Robert  Ferguson,  Esq. :  — 

Letter  on  Spain. 

Bothwell  Castle,  August  26th,  1808. 

.  .  .  .  I  cannot  say  that  I  dare,  even  yet,  allow  myself 
to  be  very  sanguine  about  tbe  Spaniards.  Could  we  hope  that 
their  present  enthusiasm  would  last,  were  it  in  its  nature  to  be 
permanent,  I  should  be  certain  that  they  were  invincible. 
But  I  dread  its  wasting  away,  and  being  worn  out  before  the 
innumerable  hosts  and  the  atrocem  animum  of  Bonaparte, 
undirected  as  their  feelings  are  by  any  great  superior  intellect, 
and  unconcentrated  on  any  one  really  interesting  object.  For 
nothing  but  a  first  burst  of  sentiment  in  a  people,  moved  al- 
most to  madness  by  insult,  can  possibly  elevate  any  of  their 
own  wretched  royal  family  into  such  an  object.  If  they 
assemble  immediately  a  general  Cortes,  and  if  there  is  a  suf- 
ficient dose  of  intellect  and  a  public  spirit  in  the  nation  to 
adapt  their  old  separate  forms  of  liberty,  to  their  present 
situation,  and  to  consolidate  them  in  a  mass,  whose  momentum 
may  prescribe  any  terms  to  the  chief,  who  or  whatever  he  may 
be,  that  they  shall  set  over  them,  they  may  certainly  succeed  in 
so  neutralising  monarchical  power  as  to  make  it  a  harmless, 
if  not  a  useful,  instrument  in  the  hands  of  a  Ferdinand.  But 
all  this  seems  to  require  peace  and  leisure.  How  they  are  to 
bring  it  about  amid,  the  din  of  arms  I  know  not,  and  I  tremble 
to  think.  Yet  after  all  the  political  wonders  of  every  sort, 
which  we  have  seen  in  our  day,  nothing  will  surprise  me ;  and 
perhaps  this  violent  shake  is  necessary  to  bring  forward  those 
thinking  heads,  as  well  as  active  arms,  that,  nursed  in  the 
shade  of  obscurity,  have  been  preparing  themselves  for  situa- 
tions to  which  they  will  be  found  equal. 

To  Robert  Ferguson,  Esq. 

Saturday,  September  3rd. — In  the  evening  Mr.  Morritt* 

read  to  us  one  of  Massinger's  plays  ('  The  Duke  of  Milan '). 

Monday,   bth.  —  A  letter   from  Mrs.  D.  told   me   of 

*  John  B.  S.  Morritt,  Esq.,  owner  of  Rokeby,  and  the  friend  of  Sir 
Walter  Scott. 


1808]  VISIT  TO    HAMILTON.  369 

the  victory  gained  by  our  troops  at  Lisbon  over  the 
French,  adding  to  it  some  melancholy  recollections 
which  such  news  was  sure  to  recall  to  her  mind  as  well 
as  mine.  I  was  occupied  with  it  all  the  day,  but  per- 
haps such  recollections,  when  time  has  softened  the 
bitterness,  ought  to  be  counted  rather  amongst  our 
pleasures  than  our  sorrows. 

We  drove  with  Lord  Webb  Seymour  *  to  Douglas 
Park  to  see  the  bridge,  said  to  be  Eoman,  which  crosses 
a  small  river  at  the  bottom  of  the  garden.  It  is  a  single 
arch,  and  much  too  narrow  for  any  sort  of  carriage. 
Mr.  Morritt  thought  that  it  was  really  a  Eoman  work ; 
I  would  rather  bet  that  it  was  not.  In  the  evening  Mr. 
Morritt  continued  reading  the  '  Duke  of  Milan.'  He 
reads  very  well,  and  Massinger  is  not  easy  to  read. 

Tuesday,  6th. — We  went,  the  same  party  as  yesterday, 
to  Hamilton,  to  see  the  pictures.  Lord  Archibald  had 
arrived  the  day  before,  and  wished  to  see  us  before  our 
departure.  In  the  evening  Morritt  began  reading  another 
of  Massinger's  plays,  'The  Fatal  Dowry,'  from  which 
Eowe  has  taken  the  story  of  '  The  Fair  Penitent.'  The 
characters  of  the  father  and  the  husband  in  '  The  Fatal 
Dowry '  are  infinitely  more  interesting  than  in  'The 
Fair  Penitent ; '  but  the  events  and  the  catastrophe  are 
badly  drawn,  and  the  wife  detestable. 

Wednesday,  1th. — In  the  evening  there  was  dancing 
and  music,  and  they  had  all  sorts  of  ridiculous  dances. 
They  played  at  false  acting,  Morritt  reciting  Antony's 
oration  upon  Caesar's  body,  and  I  making  the  gestures ; 
all  which  made  us  laugh  not  a  little.  Then  they  played 
all  sorts  of  other  ridiculous  tricks,  and  in  all  this  Lord 
Webb  is  as  eager,  as  amusing,  and  as  entirely  occupied  as 


*  Lord  "Webb  Seymour,  son  of  the  tenth  Duke  of  Somerset ;  born  in 
1777 ;  died,  unmarried,  in  1819;  held  in  high  estimation  and  regard  by  the 
literary  and  political  society  of  that  day. 

VOL.  II.  B  B 


370  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

he  would  be  in  the  deepest  discussion.  He  dances,  he 
performs  antics,  and  plays  the  fool  with  great  vivacity, 
and  at  the  same  time  with  imperturbable  gravity. 

Extract  of  a  Letter  from  Miss  Berry  to  the  Hon.  Mrs.  Darner. 

Both-well  Castle,  September,  1808. 

.  .  .  Lord  Webb  Seymour  staid  with  us  till  Friday  last. 
He  is  a  charming  creature,  from  the  perfect  and  elegant  sim- 
plicity of  his  manners  and  the  liveliness  and  activity  of  his 
mind  upon  all  subjects ;  for  he  dances,  and  plays  conjuring 
tricks,  and  plays  the  fool  with  the  same  interest  and  eagerness 
that  he  has  in  science  and  philosophy ;  only  if  he  would  not 
so  doat  upon  disquisition !  upon  mental  dissections,  and  above 
all,  upon  accounting  for  everything  which  it  is  only  necessary 
to  feel,  and  feel  he  does,  on  all  the  great  subjects  of  politics, 
taste,  &c.  exactly  as  he  ought. 

Saturday,  10th. — Lord  and  Lady  Eosslyn*  arrived  at 
four  o'clock,  accompanied  by  Mr.  Brougham  and  two 
brothers  of  Lord  Blantyre — Charles,  the  advocate,  and 
William,  who  is  in  the  service — and  the  aide-de-camp, 
Captain  Morland.  Lord  Eosslyn  gave  me  a  letter  to  read 
from  Captain  Adam  to  his  father,  praising  the  conduct  of 
Eonald  at  Vimeira  in  the  most  satisfactory  manner.  I 
went  away  to  read  it,  which  I  did  not  do  without  tears. 

Sunday,  11th. — I  wrote  to  my  father  with  the  account 
of  Eonald. 

Wednesday,  l^th. — Had  a  long  conversation  with 
Playfair.  He  seems  to  take  a  lively  interest  in  all  that 
relates  to  us. 

Friday,  16th. — A  walk  with  Lady  Douglas  and  Play- 
fair.  He  examined  and  brought  home  some  pieces  of 
stone,  from  the  environs  of  the  cotton  mill,  upon 
which  he  made  experiments  in  the  evening  with 

*  Sir  James  St.  Clair  Erskine,  second  Earl  of  Rosslyn,  a  general  officer  in 
the  army,  succeeded  his  uncle  in  1805 ;  married  in  1790  to  Henrietta 
Elizabeth,  eldest  daughter  of  the  Hon.  Edward  Bouverie. 


1808]  WALTER   SCOTT.  371 

Lord  Douglas.  It  appears  to  me  that  Playfair  has 
succeeded  very  well  here,  both  with  the  lady  and  with 
the  lord  of  the  mansion. 

Monday,  \§th. — There  was  a  servants'  ball  in  the  even- 
ing, when  everyone  danced  except  myself  and  Caroline, 
who  played  upon  the  tambourine  or  the  triangle  all  the 
evening.  The  ball  lasted  till  midnight.  The  news  of 
the  Convention*  at  Lisbon  has  arrived. 

Thursday,  22nd. — I  read  to  Lady  Douglas  my  sketch 
of  a  preface  for  the  Letters,  .with  which  she  seemed  well 
pleased.  Finished  reading  '  The  Tale  of  the  Times,'  a 
novel  which,  like  most  other  novels,  begins  better  than  it 
finishes.  In  the  evening,  Caroline,  Fanny,f  Miss  Eobert- 
son,  Mdlle.  de  Lally,  &c.  &c.  and  I  went  to  the  farm, 
where  in  the  granary  was  a  fete,  that  they  call  in  this 
country  a  '  keam,'  in  England  a  '  harvest-home  dance.'  I 
expected  that  the  peasant  men  and  women  dancing  the 
dances  of  the  country  mixed  together  with  the  servants  of 
the  house,  would  have  pleased  me  more,  but  they  have  no 
grace  whatever,  nor  the  men  even  any  choice  with  whom 
they  dance,  provided  they  could  run  about  and  make 
themselves  hot  in  executing  a  thousand  steps  of  a  '  reel ; ' 
it  seems  perfectly  indifferent  to  them  who  is  their  vis-a- 
vis, and  the  spectators  are  only  occupied  in  looking  and 
watching  the  moment  when  they  could  join  in  it  them- 
selves. This  ball  is  given  by  those  whose  harvest  is  all 
carried,  and  I  think  that  Lord  Douglas's  granary  ought  to 
have  been  better  arranged,  and  less  ill-lighted  for  a  fete, 
which  these  poor  reapers  expect  from  every  proprietor. 
The  great  and  rich  ought  to  take  a  pride  in  making  it 
a  little  more  brilliant  than  others. 

Thursday,  29th. — Walter  Scott  came  to  dinner. 

*  Convention  of  Cintra,  signed  and  concluded  at  Lisbon  August  30. 
t  Hon.  Frances  Elizabeth  Douglas,  daughter  of  Lord  Douglas ;  married, 
1826,  to  William  Moray  Sterling,  Esq.,  of  Ardoch. 

B  B   2 


372  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

Friday,  30th. — I  had  a  long  conversation  with  Walter 
Scott  at  breakfast.  I  sat  for  the  last  time  for  my  por- 
trait. 

October  3rd. — Miss  Berry  left  Bothwell  for  Edinburgh. 

Thursday,  1th. — Stopped  at  Melrose.  The  ruin  is  only 
a  few  steps  from  the  inn.  It  is  of  great  beauty,  but  now 
spoilt  by  the  parish  church,  which  is  built  into  a  part  of 
the  interior,  with  a  modern  roof  placed  against  the  fine 
Gothic  columns,  and  supported  by  arches  constructed  upon 
a  different  plan  to  the  ancient  arches.  They  are  now 
building  a  new  church  on  the  other  side  of  the  town,  and 
as  soon  as  it  is  finished  they  are  going  to  pull  down  the 
modern  edifice  in  the  interior  of  the  ruin.  It  is  in  this 
Abbey  that  Walter  Scott  imagined  that  the  Enchanter, 
Michael  Scot,  lived,  and  where  he  makes  him  consulted 
by  Deloraine,  in  his  poem,  '  The  Lay  of  the  Last  Min- 
strel.' The  cicerone,  a  very  intelligent  man,  showed  us 
Alexander  III.'s  tomb,  upon  which  the  poet  supposed 
that  the  Enchanter  and  Warrior  sat.*  I  was  very  glad  to 
have  seen  this  very  ornamented  Gothic  ruin. 

Arrived  at  Minto.  Found  Lady  Mintof  and  her 
sister  in  the  library.  The  gentlemen  were  Playfair,  Wal- 
ter Scott,  Mr.  Eliot  of  Wells,  The  Castle  Spectre,  and 
three  young  Scotch  lawyers  and  reviewers,  by  name 
Erskine,  Murray, J  and  Thompson,  §  and  the  eldest  son  of 
the  house  Gilbert.  We  talked  agreeably  enough  after- 
wards. Walter  Scott,  as  usual,  narrating,  whilst  Play- 
fair  and  Lady  Minto  and  I  listened. 

They  sate  them  down  on  a  marble  stone, 
(A  Scottish  monarch  sleeps  below) 
Thus  spoke  the  monk  in  solemn  tone. — Canto  2,  v.  xii. 
f  Anna  Maria,  eldest  daughter  of  Sir  George  Amyand,  sister  to  Sir  George 
Oomewall,  Bart.,  and  to  the  Countess  of  Malmsbury;  married,  in  1777, 
Gilbert  Elliot,  first  Earl  of  Minto. 

%  Afterwards  Lord  Murray,  judge  of  the  Session. 

§  Thomas  Thompson,  Esq.,  Keeper  of  the  Records  in  Edinburgh,  and  well 
known  there  in  literary  society. 


1808]  LETTER   PROM    LORD    W.  SEYMOUR.  373 

In  the  middle  of  October  1808  Miss  Berry  returned  to 
London,  and  her  Journal  for  the  rest  of  the  year  furnishes 
little  worth  extracting. 

On  Poor  Marriages. 

October,  1808. 

I  found  my  old  friend  and  playfellow  in  a  small  uncomfort- 
able house,  surrounded  by  a  number  of  ugly,  ill-mannered 
children,  and  a  silly,  idle  husband.  The  smallness  of  their  for- 
tune depriving  her  children  of  those  means  of  education  which 
she  has  not  in  her  power  to  supply,  and  depriving  her  husband 
of  those  means  of  expense  which  can  alone  hope  to  conceal  and 
make  passable  in  the  world,  a  character  like  his.  The  same 
smallness  of  fortune,  crowding  them  inconveniently  altogether, 
makes  their  manners  hardly  amiable  to  each  other,  and  not  at  all 
so  to  their  friends.  This  is  a  sad  picture  of  what  is  commonly 
called  a  love  marriage  upon  a  small  fortune,  but  which  /  call 
an  ill-judged,  inconsiderate  union  formed  between  two  persons 
incapable  of  the  invigorating  influence  of  a  really  great  attach- 
ment, and  perfectly  unequal  either  to  meet,  or  to  make  the  best 
of  the  ills  they  entail  on  themselves,  and  on  their  children 
— persons  who  would  both  of  them  have  been  much  more  really 
happy  in  a  connection  where  their  transient  taste  had  been  less 
consulted,  and  their  permanent  convenience  more.  Life  must 
not  be  considered  (as  I  have  known  many  willing  to  consider 
it)  as  a  party  of  pleasure,  in  which,  if  your  companions  can 
contrive  to  make  themselves  entertaining  and  agreeable  for  a 
few  days,  while  engaged  in  the  same  pursuit,  it  is  all  that  can 
be  required  of  them.  In  the  acceptance  of  a  companion  for 
life,  attention  must  be  had  to  the  many  days  of  difficulty,  dis- 
tress, and  sickness  which  c  flesh  is  heir  to,'  and  from  which  no 
situation  can  be  exempted.  M.  B. 

A  Letter  from  Lord  Webb  Seymour  to  Miss  Berry. 

Edinburgh,  November  7,  1808. 

You  must  neither  expect  a  witty  letter,  though  you  are  a 
lady  to  whom  I  would  write  one,  if  I  could;  nor  a  pretty 
letter,  though  you  are  a  lady  to  whom  I  could  write  one,  had  I 
time ;  but  this  is  to  be  a  plain  matter  of  business  letter. 


374  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isos 

Sheldon,  the  Professor  of  Anatomy  to  the  Royal  Academy, 
is  lately  dead,  and  an  active  canvass  for  the  situation  is  going 
forward.  Among  the  candidates  is  Mr.  Charles  Bell,*  a  person 
for  whom  I  feel  considerably  interested,  from  the  manner  in 
which  I  hear  him  spoken  of  by  some  friends,  whose  good 
opinion  I  think  a  strong  recommendation.  Now,  though  you 
are  not  a  painter,  or  a  sculptor,  or  a  Member  of  the  Eoyal 
Academy,  yet,  as  you  have  a  good  deal  to  say  among  painters, 
and  sculptors,  and  Members  of  the  Eoyal  Academy,  and  Com- 
missioners in  the  Fine  Arts,  I  must  believe  your  favour  and 
support  to  be  of  importance  to  Mr.  Bell.  As  to  his  good  life- 
actions,  I  understand  that  he  bears  a  high  reputation  as  a  sur- 
geon and  anatomist,  as  he  has  made  the  connection  of  anatomy 
with  the  fine  arts  his  particular  study.  Of  his  attention  to 
this  point,  you  may  have  had  an  opportunity  of  judging,  if 
you  have  met  with  a  work  he  published  a  few  years  ago  on 
*  The  Anatomy  of  Expression  in  Painting.'  As  the  production 
of  a  young  man,  it  may  be  in  some  respects  deficient ;  but  I 
believe  it  to  contain  many  ingenious  and  just  observations. 
Mr.  Bell  appears  to  be  a  deserving  man  on  every  account,  and 
I  conceive  that  any  service  you  might  do  him  would  not  be 
misplaced.  If,  upon  enquiry,  you  find  there  is  another  candi- 
date better  qualified,  I  should  no  longer  beg  your  assistance  in 
the  cause  of  Mr.  Bell. 

The  post  is  going,  so  I  must  say  adieu. 

Yours  truly, 

WEBB  SEYMOUR. 

*  Afterwards,  Sir  Charles  Bell,  an  eminent  physiologist  and  surgeon; 
born  at  Edinburgh,  1774.  In  1806  he  removed  to  London ;  in  1811  he 
published  his  celebrated  work  on  the  '  Anatomy  of  Expression.'  He  made 
important  discoveries  on  the  physiology  of  the  nervous  system,  and  is  con- 
sidered to  have  laid  the  sure  foundation  of  all  subsequent  knowledge  of 
nervous  physiology.  Married,  1811,  Marian,  daughter  of  Charles  Shaw,  Esq., 
of  Ayr  ;  died,  1842. — Imp.  Diet.  Univ.  of  Biog. 


1809]  MR.    LONGMAN,   THE   PUBLISHER.  375 


1809. 

Saturday,  January  1th. — Mr.  Longman,  the  publisher, 
came  to  speak  about  my  French  Letters.  We  settled  about 
the  number  of  volumes,  their  size,  and  the  arrangement  of 
the  subject.  I  read  my  preface  and  parts  of  the  life  to 
him.  With  both  he  appeared  much  pleased — more  than 
I  expected.  As  to  the  price  he  would  give  me  for  the 
MS.,  we  agreed  he  should  speak  to  my  friend  Edwards, 
and  that  I  would  be  satisfied  with  whatever  he  arranged 
for  me. 

Friday,  20th. — It  snowed  again  hi  the  night.  I  went 
to  the  City  to  Mr.  Longman's,  to  take  him  the  Letters  to 
be  transcribed  for  the  printers.  Paternoster  Eow,  where 
he  lives,  and  all  the  small  streets  in  the  City,  are  almost 
impassable  from  the  quantity  of  snow,  which  lies  in  heaps. 
With  much  difficulty,  I  approached  his  door  in  the 
carriage. 

Saturday,  21st — I  was  awoke  by  the  drum  announcing 
a  fire  in  our  neighbourhood.  Notwithstanding  cold  and 
illness,  I  could  not  resist  going  to  the  window,  where  I 
saw  that  the  fire  was  neither  very  large  nor  very  near. 
I  heard  in  the  morning  it  was  St.  James's  Palace,*  the 
side  which  looks  upon  the  park.  I  heard  by  a  letter  that 
Sir  John  Moore's  army  in  Spain  was  re-embarked. 

Monday,  23rd. — This   morning,   whilst   at   breakfast, 


*  The  fire  broke  out  in  the  apartments  of  the  Duke  of  Cambridge,  at  St. 
James's  Palace,  the  whole  interior  of  the  south-east  angle,  fronting  Marl- 
borough  House,  was  entirely  destroyed. — Annual  Register. 


376  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isog 

General  Abercrombie  *  came  in,  in  an  agitated  manner,  to 
ask  if  we  had  heard  any  news  ;  that  it  was  said  that  there 
had  been  an  affair  in  Spain,  and  that  Moore  f  was  killed. 
He  left  us  to  ascertain  the  truth,  promising  to  let  me 
know  what  he  heard.  In  a  quarter  of  an  hour  I  received 
the  confirmation  of  the  sad  news  in  a  bulletin,  sent  to  Mrs. 
Darner  by  one  of  her  neighbours,  and  which  she  for- 
warded to  me.  In  less  than  an  hour,  Abercrombie  him- 
self returned,  his  lips  quivering  with  agitation,  and  drops 
of  perspiration  standing  on  his  temples,  notwithstanding 
the  intense  cold.  The  deep  and  manly  grief  with  which 
he  felt  the  death  of  his  friend,  and  the  disasters  of  our 
forces,  though  victorious,  affected  me  extremely. 

Wednesday,  February  1st. — In  the  evening,  met  Mr. 
Thornton  from  the  House  of  Commons,  where  they  begin 
to  deal  with  these  strange  affairs  of  the  Duke  of  York.  J 

Tuesday,  21s#. — This  morning  I  went  to  the  Temple  to 
Mr.  Lysons',§  to  see  some  very  ancient  MSS.  of  the  time 
of  Henry  IV.,  Edward  IV.,  and  Eichard  HL,  &c.  &c.,  of 
which  he  is  the  depositary,  as  '  Keeper  of  the  Eecords  in 
the  Tower.'  Ah1  these  papers  he  has  brought  to  light,  and 
is  going  to  arrange  and  explain  them  in  a  very  satisfac- 
tory manner.  They  are  of  great  interest,  both  for  the 
history  of  the  country  and  for  the  character  of  the  kings. 

*  General  Sir  John  Abercrombie,  second  son  of  Ralph  first  Lord  Aber- 
crombie, died,  unmarried,  1817. 

t  Sir  John  Moore  was  the  son  of  Dr.  Moore,  author  of  'Zeluco,'  'Edward,' 
and  various  other  works,  born  at  Glasgow  in  1761 ;  entered  the  army  at  the 
age  of  fifteen ;  he  was  wounded  in  Corsica  1790.  In  1796  he  was  Brigadier- 
General  in  the  West  Indies,  under  Sir  R.  Abercrombie.  In  1797  he  was 
employed  in  Ireland  during  the  rebellion.  In  1799  he  went  on  the  ex- 
pedition to  Holland,  where  he  was  severely  wounded.  Was  sent  to  the  Me- 
diterranean, and  again  wounded  at  Alexandria.  On  his  return  to  England, 
he  was  made  a  Knight  of  the  Bath.  In  1808  commanded  an  army  in  Spain ; 
fell  under  the  walls  of  Corunna,  January  16,  1809. 

|  Charges  concerning  Mrs.  Clark. 

§  Samuel  Lysons,  a  writer  on  British  Topography  and  Antiquities,  born 
in  1763,  student  in  the  Middle  Temple,  and  his  brother  Daniel  published 
the  earlier  volumes  of  the  '  Magna  Britannica.'  Died  1819. 


1809]  THE   BURNING  OF   DRURY   LANE   THEATRE.  377 

Friday,  24th. — In  returning  from  Mr.  Bouverie's  in 
Grosvenor  Square,  we  first  perceived  the  burning  of  Drury 
Lane  Theatre,  which  began  to  light  up  all  the  windows 
on  the  opposite  side  of  the  Square.  From  the  third  story 
at  home  we  could  see  the  flames,  though  we  had  not  the 
least  idea  from  whence  they  came.  Behind  our  house  it 
was  so  light  that  we  could  see  to  read,  and  the  whole 
atmosphere  was  so  red  with  flames,  that  everybody 
thought  his  neighbour  on  fire  ;  and  what  was  still  more 
extraordinary,  people  thought  the  same  at  Twickenham, 
twelve  miles  from  the  fire.  Our  gardener  woke  up  in  a 
fright,  and  thought,  from  the  light,  that  it  was  from  some 
part  of  the  new  house.  Between  twelve  and  one  o'clock, 
Mr.  Cholmley  arrived  from  the  scene  of  action,  to  tell  us 
all  he  had  seen. 

Tuesday,  March  2nd. — We  passed  an  agreeable  even- 
ing at  the  Argyll  Eooms.  At  eleven  o'clock  there  were 
but  few  people ;  but  before  the  end  of  the  burletta, 
which  was  very  well  sung,  the  theatre  was  well  filled. 
Afterwards,  at  past  midnight,  everyone  took  their  places 
at  the  round  tables,  arranged  in  two  rooms  for  a  cold 
supper,  and  after  supper  some  people  began  to  dance  in 
the  room  where  the  theatre  is,  and  which  is  cleared  of 
the  benches  the  moment  the  petite  piece  is  over,  and 
makes  a  very  pretty  ball-room.  We  found  there  some 
ladies  and  a  good  many  gentlemen  of  our  own  acquaint- 
ance. 

Wednesday,  8th. — We  stayed  at  Mrs.  Bouverie's  till 
midnight,  to  hear  news  from  the  House  of  Commons, 
where  they  were  discussing  the  Duke  of  York's  affairs. 
Eeceived  a  note  from  Eonald  and  Whitbread.  Not  the 
least  hope  of  a  division  this  first  night. 

*  The  flames  burst  out  at  eleven  o'clock  at  night.  In  less  than  a  quarter 
of  an  hour  it  spread  in  one  unbroken  flame  over  the  whole  of  the  immense 
pile,  extending  from  Brydges  Street  to  Drury  Lane,  so  that  the  pillar  of  tire 
was  not  less  than  450  feet  in  breadth. — Annual  Register. 


378  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isoo 

Saturday,  2bth. — Dined  at  Sir  John  Stanley's.*  After 
dinner  arrived  the  Miss  Fanshaws,  Ways,  and  some  other 
people.  Went  to  Mr.  Knight,  where  we  found  Catalani, 
the  Corne walls,  and  Mercer  singing.  Catalani  predonneed 
several  airs  delightfully  with  Mercer. 

Friday,  April  28th. — In  the  morning  I  saw  Joanna 
[Baillie].  She  stayed  nearly  an  hour  with  me.  I  read  to 

her  my  '  Notice  upon  Madame  du  D 's  Life,'  with 

which  she  was  so  pleased  that  I  could  not  but  feel  very 
much  flattered.  I  afterwards  went  to  Walter  Scott's, 
where  I  saw  his  wife  for  the  first  time. 

Wednesday,  May  3rd. — Went  to  Mrs.  Montague's  ball. 
The  large  drawing-room  making  a  very  good  ball-room.'!' 
Everybody  comme  ilfaut  la,  except  the  opposition. 

Tuesday,  9th. — This  morning  I  had  a  very  satisfactory 
visit  from  the  Bishop  of  Eodez.|  He  will  come  to  me  one 
morning  in  every  week,  that  I  may  consult  him  upon  niy 
difficulties.  .  .  .  Went  to  the  Exhibition  of  Water  Colours, 
where  I  stayed  till  nearly  five  o'clock.  These  artists  in 
water  colours,  in  my  opinion,  have  not  made  much  pro- 
gress since  last  year.  There  is  one  (Eeinagle)  §  who 
surpasses  all  the  others.  After  him  comes  Varley  ||  in 
landscape,  and  Hopley  in  figures. 

Wednesday,  Wth. — Called  at  Lady  DonegalTs.  Soon 
after  Agnes  arrived,  saying  that  there  was  a  Mr.  Long 
who  wished  to  speak  to  me  upon  business,  and  that  she 
had  brought  him  with  her.  I  went  to  the  door  to  see 

*  Created  Lord  Stanley  of  Alderley,  1839  j  died  1850. 

t  Montague  House,  Portman  Square. 

J  Colbert,  Bishop  of  Rodez. 

§  Philip  Reinagle,  born  1750,  and  his  son  Ramsay,  born  1772,  both  artists 
of  German  origin,  and  of  some  eminence  as  painters  in  landscape,  portrait, 
and  animal  painting.  They  both  exhibited  in  the  Royal  Academy  as  early 
as  1787.  It  was  probably  Ramsay  Reinagle  who  exhibited  in  water 
colours. 

||  John  Varley,  an  eminent  water-colour  artist,  born  about  1777.  He  was 
a  man  of  eccentric  character,  and  made  no  secret  of  his  pretensions  as  an 
astrologer.  Died  1842.— Rose's  Siog.  Diet. 


1809]  THE   PRINCESS   OP  WALES.  379 

who  it  was,  and  found  it  was  Prince  Staremberg,  but  so 
disguised  *  that  he  could  hardly  be  recognised.  He  had 
rather  a  long  beard  below  his  chin  and  a  black  wig.  In  this 
disguise  he  had  crossed  Holland,  and  had  come  over  in  a 
fishing-boat,  which  brought  him  to  Aldborough  in  Suffolk, 
where  he  landed  between  one  and  two  o'clock  this  morn- 
ing, and  he  was  with  us  between  two  and  three  o'clock 
in  the  afternoon.  He  stayed  till  four  o'clock,  when  he 
was  to  see  Mr.  Canning.  In  the  evening  he  returned, 
after  having  dined  with  Mr.  Canning,  in  the  same  travel- 
ling costume. 

Friday,  12th. — This  morning  I  had  the  Bishop  of  Eodez 
with  me  for  nearly  two  hours.  I  read  to  him  my  preface 
and  my  '  Notice  on  the  Life,  &c.  &c.,'  with  which  he  was 
well  pleased,  saying  it  was  impossible  to  give  a  more 
faithful  picture  of  the  person  whom  he  had  known  during 
the  latter  years  of  his  life  in  great  intimacy. 

Tuesday,  30th. — Dined  at  Sir  George  Beaumont's.  Sat 
by  Sir  George.  Lamentable  the  manner  in  which  a  man 
of  his  turn  of  mind  and  great  accomplishments  speaks  of 
the  character  and  genius  of  Buonaparte,  the  distressing 
circumstances  of  Europe  and  ourselves  in  the  present 
moment  making  him  perfectly  blind  to  the  capacity  which 
has  wrought  such  wonderful  changes,  which,  whether 
ultimately  for  the  better  or  the  worse,  has  very  little  to  do 
with  the  argument — thinks  Cromwell  a  greater  man. 

Wednesday p,  31st.  —  At  half-past  ten  went  with  my 
sister  and  Miss  Godfrey  to  Mr.  Hope's.f  The  Princess 
of  Wales  had  dined  there,  and  stood  godmother  to  his 
second  son.  She  was  holding  a  circle  in  the  first  drawing- 
room  when  we  came  in.  Soon  afterwards  all  the  world 

*  This  disguise  must  have  been  rendered  necessary  by  the  difficulty  of 
crossing  Holland,  and  not  that  Prince  Staremberg  had  come  on  any  secret 
mission  to  England.  His  credentials  were  presented  in  due  form  on  his  ar- 
rival, and  he  resumed  his  post  he  had  quitted  the  preceding  year  as  Austrian 
Ambassador  to  the  Court  of  England. 

t  Henry  Hope,  Esq.,  the  author  of  '  Anastatius.' 


380  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [iso9 

went  to  the  statue  gallery,  where  was  dancing,  late  in 
beginning,  as  usual.  Princess  of  Wales  desired  Lady 
Sheffield  *  to  present  me  to  her.  Talked  for  a  minute  or 
two  of  the  Lockes.  I  stood  by  her  chair  till  somebody 
else  came  up,  and  I  got  away.  I  don't  think  she  was 
taken  with  me,  as  she  saw,  when  I  did  not  suppose  she 
did,  the  mien  which  I  made  to  Lady  Sheffield  when  she 
first  proposed  it  to  me — the  presentation — which  I 
changed  for  a  proper  Court  face  the  moment  I  saw  her 
looking,  and  the  thing  inevitable.  The  last  dance  before 
supper  she  danced  herself  with  Lyttelton.f  Such  an 
exhibition !  but  that  she  did  not  at  all  feel  for  herself, 
one  should  have  felt  for  her !  Such  an  over-dressed,  bare- 
bosomed,  painted  eye-browed  figure  one  never  saw  !  G. 
Eobinson  said  she  was  the  only  true  friend  the  Prince  of 
Wales  had,  as  she  went  about  justifying  his  conduct. 

Thursday,  June  1st. — Went  with  a  party  to  the  ball  in 
Argyll  Street  for  Mr.  Amsinck's  benefit.  The  ball  very 
full,  and  much  like  a  race  ball,  with  a  number  of  people 
one  knew,  and  a  number  more  one  never  saw  before. 
Went  into  one  of  the  low  boxes.  Sir  H.  Englefield  and 
Lord  Webb  Seymour  with  us.  We  sat  at  our  ease  the 
whole  night,  looking  on  upon  the  world. 

Saturday,  3rd. — Went  between  two  and  three  o'clock 
to  Lady  Glenbervie's  J  breakfast  at  the  Pheasantry.  The 
day  was  very  fine,  and  the  breakfast  pretty.  The  Princess 
of  Wales  there,  and  the  party  she  named.  The  rest 
of  the  company  all  Lady  Glenbervie's  neighbourhood. 
The  Princess  had  a  hot  dinner  in  the  library.  The  rest 
of  the  company  a  cold  one,  under  two  large  tents  or 


*  Lady  Anne  North,  second  daughter  of  Frederick  second  Earl  of  Giiil- 
ford  (Lord  North,  the  minister  of  George  III.)?  married  in  1798  to  Lord, 
afterwards  Earl,  of  Sheffield.  She  died  in  1832. 

t  Afterwards  Lord  Lyttelton. 

I  Lady  Catharine  Ann  North,  married  to  Sylvester  Douglas,  Lord  Glen- 
bervie,  1789. 


1809]  A  MASQUERADE.  381 

tarpaulins,  which  had  a  pretty  effect  in  the  wood.  .  Slept 
at  Strawberry  Hill. 

Wednesday,  1th. — Mrs.  Cholmleyand  two  of  her  daughters 
and  Walter  Scott  breakfasted  with  us.  Shortly  after  came 
Sir  G.  and  Lady  Beaumont,  Eobert  Walpole  and  Lady 
Louisa  Stuart,  and  Sir  W.  Pepys  and  F.  Cholmley.  Some- 
body was  to  read  Joanna  Baillie's  tragedy,  *  The  Family 
Legend  ; '  this  somebody  was  obliged  to  be  me,  as  nobody 
else  knew  her  hand,  or  had  ever  seen  the  play.  I  read 
the  first  three  acts,  Cholmley  the  fourth,  and  I  again  the 
fifth.  It  had  a  vast  effect  upon  Walter  Scott,  and  one 
that  was  very  pleasing,  from  the  evident  feeling  of  one 
poet  for  another. 

Thursday,  8th. — In  the  evening  I  dressed  myself  like 
an  old  peasant  woman — a  dress  and  masque  which  I  had 
possessed  some  time — and  went  with  Mrs.  Bouverie  to  a 
masquerade  at  Mrs.  Chichester's,  in  Harley  Street.  We 
went  at  half-past  twelve,  and  got  in  easily,  but  the  noise 
and  vulgarity  of  the  masques,  and  not  seeing  one  face 
unmasked  that  we  had  ever  seen  before,  made  our  party 
immediately  pull  off  ours  and  give  up  the  idea  of  any 
amusement.  The  crowd,  which  at  first  was  not  great, 
increased,  but  it  was  impossible  to  increase  the  noise. 
We  were,  in  less  than  an  hour's  time,  joined  by  Agnes, 
as  a  housemaid,  Miss  Godfrey  in  my  monk's  dress,  and 
Lady  Donegall  unmasked,  from  LadyLansdowne's,*  where 
they  had  left  many  masks,  much  company,  and  plenty  of 
room.  We  were  all  introduced  to  the  lady  of  the  house 
by  Lady  Donegall.  It  was  the  dullest  thing  of  the  kind 
at  which  I  ever  assisted,  though  certainly  the  noisiest  and 
fullest  of  characters,  such  as  they  were. 

Wednesday,  14<A. — Dined  at  Mrs.  's ;  a  dinner  of 

fifteen  people,  of  whom  my  only  acquaintance  was  Skef- 


*  Wife  of  John  Marquis  of  Lansdowne,  relict  of  Sir  Duke  Gifford,  of 
Castle  Jordan,  Ireland. 


382  MISS  BEERY'S  JOURNAL.  [1309 

fington,*  who  I  found  afterwards  was  the  wit,  the  bel- 
esprit,  I'aigle  de  la  societe  \  \  Two  ladies  joined  after 
dinner  in  extolling  the  endowments  and  even  personal 
appearance  of  Skeffington. 

Friday,  16$. — In  the  morning  went  to  the  Exhibition 
with  Lady  G.  Morpeth.  Portrait  of  Sir  G.  Beaumont's 
mother  excellent.  Wilkie's  two  pictures,  and  another  by 
Bird,f  a  man  who  follows  his  steps,  all  that  I  remarked 
as  very  good. 

Thursday,  22nd. — Went  with  Lady  Georgiana  Morpeth 
to  George,  the  silk  mercer's,  through  all  the  dirtiest  streets 
of  London,  and  round  by  Covent  Garden  Theatre,  of 
which  the  immense  walls,  but  more  immense  scaffolding, 
is  really  curious.  After  dinner  walked  with  my  father 
and  sister  to  the  fields  between  Paddington  and  Bays- 
water.  The  haymaking,  a  beautiful  warm  quiet  evening ; 
we  sat  for  some  time  on  the  cocks  of  hay,  which  I  really 
enjoyed,  but  in  how  melancholy  a  manner,  Heaven,  who 
sees  within  my  soul,  alone  can  know ! 

Monday,  26th. — Went  to  Mr.  Hope's,  at  the  Deepden, 
near  Dorking.  The  place  pretty,  with  great  capabilities, 
from  the  irregularity  of  the  ground,  but  wants  much 
doing  to  it.  A  narrow  glen  or  hollow,  with  high  banks 
and  fine  trees ;  excellent  place  for  a  flower-garden,  where 
the  present  one  is  ill-arranged.  Looked  over  drawings  in 
the  evening. 

Tuesday,  27th. — Drove  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hope  to  the 

*  Afterwards  Sir  Lumley  St.  George  Skeffington  of  Skeffington  Hall, 
County  Leicester.  He  was  the  author  of  some  dramatic  pieces.  None  of 
his  writings  were  published,  but  the  songs  in  the  '  Sleeping  Beauty  ' — a 
melodrama  of  his  composition — the  eccentricity  of  his  dress  and  appearance 
(black  ringlets,  cheeks  covered  with  rouge,  peculiar  hat  and  coat,  top  boots, 
&c.)  furnished  to  Gilray  a  subject  for  caricature.  From  some  cause  or  other, 
he  lost  his  fortune,  bis  property  was  sold,  and  he  was  forced  to  live  within 
the  rules  of  the  King's  Bench. 

t  Edward  Bird  ;  born  1772,  he  began  as  a  painter  of  tea-trays,  but  soon 
rose  to  some  eminence  as  an  artist  in  subjects  of  low  life.  He  afterwards 
attempted,  with  much  less  success,  great  historical  pictures.  Died  1819. 


1809]  VISIT  TO  WOTTON   PARK.  383 

Eookery,  a  place  belonging  to  Mr.  Fuller  (a  banker),  about 
four  miles  off.  There  is  a  considerable  lake,  and  a  very 
pretty  walk  round  one  side  of  it,  through  noble  beeches, 
and  the  wood  on  all  sides  hanging  picturesquely  over  it. 
At  the  farm,  the  largest  and  finest  witch-elm  I  ever  saw. 
Again  looked  over  drawings  in  the  evening. 

Wednesday,  28th. — Drove  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hope  to 
Wotton  Park,  Sir  Frederick  Evelyn's.*  Pretty  retired 
place,  situated  in  a  bottom,  where  two  finely-wooded 
little  valleys  meet,  a  small  stream  running  in  each  of 
them.  An  old  brick  in-and-out  country  gentleman's 
house,  the  outside  covered  over  with  all  sorts  of  different 
verdure,  and  among  the  rest  with  an  apricot-tree.  A  fine 
display  of  flowers,  from  whence  the  ground  had  formerly 
risen  in  the  regular  stages  of  an  old  garden,  quite  up  to 
the  wood.  A  beautiful  jet  tfeau  yet  remains,  and  above 
it  steps  of  green  turf.  The  family  were  all  walking  in 
the  garden  when  we  stopped  to  look  at  it  from  the 
barouche.  They  invited  us  in,  and  we  walked  round  a 
most  luxuriant  flower-garden,  which  was  in  all  the  gor- 
geous display  of  the  present  season. 

Thursday,  29th, — Left  the  Deepden. 

Saturday,  July  1st. — Mr.  Playfair  dined  with  us  ;  after- 
wards drove  with  him  and  Miss  Godfrey  to  the  upper 
gate  of  Kensington  Gardens,  and  walked  entirely  round  ; 
the  evening  was  delicious,  the  walk  very  enjoyable.  Just 
in  front  of  us  was  Lord  Paget,f  four  of  his  children,  and 
his  brother,  the  General,  who  lost  an  arm  at  Oporto. £ 

Friday,  7th.  —  Went  to  Lady  M.  Fordyce's.  The 
Princess  of  Wales  there,  and  a  great  assembly  above  stairs. 
Lady  C.  Lindsay  met  us  on  the  staircase,  and  made  us  go 
into  the  room  below,  where  the  Princess  was  surrounded 

*  Sir  Frederick  Evelyn,  married  a  daughter  of  William  Turton,  Esq.,  of 
Staffordshire.    Died  1812. 

f  The  late  Marquis  of  Anglesey. 
J  General  Sir  Edward  Paget. 


384  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL. 

by  her  usual  court — Sir  W.  Scott,*  Windham,  Lord  Henry 
Fitzgerald,f  Brownlow  North  J  Lewis,  §  Sir  H.  Englefield, 
Gill,  Craven,  &c.  &c.  We  sat  in  a  corner  talking  to  such 
of  them  as  were  not  employed  and  Lady  Glenbervie  plea- 
santly enough  for  above  an  hour.  The  Princess  very 
graciously  bowing  and  smiling  to  us  both,  and,  luckily, 
no  more. 

Saturday,  Sth. — At  near  three  o'clock  went  in  Lane's 
carriage  with  him,  Lord  W.  Seymour,  and  Mrs.  Lockhart, 
to  Lady  L.  Macdonald's  ||  breakfast.  It  was  a  fair  day. 
The  place  is  small,  and  not  very  pretty  at  East  Sheen, 
and  there  were  too  few  people,  which  made  it  dull.  Our 
party  was  conducted  to  breakfast  by  Miss  Macdonald  into  a 
summer-house,  where  the  other  convives  were  the  Duchess 
of  Beaufort,  Lady  Harrowby,^]"  Puysegur,**  Lord  A.  Ham- 
ilton,^ Edward  Montague,^  Lady  Anne  Hamilton, §§ 
and  the  eldest  Beckford.  Before  six  we  had  had  enough 
of  the  breakfast.  Lady  Donegah1  and  Mr.  Windham 
joined  us  in  the  evening  at  home.  Had  some  very  agree- 

*  Afterwards  Lord  Stowell. 

f  Son  of  first  Duke  of  Leinster. 

I  B.  North,  son  of  the  Bishop  of  Winchester. 

§  Mathew  G.  Lewis,  familiarly  called  Monk  Lewis  ;  born  1775.  ( The 
Monk,'  a  novel,  was  written  when  he  was  only  nineteen,  in  ten  days,  at 
the  Hague,  where  he  was  residing  as  attache".  He  was  the  author  of  the 
well-known  ballad  of  'Alonzo  the  Brave,'  and  of  the  'Tales  of  Terror,' 
'  Romantic  Tales,'  the  '  Bravo,'  &c. :  and  of  the  dramas  of  the  '  Castle 
Spectre,'  the  '  East  Indian,'  and  '  Timour  the  Tartar.'  His  Journal  of 
'  A  West  Indian  Proprietor '  was  published  after  his  death.  Died  at  sea  in 
1818. 

||  Lady  Louisa  Macdonald,  daughter  of  Granville,  second  Earl  Gower, 
married  1777  to  Right  Hon.  Sir  Archibald  Macdonald,  Chief  Baron  of  the 
Exchequer.  Died  1827. 

H  Daughter  of  Earl  Gower,  by  his  second  wife,  Susannah  Stewart, 
daughter  of  Earl  of  Galloway. 

**  Puyse"gur,  probably  the  Chevalier  de  Puysegur  who  came  to  London 
in  1806,  and  remained  till  1815.  Well  known  in  English  society. 

f|  Lord  Archibald  Hamilton,  son  of  Archibald  ninth  Duke  of  Hamilton, 
bom  1769,  died  1827. 

\\  Edward  Montague,  eldest  son  of  Mathew  Montague,  Esq.,  afterwards 
Lord  Rokeby,  born  1787,  died  1847. 

§§  Lady  Ann  Hamilton,  sister  to  Lord  Archibald. 


1809]  VISITS  TO   NURSERY  GROUNDS.  385 

able  conversation  with  Windham.  Just  after  I  went  to 
bed,  the  drums  beat  for  a  great  fire  in  Conduit  Street, 
which  so  waked  and  hurried  one's  spirits,  that  I  slept 
little.  Mr.  Frederick  North's  *  house  completely  burnt 
down. 

Monday,  10th. — In  the  morning  Miss  Murray  called. 
I  went  with  her  to  Bath  House.f  Curious  the  state  of 
perfect  neglect  in  which  Sir  William  Pulteney  had  lived 
in  it  till  his  death.  All  in  disorder  now,  and  it  will  be 
long  before  the  present  Sir  James  gets  it  furnished  by  the 
way  in  which  he  goes  on.  The  dining-room  is  done,  and 
very  handsomely  fitted  up  by  Morell.  Mrs.  D.  came  in 
the  evening  from  Strawberry  Hill ;  and  Mr.  Price,  Lord 
Webb  Seymour,  and  Prince  Staremberg.  Lord  Webb 
leaves  town  to-day.  His  going  is  a  loss.  He  is  rational 
and  conversable,  a  lively  fresh  mind,  and,  in  short,  very 
unlike  other  people. 

Tuesday,  ISth. — Went  in  the  morning  with  Mr.  Play- 
fair  to  see  the  two  panoramas  of  Cairo  and  of  Dublin. 
That  of  Cairo  admirable.  The  sandy  arid  look  of  the 
country  so  well  given,  and  contrasting  so  remarkably 
with  the  green  fringe  of  land  on  each  side  the  course  of 
the  Nile.  The  near  buildings — many  of  them  picturesque 
and  well  painted.  The  interior  of  the  city  of  Dublin  is 
an  ugly  subject,  but  extremely  well  done,  and  giving  a 
perfect  idea  of  a  meaner  dirty-looking  London. 

Monday,  24:th. — Mr.  Thornton  drove  me  in  the  morn- 
ing to  Thompson's  nursery  ground  at  Mile-End,  where 
we  spent  a  long  time  going  over  the  whole  garden.  From 
there  we  went  to  Lodige's  nursery  at  Hackney.  More 

*  Hon.  Frederick  North,  afterwards  fifth  Earl  of  Guilford. 

t  Sir  William  Pulteney,  created  Earl  of  Bath  1742 ;  died  1764,  s.  p. 
His  niece,  Henrietta  Pulteney,  married  Sir  James  Murray,  who  took  the 
name  of  Pulteney.  She  was  created  Baroness  and  Countess  of  Bath,  died 
1808  ;  Sir  James  died  1811.  The  house  was  afterwards  bought  and  rebuilt 
by  Alexander  Baring,  first  Lord  Ashburton.  It  still  retains  the  name  of 
Bath  House. 

VOL.  II.  C  C 


386  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL. 

fine  plants  there  than  at  Thompson's.    Eeturned  with  two 
enormous  nosegays. 

A  letter  from  Lord  Webb  Seymour  to  Miss  Berry 
belongs  to  this  month  : — 

Worthing,  Sunday,  July  16,  1809. 

Though  the  cliffs  and  the  olive  groves  and  the  mountains  of 
Nice  are  strongly  contrasted  with  the  beach  at  Worthing,  the 
recollection  of  the  coast  I  so  lately  visited,  does  not  prevent 
me  from  finding  considerable  delight  in  this.  I  am  feeding  on 
the  purest  air  and  on  pleasing  dreams,  inspired  by  the  sea- 
breeze  and  the  murmur  of  the  surge.  Even  after  having  seen 
the  Mediterranean,  you  must  have  admired  some  of  the  seas 
that  we  have  had  within  these  few  days,  just  ruffled  by  a  gentle 
breeze,  and  reflecting  the  brightest  azure  of  our  climate. 

On  Friday  I  was  at  Brighthelmstone  (I  hope  you  like  its 
long  name),  to  pass  a  day  with  Mrs.  Spencer,  and  found  her  as 
agreeable  as  ever.  One  day  with  a  friend  in  that  way  is  worth 
a  hundred  scraps  in  London.  In  London  one  page  of  the  book 
is  forgotten  before  we  have  an  opportunity  of  looking  at  the 
next ;  and  you  and  I  must  meet  at  Bothwell  or  Tunbridge,  or 
some  other  place  in  the  same  style,  before  we  can  hope  to  put 
the  mark  much  farther  forward. 

Mrs.  Spencer  returned  to  London  on  Saturday.  She  is  very 
anxious  to  see  Mr.  Playfair,  and  I  promised  to  request  you  to 
make  them  acquainted. 

I  hope  you  will  congratulate  Playfair  for  me  and  for  your- 
self, upon  his  late  grand  publication  —  a  Peerage,  in  five 
volumes,  at  ten  guineas  a  volume.  Lord  Galloway,  whom  I 
met  at  Brighthelmstone,  makes  it  a  rule  never  to  subscribe  to 
any  book,  but  an  application  some  time  ago  from  a  person  of 
the  name  of  Playfair — a  name,  too,  followed  by  sundry  scien- 
tific titles  and  dignities — induced  him  to  relax  his  rule  in 
favour  of  the  celebrated  Edinburgh  Professor,  who  declared 
that  he  was  going  to  enlighten  the  world  by  his  speculations 
on  gules  argent  and  lions  rampant,  and  addressed  himself  to 
different  peers  for  their  patronage,  as  well  as  for  private 
sources  of  information.  At  length  the  work  appeared,  and  I 
found  Lord  Galloway  grievously  disappointed  by  the  trifling 


1809]  THE   POET  BARLOW.  387 

stuff  and  fulsome  flattery  with  which  the  production  of  this 
profound  man  abounded.  His  brother,  Edward  Stewart,  had 
indeed  ventured  to  raise  a  doubt  whether  it  was  the  Edinburgh 
Professor  who  was  the  author  of  this  work,  and  I  was  appealed 
to  for  the  decision  of  the  question.  The  book,  it  seemed,  Avas 
a  bad  one,  so  I  denied  that  our  friend  had  any  concern  in  it ; 
but  had  peers  and  pedigrees  been  properly  treated,  of  course  I 
should  have  felt  it  a  point  of  delicacy  to  refer  to  better 
authority  before  I  stripped  off  at  a  blow  the  reputation  to  be 
derived  from  five  ten-guinea  volumes.  I  saw  the  Lockes  of 
Norbury  at  Brighthelmstone.  Mrs.  S.  regretted  that  their 
absence  from  Norbury  deprived  her  of  the  pleasure  of  seeing 
you  there.  Did  you  ever  see  that  wonderful  beauty  of  a  little 
girl  of  hers  ? 

Yours  ever  sincerely, 

W.  S. 
Eemember  me  to  all  friends. 

August — I  have  been  reading  a  strange  poem — the 
'  Columbiad '  of  Poet  Barlow.*  Who  or  what  he  is  I 
know  not,  except  that  he  is  an  American,  deeply  imbued 
with  all  the  bad  taste  and  all  the  prejudices  which  belong 
to  his  nation,  in  its  present  state  of  society.  His  language 
is  not  English — at  least,  is  full  of  words  which  the  English 
language,  in  its  Eastern  domain,  does  not  acknowledge. 
His  verses  are  full  of  obscurity,  and  still  fuller  of  the 
most  ridiculous  alliterations  and  the  r6ughest  cacaphonias. 
Yet  I  have  been  amused  at  this  first  American  attempt  at 
an  epic,  with  all  its  faults,  all  its  vulgarisms,  all  its  bar- 
barous names,  all  its  prejudices,  and  all  its  false  reasoning. 
It  is  full  of  ideas,  embraces  an  endless  variety  of  subjects 
— past,  present,  and  to  come.  Sets  one  a  thinking,  some- 
times justly,  but  oftener  to  detect  and  wonder  at  its 

*  Joel  Barlow,  an  American  poet,  born  at  Reading,  Connecticut,  in  1755 ; 
he  was  the  son  of  a  farmer.  In  1787  his  greatest  poem,  '  The  Vision  of 
Columbus,'  appeared,  and  was  dedicated  to  Louis  XVI.  In  1808  he  en- 
larged and  republished  it  under  the  title  of  '  Columbiad.'  In  1811  he  was 
appointed  Minister  Plenipotentiary  to  the  French  Government.  Died  near 
Cracow  1812.— Imp.  Diet,  of  Univ.  Biog. 

c  c   2 


388  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL. 

commonplace  mistakes,  and  the  conceit  with  which  so 
many  false  and  romantic  doctrines  are  brought  forward 
and  dwelt  upon.  Among  others,  that  of  the  perfectability 
of  the  human  race,  the  approach  to  which  is  supposed 
to  be  advanced  and  hastened  by  the  cultivation  and  im- 
provements of  America !  The  country  at  present  perhaps 
the  lowest  in  the  scale  of  moral  education,  the  farthest 
from  that  intellectual  character  and  perfection  which  such 
a  system  supposes.  Still,  represent  this  idea  of  the  per- 
fectability of  our  nature  as  you  will — even  in  the  uncouth 
alliterative  verses  of  Joel  Barlow — still  it  is  a  beautiful 
dream ;  still  it  is  a  reverie  in  which  benevolent  and  in- 
telligent minds  will  delight  to  indulge ;  still  the  sup- 
position of  an  indefinable,  though  not  an  interminable, 
perfection  must  conduce  to  raise,  dignify,  and  ameliorate 
man. 

Sunday,  6th. — After  church  I  went  to  Lord  Howe's, 
and  sat  some  time  with  Mrs.  Howe,  carrying  her  Play- 
fair's  problems,  with  which  she  was  delighted.  She  goes 
to-morrow  to  Sir  William  Pitt's,  in  Hampshire,  for 
three  months.  I  always  part  with  her  with  regret  for  so 
long  a  time.  Go  when  she  will  she  leaves  not  her  fellow 
behind  her,  at  past  eighty-seven,  which  she  is. 

Strawberry  Hill,  Monday,  1th. — Princess  of  Wales, 
attended  by  Lady  'Charlotte  Lindsay,  came  here  to  see 
the  house  at  three  o'clock.  Mrs.  Darner  had  received 
notice  two  or  three  days  before,  that  she  was  to  be  thus 
surprised — for  a  surprise  it  was  to  be,  and  no  trouble 
given.  She  knew  we  were  here,  and  asked  for  us.  We 
joined  the  party  in  the  Holbein  room.  The  Princess 
talked  a  great  deal  more  than  she  looked  at  anything, 
and  seemed  pleased  to  have  more  people  to  talk  to ;  the 
pictures,  &c.,  of  the  house,  and  observations  on  them, 
came  merely  to  fill  up  gaps  and  give  new  matter  for  dis- 
course. She  was  in  her  very  best  manner,  and  her  con- 
versation is  certainly  uncommonly  livery,  odd,  and  clever. 


180D]  ROYAL   PARSIMONY.  389 

What  a  pity  that  she  has  not  a  grain  of  common  sense  ! 
not  an  ounce  of  ballast  to  prevent  high  spirits,  and  a 
coarse  mind  without  any  degree  of  moral  taste,  from 
running  away  with  her,  and  allowing  her  to  act  inde- 
corously and  ridiculously  whenever  an  occasion  offers! 
Were  she  always  to  conduct  herself  as  she  did  here  to-day 
she  would  merit  the  character  of  having  not  only  a  remark- 
ably easy  and  gracious  manner,  but  natural  cleverness  above 
any  of  her  peers  that  I  have  seen,  and  a  good  many  have 
at  different  times  fallen  under  my  observation.  After- 
walking  over  the  house,  she  was  carried  into  the  library, 
where  refreshments  were  prepared.  Of  these  she  did 
not  taste,  but  proposed  our  all  sitting  down,  which  we 
did  for  about  half  an  hour,  then  departed  with  a  thou- 
sand thanks  to  Mrs.  Darner,  and  shaking  us  all  by  the 
hand.  She  had  with  her  the  little  boy  whom  she  brings 
up.  Some  poor  body's  son  at  Deptford,*  and  whom  she 
would  do  well  to  put  to  school,  but  does  very  ill  to  take 
about  with  her  during  his  holidays.  She  is  not  of  a 
disposition  to  want  either  the  amusement  or  endearing 
tenderness  of  a  child  ;  and,  after  all  that  has  been  said  of 
her,  one  may  easily  guess  what  may  be  said  of  this  little 
boy  about  seven  or  eight  years  old.  She  talked  much  of 
Gell,  who  seems  at  present  in  high  favour  ;  much  of  Jeuzie,f 
whom  she  really  seems  to  value  as  she  deserves. 

Tuesday,  Sth.  —  Lady  Glenbervie  called  in  the  morning 
to  propose  to  Mrs.  Darner  from  the  Princess  to  share  a 
box  at  Covent  Garden  Theatre  with  her  ;  that  is  to  say, 
have  it  on  opera  nights.  This  is  an  arrangement  nobody 
will  make  with  her.  But  how  ridiculous,  how  ill-managed 
and  mean  in  this  extravagant  and  spending  country,  that 
a  Princess  of  Wales  should  not  be  able  to  have  a  box  at 
the  national  theatre  to  herself  —  that  the  King  should  not 
give  a  sum  yearly,  and  have  so  many  boxes  for  the  use  of 


Austen.  f  ^rs-  William  Locke. 


390  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL. 

his  family !  The  evening  was  fine,  and  I  went  through 
Twickenham  churchyard,  and  settled  in  my  own  mind 
upon  the  place  where  I  should  like  a  stone  to  be  placed, 
and  myself  deposited  near  it.  It  is  a  cheerful  church- 
yard, and  the  place  I  have  chosen  near  that  beautiful  view 
of  the  river,  the  group  of  poplars,  and  the  opposite  bank, 
which  I  have  always  so  much  admired,  and  at  which  I 
stood  this  evening  for  nearly  a  quarter  of  an  hour  in 
quiet  and  solitary  enjoyment,  gilded  as  it  was  by  a  beau- 
tiful evening  sun.  To-day  I  have  felt  better  than  for 
months  past,  and  considered  the  churchyard  and  every 
idea  connected  with  it  just  as  I  could  wish  to  do,  and  as 
every  rational  mind  ought  to  consider  everything  con- 
nected with  their  release  from  this  existence,  whose  pro- 
longation after  the  middle  of  life  nothing  but  particular 
circumstances  can  render  desirable. 

Monday,  \kth. — I  worked  at  my  French  Letters  all 
the  morning.  In  the  evening  read  aloud  the  account  of 
General  Moore's  campaign  in  Spain.  What  an  account 
it  is !  What  an  idea  does  it  give  one  of  his  character  in 
every  respect,  aud  what  treatment  did  he  receive — what 
a  situation  was  he  put  in !  What  abilities  did  he  exert 
to  rescue  himself  and  his  army !  What  suffering  he  un- 
derwent, and,  after  all,  to  seal  them  with  his  blood ! 

Wednesday,  IQth. — Agnes  and  I  went  to  Lady  Stuart's 
Lodge,  in  Eichmond  Park,  by  appointment,  to  see  her  son 
Charles,*  and  to  hear  his  accounts  both  of  Spain  and 
Austria.  For,  since  I  saw  him  at  Lady  Spencer's  break- 
fast on  the  2nd  of  July,  last  year,  he  has  been  over  almost 
all  Spain,  and  a  very  considerable  part  of  Austria.  He  gives 
me  a  melancholy  account  of  the  wounds  of  poor  Louis 
de  Lichtenstein,  in  the  battle  of  Eatisbon.  He  must  now, 

*  Son  of  Lieutenant-General  the  Hon.  Charles  Stuart,  K.B.,  and  of 
Louisa,  daughter  of  Lord  Vere  Bertie,  and  grandson  of  Lord  Bute,  the  Mi- 
nister ;  born  1779 ;  married  Lady  Elizabeth  Yorke  in  1816 ;  created  Lord 
Stuart  de  Rothsay,  1828 ;  died  1845. 


1809]  LETTER   FROM   PROFESSOR   PLAYFAIR.  391 

in  all  human  probability,  be  for  ever  incapacitated  for 
serving,  and  this  to  a  hero  at  twenty-nine !  When  we 
lamented  to  Charles  Stuart  how  much  he  must  have  suf- 
fered within  this  last  twelve  months,  he  owned  he  had 
been  very  well  amused  too ;  that  the  two  flights  which 
he  had  witnessed  and  shared  in,  from  Madrid  and  from 
Vienna,  were  very  entertaining.  His  is  an  active,  pene- 
trating mind,  which,  I  dare  say,  while  busily  employed, 
does  not  feel  too  much  to  be  prevented  treating  the  world 
like  the  French  philosopher,  '  avec  le  sarcasme  de  la  gaiete* 
et  1'indulgence  du  mepris.' 

Friday,  25th. — We  all  three  drank  tea  at  the  Duchess 
of  Montrose's.*  Nobody  there  but  herself  and  three 
daughters — fine,  civil,  and  cheerful-looking  girls — and  the 
only  boy,  much  younger  than  any  of  them.  They  are  in 
Prince  Staremberg's  house,  and  the  room  in  which  we 
have  all  spent  so  many  evenings  and  so  much  time !  with 
a  work-table  in  the  middle  of  it,  so  much  the  same,  and 
so  much  altered,  made  us  all  melancholy. 

The  following  letter  from  Professor  Playfair  belongs  to 
this  date.  The  extraordinary  energy  and  clearness  of 
mind  possessed  by  Mrs.  Howe,  at  the  advanced  age  of 
eighty-seven,  seems  to  have  interested  and  surprised  him 
greatly  :— 

Edinburgh,  Aug.  25,  1809. 

MY  DEAR  MADAM, — I  am  sure,  from  the  way  in  which  Mrs. 
Howe  has  set  about  resolving  the  problem,  that  she  will 
succeed  in  it  easily.  I  have  hardly  met  with  anything  more 
singular  than  the  ardour  and  acuteness  of  this  lady  at  so 
advanced  a  period  of  life.  It  is  a  phenomenon  worthy  to  be 
recorded  in  the  history  of  the  human  mind,  the  more  that  it 

*  Caroline  Maria  Duchess  of  Montrose,  daughter  of  the  fourth  Duke  of 
Manchester.  The  three  eldest  daughters  were  Lady  Georgiana  Graham, 
married  the  late  Earl  of  Winchelsea,  1814;  Lady  Caroline  Graham ;  Lady 
Lucy,  married,  1818,  the  late  Lord  Powis  j  Lord  Graham,  present  Duke  of 
Montrose,  b.  1799. 


392  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1509 

throws  a  cheerful  gleam  over  that   portion  of  life  that  is  so 
'  dark  and  unlovely.' 

To  Mrs.  Howe's  impatience  to  be  set  right,  and  my  own 
mistakes  in  setting  her  wrong,  I  have  great  obligation,  as  they 
have  procured  me  the  pleasure  of  hearing  from  you  sooner  than 
I  should  have  otherwise  have  done.  I  only  wish  that  in  addition 
to  what  you  have  said,  you  had  mentioned  your  health  ;  there  is 
no  subject  whatever  in  which  I  feel  more  interest :  nothing  in 
which  I  should  rejoice  more  than  to  have  good  accounts. 

As  to  myself,  I  stood  the  journey  very  well,  and  continue  to 
get  stronger  every  day,  but  I  shall  always  have  great  pleasure 
in  recollecting  that  I  am  to  date  my  recovery  from  my  visit  to 
Strawberry  Hill. 

No  wonder  that  your  politics,  as  you  say,  are  gloomy ;  the 
nation  is  in  that  unfortunate  situation  that  the  success  of  its 
arms  do  no  service  either  to  itself  or  its  allies.  Of  what  use 
is  Sir  Arthur  W.'s  very  brilliant  and  dear-bought  victory,  but 
by  the  honour  it  reflects  on  British  valour  ?  The  taking  of  a 
small  smuggling  town  is  accompanied  with  neither  glory  nor 
advantage.  And  the  breaking  of  the  armistice  by  Austria  por- 
tends, I  fear,  the  total  annihilation  of  that  power.  The  Pope 
has  excommunicated  Buonaparte.  Does  Austria  trust  in  the 
effect  of  what  was  once  so  terrible  to  herself,  or  does  she  trust 
in  the  effect  of  our  great  expedition  ?  They  are  weapons 
nearly  of  equal  force. 

Lord  Frederick  is  here,  in  perfect  health,  activity,  and  spirits. 
Sir  William  Scott,  who  is  living  also  at  Dumbridge,  is  much 
with  him.  I  am  going  with  them  to-day  to  see  the  bones  of 
the  sea-snake,  which  are  now  here ;  and  likely  to  create  a  good 
deal  of  dispute  among  anatomists,  as  to  the  species  of  animal 
to  which  they  belong. 

I  must  entreat  to  be  remembered  to  Mrs.  Darner  and  Miss 
Agnes. 

Yours,  with  sincere  attachment, 

JOHN  PLAYFAIR. 

Saturday.,  September  2nd. — Went  at  two  o'clock,  by 
appointment,  with  Lord  Webb  Seymour  and  with  Miss 
Colernan,  to  Bow  Street,  Covent  Garden,  to  see  the  front 
of  the  new  theatre — very  handsome,  plain  Grecian  doric, 


1809]  THE   DUKE   OF   BEDFORD'S   STATUE.  393 

but  the  pediment  in  the  centre  strikes  me  as  not  suffi- 
giently  extended  for  the  extent  of  the  front ;  the  basso- 
relievos  not  sufficiently  large  for  the  large  flat  space  in 
which  they  are  placed,  and  the  statues  in  the  niches  at 
each  end  of  the  front  too  small,  both  for  their  niches  and 
for  the  place  of  those  niches.  The  composition  of  the 
two  basso-relievos  do  not  tell  their  own  story,  and  are 
not  well  grouped,  although  particular .  figures  are  good. 
Then  to  Eussell  Square  to  look  at  the  Duke  of  Bedford's 
statue.  I  like  it  much.  The  head  is  admirable,  both  in 
the  manner  in  which  it  is  treated  and  its  extraordinary 
likeness.  The  drapery,  his  robes,  managed  without  affec- 
tation as  well  as  any  Eoman  toga.  The  drapery  of  the 
legs  only  I  did  not  like  ;  they  have  a  sort  of  thin  twisted 
trouser  all  round  them,  exactly  like  what  belongs  to  the 
Phrygian  dress,  and  which  has  certainly  nothing  to  do 
with  the  robes  of  an  English  duke.  The  pedestal  is 
granite,  with  bronze  basso-relievos  —  handsome.  The 
basso-relievos  and  the  figures  of  the  Seasons  at  the  corner 
of  the  pedestal  are  ill  seen,  from  not  being  able  to  walk 
round  the  statue. 

Thursday,  1th. — Went  with  Sir  H.  Englefield  to  Fogg's, 
the  china  shop.  Some  of  the  finest  pieces  of  Indian  china 
I  ever  saw,  and  two  beautiful  dessert  services  of  old 
Sevres.  Both  sold  as  well  as  most  of  the  other  pieces  of 
Sevres  in  the  same  room  to  Lord  Gywdyr — one  of  the  sets 
for  600/.  Two  China  pagodas  in  this  shop,  most  splendid 
pieces  of  porcelain,  at  least  seven  feet  high,  standing  on 
the  ground. 

Saturday,  9th. — Went  with  Prince  Staremberg  and 
Mrs.  Darner  to  Astley's.  Well  enough  entertained.  '  The 
Arab,'  a  pretty  set  of  scenes,  with  a  combat  at  the  end, 
in  which  twelve  real  horses  appear  upon  the  stage.  Were 
the  stage  larger,  it  would  be  a  better  spectacle ;  as  it  is, 
it  is  very  well  managed. 

Tuesday,  12?A. — In  the  evening  went  to  the  Hay  market 


394  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1309 

with  Prince  Staremberg  and  Mrs.  Darner.  Pieces :  '  The 
Voice  of  Nature,'  '  Of  Age  To-morrow,'  and  '  Killing  no 
Murder.'  The  first  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  the 
judgment  of  Solomon  enacted  by  a  king  of  Sicily.  The 
hero  (not  King  Solomon)  was  well  acted  by  Mr. 
Young,  and  the  heroine  not  badly  by  Mrs.  Gibbs.  The 
house  was  very  full,  and  with  very  good  company. 

Sunday,  11th. — In  the  evening  Lord  Webb  Seymour 
came  to  bid  us  farewell.  He  sets  out  for  Scotland  to- 
morrow morning.  He  parted  with  us  kindly,  almost 
affectionately.  How  my  heart  thanks  anybody  for  this 
sentiment,  and  how  much  more  from  one  so  distinguished 
by  his  intelligence  and  amiable  simplicity  of  manners  ! 

Monday,  18^. — Breakfasted  early  with  my  father  and 
sister,  who  set  off  for  Tunbridge. 

Tuesday,  19^. — Prince  Staremberg  gave  an  accurate 
and  amusing  account  of  the  opening  of  the  new  Covent 
Garden  Theatre  the  night  before.  Not  a  single  word  of 
either  play  or  farce  heard.*  The  actors  all  went  on  as  if 


*  In  consequence  of  the  expense  attending  the  building  of  the  new  thea- 
tre, it  was  found  necessary  to  augment  the  prices  of  admission.  One  shilling 
on  the  boxes,  and  sixpence  on  the  pit.  After  five  nights  of  noise  and  riot, 
Mr.  Kemble  shut  up  the  house,  and  submitted  the  accounts  to  a  committee 
of  gentlemen.  On  reopening  the  theatre,  however,  the  disturbances  recom- 
menced, and  in  addition  to  the  other  noises  was  an  accompaniment  of  coach- 
men's horns,  trumpets,  dustmen's  bells,  and  watchmen's  rattles.  Many 
came  with  the  letters  O.P.  in  their  hats  and  upon  their  clothes,  and  joined 
in  the  notable  O.P.  dance,  as  it  Was  called,  which  consisted  in  an  alternate 
stamping  of  the  feet,  accompanied  with  the  regular  cry  of  '  O.P.'  in  noisy  and 
monotonous  cadence.  The  proprietors  lost  their  temper.  A  pugilistic  corps 
was  imprudently  introduced  into  the  pit,  and  disgraceful  fights  ensued.  Mr. 
Clifford,  a  barrister,  appeared  in  the  pit  with  the  letters  O.P.  in  his  hat. 
Brandon,  the  boxkeeper,  procured  his  apprehension  as  a  rioter,  and  carried 
him  before  a  magistrate,  by  whom  he  was  discharged.  Mr.  Clifford  indicted 
Brandon  for  an  assault  and  false  imprisonment,  in  which  indictment  Bran- 
don was  cast.  The  proprietors  were  now  obliged  to  make  a  compromise 
that  the  boxes  should  continue  at  7s.,  and  the  pit  be  restored  to  the  old 
price,  3«.  6d.  The  dismissal  of  Brandon  was  loudly  called  for  and  complied 
with.  He  was  afterwards  reinstated  in  office,  and  the  customary  routine 
restored. — Annual  Register. 


1809]  THE   "  0.  P."   ROWS.  395 

to  an  attentive  audience.  No  serious  damage  done  to  the 
house.  Walked  at  six  o'clock  to  dinner  at  Mrs.  Buller's  ; 
Cosway,  and  Eobert  Clifford  the  company  in  the  evening. 

The  modest  pomp  of about  politics,  the  state  of 

the  ministry,  his  anger  with  Eobert  Clifford  about  Lord 
Chatham,  and  his  confused  bothered  arguments  to  me, 
very  amusing  for  a  single  evening. 

Wednesday,  20^. — Mr.  Mathew  Montague  called  upon 
me.  More  than  half  an  hour's  conversation  with  him 
on  politics  and  the  curious  state  in  which  his  friend 
Percival  and  the  rest  of  his  associates  in  the  Ministry 
find  themselves  at  present — Mr.  Canning  *  declaring  he 
will  be  Prime  Minister,  and  lead  the  House  of  Commons 
or  nothing,  and  wanting  Mr.  Percival  to  be  Chancellor, 
and  go  up  to  the  House  of  Lords,  Mr.  Percival  declaring 
that  his  conscience  and  his  attachment  to  the  King  pre- 
vent this,  as  it  would  be  throwing  the  King  into  the 
power  of  Mr.  Canning,  whom  he  (the  King)  hates.  To 
what  is  this  poor  country  reduced  from  the  mere  lack  of 
superior  abilities !  At  three  o'clock  set  out  for  Lady 
Button's,  Moulsey  Hurst. 

Thursday,  21st. — Walked  to  Lady  Tancred's,f  which 
joins  this  place.  It  is  a  pretty  small  house,  which  she 

*  It  had  been  for  some  time  apparent  that  the  Duke  of  Portland  could  not 
remain  at  the  head  of  the  Ministry,  and  Mr.  Canning  had  put  forward 
his  claims  for  that  post.  He  laid  a  foundation  for  this  arrangement  by 
affirming  the  principle  that  the  head  of  the  Ministry  ought  to  be  in  the 
House  of  Commons.  This,  as  he  considered,  reduced  the  question  to  a 
choice  between  Percival  and  himself,  and  he  asserted  his  claims  to  a  pre- 
ference over  Percival.  The  King  and  the  Cabinet  did  not  concur  in  this 
view  ;  and,  therefore,  on  the  receipt  of  the  Duke  of  Portland's  answer,  Mr. 
Canning  having  failed  in  procuring  the  removal  of  Lord  Castlereagh  and  in 
becoming  the  successor  of  the  Duke  of  Portland,  lost  no  time  in  resigning  his 
office. — Administration  of  Great  Britain  from  1783  to  1830.  By  Right  Hon. 
Sir  G.  C.  Lewis.  From  this  state  of  things  arose  the  quarrel  between  Lord 
Castlereagh  and  Mr.  Canning,  that  occasioned  a  hostile  meeting  on  Putney 
Heath,  on  the  21st  Sept.,  1809. 

t  Henrietta  Lady  Tancred,  wife  of  Sir  Thomas  Tancred,  daughter  of 
Rev.  Offley  Crewe;  married  1805;  died  1837. 


396  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [ISOD 

has  fitted  up  very  elegantly.  Her  sons  lives  with  her. 
Dined  with  Sir  Thomas  *  and  Lady  Button.  His  conver- 
sation always  remarkably  sensible,  and  liberal-minded, 
and  to  the  purpose. 

Saturday,  23rd. — Walked  with  Lady  Tancred  to  the 
church  of  the  village  of  West  Moulsey,  and  from  thence  to 
a  house  on  a  common,  which,  upon  enquiry,  I  found  in- 
habited by  my  old  acquaintance  Thomas  Pitt,f  whom  we 
met  when  first  in  Italy.  He  is  now  a  widower,  with  a 
daughter  grown  up,  and  three  tall  sons.  I  made  Lady 
Tancred  call  with  me  upon  him,  but  he  was  out.  In  the 
evening,  he  and  his  daughter  and  sons  came  and  drank 
tea  at  Sir  Thomas  Sutton's.  He  is  just  what  he  was — a 
quiet,  regular,  sensible  man. 

Extract  of  a  Letter  from  Professor  Play  fair  to  Miss  Berry. 

Eleg  House,  Oct.  5,  1809. 

...  I  have  been  much  delighted  with  Mrs.  Howe's  solu- 
tion of  the  question  about  the  bees.  That  which  is  contained 
in  her  second  note  is  a  perfectly  accurate  and  scientific  investi- 
gation. It  is  not  a  little  wonderful  that  a  lady  leading  a 
fashionable  life  should  in  the  most  active  and  vigorous  state  of 
her  mind  have  acquired  such  a  skill  in  the  abstract  methods  of 
algebra  as  to  be  able  to  solve  such  a  question.  That  at  Mrs. 
Howe's  age  she  should  be  able  and  inclined  to  take  the  trouble 
of  doing  it,  is  no  less  surprising  than  it  is  pleasing  to  observe. 
I  must  request  you  to  transmit  her  the  enclosed  note.  This 
must  be  a  time  of  great  agitation,  I  think,  with  you  in  London 
and  its  neighbourhood ;  the  concussion  reaches  us  at  this  distance 
very  forcibly.  The  misconduct  of  all  our  expeditions  and  the 
duel  of  two  Cabinet  Members  have  filled  up  the  cup  of  the  iniquity 
of  the  present  administration.  I  hope  Lords  Or.  and  Gr.  will  not 
think  of  a  coalition ;  that  would  only  weaken  and  disgrace  them. 
You  ask  me  about  the  author  of  the  article  ( Eeform '  in  the  last 
number  of  the  '  Edinburgh  Eeview.'  The  article  is  by  Jeffrey 

*  Sir  Thomas  Sutton,  Bart.,  of  Moulsey.     Baronetcy  extinct  1813. 
t   Vide  Journal  of  1783. 


1809]  KING'S   COLLEGE    CHAPEL,    CAMBRIDGE. 

himself,  and  is  in  all  respects,  I  think,  worthy  of  the  praise  you 
bestow  on  it.  '  Lord  Valentia '  is  not  in  this  nor  will  be  in  the 
next,  unless  Miss  Agnes,  whose  idea  of  the  book  was  perfectly 
just,  will  favour  us  with  a  critique  on  it.  I  have  got  a  report 
on  the  progress  of  science  for  the  last  nineteen  years  made  to 
Buonaparte  last  year,  that  I  intend  to  give  some  account  of  it 
in  the  next  number. 

Monday,  October  2nd. — Returned  to  London. 

Sunday,  8th. — Went  to  Wimpole. 

Wednesday,  18th. — Set  out  with  Lady  Catherine  and 
Lady  Elizabeth  Yorke*  in  the  chariot  and  four,  and 
Lord  Hardwicke  on  horseback,  soon  after  ten,  for  Cam- 
bridge. Walked  to  King's  College  Chapel.  The  small 
towers  on  the  outside  very  light  and  beautiful.  The 
inside  struck  me  much  more  than  it  did  in  the  year  1786, 
when  I  first  saw  it.f  I  did  not  feel  so  much  the  want  of 
the  intersecting  arches  of  aisles  as  I  remember  I  did  then. 
It  is  disfigured  by  an  organ-loft  of  the  worst  style  of  Henry 
VIII.  ;  sort  of  sprigged  pilasters.  The  painted  glass  win- 
dows very  fine.  The  east  window,  though  very  large,  not 
remarkable  for  the  beauty  of  its  tracery.  Walked  through 
the  two  squares  of  Trinity ;  the  first  from  the  street,  with 
the  fountain  in  it,  large,  spacious,  cheerful,  and,  I  think, 
as  striking  as  the  Wolsey  Square  at  Christ  Church,  in 
Oxford.  In  the  chapel  on  one  side  of  this  square  is  the 
statue  of  Sir  Isaac  Newton.  J  The  head  and  the  thought- 
ful expression  of  the  whole  figure  really  admirable.  One 
regrets  that  such  an  artist  was  confined  to  the  representa- 
tion of  such  drapery  as  a  silk  gown.  The  hall  of  Trinity 
a  fine  building.  The  servitors  still  dine  there.  Sir  Isaac 
Newton's  picture  at  the  head  of  the  hall,  and  again  in  the 
combination  room.  Saw  the  kitchen,  in  which  seven 

*  Married,  1816,  to  Sir  Charles  afterwards  Lord  Stuart  de  Rothsay. 
t  In  Horace  Walpole's  letter  of  June  30,  1789,  he  reproaches  Miss  Berry 
with  not  sufficiently  admiring  King's  College  Chapel. 

J  By  Louis  Francois  Roubillac,  a  native  of  Lyons.    He  died  in  1762. 


398  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  .        [isog 

persons  are  employed.  Immense  roasting  apparatus,  but 
did  not  look  altogether  very  clean.  Second  square  of 
Trinity  a  more  modern  building.  One  side  of  it  entirely 
library,  with  windows  both  ways.  This  library  is  sup- 
ported upon  four  rows  of  Tuscan  pillars. 

Thursday,  19^. — Set  out  at  nine  o'clock  in  the  coach 
with  Lord  Hardwicke,  Lady  Catherine,  and  Lady  Eliza- 
beth, for  Newmarket,  twenty-three  miles  from  hence.  The 
whole  way  from  Cambridge  the  road  passes  through  the 
ugliest  country  that  can  be  imagined.  Newmarket  Heath 
is  entered  by  a  turnpike  at  what  is  called  the  Devil's 
Ditch,  a  high  mound,  with  a  deep  ditch  of  turf  below, 
extending  for  several  miles,  of  which  no  account  is  given, 
and  which  is  in  fact  a  curious  antiquity.  The  Heath  is 
equally  bare  and  open  upon  all  sides,  with  nothing  to 
break  the  horizon  but  Ely  Cathedral,  seen  at  the  distance 
of  ten  or  twelve  miles.  The  inn  is  almost  opposite  what 
are  called  the  rooms,  where  men  only  meet,  and  which 
have  rather  a  handsome  entrance  of  three  arcades  from  the 
street,  and  in  this  street  Tattersall  was  selling  horses  by 
auction,  and  all  the  young  men,  whose  faces  one  knows 
in  London,  were  walking  about,  as  well  as  all  the  fathers 
of  the  turf,  such  as  Sir  Frank  Standish,  Sir  Charles  Bun- 
bury,  &c.  &c.  It  had  the  oddest  effect  possible  to  see  so 
many  figures  one  hardly  ever  sees  out  of  London,  walk- 
ing about  in  a  sort  of  village-town,  for  Newmarket  is  no 
more,  with  the  exception  of  some  good  houses.  About 
one  o'clock  ah1  these  men  mounted  their  horses,  and  pro- 
ceeded towards  the  Heath,  half  a  mile  from  the  town. 
We  followed  them  in  the  carriage,  with  many  other  car- 
riages, and  Lord  Hardwicke  on  horseback.  The  scene  of 
so  many  horsemen  and  a  good  many  people  on  foot,  all 
trooping  the  same  way,  very  gay  and  pretty.  When 
they  got  upon  the  Heath,  it  is  so  vast  that  they  seemed 
only  like  small  groups  upon  it.  It  was  said  to  be  a  day 
of  little  sport.  But  four  races  were  run  :  two  subscrip- 


1609]  NEWMARKET  EACES.  399 

tions,  for  each  of  which  six  horses  started  ;  and  two 
matches.  But  the  style  in  which  all  this  is  managed  here, 
the  rapidity  with  which  one  race  follows  another,  though 
on  different  courses — that  is,  on  different  parts  of  the 
Heath — the  scene  at  the  betting  post,  one  of  which 
belongs  to  each  course,  and  is  the  only  permanent  thing 
upon  it,  for  the  ropes  are  immediately  moved,  and  the 
winning  post  (a  little  machine  upon  wheels)  is  moved 
from  one  to  the  other.  All  this  was  new  and  entertain- 
ing to  me.  Between  each  race  all  the  men  and  ah1  the 
carriages  are  collected  at  the  betting-posts.  Just  before 
the  horses  start,  the  carriages  take  their  places  near  the 
ropes,  and  the  crowd  on  horseback  disperse  from  the  post. 
As  soon  as  the  horses  are  past,  all  the  men  follow  them 
to  the  rubbing-house  to  see  them  rubbed  down,  and 
their  clothes  put  on.  These  rubbing-houses,  stables,  &c. 
&c.,  are  little  insignificant  buildings,  which  occupy  no 
space  and  take  off  nothing  from  the  extreme  bareness  of 
the  Heath.  Stand  there  is  none.  The  ladies  are  all  in 
their  carriages.  There  were  more  than  I  expected  to 
see  there.  The  fashionable  custom  at  Newmarket  is,  to 
have  the  plainest  carriage  and  liveries  possible,  and  the 
gentlemen  all  to  be  mounted  upon  shabby-looking  rips  of 
horses.  The  races  were  over  between  three  and  four, 
and  we  returned  to  Wimpole  much  pleased  with  our  day. 
Wednesday,  2bth. — Another  beautiful  day.  At  eleven 
o'clock  the  country  people  of  the  two  neighbouring 
parishes  of  Wimpole  and  Arlington  came  trooping  across 
the  park  to  the  kitchen-door  to  receive  the  portions  of 
beef,  mutton,  cold  baked  meat  pies,  bread  and  ale,  which 
Lord  Hardwicke  gave  to  every  family  upon  occasion  of 
the  day,  the  king  having  reigned  fifty  years,  which  very 
unwisely  Government  chose  to  make  a  jubilee.  A  jubilee ! 
in  the  present  situation  of  the  country,  both  externally 
and  internally  !  Lord  and  Lady  Hardwicke  had  intended 
that  all  the  peasants  should  have  been  feasted  together 


400  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isog 

before  the  house,  for  as  every  person  was  to  do  something 
to  celebrate  this  sad  jubilee,  it  would  have  been  very 
wrong,  thinking,  as  he  does,  of  the  Ministry  to  have  been 
behindhand.  The  report  of  the  Princess  Amelia's  death 
made  them  change  this  intended  festival  for  the  distri- 
bution above  mentioned.  It  was  done  in  the  most  regular 
manner.  The  cook  having  made  allotments  of  the  bread 
and  meat,  according  to  the  numbers  in  the  family,  one 
from,  every  family  came  up,  and  received  not  only  enough 
to  give  one  hearty  meal,  but  enough  to  essentially  better 
the  diet  of  the  moderate  ones  all  the  week.  The  Lady 
Yorkes  and  I  were  on  the  lawn  before  the  door,  seeing 
the  people  coming  and  going  with  their  portions,  and 
their  cans  and  pitchers,  and  pails  of  ale.  The  appear- 
ance of  the  people  in  general  was  comfortable,  though 
some  very  ragged  and  dirty.  It  was  curious  to  ob- 
serve the  great  and  decided  difference  of  industry  and 
sobriety  in  exactly  the  same  situation  in  life,  some  labourers 
with  wife  and  two  children  upon  twelve  shillings  a  week, 
perfectly  tidy,  and,  though  darned  and  patched,  clean  and 
comfortable  ;  others,  on  the  same  wages,  hanging  in  dirty 
tatters.  By  one  o'clock  it  was  all  over,  and  the  people 
enjoying  the  bounty  at  their  own  fireside.  In  the  even- 
ing there  was  a  supper  in  the  kitchen  for  all  the  workmen 
employed  about  the  house ;  and  in  the  housekeeper's 
room,  for  the  bailiffs,  gardener,  their  wives,  &c.  &c. 

Friday,  Zlth. — Waked  at  last  free  from  fever,  and  with 
a  feel  of  health  which  I  have  not  experienced  for  these  ten 
days  past.  The  weather  a  positive  summer  day.  Drove 
with  the  Lady  Yorkes  to  two  villages.  In  the  first,  Harleton 
(called  Alston),  is  a  pretty  old  church  with  handsome  win- 
dows and  an  old  little  tower,  besides  the  great  tower,  of 
which  the  use  is  not  apparent.  A  very  good  monument  in 
this  church  of  the  family  of  Fryer,  in  Charles  I.'s  time,  con- 
taining three  large  kneeling  figures  and  one  cumbent,  all 
well  carved  in  alabaster  and  coloured,  the  whole  within 


1809]  THEODORE   BEZA.  401 

an  arch,  supported  by  two  posts  of  caryatides,  and  in 
perfect  preservation.  At  the  other  village,  Haslingfield, 
we  went  over  the  old  manor  house,  for  the  last  sixty 
years  inhabited  by  farmers,  but  which  had  been  the  manor 
house  of  the  Wendys,  a  family  extinct  in  the  male  line  in 
1637;  there  are  several  good  monuments  of  them  in  the 
church,  especially  of  the  last  of  the  family,  a  Knight  of 
the  Bath,  in  the  dress  of  Louis  XTV.'s  time.  The  manor 
house  was  surrounded  by  a  moat.  There  is  a  date  cut 
on  stone  in  one  of  the  chimney-pieces  of  1555,  which 
belongs  to  Queen  Mary's  time. 

Friday,  November  3rd. — The  Lady  Yorkes  and  I  drove 
in  the  jaunting  car  down  the  avenue,  two  miles  and  a  half 
long.  Never  was  there  such  an  unmeaning  avenue ;  it 
ends  in  nothing,  not  even  in  a  gateway,  for  the  entrance  to 
it  from  the  road  is  on  the  side.  The  trees,  of  which  there 
are  two  rows  on  each  side,  and  between  which  is  the  road, 
are  none  of  them  good,  though  planted  in  the  days  of  Lord 
Oxford,  and  half  way  down  is  a  round  piece  of  water 
(five  acres),  which  can  only  be  perceived  from  the  garrets 
of  the  house  as  the  ground  rises  between.  It  is  no  longer 
used  as  the  approach  to  the  house,  and  is  separated  into 
fields  by  hurdles  and  gates. 

Saturday,  kth. — Went  with  Lord  Hardwicke  and  his 
daughter  to  Cambridge.  Stopped  at  the  public  library, 
a  separate  building  between  the  schools  and  the  Senate 
House,  contains  about  100,000  vols.,  rich  (they  say)  in 
Bibles — not  so,  I  think,  in  early  printed  books — the  first 
in  1460,  but  there  are  few  of  them  very  perfect,  and 
in  fine  condition.  The  oldest  MS.  of  the  fourth  century, 
given  by  Theodore  Beza,*  '  The  Four  Evangelists.'  Some 


*  Theo.  Bezas,  or  de  Beses,  born  1519,  in  Nivernois,  of  considerable  emi- 
nence as  a  writer.  At  the  instigation  of  Calvin,  he  continued  the  version  of 
the  Psalms  in  French,  begun  by  Calvin ;  and  in  1659  a  Latin  version  of  the 
New  Testament,  and  was  the  author  of  many  other  works.  lie  was  a  dis- 
tinguished advocate  of  the  Protestant  faith.  Died  at  Geneva  1005,  aged  87. 
VOL.  II.  D  D 


402  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [iso9 

good  prints,  fine  impressions  of  Eembrandt,  but  not  a 
complete  set.  The  library  of  Trinity,  a  fine  large  room, 
with  a  hideous  modern-painted  window,  contains  about 
30,000  vols.,  with  a  small  fund  for  buying  more ;  but  all 
these  libraries  are  without  fireplaces  or  any  means  of 
warming  them,  and  seem  but  inconvenient  places  for  real 
study,  without  paper,  pens  or  ink,  or  anybody  to  look  for 
the  books  wanted.  Masters  of  Arts  are  allowed  to  take 
any  they  may  want  to  their  own  rooms,  or  even  out  of 
Cambridge.  In  this  library  is  a  very  curious  dried  man, 
from  the  cave  in  the  Island  of  Tenerifie,  which  has  the 
property  of  thus  drying  up  the  human  body.  It  is  in  a 
glass  case  ;  the  skin  appears  completely  tanned  upon  the 
bones,  the  hair  is  still  on  the  head,  and  the  teeth  in  the 
jaws. 

Monday,  6th. — Eeturned  to  North  Audley  Street. 

Letter  to  Joanna  Baillie. 

Wimpole,  Nov.,  1809. 

Mr  DEAR  JOANNA, — What  are  you  doing  ?  and  where  are  you 
doing  ?  Troth,  say  you,  if  you  had  wanted  to  know,  you  would 
have  enquired  sooner ;  and  troth,  if  I  had  been  doing  better 
myself,  so  I  should,  answer  I. 

I  have  been  here  a  month  with  people  that  I  love,  in  a  com- 
fortable family-circle,  surrounded  by  every  comfort  and  every 
luxury  of  life,  and  sitting  in  a  library — such  a  library !  as 
would — 

Make  those  read  now,  who  never  read  before  ; 
And  those  who  always  read,  now  read  the  more. 

Yet  even  thus  situated,  with  the  perfect  command  of  my 
own  time  and  nothing  to  fatigue  me ;  if  I  were  to  tell  you  how 
little  use  I  have  been  able  to  make  of  all  these  advantages ; 
if  I  were  to  reckon  up  how  many  days  in  this  month  I  have 
enjoyed  the  free  and  unembarrassed  use  of  my  own  faculties ;  I 
should  make  you,  as  well  as  myself,  melancholy,  and  therefore, 
as  this  is  a  good  day  with  me,  I  will  say  no  more  about  it. 


1809]  MR.    ORME,   THE   PUBLISHER.  403 

My  last  and  only  letter  from  you  was  on  the  8th,  from 
Cotswold.  You  had  been  seeing  Oxford,  which  I  was  delighted 
to  find  had  impressed  your  mind,  exactly  as  it  had  always  done 
mine.  During  my  stay  here  I  have  been  to  Cambridge,  which 
I  had  seen  in  a  slight  manner  so  long  ago  as  to  have  almost 
entirely  forgotten.  It  cannot  vie  with  the  magnificent  groups 
of  Oxford.  But  it  has  one  College  which  may  rival,  if  not 
surpass,  Christ  Church  in  picturesque  beauty,  and  one  point  of 
view  in  which  it  appears  singularly  adapted  for  the  seat  of  calm 
contemplation  and  learned  ease.  I  fear  the  evil-minded  will 
say,  the  calm  is  often  unaccompanied  by  contemplation,  and 
the  ease  unaccompanied  by  learning.  Still  I  must  ever  love  to 
see  such  great  means  brought  together,  and  such  assistance 
offered  to  both,  and  must  ever  feel  a  degree  of  exaltation  of 
mind  in  places  dedicated  for  so  many  centuries  to  the  cul- 
tivation of  the  noblest  and  most  distinguished  faculty  of  human 
nature ;  perhaps,  too,  a  little  spark  of  sexual  vanity  creeps  in 
with  the  wonder  one  cannot  help  feeling  at  men  enjoying  such 
advantages  and  doing  so  little,  and  women  labouring  under 
such  disadvantages  doing  so  much.  This,  my  dear  Joanna, 
regards  you  more  than  any  other  female  now  living.  Go  on 
then  and  prove  to  them,  that  poetry,  at  least,  is  as  independent 
of  sex  as  of  rule ;  that  it  is  a  spark  of  ethereal  fire  kindled  on 
earth  once  in  an  Age,  which  Shakspeare  alone  has  described, 
and  with  which  you  are  enlightened. 

M.  B. 

To  Joanna  Baillie,  from  Wimpole,  Nov.,  1809. 

Sunday,  \§th. — Looked  over  all  the  three  vols.  of 
Madame  du  Deffand's  letters,  published  at  Paris,  which  I 
got  yesterday ;  sketched  the  little  alteration  necessary  to 
be  made  in  my  preface  and  life. 

Monday,  2Qth. — In  the  evening  Charles  Stuart  (Bute) 
sat  with  me  till  twelve  o'clock.  We  talked  over  politics, 
on  which,  particularly  foreign  ones,  he  is  better  informed 
than  anybody,  has  seen  more,  and  judges  better. 

Wednesday,  22nd. — Saw  Mr.  Orme,  Longman's  partner, 
with  whom  I  settled  several  particulars  about  my  publi- 
cation. 

D  D  2 


404  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [iso9 

Thursday,  23rd. — Worked  hard  at  my  'Life,',  and  the 
arrangement  of  the  notices  to  be  taken  of  the  Paris  pub- 
lication. 

Saturday,  2oth. — I  spent  the  whole  day  in  my  garden 
and  greenhouse,  completely  enjoying  myself  and  forgetting 
everything  but  the  pots  I  was  arranging  and  the  roots  I 
was  transplanting,  my  mind  in  repose  and  my  body  in 
activity  ;  but  I  never  regret  a  day  like  this. 

Wednesday,  29th. — In  the  morning  saw  J.  Baillie,  after- 
wards worked  at  my  Letters.  Before  ten  set  out  for 
Kensington.  When  we  arrived  the  Princess  had  not  come 
out  of  the  dining-room.  In  about  ten  minutes  she  ap- 
peared with  Lady  Charlotte,  and  no  other  ladies.  Her 
manner  very  gracious  and  civil ;  announced  her  appoint- 
ment of  Lady  Charlotte  Campbell  to  us  as  her  Lady  of  the 
Bedchamber,  in  place  of  Lady  Sheffield.  The  gentlemen 
soon  followed  her  from  the  dining-room  ;  they  were  Lord 
Henry  Fitzgerald,  Mr.  Ward,*  Mr.  Gell,  Mr.  de  Puysegur, 
and  Colonel  Lindsay.  The  only  break  in  conversation 
was  looking  at  Colonel  Lindsay's  model  of  a  new  sort  of 
telegraph.  At  twelve  we  supped  in  her  own  little  morn- 
ing room,  looking  full  of  litter,  and  very  comfortable. 
Conversation  flagged  a  little ;  however,  the  Princess  sat 
until  half-past  one,  then  rose,  wished  us  a  good  night, 
and  we  were  at  home  before  two. 

Monday,  December  ±th. — A  long  visit  from  Stuart. 
Advised  him  to  go  into  Parliament,  where  his  great  know- 
ledge of  foreign  affairs  is  so  much  wanted.  He  does  not 
wish  and  has  no  thought  of  it  from  feeling  no  talent  for 
public  speaking,  and  thinking  (falsely,  I  think)  that  it 
would  take  him  away  from  his  profession,  which  he 
likes. 

Tuesday,  bth. — A  long  talk  with  Mr.  Orme  (Longman's 
partner)  about  the  printing,  the  quantity,  and  the  form 

*  Hon.  John  William  Ward,  afterwards  Lord  Dudley  and  Ward. 


1809]  ASSEMBLY  AT  THE   PRINCESS   OP  WALES'S.  405 

of  the  French  Letters.  Soon  after,  a  long  visit  from  my 
bishop,  with  his  notes  to  another  cahier  of  the  said  Letters. 
Eead  to  him  my  additions  to  the  '  Life,'  &c.  &c.  Inter- 
rupted by  the  arrival  of  Lord  Hartington,  to  whom  I  had 
promised  to  be  at  home.  His  happiness  at  his  sister's  * 
marriage  quite  charming. 

Saturday,  $th. — Dined  with  the  Princess  of  Wales  at 
Kensington  at  seven  o'clock.  Company,  only  Lord  Henry 
Fitzgerald,  Mr.  Gell,  ourselves,  and  Mrs.  Lisle,  in  waiting. 
Mrs.  Lisle  a  sad  aid  to  the  Princess  in  entertaining  her 
company,  not  having  a  word  to  throw  at  a  dog — but  the 
Princess  wants  no  aid.  Dinner  went  off  very  well ; 
servants  sent  away  and  dumb  waiters.  Dinner  and  dessert 
good,  but  plain,  served  upon  the  magnificent  plate  of  the 
Prince  of  Wales.  In  the  evening,  nobody  else  came. 
The  Princess  talked  of  the  apartments  above  stairs,  and 
proposed  our  looking  at  them.  Luckily  not  a  very  cold 
night.  We  all  wrapped  up,  and,  taking  two  candles  only 
with  us,  sallied  up-stairs.  The  royal  apartment  very 
handsome,  both  in  size  and  fittings  up ;  furniture,  properly 
speaking,  there  is  at  present  none.  In  the  first  room, 
some  of  the  finest  cork  models  I  have  ever  seen,  of  all 
the  principal  ruins  of  Eome,  and  in  all  the  rooms  very 
fine  pictures,  as  far  as  we  could  judge  by  the  light  of  our 
two  glimmering  candles,  carried  in  different  hands.  Supper 
on  the  table  when  we  came  down,  and  nearly  one  before 
we  got  away. 

Monday,  ll^A. — At  home  ah1  the  morning.  In  the 
evening,  at  ten  o'clock,  we  went  to  the  Princess  of  Wales'. 
Meant  to  be  an  assembly.  Princess  Sophia  of  Gloucester 
there.  Some  eight  or  ten  old  women  and  Lady  Harrowby, 
Lady  Shaftesbury  and  her  daughter,  Mrs.  C.  Locke  and 
the  two  Churchill  girls.  The  only  men  Lord  Westmore- 


*  Lady  Harriet  Cavendish  to  Lord  Granville  Leveson  Gower,  afterwards 
Earl  Granville. 


MISS   BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1809 

land,  Mr.  Manners  Button,  Lord  H.  Fitzgerald,  and  the 
two  Churchills,  father  and  son.  Much  later  came  Mr. 
Edward  Montague  *  and  Delme.  Princess  played  at  a 
round  table  with  Princess  Sophia,  &c.  &c.  Delme  and 
Lady  Barbara,  Mrs.  Locke,  and  the  Churchill  girls  danced 
reels,  &c.,  in  the  saloon.  The  table  dejeu  in  the  dining- 
room. 

Monday,  18th. — Busy  all  the  morning.  Saw  Mercier, 
the  printer,  and  gave  him  the  first  two  years  of  the  Letters 
to  print. 

Tuesday  ^  \$th. — Went  to  Co  vent  Garden.  In  Prince 
Staremberg's  box.  This  was  the  first  night  of  the 
theatre's  being  quiet  after  the  late  disturbances.  Between 
the  play  and  farce  one  man  in  the  pit  produced  a  placard, 
the  object  of  which  was  to  restore  Brandon,  and  he  was 
supported  by  a  man  who  spoke  from  the  upper  boxes  ; 
but  both  their  voices  were  soon  overpowered,  and  all  was 
perfectly  quiet  again.  The  house  full.  Play,  '  Merchant 
of  Venice,'  abominably  acted,  except  Charles  Keinble, 
who  did  Bassanio  well. 

Wednesday.,  2Qth. — Out  in  the  morning  in  the  carriage. 
Great  crowd  in  St.  James's  Park,  seeing  the  first  audi- 
ence of  the  Persian  ambassador  at  the  Queen's  house. 

Sunday,  24:th. — Lady  Harriet  Cavendish  married  this 
evening  at  Chiswick.  Quodfelix  faustemque  sit ! 

The  following  thoughts  on  language,  and  the  melancholy 
reflections  on  time  gliding  on,  belong  to  this  year  : — 

On  Language. 

Oct.  30,  1809. 

Mitford,  in  his  '  Enquiry  into  the  Principles  of  Harmony  in 
Language,'  decidedly  advises  adopting  the  Italian  mode  of  pro- 
nouncing Latin,  and  the  Athenian  mode  of  pronouncing  Greek, 
as  that  most  nearly  approximating  the  ancient  mode,  and  most 

'•*  Son  of  Mathew  Montague,  Esq.,  afterwards  Lord  Rokeby. 


1809]  THOUGHTS   OX   LANGUAGE.  407 

likely  to  make  us  sensible  of  the  harmony  of  their  verses.  (See 
page  270  et  passim.) 

He  notices  the  marvellous  critical  and  grammatical  learning 
of  the  modern  Greeks  in  their  ancient  language,  which  has 
been  uninterruptedly  cultivated  and  taught  to  all  persons  pre- 
tending to  education,  ever  since  it  was  actually  the  common 
language  of  the  people.  (See  page  276.) 

In  confirmation  of  what  he  says  as  to  the  acuteness  of  the 
modern  Greeks  in  those  perceptions  of  meaning,  independent  of 
reasoning,  I  remember  with  astonishment  the  depth  and  meta- 
physical niceties  of  a  certain  Petrarchi,  a  modern  Greek,  who 
gave  me  in  some  months'  teaching,  the  few,  and  now  almost 
forgotten,  ideas  I  ever  had  of  that  exquisite  language. 

This  Petrarchi  was,  in  all  other  respects,  a  singularly  slow, 
dull,  stupid  man,  holding  in  contempt  all  other  languages  and 
their  literature,  and  above  all  others  the  Latin,  to  which  he 
never  would  allow  my  ignorance  to  help  itself  with  an  allusion 
or  a  reference.  But  in  reply  to  my  enquiries  as  to  the  use  of 
the  different  parts  of  the  Greek  verb,  what  wonderful  and  pro- 
found application  of  the  action  of  the  mind  in  thought,  or  the 
powers  it  meant  to  express !  What  nice  disquisition  of  the 
different  tenses  !  What  feeling,  imperceptible  to  others,  of  the 
exact  measure  of  passion,  or  of  action  expressed  by  those 
tenses  in  which  no  English  scholar,  no  Porson,  no  Parr,  no 
Knight,  could  follow  him,  and  in  which,  to  say  the  truth,  I 
much  doubt  if  the  organs  of  perception  of  a  northern  people, 
either  of  mind  or  body,  would  ever  have  allowed  them  to  be 
sensible ! 

Time  gliding  on. 

The  stream  of  time  seems  now  to  carry  me  along  so  rapidly, 
that  I  already  approach  the  brink  of  the  great  ocean  of  eternity 
into  which  that  stream  is  hurrying  to  lose  itself.  I  feel  so  near 
disappearing  with  it,  that  I  would  fain  catch  at  some  idle  weeds 
as  my  bark  glides  by,  to  mark  my  passage. 

How  heartily  do  I  and  my  fireside  shake  hands,  when  we 
meet  alone  at  night  after  an  evening  passed  in  any  sort  of  com- 
pany ;  for  alas !  however  agreeable  that  company  may  be,  to 
have  been  in  it,  is  now,  to  me,  much  more  enjoyable  than  being 


408  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1309 

in  it.  Solitude  broken  by  a  book,  and  reverie  when  I  can  in- 
dulge in  it,  are  very  real  enjoyments.  The  rest  is  merely 
desirable  to  give  a  zest  to  these.  And  so  life  glides  by  me ! 
I  no  longer  make  an  attempt  to  mark  its  course,  and  aware  of 
the  extreme  rapidity  with  which  it  passes,  feel  the  consolation 
of  knowing  that  I  shall  not  long  be  oppressed,  even  by  the 
painful  sense  of  my  own  insignificance. 


1810]  VISIT   TO   THE   PRINCESS   OF   WALES.  409 


JOUKNAL. 
1810. 

January  ±th. — In  the  evening,  Mrs.  D.  and  Mr.  Stuart, 
whose  conversation  was  most  entertaining  on  the  history 
of  Spain.  His  information,  clearness,  memory,  and  judg- 
ment on  matters  of  history  are  quite  admirable. 

Sunday,  1th — At  ten  o'clock  went  to  the  Princess  of 
Wales ;  Princess  Sophia  of  Gloucester  there.  C'est  tout 
dire  as  to  the  dulness  of  the  party.  The  Princess  knows 
not  what  to  say  to  her,  nor  she  to  the  Princess,  who  at 
the  same  time  cannot  indulge  in  her  usual  flights  and  con- 
versation. The  only  women  were  (besides  Mrs.  Lisle  and 
Lady  Carnarvon  in  waiting)  Duchess  of  Leeds,*  Lady  De 
Eos,f  Mrs.  C.  Lock,  and  ourselves  ;  the  men — Lord  Grey, 
Brougham,  Lord  W.  Somerset,  and  half  a  score  more 
young  ones,  who  could  have  not  thought  it  royal  sport 
The  Princess  asked  us  to  stay  supper,  but  not  being  well 
I  got  off. 

Monday,  8th. — Waked,  feeling  well — a  feeling  for  which 
no  creature  that  walks  this  suffering  earth  can  be  more 
thankful  nor  more  prone  to  enjoy  than  myself.  Worked 
hard  at  my  Letters  all  the  morning. 

Thursday,  llth. — Went  to  Strawberry.  Walked  over 
to  Little  Strawberry  :  found  everything  out  of  doors  in 
excellent  winter  order  and  looking  quite  pretty ;  but  every- 
thing at  Twickenham  now  wears,  to  me,  a  melancholy 

*  Catherine,  daughter  of  Thomas  Anguish,  Esq.,  widow  of  Francis 
Godolphin,  fifth  Duke  of  Leeds  ;  married  1788 ;  died  1837. 

t  Charlotte  Fitzgerald  Baroness  de  Ros,  daughter  and  heir  of  the  Hon. 
Rohert  Boyle  Walsingham.  wife  of  Lord  Henry  Fitzgerald;  died  1831. 


410  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isio 

aspect  :  its  charms  are  no  longer  for  me.  Well,  this, 
however,  is  not  a  real  evil :  the  mind,  if  otherwise  un- 
encumbered, will  get  the  better  of  these  feelings,  and  turn 
to  other  sources  of  amusement  or  occupation ;  while  the 
memory  of  Twickenham  will  perhaps  afford  more  un- 
alloyed pleasure  than  its  actual  possession. 

Of  the  publication  of  Madame  du  Deffand's  Letters  at 
Paris,  to  which  Professor  Playfair  alludes,  Miss  Berry 
gives  the  following  account,  in  her  preface  to  the  work 
she  edited : — 

'  Madame  du  Deffand  bequeathed  to  Mr.  Walpole  the 
whole  of  her  MSS.  papers,  letters,  and  books  of  every 
description,  with  a  permission  to  the  Prince  de  Beauvau 
to  take  a  copy  of  any  of  the  papers  he  might  desire, 
before  he  conveyed  them  to  Mr.  Walpole.  This  per- 
mission Mr.  Walpole  suspected  he  had  extended  to  the 
substraction  of  some  of  the  original  papers.' 

'  To  this  permission,'  Miss  Berry  adds  in  a  note,  '  was 
probably  owing  the  publication  of  three  volumes  of 
Madame  du  Deffand's  Correspondence,  which  lately  ap- 
peared at  Paris ;  the  originals  of  almost  all  of  which  are 
in  the  Editor's  possession.' 

JOUENAL. 

Saturday,  I3th. — Worked  at  my  French  Letters  all 
morning  ;  at  five  o'clock  set  off  for  Chiswick. 

Sunday,  14#A. — Sat  with  the  Duchess  and  Lady  Geor- 
giana  :  an  interesting  conversation,  in  which  her  excellent 
heart  and  plain  unaffected  good  sense  shone  forth. 

Sunday,  21st. — Went  to  dinner  at  Kensington.  Not  one 
of  the  intended  party  but  ourselves  could  come  :  instead, 
we  had  Lyttelton,  Douglas,  Kinnaird,*  Sir  Eobert  Wilson, f 

*  Brother  to  the  late  Lord  Kinnaird,  banker  in  Westminster ;  died  1830. 

t  General  Sir  Robert  Wilson  was  the  son  of  Benjamin  Wilson,  the 
painter,  born  1777.  He  was  engaged  in  active  service  in  the  army  from 
1793  to  1812,  and  was  then  appointed  British  Commissioner  at  the  head- 


1810]  LADY    HARRIET   LEYESON   GOWER.  411 

Lord  H.  Fitz-Gerald,  and  ourselves — Lyttelton  always  a 
host  of  spirits  and  conversation  ;  the  party  by  no  means 
dull.  Supper  ordered  at  half-past  eleven  ;  we  caine  away 
at  one. 

Wednesday,  3Ist. — Called  on  Lady  Harriet,*  whom  I 
saw  for  the  first  time  in  her  own  house :  it  is  beautifully 
fitted  up  in  real  comfort  and  much  good  taste. 

The  following  letter  from  Professor  Playfair  belongs  to 
this  period : — 

Edinburgh,  llth  January,  1810. 

MY  DEAR  MADAM, — I  long  very  much  to  hear  how  you  are 
and  what  you  are  doing,  and  must  entreat  that  you  will  have 
the  goodness  to  tell  me  as  soon  as  you  conveniently  can.  A 
publication  which  I  have  just  seen  gives  me  a  good  deal  of 
solicitude,  as  I  know  not  how  far  it  may  interfere  with  your 
intentions.  I  mean  the  letters  of  Madame  du  Deffand,  just 
published  at  Paris,  containing  letters  of  D'Alembert,  Mon- 
tesquieu, Renault,  &c.  You  have  no  doubt  seen  it ;  many  of 
the  letters  are  extremely  interesting,  and  some  of  them,  I  think, 
can  hardly  fail  to  be  the  same  that  are  in  your  collection.  I 
feel  very  much  interested  to  know  how  this  matter  stands. 

I  suppose  you  are  now  in  town  enfamille.  Much  interesting 
discussion  about  public  affairs  must  soon  take  place.  What 
think  you  is  to  be  the  result  ?  Will  the  inertness  and  apathy  of 
the  public  prevail  over  all  other  considerations,  and  support  an 
administration  unparalleled  for  ignorance  and  weakness :  or  is 
the  nation  to  be  at  length  roused  to  a  sense  of  its  danger  ? 

I  shall  write  to  Mrs.  Howe  in  a  day  or  two,  and  send  her 
some  problems. 

JOHN  PLAYFAIR. 

P.S. — Lord  W.  Seymour,  in  whom  I  know  you  to  take  an 
interest,  is  now  here ;  he  is  much  better,  but  I  think  has  not 
recovered  his  former  strength  or  activity. 

quarters  of  the  allied  armies.  In  1816  he  was  concerned  in  the  escape  of 
Lafayette.  His  conduct  at  the  funeral  of  Queen  Caroline  led  to  his  dismis- 
sal from  the  army  in  1821,  but  he  was  reinstated  in  1825.  From  1818  to 
1831  he  was  M.P.  for  South wark;  from  1842  to  1849  Governor  of  Gibraltar; 
died  in  London,  1849.  He  was  a  writer  of  several  interesting  works  on 
military  subjects. 

*  Lady  Harriet  Leveson  Gower* 


412  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isio 

Tuesday,  February  13^. — At  home  all  the  morning, 
working  at  my  Letters. 

Friday,  ~\.6th. — In  the  evening  we  went  at  half-past  ten 
to  Lady  Cholmondeley's.  A  great  assembly,  with  the 
Persian  Ambassador. 

Friday,  2 3rd. — Went  to  the  play ;  in  Mrs.  Kemble's 
box.  '  The  Free  Knights,'  and  '  The  Budget  of  Blunders.' 
The  first  a  sort  of  Sadlers  Wells  pantomime,  but  interest- 
ing, and  Young's  acting  admirable.  'The  Budget  of 
Blunders '  all  old  blunders,  but  laughable  from  being  well 
acted.  Got  the  first  proof  from  Juigne,  the  new  printer. 

Wednesday,  28th. — Finest  spring  day  that  ever  was  felt, 
which  was  lucky,  for  it  was  the  fast  day  appointed,  and 
consequently  a  day  of  feasting  and  rejoicing  to  all  the 
lower  orders  of  people.  After  church,  Agnes  and  I 
walked  in  Hyde  Park.  In  my  life  I  never  saw  it  so  full 
of  walkers. 

Saturday,  March  3rd. — I  dined  at  Lord  Ellenborough's. 
Company  almost  the  whole  of  the  former  ministry :  Lord 
and  Lady  Grey,  Lord  and  Lady  Lansdowne,  Lord  Gren- 
ville,  Mr.  Thomas  Grenville,  Lord  John  Townshend,  Lord 
Holland,  Duke  of  Norfolk,  Lord  Hartington,  and  Lord 
Ellenborough  ;  himself  the  greatest  speaker. 

Sunday,  kth. — At  one  o'clock  went  with  Mrs.  D.  to  Mr. 
Hoper's,  to  stand  godmother,  with  her,  to  his  little  girl. 
Clergyman  kept  us  waiting  till  near  three,  from  the  num- 
ber of  communicants  there  had  been  at  St.  James's  Church 
— above  300  ;  this  accounted  for  by  the  number  of  people 
obliged  to  qualify,  as  it  is  called,  for  offices,  and  commonly 
doing  so  at  this  church.  In  the  evening  a  party  at  home, 
which  turned  out  more  numerous  than  we  expected,  for 
we  had  forty-three  people. 

Sunday,  \Sth. — Went  at  half-past  eleven  to  Kensington 
Chapel,  to  hear  Sydney  Smith  preach.*  The  sermon  upon 

*  The  Rev.  Sydney  Smith,  born  1771,  died  1845.    He  was  one  of  the 


1810]  REV.   SYDNEY   SMITH.  413 

'  Toleration  ; '  very  excellent  in  its  general  principles,  and 
in  the  light  in  which  Christianity  ought  to  be  considered. 

Saturday,  31st. — Mr.  Sydney  Smith  with  rne  in  the 
morning,  looking  critically  over  my  Preface  and  Life. 
Much  mended  by  his  observations,  upon  which  I  am  to 
work,  and  I  set  to  it  as  soon  as  he  was  gone. 

Tuesday,  April  3rd. — Lord  Aberdeen,  the  two  ladies, 
and  myself,  went  to  their  box  at  Covent  Garden.  The 
play,  '  The  Beggars'  Opera,'  not  only  most  execrably  sung 
and  acted,  but  the  best  parts  cut  out ;  but  whether  from 
carelessness  or  propriety  I  am  at  a  loss  to  know. 

Wednesday,  4th. — In  the  morning  called  on  J.  Baillie, 
to  whom  I  gave  a  good  lesson,  which  she  will  not  profit 
by.  Sat  a  long  time  with  Mrs.  Hope;  always  good- 
humoured  and  unaffected.  Hope  and  she  the  image  of 
domestic  comfort  and  good  understanding. 

Thursday,  5th. — Lady  Ellenborough  called  for  me  to 
go  to  Mrs.  Hope's.  An  enormous  assembly ;  the  whole 
house  open,  and  the  Princess  of  Wales  there.  Very  civil 
to  me,  although  I  had  excuses  to  make.  All  the  men  at 
the  House  of  Commons,  which  sat  till  half-past  seven 
o'clock,  and  voted  the  commitment  of  Sir  F.  Burdett  to 
the  Tower. 

Friday,  6th. — Went  at  eleven  o'clock  to  Brook  Street, 
to  Mrs.  Bouverie's.  Found  the  whole  of  Berkeley  Square 
and  Bruton  Street  illuminated ;  several  windows  having 

three  or  four  literary  friends  who  first  started  the  '  Edinburgh  Review.'  His 
eminence  as  a  writer  upon  various  subjects  was  great.  His  kindness  and 
charity  were  a  blessing  to  the  poor  by  whom  he  was  surrounded;  his  warmth 
of  heart,  the  clearness  and  depth  of  his  understanding,  and  his  brilliant  conver- 
sation, made  him  the  most  genial  of  social  companions,  the  most  cherished 
guest  of  every  society  he  entered.  His  abounding  wit  and  playful  humour 
were  always  founded  on  good  sense  and  on  practical  wisdom,  and  he  was  often 
apparently  so  amused  himself  with  the  comic  combinations  that  sprang  from 
these  sober  foundations,  that,  as  the  bright  thoughts  came  bubbling  forth 
in  words,  he  enhanced  the  amusement  of  others,  by  his  own  frank  mirth. 
To  have  enjoyed  the  society  of  Mr.  Sydney  Smith  must  be  regarded  as  a 
privilege  never  to  be  forgotten,  but  stored  with  other  memories  of  departed 
joys. 


414  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isio 

been  broken.  On  my  return  to  North  Audley  Street, 
between  twelve  and  one  o'clock,  every  house  in  Grosvenor 
Square  likewise  illuminated,  and  a  few  boys  and  rabble 
at  the  corners  of  some  of  the  streets,  calling  '  Hats  off,' 
and  '  Burdett  for  ever.'  All  quiet  in  North  Audley  Street, 
and  no  lighting.  Sir  F.  B.  not  gone  to  the  Tower,  and 
resisting  the  order.* 

Saturday,  1th. — Soon  after  two  o'clock  went  out  with 
Agnes.  Drove  down  Berkeley  Street  into  Piccadilly,  and 
passed  Sir  F.  B.'s  house  twice.  The  Horse  Guards  were 
now  patrolling  before  it,  and  the  people,  and  for  the  far 
greater  part  very  decent  people,  in  peletons  only  in  the 
street.  From  Piccadilly  we  went  to  St.  James's  Square, 
and  passed  Lord  Castlereagh's  house,  in  which  there  was 
not  a  pane  left,  and  one  or  two  of  the  lower  window 
frames  broken  in.  The  window  shutters  were  all  shut, 
and  many  people  looking  at  it.  After  sitting  some  time 
with  Lady  Hardwicke  we  came  again  into  Piccadilly,  but 
the  crowd  had  become  so  great,  both  of  carriages  and 
people,  that  we  turned  up  Dover  Street.  No  passage  was 
now  allowed  by  the  Horse  Guards  up  Berkeley  Street, 
and  the  people  were  crowding  down  to  Piccadilly  in 
every  direction,  and  every  window  and  the  tops  of  the 
houses  crowded  with  people,  in  expectation  of  seeing  him 
pass  to  the  Tower.  But  his  resistance  continued  obstinate, 
and  the  Government,  with  a  folly,  improvidence,  and 
weakness  worthy  of  them,  had  never  supposed  resistance 


*  Veneris,  6°  die  Aprilis,  1810. — "Whereas  the  House  of  Commons  has 
this  day  adjudged  that  Sir  Francis  Burdett,  Bart.,  who  has  admitted  that 
a  letter,  signed  'Francis  Burdett,'  and  further  part  of  a  paper  entitled 
'  Argument,'  in  Cobbetfs  Weekly  Register,  of  March  24,  1810,  was  printed 
by  his  authority  (which  letter  and  argument  the  said  House  has  resolved  to 
be  a  libellous  and  scandalous  pap^r,  reflecting  on  the  just  rights  and  privi- 
leges of  the  said  House),  has  been  thereby  guilty  of  a  breach  of  the  privi- 
leges of  the  said  House.  The  House  of  Commons  hath  thereupon  ordered 
that  the  said  Sir  Francis  Burdett,  for  his  said  offence,  be  committed  to  His 
Majesty's  Tower  of  London. 


1810]  ARKEST    OF   SIR   F.    BURDETT.  415 

possible,  and  were  totally  at  a  loss  how  to  meet  it.  The 
whole  of  Saturday  the  people  again  pelted  everybody  in 
Piccadilly,  and  in  the  evening,  in  various  parts  of  the 
town,  betrayed  a  disposition  to  rioting,  and  to  insisting 
upon  lights ;  why,  or  wherefore,  neither  themselves  nor 
any  mortal  could  tell.  Our  street  and  all  above  it  re- 
mained quite  quiet.  At  half-past  nine  we  went  to  Lord 
Dunmore's.  Here  we  sat  till  past  eleven,  when  I  went  to 
Bruton  Street,  where  I  found  them  again  illuminated, 
though  all  was  quiet;  and  in  Grosvenor  and  Berkeley 
Squares  detachments  both  of  Light  Horse  (the  13th)  and 
Foot  Guards,  and  three  pieces  of  artillery  were  stationed 
— in  the  south  corner  of  Grosvenor  Square  and  the  north 
of  Berkeley  Square.  Everybody  saying  that  now  it  was 
impossible  Sir  F.  B.  could  be  touched  till  after  Monday, 
when  the  House  would  meet  and  come  to  a  decision. 

Sunday,  8th. — Saw  Mr.  Hatchet,  who  lives  at  the  cor- 
ner of  Clarges  Street ;  he  reported  Piccadilly  to  be  full  of 
people,  but  free  from  outrage,  owing  to  the  presence  of 
the  Horse  Guards  ;  the  people,  however,  getting  into  the 
Green  Park,  had  pelted  them  through  the  iron  rails,  upon 
•which  a  troop  was  dismounted  and  marched  by  with  their 
bayonets  fixed  on  their  carabines,  through  the  little  gate 
into  the  Green  Park,  and  driving  the  people  without  mis- 
chief to  the  walk  on  the  other  side  of  the  pond,  and  keep- 
ing that  next  the  street  clear.  I  walked  to  Lady  G.  Mor- 
peth's,  with  whom  I  sat  an  hour ;  it  was  a  cold  dry  day, 
and  the  streets  were  uncommonly  full,  but  no  apparent 
disposition  to  rioting  or  anything  more  than  general  curi- 
osity, and  a  general  fabrication  and  belief  in  lies  at  the 
corner  of  every  street. 

Monday,  9th. — A  hard  rain,  which  continued  all  night, 
had  helped  to  disperse  the  mob  and  keep  all  quiet  in  the 
streets  last  night.  The  rain  continued  the  whole  of  this  day. 
The  first  thing  we  heard  in  the  morning  was  that  Sir  F,  B.'s 
house  had  been  broken  into  by  the  civil  power,  that  is 


416  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isio 

to  say  the  police  officers,  at  six  o'clock  in  the  morning,  and 
that  he  was  then  on  his  road  to  the  Tower  in  a  hired 
coach-and-four,  escorted  by  a  strong  party  of  cavalry  and 
Light  Horse.  He  was  carried  up  Bond  Street  so  far,  and 
along  Conduit  Street  and  by  Portland  Street  to  the  New 

O  w 

Koad,  the  Lord  Mayor  having  declined  admitting  his  pas- 
sage with  troops  through  the  City.  The  crowds  in  Bond 
Street,  Oxford  Street,  &c.,  were  great,  in  spite  of  the  con- 
tinued rain,  but  no  mischief  ensued,  and  he  was  safely 
lodged  in  the  Tower,  and  received  there  by  Lord  Moira  at 
half-past  eleven  o'clock.  Lord  Moira  got  quite  safe  back, 
the  crowd  in  the  streets  pulling  off  their  hats,  and  being 
civil.  But  the  cavalry  on  their  return,  especially  the 
Horse  Guards,  after  long  bearing  the  insults  of  the  people 
in  the  most  exemplary  manner,  at  last,  in  the  narrow  lanes 
of  the  City,  fired  some  of  their  pistols  and  carabines, 
which  killed  two  persons  and  wounded  several  others.  It 
continued  raining  hard  and  continually  the  whole  day, 
which  considerably  helped  to  drive  home  the  idlers  and 
the  lookers  on,  of  which  every  great  mob  in  a  great 
town  is  half  composed.  Sir  Thomas  Sutton  called  in  the 
morning  to  inform  us  of  Lord  Moira*  having  got  to  the 
Tower  quietly  at  half-past  ten  before  his  prisoner,  and 
then  again  to  tell  us  of  his  safe  return.  In  the  evening 
the  town  was  quite  quiet ;  there  were  some  patrols  of  sol- 
diers in  the  streets,  but  the  cannons  were  moved  out  of 
the  squares,  and  everything  at  the  west  end  of  the  town 
was  tranquil,  to  which  the  continuous  rain  in  some  degree 
contributed. 

Wednesday,  Ilth. — Saw  Mr.  Sydney  Smith  in  the 
morning  ;  went  over  again  my  Preface  and  Life ;  adopted 
almost  all  his  corrections ;  expressed  with  much  warmth 
and  sincerity  my  thanks  to  him.  I  believe  he  was  pleased, 
but  I  have  not  known  him  long  enough  for  him  to  know 

*  Afterwards  Marquis  of  Hastings,  constable  and  chief  governor  of  the 
Tower  j  died  1836. 


1810]  DEATH   OP  THE   HON.   C.   YORKE.  417 

me.  In  the  evening  to  Mr.  Whitbread's ;  a  large  meeting 
of  all  the  party,  and  very  agreeable. 

Sunday,  22nd. — Walked  off  to  St.  George's  Church ; 
the  church  very  full,  and  the  sermon  by  Mr.  Hodgson, 
whom  I  went  to  hear,  excited  my  attention. 

Sunday,  29th. — Saw  Dr.  Baillie  in  the  evening ;  he  had 
been  sent  for  to  Wimpole,  and  was  going  next  morning  at 
five  o'clock. 

Monday,  3(M. — Soon  after  eleven  arrived  the  fatal  let- 
ter from  Agnes,  brought  by  Dr.  Baillie,  announcing  poor 
Charlie's  *  death  at  Wimpole  the  day  before.  The  Lord 
have  mercy  on  his  mother !  few  things  out  of  my  own 
family  could,  on  her  account,  more  heartily  affect  me. 
While  Agnes's  melancholy  letter  lays  before  me,  and  my 
mind  is  full  of  what  at  this  moment  the  wretched  parents 
of  this  poor  only  boy  are  feeling,  the  carriages  are  rolling 
by  in  hundreds  to  Lady  Hertford's  music  and  Mrs.  Beau- 
mont's ball !  But  this  is  human  life  !  I  know  it,  and  have 
had  enough  of  it. 

Thursday,  May  3rd. — About  nine  o'clock  Mr.  Mon- 
tague told  me  he  had  left  Wimpole  that  day,  and  had 
persuaded  them  all  to  come  to  town,  and  that  they  would 
certainly  arrive  that  night. 

Friday,  ±th. — In  the  morning  went  down  to  St.  James's 
Square  with  Agnes,  and  the  poor  afflicted  souls  had  in- 
tended seeing  me  as  well  as  her,  but  I  thought  it  better 
not  to-day. 

Saturday,  bth. — We  went  again  down  to  St.  James's 
Square  in  the  morning,  and  I  saw  and  sat  with  them  all. 
It  was  a  sort  of  relief  to  my  mind,  for  I  found  them  bet- 
ter than  I  expected,  that  is  to  say,  their  grief  of  that  ten- 
der saint-like  kind,  which  it  is  a  comfort  to  share  and  to 
be  shared.  This  evening  they  are  to  go  to  Lady  A.  Bar- 
nard's little  place  at  Wimbledon,  merely  to  avoid  the 

*  Hon.  Charles  Yorke,  died  in  his  thirteenth  year. 
VOL.  II.  E  E 


418  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isio 

number  of  people  who  would  want,  and  whom  they  could 
hardly  refuse  seeing  them. 

Friday,  llth. — In  the  morning  went  by  myself  to  Wim- 
bledon. Much  more  comfortable  than  I  expected  it; 
was  a  good  day  with  Lady  Hardwicke  ;  both  she  and  he 
had  been  occupied  with  the  sheets  of  the  French  Letters  I 
had  sent  them,  and  with  my  Preface.  They  both  talked 
to  me  a  great  deal  about  it ;  had  made  little  corrections, 
&c. 

Thursday,  17th. — At  home  all  morning ;  saw  Mr.  Long- 
man ;  perfectly  content  with  what  I  have  been  doing,  and 
very  civil  about  everything  that  depends  upon  him.  At 
ten  went  to  Lady  Liddell ;  *  few  people  there ;  poured  in 
by  hundreds,  all  the  north,  and  many  from  every  other 
point  of  the  compass  before  twelve,  when  we  went  to 
Lady  Shaftesbury's,  luckily  almost  next  door  in  Portland 
Place.  The  dancing  began  immediately :  first,  an  English 
dance ;  then  two  quadrilles,  admirably  well  danced ;  high 
benches  round  the  room,  upon  which  everybody  mounted. 
Then  another  English  dance  ;  and  then  Miss  Montgomery 
danced  a  Bolero,  and  Lady  Barbara  immediately  after- 
wards the  Tambourine  dance,  which  was  really  admirable. 
The  ball,  upon  the  whole,  both  with  respect  to  numbers, 
lighting,  company,  dress,  and  dancing,  one  of  the  most 
brilliant  I  ever  saw  in  London. 

Friday,  ISth. — Went  to  Barthelrnan's  concert  with  Lady 
Ellenborough.  The  party,  Lord  and  Lady  Ellenborough, 
Lord  and  Lady  Dunmore,  Lord  Sidmouth,  sat  together 
very  comfortably.  The  Handel  part  of  the  concert  fine. 
The  Hanover  Square  Eooms  quite  full  of  persons,  not  one 
of  whose  faces  I  had  ever  seen  before.  At  the  end  of  the 
first  act  I  went  away,  and  walked  down  the  whole  length 
of  the  room  with  Mr.  Eogers,  through  rows  of  people,  all 
well  or  expensively  dressed,  who  had  paid  half  a  guinea 
for  their  tickets,  such  a  place  is  London ! 

*  Wife  of  Sir  Thomas  Liddell,  afterwards  Lord  Ravens-worth. 


1810]  RELEASE   OF   SIE  F.   BURDETT.  419 

Tuesday,  22nd. — Soon  after  one  o'clock  went  to  Sloane 
Street,  to  call  for  Lady  Charlotte  Lindsay,  to  go  to  Lady 
Buckinghamshire's*  Venetian  breakfast.  We  went  on  by 
ourselves  to  Lady  Hood's  f  house,  next  door  to  the  break- 
fast, from  whence  we  proceeded  with  her.  The  house, 
spacious,  clean  and  pretty,  the  garden  looked  pretty,  filled 
with  young  and  gaily-dressed  people  dancing,  some  of 
them  in  masks,  and  many  in  dominoes,  for  this  was  the 
notion  of  a  Venetian  breakfast !  The  eating  part  of  it 
was  luckily  quite  h  PAnglaise,  good  bread  and  butter,  tea 
and  coffee,  &c. 

Thursday,  June  21st. — All  the  streets  full  of  com- 
mon people,  moving  about  in  all  directions  to  see 
Sir  Francis  Burdett's  coming  out  of  the  Tower. 
Went  in  our  carriage  down  to  Piccadilly  just  as 
the  procession,  with  its  innumerable  attendants,  were 
passing,  and  therefore  turned  directly  into  the  court  of 
Devonshire  House,  and,  going  up  a  ladder  from  the  stable 
to  the  roof  next  Sir  F.  Burdett's,  saw  at  our  ease  the 
enormous  troops  of  *  unwashed  artificers '  who  accom- 
panied on  foot  a  long  train  of  shabby  carriages,  and 
squadrons  of  people  on  horseback,  which  formed  the  pro- 
cession, in  which  Sir  F.  Burdett  was  not,  having  gone 
quietly  from  the  Tower  by  water  to  Putney,  and  from 
thence  to  Wimbledon,  to  the  great  disappointment  of  his 
followers ;  a  third  part  of  whom,  it  is  said,  left  the  proces- 
sion before  it  left  the  City.  The  numbers  that  remained, 
joined  to  the  spectators,  certainly  could  not  be  less  than 
150,000  people  ;  I  mean  the  number  that  we  saw  in  the 
whole  length  of  Piccadilly.  There  were  three  shabby 
open  carriages,  drawn  by  men,  and  filled  with  other  men, 
who  were  violently  applauded  and  huzzaed.  We  none 
of  us  knew  any  of  them  by  sight,  but  were  told  Mr. 

*  Albinia,  daughter  of  Lord  Vere  Bertie,  and  granddaughter  of  the  first 
Duke  of  Ancaster ;  married  Earl  of  Buckinghamshire,  1757 ;  died  1816. 
t  Wife  of  Sir  Samuel  Hood,  afterwards  married  to  Stuart  Mackenzie,  Esq. 

£  E  2 


420  MISS  BEERY'S  JOURNAL.  [isio 

Waithman  was  in  one  of  them.  After  they  had  passed  and 
huzzaed  before  Sir  F.  Burdett's  house,  they  dispersed  by 
the  other  streets  of  Piccadilly. 

Tuesday,  July  17 'th. — Went  to  Lady  EUenborough's. 
Soon  after  eleven  we  set  out  for  Deptford ;  Lord  Ellen- 
borough,  myself,  and  Mr.  Pakenham,  in  their  coach  and 
four,  and  Lady  Ellenborough  and  the  rest  of  the  party  in 
two  other  carriages.  An  almost  perpetual  string  of  car- 
riages of  one  sort  or  other  the  whole  way  to  Deptford. 
We  had  cards  to  go  into  the  Victualling-office  Yard. 
From  thence  we  walked  into  the  Dockyard ;  the  crowd 
on  foot  there  excessive.  With  all  our  gentlemen,  and  Mr. 
Towey,  a  Commissioner  of  the  Victualling-office,  at  our 
head,  we  could  with  difficulty  make  our  way  good,  into 
the  covered  seats  set  apart  for  tickets  from  the  Lords  of 
the  Admiralty  and  the  Commissioners,  on  each  side  the 
slip  where  the  ship  was.*  We  were  at  last  placed  very 
near  the  end.  The  ship  went  off  five  minutes  before  two 
most  majestically,  though  we  were  too  near  her  to  see 
much  of  the  effect  in  the  water.  The  river  was  crowded 
with  boats,  and  when  this  enormous  ship  drove  for  a 
minute  or  two  with  the  tide,  before  her  anchors  held  her, 
she  must  have  sunk  some  of  the  boats,  which  were  as 
thick  as  they  could  lay  around.  But  one  person,  that  I 
could  hear,  was  drowned.  The  Princess  of  Wales  was  upon 
the  water  in  a  green-covered  barge,  steered  by  a  post 
captain.  Sir  William  Eule,  one  of  the  Surveyors  of  the 
Navy,  took  us  on  board  the  King's  yacht  (that  has  always 
been  at  Weyinouth) ;  it  is  now  in  dock.  A  fine  maho- 
gany and  gilded  thing,  really  very  handsome ;  but  gilt 
blocks  look  somehow  so  inappropriate  for  use,  that  they 
seem  too  misplaced  to  please.  The  crowd  of  common 
people  and  their  wives  and  children,  upon  the  deck  of  this 
vessel  was  great,  and  nothing  but  authority  and  great 

*  The  '  Queen  Charlotte,'  120  guns. 


1810]      LAUNCH  OP  THE  '  QUEEN  CHARLOTTE.'      421 

names  in  the  yard  could  obtain  leave  for  the  cabins  being 
opened  to  our  party. 

Friday •,  2(M. — Sat  to  work,  and  transcribed  all  the 
many  errors  the  accurate  eye  of  Lord  Hardwicke  had 
discovered. 

Monday,  30 th. — Went  by  appointment  with  Eobert  to 
Grafton  Street,  to  consult  with  Mr.  Thornton  about  the 
library  he  proposes  adding  to  his  house.  The  architect 
with  him — a  Mr.  Hopper ;  his  ideas  in  some  respects 
good. 

Thursday,  August  2nd. — Received  my  copies  of  the 
Letters  from  the  bookseller. 

To  Mrs.  Cholmeley. 
Strawberry  Hill,  Tuesday,  7th  August,  1810. 

I  have  just  been  writing  a  line  to  Mr.  Sydney  Smith  to  inform 
him  that  a  copy  of  Madame  du  Deffand's  Letters  awaits  his 
orders,  and  to  beg  that  as  soon  as  he  has  cast  his  eye  over  the 
vols.,  that  he  will  lend  them  to  you.  .  .  .  The  preface  and  life 
you  will,  I  hope,  be  curious  to  read  as  my  writing.  You  will 
tell  me  truly  how  they  strike  you.  Even  Sydney  Smith  said  he 
never  knew  any  one  who  bore  cutting  and  slashing  so  well.  .  .  . 
You  mistake  in  supposing  both  our  houses  on  our  hands.  Little 
Strawberry  has  been  let  ever  since  the  1st  July,  to  Dr.  Bell,  a 
Prebendary  of  Westminster.  But  these  yearly  lettings  answer 
so  ill,  and  are  such  a  continual  source  of  trouble  and  vexation 
to  me,  that  I  mean  to  seek  letting  it  upon  lease.  ...  If  we 
obtain  not  as  much  for  the  year,  as  we  now  get  for  six  months, 
we  shall  be  rich  by  the  change,  and  every  such  change  is  abso- 
lutely necessary  to  be  made  in  these  days,  when  our  privations 
are  at  least  as  great  as  other  people's.  The  term  of  our  yearly 
job  horses  being  out,  we  have  none  at  present,  and  heaven 
knows  when  we  shall  be  able  to  take  them  up  again,  while 
horse-hire  and  everything  else  augments  in  price  every  day.  In 
spite  of  all  my  determinations  not  to  allow  money,  or  consi- 
derations about  it,  to  wrong  the  remainder  of  my  life,  it  is 
impossible  not  to  be  sometimes  plagued,  and  sometimes  melan- 
choly both  with  what  one  does,  and  what  one  does  not  do.  We 


422  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isio 

have  at  present  the  happiness  of  having  with  us  our  friend  and 
cousin,  Mrs.  Bannister  (Basleton),  whose  husband  has  kindly 
allowed  her  to  fly  up  for  a  month  to  see  Agnes.  The  rational 
cheerful  happiness  of  her  well-ordered  mind,  in  her  union  with 
a  sensible  man  who  knows  her  value,  and  who  doats  upon  her, 
is  really  quite  a  consoling  view  of  existence,  and  her  having  so 
well  deserved  the  quiet  comforts  she  enjoys  by  all  her  former  life 
and  sufferings,  allows  one  reasonably  to  hope  they  will  last. 

JOUKNAL. 

Tuesday,  14^A. — Eeceived  the  two  notes  for  a  hundred 
pounds  each  for  my  book,  from  Longman,  payable  six 
months  hence. 

Thursday,  IQth. — I  worked  hard  at  restoring  all  the 
Du  DefFand  papers  into  their  original  box,  which  is  to  be 
left  here. 

Saturday,  18th. — Walked  over  with  Bab  and  my  father, 
after  breakfast,  to  Little  Strawberry.  The  garden  full  of 
small  fruits,  which  the  tenants  do  not  seem  to  destroy. 
My  flower-garden  overgrown  with  weeds.  I  was  begged 
to  go  in  and  see  Dr.  Bell,  which  I  did,  and  found  the  poor 
little  deaf  old  man  sitting  in  the  drawing-room,  unable  to 
take  exercise,  and  starving  of  cold  because  he  could  not 
think  of  having  a  fire  in  August ! 

Saturday,  2bth. — The  Princess  of  Wales  had  announced 
herself  to  Strawberry  Hill  at  five  o'clock ;  she  did  not 
arrive  till  half-past  six  o'clock.  She  had  with  her  only 
Lady  Charlotte  Campbell,  though  she  had  said  she  meant 
to  bring  with  her  two  or  three  gentlemen.  She  had 
waited  for  Mr.  Gell  and  Mr.  Craven,*  who  had  mistaken 
the  day.  We  had  a  cold  dinner,  as  it  was  supposed  to  be 
luncheon  only.  The  Princess  was  very  lively,  though  the 
company  was  certainly  not  very  amusing  for  her.  She 
remained  long  at  table,  then  walked  and  sat  in  the  garden, 
and  afterwards  looked  at  some  books  of  engravings ;  and 

*  Hon.  Keppel  Craven,  son  of  William  Lord  Craven ;  born  1779. 


1810]  VISIT  TO  HAM   HOUSE.  423 

was  sufficiently  amused  to  remain  till  twelve  o'clock, 
instead  of  leaving  at  half-past  nine  when  the  carriage  was 
ordered.  The  Princess  talked  a  great  deal  to  me,  and,  as 
the  company  was  so  small,  I  exerted  myself  to  keep  up 
the  conversation,  and  to  respond  to  her  gracious  manner. 

Tuesday,  28#A. — We  went  to  Ham  House.  The  house 
and  the  gardens  are  in  the  old  style  ;  that  is  to  say,  the 
style  of  Charles  II.,  and  belonged  to  the  Duke  of  Lauder- 
dale,* who  married  an  heiress,  Countess  of  Dysart,  in 
her  own  right.  There  are  a  great  many  portraits,  some 
of  them  very  good,  and  several  charming  little  pictures  of 
the  Flemish  school ;  much  old  furniture,  and  some  can- 
delabras  in  silver,  chased  to  perfection.  I  was  much 
pleased  with  the  house  and  its  situation,  surrounded  as  it 
is  by  large  avenues  of  trees,  with  its  terraced  gardens,  and 
its  great  bowling  green  ;  and  it  needs  only  to  cut  down  a 
few  trees  to  enjoy  a  most  smiling  scene,  yet  as  perfectly 
quiet  and  secluded  as  if  the  house  were  placed  in  the 
furthest  county  from  London.^ 

Friday,  31st. — During  the  night  there  was  a  clap  of 

*  John  Maitland,  second  Earl  of  Lauderdale,  was  created  Marquis  and 
Duke  of  Lauderdale  1672.  He  married  first,  Ann,  daughter  of  Lord  Home, 
secondly,  1671,  Eliza  Countess  of  Dysart,  relict  of  Sir  Lionel  Tollemache, 
Bart. ;  died  1682. 

f  The  description  of  a  visit  to  Ham  House  from  the  pen  of  Queen  Char- 
lotte, addressed  to  one  of  her  own  family,  may  be  of  some  interest  to  the 
reader.  The  spelling,  capital  letters,  &c.,  are  retained,  as  in  the  original 
letter : — 

'  I  am  to  thank  My  dearest  ....  for  a  very  Kind  Letter  I  received  yes- 
terday, &  wished  to  have  answered  it  immediately,  but  was  prevented  doing 
it  by  a  Visit  to  Ldy  Caroline  and  M™  Darner  at  Ham,  where  we  were 
received  most  kindly  in  Every  Sense.  This  little  retreat  is  quite  a  little 
Earthly  Paradise,  The  House  stands  in  a  Green  Field  Incircled  by  Most 
Magniticant  Trees  all  Planted  by  the  late  Grl  Carpenter,  A  Gravel  Walk 
goes  all  Round  the  Shrubbery  and  also  round  another  Field  which  goes  to 
the  end  of  Ham  walks,  there  they  keep  three  Cows  the  produce  of  their 
Milck  is  sufficient  for  their  Establishment.  The  House  consists  below  Stairs 
of  a  Small  Hall,  Drawing  Room  &  Dining  Room  &  a  Small  Parlour  which 
is  Lady  Portarlingtons  Painting  Room  when  she  inhabits  the  House.  The 
Drawing  &  Dining  Room  are  entirely  furnished  with  Lady  Portarlington's 
Paintings  Consisting  Chiefly  of  Copies  after  the  Old  and  most  Famous 


424  MISS  BEKRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isio 

thunder  which  awoke  and  frightened  everybody,  and  I 
above  all,  who  am  always,  to  my  shame,  afraid  of  thunder. 
It  was  a  single  clap,  which  seemed  to  be  immediately  over 
London,  but  which  really  fell  at  Kensington,  near  the 
palace.  Several  panes  of  glass  were  broken  by  the  per- 
cussion of  the  air ;  and  a  large  tree,  near  the  entrance  to 

Masters.  A  Picture  of  Her  Mother  in  a  Turkish  Dress,  one  of  the  Present 
Lrd  Bute,  &  one  of  Sr  Charles  Stewart  are  those  not  done  by  Her.  From 
the  Salle  de  Companie  You  go  into  the  Gardens  where  under  the  Shade  of 
the  finest  Trees  possible  You  may  save  Yourself  from  the  Violence  of  the 
Sun.  Above  Stairs  there  are  upon  the  Best  Floor  four  excellent  Bed 
Chambers,  &  M"  Darner  assures  me  that  the  Attics  are  good  &  the 
Offices  also.  We  Dined  at  three  &  had  to  the  Honour  of  M™  D.'s  House- 
keeper &  Cook  as  Elegant  &  good  a  Dinner  as  if  a  Cordon  Bleue  had 
directed  it,  we  were  very  Chearfull  &  a  little  after  four  we  drank  Coffe ; 
the  Rain  having  ceased  Ldy  Caroline  wished  to  shew  me  from  Ham  walks 
the  View  of  the  Biver  &  likewise  that  of  Lord  Dysart's  Place  &  as  She 
has  been  favoured  with  a  Key  She  offered  to  carry  us  there,  we  walked  & 
most  delightfull  it  was  there,  &  saw  not  only  the  House,  but  all  the  Beau- 
tifull  Old  China  which  a  Civil  Housekeeper  offered  to  show  us.  It  is  so 
fine  a  Collection  that  to  know  &  admire  it  as  one  ought  to  do  it  would 
require  many  Hours,  but  when  all  the  Fine  Paintings,  Cabinets  of  Excellent 
Workmanship  both  in  Ivory  &  Amber  also  attrack  Yr  Notice  Days  are 
required  to  see  it  with  Advantage  to  oneself.  The  House  is  much  altered 
since  I  saw  it  by  repairing  &  tho'  the  Old  Furniture  still  remains  it  is  now 
kept  so  clean,  that  even  under  the  Tattered  State  of  Hangings  &  Chairs 
One  must  admire  the  good  Taste  of  Our  forefathers  &  their  Magnificence. 
The  Parquete"  Floors  have  been  taken  up  with  great  Care,  Cleaned  &  re- 
laid  &  in  order  to  preserve  them  the  Present  Lord  has  put  Carpets  over 
them,  but  of  Course  not  Nailed  down.  I  saw  this  time  also  the  Chapel 
which  is  so  dark  &  Dismal  that  I  could  not  go  into  it.  Upon  the  whole  the 
Place  remaining  in  its  old  Stile  is  Beautifull  &  Magnificent  both  within  & 
without,  but  truely  Melancholy.  My  lord  is  very  little  there  since  the 
Death  of  His  Lady  for  whom  He  had  the  greatest  regard  &  attention. 
We  returned  by  six  to  Ham,  and  left  Our  Hostesses  &  Ldy  Cardigan  immedi- 
ately, we  were  back  time  enough  to  Dress  before  the  Kg  returned  from 
London,  &  I  had  before  that  a  Visit  from  Augustus  [Duke  of  Sussex],  who 
sets  out  to  Day  to  join  the  Prince,  but  means  to  see  Oxford  &  Blenheim  in 

His  way.      And  now  my  dearest I  know  of  no  more  to  entertain 

you  for  to  Day,  &  if  I  have  succeeded  in  giving  You  but  a  Quarter  of  an 
Hours  Amusement  I  shall  be  amply  rewarded,  but  the  greatest  reward  You 
could  give  me,  &  the  best  News  from  Y'  Part  of  the  World  would  be  that 
of  Yr  being  better  which  I  hope  will  soon  be  attained  by  Fresh  Air,  and  in- 
hailing  the  Soft  Sea  Breathe.  This  is  the  Constant  Prayer  &  wish  of 

Yr  affectionnate &  Friend, 

« the  7th  Sep1*  1809.'  <  CHARLOTTE. 


1810]  A  THUNDER  STORM.  425 

the  Princess  of  Wales's  apartments,  was  half  torn  up.  Sir 
Harry  Englefield,  Eogers,  Gell,  and  Keppel  Craven,  who 
went  out  the  instant  supper  was  over  at  the  Princess's, 
were  surrounded  with  a  blue  flame,  which  serpentined  in 
a  thousand  little  zigzags  of  fire ;  and  the  noise  of  the 
thunder  afterwards  sounded  like  the  largest  pieces  of 
artillery  fired  off  in  their  ears.  They  all  felt  deafened  for 
a  time,  and  then  quitted  their  carriage,  and,  expecting 
the  continuance  of  the  storm,  re-entered  the  Princess's 
apartments ;  but  in  less  than  an  hour  the  sky  was  perfectly 
clear  and  covered  with  stars. 

Saturday,  September  \st — Notwithstanding  the  storm 
last  evening,  the  morning  is  hotter  than  ever.  The  ther- 
mometer yesterday  and  to-day  was  up  to  86  and  89. 

Saturday,  8th. — I  went  to  Kensington,  to  Lady  C. 
Campbell,  to  take  Madame  du  Deffand's  Letters  to  the 
Princess.  The  Princess,  who  came  into  her  ladyship's 
room,  thanked  me  in  the  most  gracious  manner  possible. 
She  remained  talking  with  me  for  more  than  an  hour,  and 
invited  me  to  dine  with  her  to-day,  but  I  was  furnished 
with  an  excuse,  which  she  accepted ;  I  was  going  into  the 
country,  and  she  took  leave  of  me,  saying  a  thousand 
amiable  things,  and  begging  me  to  remember  her,  and  to 
preserve  her  in  my  '  good  graces.' 

Wednesday,  I2th. — I  saw  Mr.  Hope,  to  whom  I  had  to 
talk  upon  the  subject  of  the  decorations  of  Mrs.  D —  -'s 
theatre,  and  to  ask  his  advice  about  Mr.  Thornton's 
intended  library. 

The  following  letters,  from  Colbert,  Bishop  of  Kodez, 
Professor  Playfair,  Mr.  Cambridge,  Mr.  Hope,  and  Mr. 
Eoscoe,  bear  testimony  to  the  impression  made  on  them 
by  the  manner  in  which  Miss  Berry  had  executed  her 
arduous  task  as  editor  of  Madame  du  Deffand's  Letters, 
and  as  author  of  the  preface  and  notes,  which  added  so 
much  to  the  interest  of  the  work  : — 


426  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isio 

Londres,  le  3  d'Aout,  1810. 

J'ai  recu  hier  au  soir,  Mademoiselle,  un  gros  paquet  avec  une 
petite  lettre  attachee  a  1'enveloppe.  J'ai  ouvert  1'un  et  1'autre 
avec  1'empressement  de  la  curiosite,  et  en  presence  de  plusieurs 
personnes. 

La  petite  lettre  etoit  de  vous,  et  m'annoncoit  le  magnifique 
present  que  vous  m'avez  envoie.  Elle  etoit  charmante  cette 
lettre,  pleine  de  bontes ;  j'en  etois  confus,  et  cependant  ma 
modestie  n'a  pas  resiste  a  la  tentation  de  la  montrer  a  mes  amis. 
Us  1'ont  tous  jugee,comme  moi,digne  de  toute  ma  reconnoissance. 
Je  ne  merite  pas  la  centieme  partie  de  tout  ce  que  vous  m'y 
dites  d'honnete  et  de  flatteur.  Et  pourquoi  m'avez-vous  offert 
ce  magnifique  don?  N'etois-je  pas  deja  assez  honore,  assez 
heureux  d'avoir  pu  manifester  un  peu  de  zele  et  de  bonne 
volonte  pour  le  succes  d'un  objet  qui  vous  interesse  et  qui  est 
interessant  par  lui-meme  ?  Eeprennez  done  vos  remercimens ; 
mais  je  garde  1'ouvrage  comme  votre  bienfait,  une  marque 
honorable  de  votre  bienveillance  et  de  votre  amitie. 

En  parcourant  les  volumes,  j'ai  ete  en  general  content  de 
1'impression,  quoi  que  le  n ombre  des  erratas  soit  considerable, 
et  je  ne  doute  pas  du  succes  de  1'ouvrage.  Je  m'attens  de  la 
part  des  imprimeurs  a  plus  d'exactitude  dans  une  seconde  edition. 
Quant  a  1'ouvrage  meme,  je  regrette  que  1'on  y  ait  laisse  subsister 
quelques  taches.  Je  ne  releverai  que  les  epigrammes  qu'on  lit 
dans  le  2  volume,  pages  385,  386,  515,  et  516.  Elles  peuvent 
faire  de  la  peine  a  des  personnes  bien  cheres  aujourd'ui  a  tout 
bon  Francois.  Mais  il  est  trop  tard  d'en  faire  a  present  1'obser- 
vation. 

Quoi  qu'il  en  soit,  Mademoiselle,  recevez  mes  respectueuses 
actions  de  graces,  disposez  de  moi  dans  toutes  les  circonstances 
de  ma  vie  ou  j  e  puis  vous  servir  utilement ;  ne  pensez  jamais  a 
me  remercier,  et  songez  que  je  serai  toujours  flatte  que  vous 
daigniez  m'employer  a  promouvoir  vos  louables  vues.  Ce  sont  les 
sentimens  bien  sinceres  de  votre  fidele  serviteur 

F.  S.,  Ev.  DE  Ex  Z. 

Edinburgh,  22nd  Sept.,  1810. 

MY  DEAR  MADAM, — I  have  had  the  pleasure  of  your  letter, 
and  since,  of  the  Letters  of  Madame  du  Deffand,  which  last 
arrived  safe  by  the  mail  three  days  ago.  Accept  my  best 
acknowledgments  for  both.  I  have  had  little  time  yet  to  look 


1810]  TESTIMONIALS.  427 

into  the  Letters  ;  the  preface  is  excellent,  very  well  written  and 
very  judicious.  The  notes  bespeak  that  great  familiarity  with 
the  characters  and  persons  who  figure  in  the  book,  which  cannot 
be  acquired  by  reading,  and  are  the  result  of  living  and  con- 
versing in  the  first  circles  both  in  France  and  in  this  country. 
I  find  a  great  deal  of  amusement  and  interest  in  the  few 
letters  I  have  yet  read ;  yet  I  am  not  sure  that  the  book  will 
be  so  generally  interesting  as  it  deserves  to  be ;  its  popularity,  I 
think,  is  likely  to  be  confined  to  a  part  of  the  fashionable  and  a 
part  of  the  literary  world,  the  part  of  each  that  takes  a  parti- 
cular concern  in  the  society  and  literature  of  France,  or  of  what 
was  the  society  and  literature  of  that  country.  You  do  not,  I 
am  persuaded,  expect  more  than  this,  and  this  I  think  you 
cannot  fail  to  have. 

I  have  been  a  great  wanderer  this  summer,  though  my  route  has 
not  lain  far  to  the  south.  I  made  a  visit  to  the  Giant's  Cause- 
way, with  which  I  was  extremely  delighted  ;  though  from  descrip- 
tion and  drawings,  I  found  I  had  conceived  a  tolerably  exact 
idea  of  the  structure ;  yet  the  impression  from  the  greatness 
and  magnificence  of  the  objects  could  not  be  anticipated  but 
by  an  imagination  much  more  powerful  than  mine.  From  the 
Giant's  Causeway  I  went  to  Dublin,  and  returned  much  de- 
lighted with  all  that  I  had  seen,  and  with  most  of  those  whom  I 
met  in  Ireland.  Since  that,  I  have  been  in  the  north  of  Scotland 
on  a  short  excursion,  and  have  now  begun  to  prepare  seriously 
for  the  academical  winter,  which  begins  unfashionably  enough 
in  November.  If  all  is  well,  I  hope  to  see  you  in  May. 

Some  weeks  ago  I  saw  Miss  Phil.  Godfrey,  who  was  here  on 
her  way  to  Ireland  with  Lady  Kingston.  She  is  very  agreeable ; 
I  hardly  ever  had  an  opportunity  of  hearing  her  speak  before, 
but  her  conversation  is  very  pleasing. 

I  will  say  nothing  of  public  matters,  which  seem  to  go  on  as 
bad  as  possible,  but  in  the  affair  of  Walcheren  we  have  wit- 
nessed the  utmost  degradation  that  the  country  ever  experienced, 
and  anything  short  of  that  infamy,  is  to  be  reckoned  a  kind  of 
prosperity.  Among  private  evils,  the  death  of  Lady  Rosslyn  is 
one  of  the  most  melancholy  I  have  known.  How  does  Mrs. 
Bouverie  bear  up  ? 

A  most  amiable  and  charming  woman,  Mrs.  Apreece,*  who 

*  Jane,  daughter  of  Charles  Kerr,  of  Kelso,  Esq.,  married,  first,  to  Shuck- 


428  MISS  BEKRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isio 

has  been  with  us  in  Scotland  for  near  a  year,  is  just  returning 
to  the  south,  greatly  to  our  sorrow  (to  mine  certainly  very  much) ; 
she  is  extremely  desirous  of  becoming  acquainted  with  you ; 
she  is  a  great  friend  of  some  of  your  friends — Mrs.  Clifford  par- 
ticularly— and  so  I  hope  you  will  early  be  able  to  meet.  She 
will  not  be  in  London  till  February. 

What  shall  I  say  about  Mrs.  Howe  ?  nothing  but  that  I  am  to 
write  her  in  a  post  or  two  a  letter  full  of  problems  and  apologies. 
I  wish  you  could  sometimes,  especially  now  that  you  are  relieved 
from  the  duties  of  publication,  find  time  to  write  me  a  line  or 
two  in  the  winter.  You  do  not  know  what  a  treat  your  letters 
are  to  me.  Be  kind  enough  to  remember  me  to  Miss  Agnes, 
Mrs.  Darner,  and  Mr.  Berry. 

Yours,  with  the  most  sincere  and  affectionate  attachment, 

J.  PLA.YFAIR. 

Extract  of  a  letter  from  Mr.  Cambridge  to  Miss  Berry. 

Twickenham  Meadows. 

.  .  .  .  I  was  about  to  take  up  my  pen  to  you  to  express 
the  pleasure  and  satisfaction  we  have  just  experienced  in  the 
perusal  of  your  *  Life  of  Madame  du  Deffand,'  which  does  great 
credit  to  your  judgment  and  feeling.  The  plain  and  clear  re- 
presentation you  have  given  of  the  mischiefs  of  French  manners, 
and  the  sufferings  she  endured  from  the  want  of  those  consola- 
tions which  religious  impressions  are  so  well  calculated  to 
furnish,  to  infirmity  and  old  age,  will  do  more  to  recommend 
religion  to  your  readers,  than  any  more  direct  argument  on  the 
subject  could  do.  This  sketch  of  yours  reminded  me  strongly 
of  some  of  Sir  Joshua's  single  heads,  so  much  and  so  justly 
admired  for  their  simplicity  and  truth.  I  only  regret  you  have 
not  taken  a  larger  canvas  and  introduced  a  greater  variety  of 
figures  and  objects.  But  it  was  the  success  of  his  single  figures 
which  led  that  great  painter  on  to  his  Ugolino. 

Extracts  of  a  letter  from  Mr.  Hope. 

MY  DEAR  Miss  BERRY, — Your  preface  I  devoured  the  moment 
I  got  it.  I  have  since  not  despatched,  but  finished  your  life, 
with  the  highest  relish  for  the  ease  of  its  style,  and  the  pro- 
burgh  Ashby  Apreece,  Esq.,  and  afterwards,  April  1812,  to  Sir  Humphry 
Davy.  Sir  Humphry  died  May  1829. 


1810]  TESTIMONIALS MR.   HOPE.  429 

found  reflections  and  just  estimate  of  Madame  du  Deffand's 
own  character,  and  that  of  her  age  and  society  which  it  con- 
tains. I  now  feast  upon  your  notes,  and  a  delightful  treat  they 
are.  Avec  une  telle  sauce  on  mangerait.  .  .  No  matter 
what,  I  read  all  out  to  Louisa,  who  owes  you  the  whole  of  the 
few  moments  of  enjoyment  she  feels  at  this  period  of  anxious 
expectation,  and  desires  me  most  warmly  to  thank  you  for 
them.  I  regret  your  wire-wove  copies  having  been  spoilt,  be- 
cause it  is  a  disappointment  to  you.  To  me  the  two  lines 
inscribed  on  the  title  page  render  my  little  copy  what  no  sheets 
of  gold  could  equal.  .  .  . 

What  a  labour  those  notes  must  have  cost  you,  notwithstand- 
ing il  y  parait  si  pen,  and  yet  they  preserve  the  true  character 
of  notes — subordinate  to  the  text;  explaining,  sometimes  cor- 
recting, and  never  eclipsing  it  by  a  disproportionate  length. 

From  Mr.  Roscoe  to  Miss  Berry. 

DEAR  MADAM, — It  was  not  possible  that  your  obliging  note 
of  the  26th  could  have  arrived  at  a  more  welcome  moment ;  in 
fact,  I  may  almost  be  said  to  have  past  the  last  ten  or  twelve 
days  in  your  society;  for  having  been  confined  to  the  house 
by  indisposition,  my  chief  pleasure  has  been  the  perusal  of 
Madame  du  Deffand's  Letters  with  the  notes,  together  with  Lord 
Orford's  correspondence,  which,  of  all  the  books  in  our  language, 
is  the  best  calculated  for  the  study  of  a  convalescent,  and  I 
really  believe  is  better  than  most  of  the  physic  in  the  pharma- 
copoeia. On  the  table  before  me  lay  the  beginning  of  a  letter 
intended  to  thank  you,  for  the  four  elegant  volumes  which  I 
some  time  since  received,  although  I  have  scarcely  till  this  in- 
terval of  leisure,  had  time  to  look  into  them.  These  letters 
seem  to  me  to  be  curious  and  interesting,  but  they  open  the 
way  to  other  reflexions  than  the  author  herself  was  ever  aware 
of.  What  these  are,  I  need  not  inform  you.  The  judicious 
and  excellent  notes  which  accompany  them  show  that  you  have 
considered  them  in  their  proper  light,  and  that  you  are  as  well 
aware  as  I  am,  that  the  horrible  depravity,  selfishness,  insin- 
cerity, and  licentiousness,  which,  under  the  example  of  the 
French  monarchs,  had  infected  all  the  higher  ranks  of  society, 
and  impoverished  and  enslaved  the  nation  at  large,  could  have 
no  other  result  than  that  which  has  actually  taken  place. 


430  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [mo 

As  to  Madame  du  Deffand  herself,  I  have  some  doubts 
whether  we  shall  so  nearly  agree.  She  is  a  true  Frenchwoman, 
with  great  penetration  and  shrewdness,  but  little  discretion; 
great  pretence  to  sentiment,  but  wholly  without  a  heart — 
witness  her  conduct  with  respect  to  Voltaire,  whom  she  pro- 
fessed to  esteem  and  admire  above  all  her  other  friends,  but 
whose  death  she  has  noticed  with  the  utmost  indifference,  and 
whose  yet  warm  ashes  she  insulted  with  a  wretched  witticism. 

Mad.  du  Deffand  was  sick  in  mind  all  her  life,  and  could 
never  discover  the  cause.  Mr.  Walpole,  her  true  friend,  seems 
from  time  to  time  to  have  given  her  some  good  advice,  which 
she  had  the  philosophy  to  take  in  good  part,  as  a  patient  receives 
a  bottle  of  physic,  the  contents  of  which  be  resolves  never  to 
swallow.  Her  disease  was  vanity ;  her  opiate,  admiration ;  and 
as  this,  like  other  opiates,  requires  an  increased  dose,  she  be- 
came miserable  when  she  could  not  obtain  it.  How  happy  it 
would  have  been  for  her  if,  instead  of  depending  on  the  opinion 
of  others,  she  had  relied  on  herself;  chastised  her  mind;  im- 
proved her  understanding — naturally  so  capable  of  it ;  viewed 
the  present  and  the  future,  not  through  the  glass  of  fashion,  but 
with  the  eye  of  reason ;  and  whilst  she  enjoyed  the  calm  and 
temperate  pleasures  which  even  her  situation  afforded,  have 
looked  forwards  with  hope  and  confidence  to  a  better  state.  But 
retirement  was  not  fashionable  ;  good  sense  was  not  fashionable ; 
sincerity  was  not  fashionable ;  religion  was  not  fashionable ; 
and  morality  still  less  so ;  in  short,  it  was  the  fashion  to  turn 
everything  that  is  truly  estimable  in  public  and  private  life  into 
ridicule ;  and  Mad.  du  D.  had  the  assurance  to  sing,  in  the  pre- 
sence of  the  King  of  Sweden,  her  Chanson  des  Philosophes, 
little  thinking  that  such  outrages  upon  decency  were  only  the 
dreadful  notes  of  preparation  for  those  horrible  calamities,  which 
were  so  shortly  to  ensue. 

It  would  however  be  unjust  to  Mad.  du  D.  not  to  acknowledge 
that  the  easy  and  unaffected  style  of  her  letters  must  ensure  the 
approbation  of  the  admirers  of  the  best  models  of  French  com- 
position, and  that  the  succession  of  important  personages  who 
pass  in  review  before  her,  will  amuse  those  who  like  to  contem- 
plate the  shadows  of  fallen  greatness. 

If  I  have  been  pleased  with  your  notes  on  Mad.  du  Deffand, 
I  am  delighted  with  the  favourable  opinion  you  have  so  kindly 


1810]  TESTIMONIALS — MR.   W.    ROSCOE.  431 

expressed  of  my  collection  of  tracts  on  the  war.  In  proportion 
as  those  who  avow  such  opinions  are  few,  the  approbation  they 
express  is  dearer  to  the  feelings  of  an  author ;  besides,  the  ladies 
of  the  present  day  are  so  warlike,  that  it  is  really  extraordinary 
to  find  one,  who  has  retained  the  clear  and  unprejudiced  use  of 
her  understanding  amidst  the  attempts  that  are  made  on  all 
hands  to  confound  right  and  wrong,  and  to  persuade  us  that  no 
other  nations  have  either  a  right  to  think  for  themselves,  or  to 
be  happy  in  their  own  way. 

To  talk  over  these  subjects  with  you,  and  for  once  in  my  life 
to  visit  the  real  '  Castle  of  Otranto '  before  I  go  to  meet  its  late 
possessor,  would,  I  assure  you,  give  me  great  pleasure — a  pleasure 
which  I  do  not  yet  wholly  despair  of  obtaining.  Lord  Orford's 
character  improves  upon  me  every  time  I  read  his  works.  His 
wit  is  universally  acknowledged;  of  his  political  sagacity  and 
foresight  he  has  left  many  very  striking  proofs ;  but,  above  all, 
there  are  so  many  instances  of  a  kind  and  beneficent  disposition, 
and  such  an  enlarged  and  impartial  solicitude  for  the  good  of 
others,  without  the  least  affectation  or  pretence,  that  I  cannot 
but  venerate  his  memory  ;  and  in  this  sentiment  find  an  addi- 
tional motive  of  assuring  you  how  truly  I  am, 

Dear  Madam,  your  obliged  and  faithful  friend, 
And  very  obt.  sert. 

W.  EOSCOE. 
Allerton,  30th  Dec.,  1810. 

JOUENAL. 

Monday,  September  24$. — Arrived  at  Guy's  Cliff.  We 
received  the  heartiest  of  welcomes  from  our  two  friends 
here.  Nobody  staying  in  the  house. 

Tuesday,  25$. — Walked  all  round  the  place  after 
breakfast,  and  Mr.  Greathead  showed  us  all  the  alterations 
he  has  made  in  the  house,  which  render  it  one  of  the 
most  comfortable  gentleman's  houses  I  know.  The  out- 
side, too,  is  managed  with  great  taste ;  and  a  little  excres- 
cence is  a  beauty  instead  of  a  deformity.  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Wilmot  dined  here — two  young  people  living  within  two 
miles  of  this  place  ;  she  a  very  pretty  woman. 


432  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isio 

Wednesday r,  26^. — At  one  o'clock  we  went  to  Lea- 
mington, to  see  the  new  houses  building  and  to  be  built 
on  Mr.  Greathead's  land — land  of  which  he  has  sold  three 
acres  for  1,200/.  an  acre,  or  5s.  a  yard.  The  houses  are 
all  building  by  an  associated  company  of  people  at  War- 
wick, who  have  subscribed  and  are  expending  50,000£. 
here.  The  houses  now  building  are  in  rows,  like  any 
street  in  London,  and  are  in  the  very  worst  taste  possible, 
though  upon  land  gently  rising  from  the  old  village, 
through  which  the  high  road  passes,  and  which  might  be 
very  pretty.  Our  friend  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  build- 
ing ;  he  can  lay  no  such  restrictions  or  commands  as  his 
excellent  taste  would  dictate,  without  losing  the  opportu- 
nity of  making  that  money  of  his  land  which  he  has 
expended  to  his  more  solid  comfort  at  Guy's  Cliff.  Other 
land,  still  nearer  the  old  village,  has  been  sold  for  build- 
ing at  15s.  a  yard,  or  at  the  rate  of  3,500/.  an  acre,  at  this 
place,  which  is  fast  rising  into  a  considerable  town  and 
watering-place.*  The  two  Misses  Williams  and  their 
brother  dined  and  slept  here.  They  are  the  son  and 
daughters  of  the  clergyman  in  this  neighbourhood.  One 
of  the  daughters  is  entirely  blind ;  she  is  very  cheerful 
and  handy,  and  consequently  interesting,  and  they  all 
seemed  well  informed. 

Friday,  28th. — Mr.  Greathead  and  Mr.  Williams  rowed 
Agnes  and  me  down  the  river  to  Warwick  Castle.  The 
navigation  down  the  Avon  is  very  agreeable ;  a  quiet 
stream  overshadowed  with  broad  alders,  and  flowing 
through  a  country  of  quiet  sylvan  beauty. 

Sunday,  30#A. — Went  to  Milverton  Church.  An  ex- 
cellent sermon  from  Mr.  Lane,  (?)  on  the  true  spirit,  and 
in  the  true  spirit  of  Christianity. 

Monday,  October  ~Lst. — We  all  dined  at  Kenilworth 
with  Sir  James  and  Lady  Lake.  Sir  James  Lake's  house 

*  The  population  of  Leamington  at  the  last  Census  was  estimated  at 
15,724. 


1810]  VISIT  TO   STONELEIGH.  433 

very  pretty  of  its  size,  entirely  of  Mr.  Greathead's  con- 
trivance ;  to  me,  who  saw  it  as  it  was  bought,  it  is  won- 
derful. The  purchase-money  for  it  and  fourteen  acres  of 
land,  was  2,000/.  The  house,  its  alterations,  and  fittings 
have  cost  5,000/. 

Wednesday,  3rd. — Waked  low  and  ill,  and  would  will- 
ingly not  have  dined  out,  but  Mr.  Greathead  wished  it. 
I  went  with  them  to  Mr.  Parke's,  at  Warwick,  a  great 
worsted—spinner,  who  is  likewise  a  sort  of  agent  and 
banker  to  Greathead,  and  one  of  whom  he  has  a  high 
opinion ;  seems  a  sensible  intelligent  man,  is  a  dissenter, 
and  much  in  the  Whig  party  at  Warwick.  He  was 
cruelly  persecuted  at  the  time  of  the  Church-and-King 
riots  at  Birmingham.  I  liked  the  plain  unpretending 
manner  of  living  of  the  Parkes. 

Saturday,  6th. — Greathead,  my  sister,  and  myself  went 
to  Stoneleigh,  about  four  miles  from  hence.  We  passed 
the  house  or  abbey,  as  it  is  called,  from  an  abbey  for- 
merly on  the  site  of  the  present  clumsy  house,  and  drove 
on  to  the  park.  Before  we  entered  we  met  our  acquain- 
tance Mrs.  Leigh  (whose  husband*  is  to  succeed  to  this 
place  after  the  present  incumbent), -and  the  old  incumbent 
himself,  and  Mr.  Eepton,  planning  future  improvements ; 
very  probably,  like  the  Irishman's,  for  the  worse.  They 
gave  us  a  key  to  the  park,  but  we  continued  on  foot,  and 
were  led  by  Greathead  to  the  most  beautiful  parts  of  the 
most  beautiful  woodland  scenery.  The  Avon,  which 
runs  through  it,  is  here  in  some  parts  a  pretty  rippling 
trout  stream,  with  such  magnificent  oaks  hanging  over  it 
as  mine  eyes  never  before  beheld ;  and  in  others  it  has 
steep  sandy  banks,  covered  by  the  same  magnificent  trees, 
which  in  this  park  are  in  every  state  and  stage  of  growth, 
of  full  vigour,  and  of  natural  decay,  producing  every 

*  James  Henry  Leigh,  Esq.,  of  Adelstrop,  afterwards  of  Stoneleigh ;  born 
1765 ;  married,  1786,  the  Hon.  Julia  Judith  Tvrisleton,  eldest  daughter  of 
Thomas  Lord  Saye  and  Sele;  he  died  1823. 
VOL.  II.  F  F 


434  MISS  BEKKY'S  JOURXAL.  [isio 

possible  accident  of  woodland  scenery.  Many  of  the  oaks 
measured  by  Mr.  Greathead  are  twenty-seven  and  twenty- 
nine  yards  round.  If  this  park  shows  some  marks  of 
4  neglect,  it  is,  at  least,  unspoiled  by  improvement.  After 
our  walk  we  returned  to  the  house,  and  saw  the  principal 
rooms  on  the  ground-floor  of  one  of  the  worst-contrived 
large  houses  of  fourteen  windows  in  front  I  ever  saw; 
most  of  the  rooms  are  oak  boxes,  floored  and  lined  with 
oak,  of  which  one  may  have  too  much,  though  I  love  it. 
We  met  Mrs.  Leigh  and  her  party  on  our  road  home. 
Mr.  Eepton  (whom  I  had  never  seen  before),  fired  off  an 
exceeding  fine  complimentary  speech  to  Agnes  and  me 
from  the  window  of  the  carriage.  The  Leighs  possess 
12,000  acres,  in  the  parish  of  Stoneleigh  alone,  of 
excellent  land,  much  under-let  at  30s.  an  acre,  and  in 
the  county  of  Warwick,  not  less  than  22,000  acres,  upon 
which,  certainly,  50,000/.  worth  of  wood  might  be  cut 
down — I  don't  say  without  injuring,  but  positively  doing 
good  to  the  estate.  What  a  magnificent  possession  of 
real  wealth !  It  has  been  long  thrown  away  upon  people 
who  have  done  no  good,  encouraged  no  improvements, 
employed  no  fine  arts,  collected  nothing ;  there  is  not  even 
the  pretence  to  a  library  in  the  house ;  and  the  present 
possessors,  an  old  clergyman  and  his  old  sister,  are 
perfectly  encumbered  with  the  wealth,  to  which  they 
succeeded  at  a  late  period  of  life,  and  which  obliged  them 
to  leave  a  comfortable  parsonage,  where  they  had  passed 
their  best  years. 

N.B. — The  whole  of  the  timber  on  the  Leigh  estates 
in  Warwickshire  has  been  valued  at  1,000,000/.  sterling. 

Tuesday,  9th. — Agnes  and  I  walked  with  Mr.  Great- 
head,  after  breakfast,  to  Warwick,  to  see  Mr.  Parke's 
manufactory,  which  he  had  offered  to  show  us,  and  which 
I  visited  rather  out  of  compliment  to  him  than  from  any 
pleasure  to  myself;  for  machinery  I  never  comprehend 
except  in  a  model ;  and  manufactories,  upon  a  near  in- 


1810]  WARWICK  CHURCH.  435 

spection,  are  always  disagreeable.  This  is  for  spinning 
worsted,  for  knitting  and  weaving.  It  differs  but  little 
from  cotton-spinning ;  the  fleeces  are  cleverly  washed 
between  rollers.  About  500  people,  men,  women,  and 
children,  are  here  employed ;  and  the  whole  machinery 
all  over  the  building  moves  by  a  steam-engine  of  24-horse 
power,  which  can  be  stopped  at  once  by  pulling  a  single 
string  like  a  bell-handle. 

After  seeing  the  manufactory  in  all  its  detail,  we  went 
with  Mr.  Parke  and  his  sons  to  Warwick  Church:  I 
wished  to  see  the  spot  where  poor  Bertie  *  is  deposited. 
There  is,  as  yet,  no  memorial  of  him  on  the  stone  which 
covers  the  family  vault,  and  where  mention  is  only  made 
of  Samuel  Greathead,  his  grandfather,  and  Peregrine 
Greathead,  his  father's  elder  brother,  who  died  when  a 
lad. 

The  Lady  Chapel,  as  it  is  called,  in  this  church  (the  only 
part  that  escaped  fire  some  years  ago),  is  beautiful,  and 
kept  almost  in  too  good  repair,  for  it  and  all  its  monu- 
ments are  gilt  and  coloured  up,  perhaps  too  much  ;  40/. 
a  year  is  left  for  this  purpose.  A  very  fine  tomb,  with 
figure  in  complete  armour  of  brass,  and  covered  with  a 
sort  of  cradle  of  the  same  metal,  of  Beauchamp,f  Earl  of 
Warwick.  A  fine  and  much-ornamented  tomb,  with 
cumbent  figures  of  Leicester,  Queen  Elizabeth's  favourite, 
and  his  wife ;  and  a  little  cumbent  figure  of  an  eldest  son 
of  an  Earl  of  Warwick,  called  upon  the  inscription,  '  an 
Illustrious  Impe,'  admirably  sculptured. 

In  the  middle  of  the  old  chapter-house  is  the  tomb 
of  Sir  Fulke  Greville,  erected  by  himself  during  his  life, 
with  the  inscription  upon  it  of  '  the  friend  of  Sir  Philip 
Sidney.' 

Saturday,  13$. — We  took  a  long  scrambling  walk,  over 

*  Bertie  Greathead,  Esq.,  son  of  Mr.  Greathead,  of  Guy's  Cliff, 
t  Beauchamp,  Earl  and  Duke  of  Warwick,  died  in  1445,  when  the  duke- 
dom became  extinct. 


436  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isio 

hedge  and  ditch,  and  turnip  and  stubble  fields,  to  a 
shepherd's  cave,  cut  in  the  rock,  and  to  the  drooping  well 
upon  the  edge  of  the  Avon,  to  which,  three  years  ago, 
Greathead  had  carried  me  by  water.  The  blind  Miss 
Williams,  who  was  one  of  our  company,  got  marvellously 
over  everything,  with  no  more  assistance  than  the  rest  of 
us,  and  with  much  cheerfulness. 

Sunday ',  \kth. — I  went  to  Melverton  Church  with  the 
Greatheads,  and  stayed  and  took  the  Sacrament  with 
them,  which  I  always  prefer  doing  in  a  quiet  country 
church,  than  in  the  bustle  of  a  London  one. 

The  blind  Miss  Williams  played  much  of  Handel's  music, 
and  afterwards  Greathead  read  Clarke's  travels  to  us. 

Sunday,  2~Lst. — In  the  evening  the  two  young  Parkes 
came  up,  and  we  traced  upon  a  map  the  route  of  a  bro- 
ther of  Mrs.  Parke  (a  captain  of  a  coasting  vessel,  who 
has  just  escaped  out  of  a  French  prison  at  Auxonne,  and 
came  round  by  Prague,  and  then  by  the  Baltic  home).  He 
and  his  companion  were  forty-six  days  on  their  journey, 
walking  on  an  average  thirty  miles  a  day,  and,  till  they 
got  far  out  of  France,  sleeping  in  the  fields. 

Monday,  22nd. — At  ten  o'clock  we  took  leave  of  our 
kind  friends.  We  have  spent  a  month  with  them  most 
agreeably,  with  the  additional  charm  of  fine  weather. 
Before  breakfast  I  had  gone  to  Greathead  in  his  room, 
where  he  always  reads  before  breakfast :  here  we  had 
a  little  serious  talk  about  his  affairs  and  prospects,  which 
he  considers  in  the  most  rational,  manly,  and  respectable 
way.  He  then  in  the  most  kind  and  flattering  manner 
recommended  some  stiff  theological  reading,  as  occupa- 
tion worthy,  as  he  said,  of  my  active  mind.  I  gave  him 
simply  and  entirely  my  creed,  and  the  only  reason  why  I 
feared  such  reading  might  not  sufficiently  interest  my 
mind,  viz.,  because  I  have  no  doubts  to  solve,  and  my 
entire  and  perfect  confidence  in  the  dispensations  of  an 
all-merciful  Creator,  makes  all  lesser  points,  all  subsequent 


1810]  LETTEE  TO   MB.    GKEATHEAD.  437 

arrangements,  wonderfully  indifferent  to  me.  I  cannot 
much  interest  myself  in  the  truth  of  this  or  that  dogma, 
or  the  authenticity  of  this  or  that  story.  Whether  true 
or  false,  they  can  in  nothing  shake  my  faith,  my  hopes, 
and  my  conviction.  He  entirely  entered  into,  agreed,  and 
was  satisfied  with  what  I  said,  but  still  repeated  his  wish 
I  should  read  upon  that  subject. 

Saturday,  27th. — Went  to  town. 

Sunday,  Nov.  kth. — Called  on  Mrs.  Howe  ;  found  her 
looking  thin  and  in  very  low  spirits  about  the  melancholy 
state  of  the  Eoyal  Family,  but  otherwise  quite  herself  and 
well.  Met  Lady  Donegal!,  her  sister,  and  mine,  going 
down  to  the  Queen's  house  to  make  enquiries. 

Monday,  5th. — The  post  brought  us  a  letter  from 
Eonald,  with  the  account  of  his  father's  death  on  Wednes- 
day morning  last. 

Miss  Berry's  feelings  on  this  occasion  are  detailed  in 
her  letter  to  Mr.  Greathead,  who  had  recently  lost  a 
friend. 

North  Audley  Street,  Sunday,  llth  Nov.,  1810. 

Mr  DEAR  FRIEND, — I  was  intending  to  write  to  you  when  I 
received  from  Anne  Turner,*  two  days  ago,  the  account  of  your 
poor  old  friend's  sudden  decease.  .  .  .  My  trust  and  hope  in 
yours  and  Mr.  Gr.'s  rational  minds  convinces  me  that  as  soon  as 
the  first  shock  is  over,  you  will  both  feel  with  what  a  singularly 
enviable  exit  this  good  old  soul,  full  of  years  and  honour,  has 
been  blessed,  out  of  this  suffering  world.  In  the  house  of  her 
friend  and  adopted  child,  with  every  possible  attention,  kind- 
ness, and  comfort  about  her,  she  enjoys  life  to  the  last  moment, 
goes  to  bed  in  perfect  health,  and  awakes  (for  waking  only  one 
can  call  it,  when  her  appearance  does  not  justify  even  the  sup- 
position of  a  struggle  at  parting)  in  another  state  of  existence, 
for  which  her  conduct  in  this  had  duly  prepared  her.  Such  is 
indeed  the  enthusiasm  so  beautifully  described  by  Pope — 

*  Anne  Turner,  daughter  of  Dr.  Turner,  of  Curzon  Street,  an  intimate 
friend  of  the  Miss  Berrys. 


438  MISS  BEEEY'S  JOUENAL.  [i8io 

May  death  answer,  that  tender  frame  destroy 
In  some  soft  dream,  or  ecstasy  of  joy ; 
Peaceful  sleep  out  the  Sabbath  of  the  tomb, 
And  wake  to  rapture  in  a  life  to  come. 

This  I  am  sure  will,  after  a  short  time,  have  its  due  effect  upon 
you,  but  it  can  neither  alter  the  feelings  nor  raise  the  depression 
of  the  moment  .  .  .  Alas !  my  good  friend,  you  needed  not 
all  this,  in  addition  to  the  worldly  cares  which  have  lately  so 
unmeritedly  fallen  upon  you.  Would  to  heaven  I  could  in  any 
way  contribute  to  the  alleviation  of  your  feelings !  You  know 
that  death  has  lately  visited  our  family,  but  with  a  very  differ- 
ent aspect  from  that  he  put  on  to  your  good  old  friend.  My 
uncle  was  seized  yesterday  fortnight,  suddenly,  while  dressing 
for  dinner,  with  an  attack  both  of  palsy  and  apoplexy  together ; 
from  the  first  the  medical  people  said  there  was  no  hope;  he 
remained  all  Sunday  totally  insensible,  and  as  if  asleep.  On 
Monday  he  recovered,  in  a  degree,  his  speech  and  senses ;  he  did 
not  know  that  Sunday  was  passed,  but  asked  much  for  Eobert, 
spoke  kindly  of  him,  and  was  anxious  to  see  him.  This  happi- 
ness he  was  denied,  for  he  expired  on  the  Wednesday  morning. 
.  .  .  Ronald  was  with  him  at  the  time  of  the  seizure,  but  the 
express  he  sent  for  his  brother  only  got  to  him  in  Yorkshire  on 
the  Tuesday,  so  that  the  news  of  his  father's  death  met  Robert 
in  Edinburgh  .  .  .  The  state  of  public  affairs,  and  the  me- 
lancholy situation  of  the  Royal  Family,  were  it  not  for  one's  own 
private  concerns,  one  should  think  sufficiently  agitating.  The 
King's  determined  illness,  its  probable  event,  and  all  its  con- 
sequences, must,  in  one  way  or  other,  interest  every  mortal,  and 
either  by  oneself  or  one's  friends,  cast  a  degree  of  uncertainty 
over  everybody's  plans.  A  regency,  in  all  cases  the  worst  pos- 
sible edition  of  the  government  it  administers,  hangs  over  our 
heads,  in  circumstances  o*  particular  difficulty  and  danger,  and 
certainly  without  a  single  countervailing  advantage  to  meet  them. 

The  letter  from  Sir  Wm.  Gell,  at  Lisbon,  was  on  its 
way  to  Miss  Berry  at  this  period. 

From  Sir  W.  Gell  to  the  Miss  Berrys. 

November  9,  1810. 

MY  DEAR  LADIES, — Though  I  am  not  aware  that  I  can  say  any- 
thing which  will  entertain  you  on  the  very  dark  and  gloomy 


1810]  LETTER   PROM   SIR  W.   GELL.  439 

day  on  which  you  receive  this  epistle,  yet  I  have  a  fancy  for 
writing  to  you;  so  pray  call  for  a  candle,  for  'tis  too  dark  to  see 
without,  and  try  to  get  through  it.  You  have,  as  I  am  just  in- 
formed, heard  from  my  companion  the  events  of  our  voyage, 
and  your  imaginations  can  easily  supply  the  horrors  attending  it, 
as  well  as  the  delight  of  getting  on  shore  with  a  fine  clear  air  and 
roasting  sun  after  the  operation.  Lady  Charlotte  will  also  give 
you  some  hints  which  I  sent  to  her  on  my  first  arrival.  Since 
that  time  I  have  been  to  the  wars — if  wars  they  can  be  called, 
for  at  present  the  situation  of  our  army  is  that  of  country 
gentlemen  in  houses  which  look  as  if  the  inhabitants  had  built 
them  on  purpose  for  the  occasion,  and  kindly  left  them  to  us. 
I  went  with  Captain  Beresford,  the  brother  of  the  grand  mar- 
shal, in  one  of  those  delectable  carriages  which  I  have  described 
to  my  Lady  Charlotte.  A  person  in  a  large  cocked  hat,  in  royal 
livery,  drove,  and  another  was  mounted  behind.  The  distance 
may  be  about  twenty-three  miles,  and  about  half  way  we  had  a 
relay  of  more  monsters  and  fresh  mules.  Here,  in  justice  to  the 
Portagooses,  I  must  stop  to  say  that  they  are  by  no  means 
the  monsters  represented  by  your  friend  '  the  black-eyed,'  for 
he  would  be  a  fright  even  here.  On  the  contrary,  the  'Gruese 
have  fine  eyes,  very  intelligent  countenances,  and  the  most  beau- 
tiful teeth  in  the  world ;  besides  which,  they  are  very  civil  and 
obliging,  and  all  the  horrors  related  of  them  and  their  persons 
belong  only  to  the  rich  and  great.  After  this  episode,  I 
must  tell  you  that  such  a  system  of  ups  and  downs  never  was 
undergone.  Take  a  newspaper  and  crumple  it  in  your  hand — 
that  is  a  map  of  the  country.  Then  the  roads  are  large  stones 
with  large  holes  between  them,  and  sometimes  a  descent  between 
two  rocks  not  wide  enough  to  admit  the  carriage,  yet  with  all  this, 
and  more  horrors  than  can  be  descried,  the  mules  crept  along 
very  well,  and  the  carriage  jumbled  after  them  just  as  if  it  had 
been  ever  so  good.  In  about  six  hours  we  arrived  at  Capateria, 
Marshal  Beresford's,  twenty-two  miles.  It  is  a  lone  house  by 
the  road  side,  covered  with  tall  trees,  and  remains  a  lone  house 
in  appearance,  though  there  are  fifty  people  in  it  and  around  it, 
from  the  nature  of  the  place.  It  was  my  good»£»rtune  to  meet 
with  Lord  Wellington,  the  greatest  man  in  his  day,  at  dinner, 
the  very  first  day.  He  is  no  other  than  a  Bonaparte,  so  strong 
a  likeness,  but  with  better  colour ;  and  more  animation  and 


440  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [mo 

merriment  I  never  saw.     He  has  none  of  the  airs  of  a  great  man 
at  the  head  of  100,000  men — all  life  and  good  humour.     I  also 
met  El  Marquis  Komana,*  whom  I  very  much  wished  to  see,  and 
was  quite  astonished  to  find  how  well,  first  of  all,  he  talks  Eng- 
lish,  and  afterwards,  what  a  fund  of  information,  not  to  say 
learning,  the  little  wretch  has.     I  talked  a  great  deal  to  him, 
and  called  on  him  the  next  morning.     As  to  his  figure,  such  a 
gig  was  never  seen — a  little  yellow  tailor,  smothered  in  waist- 
coat lapels,  with  a  blue  coat  bordered  with  broad  gold  lace,  very 
full  at  top,  and  coming  below  to  a  very  narrow  waist,  the  pic- 
ture of  one's  great-grandfather.     He  is  very  lively  and  good- 
humoured,  and  entirely  without  humbug.     In  the  morning  the 
Marshal  lent  me  a  nag  on  which  I  visited  the  lines  and  fort,  for, 
be  it  known  to  you  that  our  people  are  invisible  to  the  French, 
having  ridges  in  front,  and  occupying  in  general  villages  and 
quintes  or  garden-houses  on  the  west  of  it,  some  miles  distant. 
These  ridges  are  so  high  that  we  overlook  the  French  in  all 
parts,  but  they  lie  dispersed  in  tents,  generally  in  different  parts 
of  the  country  below.     Junot's  camp  is,  as  I  think,  five  or  six 
miles  distant,  though  our  advanced  sentries  and  theirs  speak. 
The  consequence  is,  that  they  cannot  attack  us  without  several 
hours'  previous  notice,  in  any  force.     Our  people  are  quite  con- 
fident, and  this  is  certain,  that  the  French  are  at  least  twice 
outnumbered  by  the  allies  for  the  present.     Their  communica- 
tions are  and  have  been  long  entirely  cut  off,  and  they  have  no 
means  of  sending  any  intelligence  of  their  situation,  as  the  mes- 
senger has  always  been  intercepted.     The  last,  a  Portuguese, 
who  spoke  Spanish  well,  and  who  agreed  for  the  promise  of  a 
colonelcy  to  undertake  to  carry  a  despatch.     What  is  singular, 
a  deserter  told  us  this  at  Marshal  Beresford's,  and  yesterday  I 
heard  just  such  a  man  had  been  taken  with  a  letter  about  his 
commission  to  that  effect.     Upon  the  whole,  the  situation  of 
things  is  quite  the  reverse  of  what  is  imagined  in  England. 
You  would  think  Lisbon  as  quiet  as  any  place  could  be  with 
operas  and  plays  every  night ;  but  the  camp  is  a  still  more 

*  Marquis  de  la  Romana,  general  in  the  war  of  the  Spaniards  against 
Napoleon.  He  was  the  first  to  suggest  the  idea  of  arming  the  peasantry,  and 
forming  the  guerillas.  In  this  way,  as  well  as  by  his  personal  services  in  the 
field,  Romana  played  an  important  part  in  maintaining  the  independence  of 
Spain.  Died  1811. — Popular  Encyclopaedia. 


1810]  ILLNESS   OF   GEORGE   III.  441 

curious  species  of  tranquillity ;  everybody  seems  to  do  as  they 
like ;  people  ride  all  over  the  country ;  many  officers  come  to 
Lisbon.  Lord  Wellington  goes  to  Mafra  and  gives  a  grand 
dinner  and  ball,  and  in  short  all  seems  like  peace ;  but,  I  believe, 
underhand,  everything  is  so  well  settled,  foreseen,  managed,  and 
planned,  that  every  one  knows  what  is  to  be  done  at  a  moment's 
warning,  and  under  all  possible  circumstances.  I  returned  on 
horseback,  and  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  the  wonderful 
strength  which  nature  and  art  have  united  to  form  our  system 
of  defence,  should  even  our  first  line  be  broken.  Not  a  turn  of 
the  road  but  you  find  two  or  three  hills,  each  mounted  with 
guns,  placed  in  forts  bearing  upon  you  in  all  directions.  Lisbon 
is  certainly  a  better  place  than  Madrid  or  any  city  in  Spain,  and 
more  like  Italy.  The  language  is  too  shocking  a  corruption  of 
Spanish  '  os  Reis  de  Portugal  nao  sao  tdo  (non  sono  tanto) 
absolutes  como  os  de  Hespanha.'  In  this  specimen  nao  sao 
tdo  are  pronounced  nawn  sawn  tawn,  as  much  like  a  cat  as  pos- 
sible, and  your  friend  Sousa  is  called  Soysa.  The  plays  are  very 
entertaining,  and  the  singing  in  them  very  good.  The  gro- 
tesque dancing,  too,  I  really  believe  the  best  in  Europe ;  we  go 
almost  every  night  to  something  of  the  kind.  To-night  'II 
Barbiere  de  Sevilla,'  a  most  capital  buffo,  Varancio,  or  some  such 
name.  The  Queen  of  Spain  had  a  passion  for  him,  so  we  are 
persuading  him  to  come  to  England  to  try  his  fortune.  Pray 
tell  Mercer  it  is  very  absurd  of  him  not  to  come,  as  both  his 
brethren  are  here.  Douglas  Mercer,  by-the-by,  who  ought  to 
be  at  Cadiz,  chose  to  come  here,  and  got  two  fingers  broken ;  but 
he  is  now  almost  recovered  of  that,  and  looks  very  well ;  we  see 
him  almost  every  day.  Adieu. — Most  truly  and  affectionately 
yours, 

ANACHARSIS. 

Adml.  Berkeley  saw  a  play,  *  The  death  of  Captain  Cook,'  in 
the  Isles  of  the  Hottentots. 

Monday,  12th. — Walked  with  Lady  Donegall  and  her 
sister  through  the  park  to  St.  James's,  to  enquire  after  the 
King ;  the  names  written  down  in  the  presence  chamber, 
and  the  Lord  in  Waiting  (Lord  C.  Spencer)  sitting  in  the 
room.  Nobody  with  him  when  we  went  in,  and  not  a 
great  crowd  in  the  other  rooms. 


MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isio 

Tuesday,  13th. — Walked  to  St.  James's :  the  crowd 
great  in  all  the  rooms,  and  a  stream  going  up  and 
down  stairs,  chiefly  men.  Saw  a  number  of  people  I 
knew. 

Thursday,  15th. — Accepted  Mr.  Hope's  proposal  of 
going  with  him  to  Brighton. 

Saturday,  17th. — Mr.  Hope  came  soon  after  eleven.  It 
was  a  fine  sunny  day,  well  calculated  to  raise  one's  spirits 
when  travelling  comfortably  in  a  chaise  and  four.  But  I 
was  out  of  spirits  with  myself.  My  companion,  always 
acute  and  intelligent  in  a  tete-a-tete,  was  another  circum- 
stance in  my  favour ;  but  all  did  not  do.  We  arrived  at 
Brighton  in  the  dark  and  the  rain  at  half-past  five. 

Tuesday,  20th. — We  drove  to  the  West  Cliff.  The  ex- 
tent of  Brighton  along  the  cliff  to  the  Crescent,  the  fur- 
thest houses  on  the  East  Cliff,  cannot  be  much  less  than 
two  miles.  Went  to  the  play  ('The  Kivals,'  and  the 
4  Agreeable  Surprise'),  which  had  been  bespoken.  The 
house  was  more  than  three  parts  empty ;  and  the  company 
in  the  Prince's  box,  which  is  always  given  to  the  lady  who 
bespeaks  the  play,  talked  so  loud  by  way  of  being  so  very 
genteel,  that  one  could  hardly  hear  the  players. 

Friday,  23rd. — Walked  with  Mr.  Ward;*  his  obser- 
vations are  always  acute,  often  droll.  But  there  is  nil 
grande  in  that  man ;  and  with  a  keen  and  too  accurate 
observation  of  the  littlenesses  and  vanities  of  others,  he 
is,  if  I  am  not  much  mistaken,  overcharged  with  both 
himself. 

Sunday,  25th. — In  the  evening  had  some  conversation 
with  Mr.  Grattan.  His  manner  is  singular,  with  much 
action,  and  his  pronunciation,  without  being  Irish,  so  very 
foreign  that  nobody  at  first  could  possibly  take  him  for  a 
native  of  these  islands ;  his  language  is  good,  however, 
and  his  choice  of  words  figurative,  and  out  of  the  com- 

*  The  Hon.  John  William  Ward,  son  of  Viscount  Dudley  and  Ward  j 
created  Earl  of  Dudley  in  1827  ;  died  1833. 


1810]  THE   ONLY   CHURCH  AT   BRIGHTON.  443 

mon  way ;  but  his  manner  upon  the  whole  in  society  is 
much  more  odd  than  pleasant.* 

Monday,  2Qth — Went  with  Mrs.  Hope  to  the  church  on 
the  hill  above  the  town.  It  is  crowded  with  tablets  and 
monuments  within,  and  tombstones  without ;  in  short,  the 
town  and  its  inhabitants  have  fairly  outgrown  their  church, 
for  there  is  but  one  here.f 

Wednesday,  28th. — Had  a  long  talk  with  Lord  and 
Lady  Conningham  on  horseback,  and  met  Du  Cane,  just 
arrived.  Questioned  him  about  the  King  of  Sweden,  who, 
immediately  after  his  landing,  had  been  brought  to  his 
father's  house.  Went  to  Mrs.  Grattan's,|  where  there  was 
music  by  the  Miss  Burgoynes  and  Miss  Grattans,  and  all  the 
people  assembled,  who  I  have  seen  here,  and  the  Trevors, 
who  are  just  arrived.  Mrs.  Grattan,  from  lameness,  is 
always  seated,  but  a  more  pleasing  woman  of  past  fifty, 
both  in  appearance  and  manner,  I  never  saw.  She  has 
been  a  beauty,  an  expressive  beauty  of  that  sort  of  which 
age  never  can  obliterate  the  traces,  and  has  a  manner  of 
speaking  particularly  sweet  and  interesting,  without  the 
smallest  tincture  of  affectation.  As  to  her  husband,  from 
having  seen  him  only  in  company,  which  does  not  draw 
him  out,  the  singularity  of  his  manner  is  still  with  me 
more  prominent  than  his  agreeableness  in  conversation. 

The  Princess  of  Wales's  kind  letter  of  enquiry  after  her 

*  The  Rt.  Hon.  Henry  Grattan,  born  1746.  In  1772  he  was  called  to  the 
Irish  bar.  In  1775  he  took  his  seat  in  the  Irish  House  of  Commons,  and 
from  that  time  his  life  was  identified  with  the  history  of  Ireland.  In  1805 
he  sat  for  Malton  in  the  English  House  of  Commons.  He  died  in  1820 ; 
his  remains  were  interred  at  Westminster  Abbey.  On  moving  the  writ  to 
fill  the  vacancy  occasioned  by  his  death,  Sir  James  Mackintosh  described  Mr. 
Grattan  as  one  of  the  few  individual  men  whose  personal  virtues  were 
rewarded  by  public  favour,  and  as  one  as  eminent  in  his  observances  of  all 
the  duties  of  private  life  as  heroic  in  the  discharge  of  his  public  obligations. 

f  There  are  now  at  Brighton  eighteen  places  of  worship  connected  with 
the  Established  Church. 

|  Henrietta  Fitzgerald,  descendant  of  the  Earls  of  Desmond,  married 
Henry  Grattan,  1782. — Imp.  Diet,  of  Unto.  Hiog, 


444  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [mo 

friends,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  WHI.  Locke,  who  had  just  sustained 
the  loss  of  a  child,  was  received  and  answered  by  Miss 
Berry  at  the  close  of  her  visit  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hope. 

From  the  Princess  of  Wales  to  Miss  Berry. 

Kensington  Palace,  Nov.  26, 1810. 

My  anxiety  is  so  great  on  account  of  the  poor  Lockes,  since 
the  melancholy  event  of  the  death  of  their  youngest  child,  that 
I  am  induced  to  commit,  perhaps,  an  indiscretion  in  intruding 
on  your  leisure  hours,  my  dear  Miss  Berry ;  but  trusting  to 
your  usual  good  nature,  and  our  sentiments  concerning  them 
being  so  congenial,  you  will  comprehend  my  solicitude.  I  in- 
trust into  your  hands,  and  to  your  sound  judgment,  the  manner 
how  best  to  convey  from  my  part  everything  that  is  kind  and 
soothing  to  them  :  consolation  it  is  impossible  to  offer  them  on 
such  a  painful  occasion,  but  it  is  time  alone  that  can  cure  so 
great  an  affliction. 

Let  us  waive  this  melancholy  topic,  and  rejoice  together  at 
the  happy  prospect  of  our  beloved  Monarch's  recovery.  We 
may  now  trust  that  that  storm  which  passed  over  our  heads  will 
be  dispersed  for  a  number  and  number  of  years ;  it  must  be  the 
fervent  wish  of  every  individual,  but  especially  that  of  one  of 
his  first  subjects. 

I  look  forward  with  great  pleasure  to  the  period  which  will 
enable  me  again  to  enjoy  your  agreeable  society. 

I  wish  to  be  remembered  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hope  ;  and  do  me 
the  justice  to  believe  me,  for  ever, 

My  dear  Miss  Berry, 

Your  very  sincere  and  affectionate, 

C.  P. 

P.S. — I  am  much  shocked  and  grieved  at  the  melancholy 
event  of  poor  Lady  Aberdeen.*  I  trust  that  she  will  feel  no 
bad  effect  from  this  sad  disappointment,  for  nobody  deserves 
more  respect  and  admiration  than  she  does,  by  those  who  have 
the  happiness  of  being  intimately  acquainted  with  her. 

*  Catherine  Elizabeth,  eldest  surviving  daughter  of  John  James  first 
Marquis  of  Abercorn.  She  died  February,  1812. 


1810]  REPLY  TO   THE   PRINCESS  OP  WALES.  445 

From  Miss  Berry  to  the  Princess  'of  Wales. 

Brighton,  27th  Nov.,  1810. 

MADAM, — I  have  conveyed  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Locke  *  the  senti- 
ments of  which  your  Royal  Highness  has  honoured  me  with 
being  the  interpreter.  They  must  themselves  express  their 
gratitude,  and  the  high  sense  they  entertain  of  your  Royal 
Highness's  benevolent  solicitude.  I  confess  I  could  use  no 
words  at  once  so  impressive  and  so  soothing  as  those  of  your 
Royal  Highness.  I  am  happy  to  say  that  Mrs.  Locke's  health 
has  not  suffered  by  her  constant,  painful,  and  unwearied  atten- 
dance on  her  children,  and  that  the  remaining  twof  are  entirely 
recovered.  This  I  have  been  obliged  to  content  myself  with 
hearing  by  report,  and  by  notes  that  have  passed  between  us, 
for  I  have  been  under  such  strict  quarantine  here  by  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Hope,  from  the  dread  of  a  possibility  of  infection  to  their 
children,  that  I  have  only  had  two  short  interviews  with  William, 
and  that  in  the  open  air.  ...  I  have  had  the  happiness  to 
find  myself  here,  Madam,  surrounded  by  some  of  your  Royal 
Highness's  most  devoted  admirers.  Mr.  Ward,  Sir  W.  Drum- 
mond,  Mr.  Rogers,  Lord  and  Lady  Aberdeen,  are  those  with 
whom  I  have  been  living ;  and,  though  last,  not  least,  my  kind 
hosts  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hope,  who  desire  me  to  express  to  your 
Royal  Highness  their  gratitude  for  the  honour  of  your  enquiry 
after  them.  Mrs.  Hope  has,  I  think,  quite  recovered  her  health 
here.  Her  best  comfort,  under  the  loss  of  her  little  girl,  is  the 
daily  improvement  of  your  Royal  Highness's  little  godson,  who 
is  really  one  of  the  finest  children  of  his  age  I  ever  saw.  Lady 
Aberdeen,  I  am  happy  to  say,  is  going  on  as  well  as  possible, 
after  her  very  unexpected  confinement.  .  .  .  Lord  Aberdeen 
certainly  bears  his  disappointment  remarkably  well.  .  .  .  The 
sentiments  which  your  Royal  Highness  expresses  upon  the  pros- 
pect of  his  Majesty's  recovery,  must  be  those  of  everyone  worthy 
the  happiness  of  being  his  subject,  by  having  a  due  sense  of  the 
blessings  of  his  reign.  .  .  . 

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  Madam,  your  Royal  Highness's  most 
grateful  and  most  obedient  Servant, 

M.  B. 

*  Mr.  and  Mrs.  William  Locke,  of  Norbury. 

f  Mr.  William  Locke,  drowned  in  the  Lake  of  Como ;  and  Elizabeth, 
married,  1822,  to  the  Lord  Wallscourt. 


446  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isio 

J  0  U  E  N  A  L. 

Thursday,  Nov.  29$. — Eeturned  to  London. 

Tuesday,  Dec.  4$. — Went  to  Wimpole. 

Wednesday,  5$. — Walked  to  the  garden,  and  to  the 
dairy  and  the  farm.  Somehow  or  other,  the  garden  is 
never  in  very  nice  order  here :  the  dairy  is  not  much 
more  finished  than  when  I  was  here  last  year.  Poor 
souls !  no  wonder  that  everything  has  been  at  a  stand 
lately,  and  that  nothing  goes  on  with  the  same  heart  as 
formerly ! 

Saturday,  8$. — Began  cutting  down  the  trees,  and 
clearing  away  about  the  reservoir,  the  only  building  in 
real  good  taste  about  this  place.  It  is  like  a  Eoman 
sepulchre,  and  will  look  well  when  no  longer  choked  up 
with  trees — two  beautiful  yews  behind  and  a  fine  cedar 
in  front  excepted. 

Thursday,  13$. — Left  Wimpole,  and  returned  to 
North  Audley  Street.  In  the  evening  Mr.  Thornton 
came,  at  ten  o'clock,  and  told  us  what  had  been  doing  in 
the  House  of  Commons. 

Saturday,  15$ — Lord  Hardwicke  brought  the  news  of 
Lucien  Bonaparte  and  all  his  family  having  landed  at 
Falmouth  *  from  one  of  our  frigates,  which  brought  them 
from  Malta. 

Sunday,  16$. — Walked  with  Lady  Donegall  down  to 
the  palace.  Very  few  people  there,  and  still  fewer 
women. 

*  If  Lord  Hardwicke's  information  was  right,  Lucien  and  his  family  must 
have  re-embarked  for  Plymouth  :  —  l  Dec.  18.  —  Lucien  Bonaparte,  his 
family  and  suite,  landed  this  afternoon  at  the  Victualling  Office,  Plymouth, 
and  proceeded  to  the  "  King's  Arms,"  accompanied  by  Sir  Robert  Calder 
(the  Port  Admiral),  General  England,  Lord  Boringdon,  and  several  naval 
and  military  officers.  Lucien  is  described  as  a  man  about  fifty,  of  pale  sallow 
complexion,  intelligent  countenance,  and  gentlemanlike  appearance,  accom- 
panied by  his  wife,  "  a  stout  handsome  woman,"  and  by  his  five  daughters 
and  two  sons.' — Annual  Register.  It  was  on  this  occasion  that  they  visited 
Saltram,  the  seat  of  Lord  Boringdon,  afterwards  first  Earl  of  Morley. 


1810]  MRS.  CHOLMELEY'S  DEATH.  447 

Thursday,  27th. — Lady  Charlotte  Lindsay  called.  We 
walked  down  to  the  palace ;  no  crowd  there.  Lord 
St.  Helens  in  waiting,  and  giving  up  almost  all  hopes — 
of  senses,  I  suppose,  was  meant. 

Monday,  3lst. — Lord  Aberdeen  called  upon  me  in  the 
morning,  and  promised  to  come  from  the  House  of 
Commons  and  tell  us  what  was  doing;  which  he  did,  but 
at  past  twelve,  when  we  were  all  gone  up-stairs.  He 
wrote  down  the  divisions  in  his  carriage,  and  sent  them 
up.  I  felt  quite  well  all  day,  which  I  have  not  done 
since  my  attack  at  Wimpole,  and  blessed  Heaven  that 
the  last  day  of  the  year  ended  in  health  and  cheerful- 
ness. 

It  was  in  the  course  of  this  year  that  Miss  Berry  lost 
her  friend  and  correspondent  Mrs.  Cholmeley.  The  fol- 
lowing extract  from  some  reflections  on  the  year  thus 
alludes  to  that  event,  though  without  the  precise  date  of 
its  occurrence. 

Mrs.  Cholmeley 's  death  recalls  to  me  in  a  melancholy 
manner  many  passages  in  my  own  past  life,  and  forcibly 
reminds  me  how  little  of  that  life  probably  remains 
to  me.  This,  God  knows,  I  call  not  melancholy,  but 
consoling.  ...  I  became  acquainted  with  her  in  the 
year  1785,  when  I  was  twenty- two,  and  was  just  returned 
from  having  been  plunged  for  two  years  into  the  great 
world  of  Europe,  from  the  most  perfect  retirement  in 
England. 


448  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isn 


,.;    JOURNAL. 
1811. 

Tuesday,  January  1st. — After  we  were  gone  up-stairs, 
Harrot  *  brought  me  up  a  paper,  with  the  division  in  the 
House  of  Commons  of  thirteen  against  the  ministers,  on 
the  proposed  restrictions  of  the  Kegency,f  and  said  Mr. 
Thornton  was  in  the  drawing-room.  I  went  down ;  the 
fire  was  out,  and  he  looked,  in  his  great  coat,  the  picture 
of  cold  and  fatigue,  yet  we  had  a  talk  on  politics  of  near 
half  an  hour.  The  Duke  of  Cumberland,  that  arch  in- 
triguer, has  been  tampering  with  him,  and  persuaded 
him  to  vote  against  the  ministers,  those  very  ministers 
which  this  Duke  of  Cumberland  intrigued  to  bring  in. 

Extract  of  a  Letter  from  Miss  Berry  to  Charles  Stuart,  Esq., 
H.B.MSs  Minister  Plenipotentiary  at  Lisbon. 

London,  2nd  Jan.  1811. 

The  enclosed  might  have  gone  under  cover  to  Admi  Berke- 
ley, or  might  have  found  its  way  without  any  cover  at  all ;  but  I 
have  chosen  to  plague  you  with  it,  that  I  might  at  the  same 
time  recall  myself  to  your  memory,  and  tell  you  that  if  your 
presence  is  as  much  wanted  in  Portugal  as  your  absence  is 
regretted  here,  we  shall  never  get  you  home  again. 

*  Harrot  was  the  name  of  Miss  Berry's  maid. 

t  Mr.  Percival  (first  minister),  Mr.  Ryder,  Lord  Castlereagh,  Lord  Sid- 
mouth,  Lord  Westmoreland,  Lord  Melville,  Lord  Eldon,  Lord  Liverpool,  &c. 
This  defeat  of  ministers  was  on  an  amendment,  moved  by  Earl  Gower, 
to  the  Fifth  Resolution  respecting  the  Regency,  being  that  which  gave  to 
the  Queen  the  care  of  the  King's  person,  and  the  power  of  appointment  and 
removal  of  persons  in  the  several  offices  of  the  household,  and  proposing 
also  that  a  Council  should  be  appointed  to  advise  and  assist  her  Majesty. — 

Hansards  Debates. 


1811]  DEFEAT   OP   MINISTERS.  449 

Perhaps  you  think  (considering  only  the  importance  of  the 
business)  that  we  are  here  all  intent  on  the  affairs  of  Portugal, 
impatient  for  the  arrival  of  a  mail  from  Lisbon,  aDQ  hanging 
with  fearful  expectation  upon  the  event  of  this  last  struggle  for 
the  expiring  liberties  of  Europe — upon  this  last  stand  against 
the  conqueror  of  the  western  world,  &c.  &c.  You  are  quite 
mistaken,  we  are  thinking  of  nothing  but  regencies  and  restric- 
tions, whether  by  bill  or  by  address,  and  one  half  of  us  are  as 
triumphant  this  morning  at  having  beaten  the  ministers  last 
night  by  a  majority  of  thirteen,  as  we  should  have  been  if  you 
and  Lord  Wellington,  tarn  arte  quam  marts,  had  beaten 
Massena. 

To  say  the  truth,  I  have  a  notion  that  this  defeat  of  ministers 
is  somewhat  of  a  ruse  de  guerre  on  their  part.  I  know  that 
the  Prince  of  Wales  three  days  ago  intended  to  keep  them  all 
in,  and  I  rather  suspect  that  this  knowledge  prevented  what 
the  sailors  call  a  long  pull,  a  strong  pull,  and  a  pull  altogether. 
However,  they  have  managed  their  matters  very  ill,  as  usual, 
for  the  Prince  is  now,  or  pretends  to  be,  much  affronted.  They 
are  all  to  resign  as  soon  as  the  bill  is  passed,  and  they  say  their 
resignations  will  be  accepted.  But,  at  all  events,  these 'delays, 
whether  intended  or  not,  may  very  possibly  put  an  end  to  any 
regency  and  any  restrictions. 

By  what  I  hear  to-day,  I  expect  that  just  as  the  Prince  is 
ready  to  step  into  his  new  title,  the  King  will  be  ready  to  govern 
us  just  as  he  has  done  before,  and  will  be  declared  by  his  phy- 
sicians well  enough,  that  is  to  say,  mad  enough,  to  wish  to 
retain  the  government. 

Saturday,  bth. — Before  dinner,  Matthew  Montague,  Sir 
John  Sebright,  and  Lord  Hardwicke  met  here.  Matthew's 
account  of  one  of  the  divisions  in  the  House  of  Commons 
most  laughable. 

Sunday,  Qth. — Had  a  long  conversation  with  Mr  S. 
Turner  in  my  room  on  the  subject  of  the  report  of  the 
Bullion  Committee.  His  ideas  have  on  some  points  cleared 
up,  and  on  some  confirmed,  my  own.  But  the  subject  is 
more  involved  in  difficulties  than  one  at  first  imagines, 
from  the  very  extraordinary  circumstances  in  which  the 

VOL.  II.  G  G 


450  MISS  BERKY'S  JOURNAL. 

very  extraordinary  times  have  placed  commerce,  as  well 
everything  else,  and  therefore  it  requires  a  more  steady 
and  frequent  recurrence  to  first  principles  to  keep  one's 
understanding  clear. 

Extract  of  a  Letter  from  Charles  Stuart,  Esq.,  to  Miss  Berry. 

Lisbon,  9th  January,  1811. 

.  .  .  .  I  am  sorry  the  public  attention  is  directed  rather 
to  parish  business  in  England  than  to  the  observation  of  the 
events  which  are  going  forward  in  this  country.  It  is  not 
Portugal  merely  we  are  defending,  but  we  are  training  and 
forming  an  army  accustomed  to  war  on  the  great  scale,  and  on 
whom  we  probably  shall  one  day  rely  for  the  security  of  our 
firesides,  though  to  most  people  that  is  a  more  interesting 
subject  than  it  is  to  me,  whose  fireside  is  always  in  some  other 
part  of  the  world. 

On  this  ground  I  should  be  sorry  that  any  change  in  England 
induced  people  to  give  up  the  game  here.  We  have  a  fair  equal 
chance,  and  if  the  new  or  the  old  minister  will  allow  us  to 
fight  it  out,  I  am  very  well  convinced  that  we  shall  get  through 
the  business,  more  honourably  and  more  advantageously  than 
we  have  any  reason  to  expect.  I  hope  you  will  not  be  uneasy 
about  the  brothers  and  husbands,  and  cousins,  whose  fate 
would  depend  on  this  determination :  such  considerations  usually 
have  more  influence  in  ladies'  politics  than  any  calculations  of 
the  chances  attendant  on  the  different  contingencies  which  may 
occur. 

Saturday,  I2th. — Dined  at  Mrs.  Darner's  with  M.  De 
Brehan,  the  Frenchman  who  has  brought  her  the  present 
of  a  fine  cup  and  saucer  from  the  Empress  Josephine.* 

*  In  the  work  entitled  '  Queens  of  Society,'  before  alluded  to  as  misrepre- 
senting the  reception  of  Mrs.  Darner  at  Paris  in  1802,  this  gift  of  porcelain 
is  also  affixed  to  a  wrong  date.  Mrs.  Darner  is  there  mentioned  as  visitino- 
Paris  in  the  year  1779,  when  '  she  was  introduced  to  the  beautiful  and 
witty  Josephine  Beauhamais,  then  a  leader  of  fashion  in  that  city,  and  their 
acquaintance  had  ripened  into  friendship,'  that  '  she  heard  no  more  of  Jose- 
phine till  one  day  a  French  gentleman  called  upon  her  with  a  fine  piece  of 
porcelain  cind  a  letter  of  introduction  from  the  First  Consul's  wife ;  that 
Napoleon  was  anxious  to  conciliate  the  Whigs,  and  that  Mrs.  Darner  set  out 


1811]  M.    DE   BRfiHAM.  451 

He  appears  by  his  conversation  and  manners,  which  are 
unaffected,  to  be  something  above  the  rank  of  an  upper 
servant — a  decent  person  employed  in  commissions,  &c. 
He  comes  here  with  a  great  order  to  Lee  and  Kennedy, 
for  plants  for  the  said  Empress ;  whether  he  brings  a 
liquidation  of  her  long  account  with  them,  I  know  not. 
He  has  a  mother  and  an  uncle  settled  here,  who  live 
together  at  Hampstead.  The  uncle  is  no  other  than  that 
M.  de  Montier  or  Monstier,  who  was  the  first  French 
agent  to  motive  the  peace  of  1783,  before  Reyneval  was 
sent  here.  He  crossed  from  Dieppe  to  Gravesend  as  was 
intended,  but  by  stress  of  weather  was  allowed  to  land  at 
Margate.  He,  or  anybody  else  leaving  France  for  this 
country,  must  have  a  particular  passport,  signed  twice  by 
the  Emperor's  own  hand. 

Tuesday r,  ~Lbth. — Found  Miss  C.  Fanshawe  at  home ; 
half  her  formality,  I  believe,  depends  upon  the  family  to 
which  she  belongs.  We  are  half  of  us  the  creatures  of 
circumstances ;  or  rather,  the  half-marred,  half-made  crea- 
tures of  circumstance. 

Wednesday,  Iftth. — Went  to  Little  Strawberry. 

Saturday,  19<A. — Upon  the  terrace  before  my  little 
green-house  the  sun  was  quite  warm,  and  all  the  double 
violets  upon  the  bank  ready  to  blow ;  how  occupied  and 
happy  I  could  be  for  many  an  hour  in  such  a  scene !  but 
I  am  quite  aware  that  in  my  particular  circumstances  I 
have  nothing  to  do  but  to  leave  it,  and  forget  it  as  soon 
as  I  can. 

Monday,  21.<tf. — Lady  Charlotte  Lindsay  proposed  from 
the  Priory  our  acting  with  them,  which  I  begged  her  in 
the  most  civil  manner  to  refuse  on  my  part,  my  health 
alone  a  more  than  sufficient  apology :  but  if  it  were  not, 

for  Paris  after  the  Peace  of  Amiens,  &c.'  It  appears  that  the  French  gen- 
tleman's visit  was  nine  years  after  Mrs.  Darner's  visit  in  1802,  -when  she  had 
little  reason  to  be  flattered  by  the  reception  given  to  her  by  the  First  Consul 
and  his  wife. 

G  G  2 


452  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isn 

I  should  never  think  of  enlisting  in  their  troop  for  a 
thousand  reasons — distance,  time,  expense,  trouble,  and 
exhibition  to  all  London  at  Easter.  Besides  there  is  a 
time  for  every  thing. 

Friday,  February  \st. — Went  at  nine  o'clock  to  Ken- 
sington to  the  Princess  of  Wales'.  Princess  Charlotte  had 
dined  there,  and  I  was  anxious  to  see  her.  We  found  her, 
the  Princess,  the  Lady  Charlotte  Campbell  (in  waiting), 
Miss  Garth,  Miss  Hayman,  Lady  de  Clifford,  and  Sir 
William  Drunimond,*  playing  at  a  round  table  at  a  foolish 
sort  of  game,  of  calling  the  cards  by  the  name  of  Niny- 
cumtwit,  or  something  like  that.  Princess  Charlotte  was 
seated  by  her  mother,  who  named  us  to  her,  and  said  to 
us,  '  My  daughter.'  I  sat  down  by  the  Princess ;  she 
whispered  something  to  Princesss  Charlotte  about  me; 
she  answered  immediately,  '  I  know  it,  I  know  it ;  she  is 
a  great  friend  of  Mrs.  Howe.' 

A  finer  girl  of  fifteen  one  seldom  sees,  with  an  open 
lively  countenance,  and  well-cut  expressive  features ;  fair, 
like  all  her  family,  but  without  having  a  fine  complexion, 
or  at  present  any  colour,  for  by  some  inconceivable  mis- 
management at  the  time  she  had  the  small-pox,  it  has 
muddled  her  complexion,  destroyed  in  part  her  eyebrows, 
and  left  several  decided  marks  about  the  end  of  her  nose. 
I  dare  say  there  is  hardly  another  person  in  the  kingdom, 
who  within  these  last  fifteen  years  has  suffered  as  much 
by  the  small-pox,  which  only  shows  the  old  story,  how 
much  the  children  of  princes  are  neglected  and  ill-treated. 
Her  mouth  is  like  the  Prince  of  Wales's,  without  having 
however  much  sweetness,  and  her  eyes  are  by  no  means 
as  handsome  as  her  mother's.  She  is  lively,  animated, 
and  laughing ;  told  Sir  William  Drumrnond,  who  was  on 

*  Rt.  Hon.  Sir  William  Drummond,  formerly  Ambassador  to  the  Court 
of  Sicily,  the  author  of  a '  Review  of  the  Governments  of  Sparta  and  Athens,' 
1  The  Satires  of  Persius,'  &c.,  also  of  a  work,  for  private  circulation,  in  which 
he  treated  some  of  the  histories  in  the  Old  Testament  as  allegories. 


1811]  PRINCESS   CHARLOTTE.  453 

the  other  side  of  her,  to  go  on  with  what  he  was  saying, 
for  she  liked  nothing  so  much  as  politics ;  then  got  into  a 
talk  with  Lady  Charlotte  Campbell,  about  being  afraid  of 
the  dark  and  ghosts,  and  dismal  stories ;  told  a  good  one 
herself,  and  then  made  me  tell  her  the  story  of  Lillo's* 
'Fatal  Curiosity,'  which  Lady  Charlotte  mentioned,  and 
which  she  had  never  heard  of  before.  Soon  after  ten 
o'clock  her  carriage  was  announced,  and  away  she  went, 
very  cheerfully,  having  kissed  her  mother,  shook  hands 
with  Lady  Charlotte,  &c.,  and  bowed  to  us.  And  thus  is 
this  girl,  now  a  woman,  who  in  three  short  years  may  be 
called  to  reign  over  this  country,  with  all  her  senses 
awake,  eager  and  curious  about  everything  and  every- 
body, sent  away  with  her  governess,  and  during  the 

hours  not  spent  with  her,  she  has  Mrs. to  form  her 

mind,  manners,  and  disposition !  Alas !  poor  Princes, 
one  and  all,  can  you  ever  be  pitied  enough,  or  even 
judged  with  common  justice  under  all  the  disadvantages 
you  labour?  True,  this  poor  thing  is  taught  music,  and 
taught  Latin,  neither  of  which  will  certainly  be  of  much 
service  to  her  in  governing  this  country,  in  detecting  folly 
and  knavery,  in  surrounding  herself  with  talents,  and 
above  all,  in  acquiring  truth  and  stability  of  character. 
She  knows  no  creature,  but  the  Royal  Family  and  their 
attendants ;  she  has  never  yet  seen  a  play  or  an  opera ; 
and  whenever  she  is  her  own  mistress,  what  must  be  her 
first  idea  but  to  satiate  herself  with  pleasures,  which 
every  other  girl  of  fifteen  is  beginning  to  appreciate  at 
their  just  value,  provided  they  are  not  entirely  new  to 
them. 

We  remained  to  supper ;  nobody  joined  the  party,  but 
Lord  Aberdeen  and  the  Hopes,  who  did  not  arrive  till 
twelve  o'clock,  though  asked  at  nine  o'clock,  which  the 
Princess  remarked.  The  Princess,  though  lively  at  supper, 

*  George  Lillo,  a  dramatic  writer,  son  of  a  Dutch  jeweller ;  born  1693  j 
died  1739. 


454  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isn 

and  talking  a  great  deal  to  me  about  her  memoirs,  which 
in  joke  she  said  I  should  publish,  &c.,  is  pensive,  and  not 
in  her  usual  spirits,  says  she  has  the  second-sight,  and 
sees  a  great  deal  that  is  coming,  nothing  that  anybody 
expects,  and  a  great  deal  that  nobody  thinks  of. 

Saturday,  2nd. — Went  to  the  play — '  Cato ' — in  Mrs. 
Kemble 's  box.  I  have  always  particularly,  and  in  spite 
of  all  abuse  of  it,  loved  the  piece ;  it  both  interests  and 
affects  me,  which  magnanimity  ever  does.  Kemble  acted 
well.  Young  particularly  so,  in  the  short  part  of  Portius  ; 
C.  Kemble  well  in  Juba  ;  Syphax,  by  a  man  of  the 
name  of  Egerton,  who  had  no  idea  of  the  poetry  he  was 
repeating. 

Friday,  8th. — To  Mrs.  Sotheby's,  where  was  a  sort  of 
blue-stocking  assembly,  misses  and  their  mammas  with- 
out end,  so  pleased  to  carry  them  to  a  rational  house,  and 
unite  pleasure  and  wisdom  together ! 

Sunday,  1  Oth. — Lady  Charlotte  Lindsay  called  for  me 
in  the  Princess's  carriage  to  go  to  dinner,  and  we  took  up 
Puysegur  at  Monsieur's  house  in  South  Audley  Street, 
The  party  at  dinner  were :  Lord  Gower,*  Lord  Charlemont, 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hope,  Mr.  Lewis,  and  Sir  H.  England; 
Lady  Glenbervie  and  Miss  Hayman  in  waiting.  The 
Princess  did  not  look  ill,  but  really  was  so.  The  men  all 
went  away  sooner  or  later,  and  nobody  remained  to 
supper  but  myself  and  Lady  Charlotte  Lindsay.  The 
Princess  quiet  and  low,  but,  to  give  her  her  due,  not  out 
of  humour. 

From  Sir  W.  Gell  to  Miss  Berry. 

Lisbon,  Feb.  2,  1811. 

MY  DEAR  FRIENDS, — If,  as  Plutarch  says,  you  really  wish  for  us 
back  again  in  England,  your  hopes  stand  some  chance  of  being 
realised,  for  we  have  this  day  taken  measures  for  bringing  about 
that  desirable  event — an  event  chiefly  rendered  necessary  by  the 

*  The  late  Duke  of  Sutherland. 


1811]  LETTER   FROM   SIR   W.    GELL.  455 

total  disorganization  of  the  system  of  finance  which  seems  to 
have  affected  us  both  at  the  same  moment.  .  .  .  So  many 
lies  are  invented  on  the  subject  of  our  situation  here,  and  we  are 
in  general  so  completely  in  the  dark  on  the  subject  of  who,  how 
many,  where  and  when,  that  I  shall  give  you  what  I  have  seen 
myself  before  I  proceed  -to  the  reigning  lies  of  the  day.  Ro- 
mana  is  dead,  and  we  went  in  the  procession  to  his  burial.  He 
was,  perhaps,  the  only  learned  man  in  his  country,  and  I  believe 
the  only  person  in  the  Peninsula  who  had  information  sufficient 
to  guide  his  judgment  beyond  the  mere  events  of  the  day.  He 
was  a  very  good  scholar — a  thing  quite  unheard  of  in  Spain ;  he 
was  very  well  read  in  history,  and  if  he  was  not  a  good  general, 
which  I  very  much  doubt,  there  is  no  hope  of  a  better  among 
the  survivors.  Moreover,  a  person  who  with  a  small  army  and 
confined  resources  can  preserve  himself  from  any  serious  defeat, 
with  20,000  enemies  in  the  country,  for  the  space  of  two  years, 
cannot  be  so  very  bad  a  commander  as  the  English  would  repre- 
sent him.  I  took  particular  pains  to  get  acquainted  with  him,  and 
think  I  never  saw  a  person  of  whom  one  has  heard  so  much,  with 
so  little  of  the  humbug  grandissima  about  him.  The  history  of 
Romana  being  concluded,  I  shall  proceed  to  inform  you  that  the 
last  lie  from  Cadiz  says  the  French  have  so  far  raised  the  siege, 
that  only  6,000  men  remain  there,  and  that  we  have  it  in  con- 
templation to  blow  them  and  their  works  up  together.  It  will 
be  the  first  time  since  the  revolution  that  the  French  have  spent 
a  whole  year  upon  a  siege  and  got  nothing  but  their  labour  for 
their  pains.  A  blind  shell,  that  is  a  shell  filled  with  lead  to 
make  it  heavier,  will  just  reach  over  the  walls  into  the  herb- 
market  at  Cadiz.  This,  however,  requires  so  much  powder,  and 
burying  the  gun  in  the  earth,  that  no  gun  can  last  long  with 
such  treatment,  while  the  shell  does  little  mischief,  being  directed, 
as  Aristotle  observes,  so  high  in  the  air  that  it  falls  down  per- 
pendicularly, and  can  only  kill  at  most  one  person  at  a  time, 
and  this,  if  indeed  anyone  is  hit,  is  at  the  expense  of  five  to  six 
pounds  a  shot.  It  appears,  however,  very  possible  that  our  ship- 
ping might  easily  be  annoyed  in  the  harbour.  As  to  Junot'a 
death  by  a  shot  in  the  face,  you  may  perhaps  hear  of  it  before 
this  reaches  you.  It  was  at  first  certain  ;  then  quite  false ;  then 
absolutely  verified ;  then  a  lie  again;  and  now  remains  uncer- 
tain, only  this  being  known,  that  a  person,  supposed  Junot,  was 


456  MISS   BERET'S  JOURNAL.  [1811 

hit  in  the  face  by  a  musket-ball,  and  fell  from  his  horse.     We 
have  taken  several  letters  which  were  to  have  been  delivered  to 
the  French.     One  from  Mrs.  Junot,  at  Ciudad  Eodrigo,  says  to 
Junot,    '  I  have  just  produced  a  son,  which  I  am  glad  of,  be- 
cause it  will  please  you.     As  to  your  ever  establishing  yourself 
at  Abrantes,  the  hope  does  not  seem  likely  ever  to  be  realised, 
so  I  shall  set  off  for  Paris,  as  the  sight  of  ten  men  per  day  car- 
ried past  my  window  to  their  graves  makes  me  melancholy ; 
and  if  I  go  to  Salamanca,  as  you  recommend,  they  tell  me  I 
shall  see  not  fewer  than  forty  burials  every  day.'     Some  of  those 
passages  which  relate  to  private  concerns,  Lord  Wellington  has 
copied  for  Junot  in  his  own  hand,  and  added  congratulations  on 
the  birth  of  the  son,  so  that  Junot  must  answer  in  his  own 
hand,  which  Lord  Wellington  knows  well,  and  thus  expects  to 
find  out  whether  he  is  killed  or  dangerously  wounded,  or  unhurt. 
As  to  what  you  see  in  newspapers  about  the  starvation  of  the 
French  at  Santarem  a  fortnight  ago,  that  is  all  false ;  indeed, 
the  event  alone  is  a  sufficient  contradiction.     Two  or  three  days 
ago,  however,  it  was  suspected  that  the  enemy  was  weakening 
his  forces  at  Santarem  by  degrees,  and  Marshal  Beresford  went 
up  the  left  bank  of  the  Tagus  to  see  that  Abrantes  was  secure 
from  any  coup-de-main  they  might  attempt  if  they  retreated 
by  that  city.     Upon  the  whole,  though  there  is  not  apparently 
the  smallest  chance  of  any  great  overthrow  of  the  French  under 
Massena,  they  do  not  seem  likely  to  be  able  to  do  anything 
against  us,  while  they  certainly  are  diminishing  very  rapidly  in 
numbers  throughout  the  Peninsula.     Perhaps  you  have  heard 
that  since  the  war  broke  out  500,000  men  have  passed  this  way 
through  Bayonne ;  and  this  account,  compared  with  the  state- 
ment of  the  French  force  in  Spain  up  to   December,    1810, 
shows  that  280,000  have  been  somehow  or  other  disposed  of  in 
this  country,  and  this  is  their  own  account  of  the  business, 
while  they  certainly  have  not  a  foot  of  land  beyond  what  their 
army  occupies,  and  even  their  armies  have  no  communications 
unless  it  be  on  occasions  where  it  is  worth  sending  5,000  or 
6,000  men  as  an  escort,  for  their  letters  are  perpetually  falling 
into  our  hands.     Neither  prisoners  nor  deserters  now  seem  to 
come  in  to  us  quickly ;   indeed,  desertion  is  difficult  from  the 
nature  of  the  French  position,  but  a  great  deal  of  this  has  been 
much  magnified,  as  it  appears  that  the  French  have  lost  only 


1811]  LETTER   FROM   SIR   W.    GELL.  457 

1,500  men  in  the  whole  year  by  desertion,  while  we  have 
lost  480  ourselves.  I  believe  there  are  very  few  instances  of 
the  Portuguese  deserting.  This  is  I  think  all  I  know  at  pre- 
sent. As  to  climate,  we  have  had  sixty-four  of  bright  sunshine 
and  about  twelve  of  heavy  weather.  We  intend  to  be  in  Eng- 
land about  the  latter  end  of  this  month  ;  indeed,  I  shall  this 
day  begin  to  pack  up.  .  .  .  My  health  has  so  much  im- 
proved by  the  assistance  of  M.  Husson,  that  I  am  become  an 
absolute  nuisance  in  company  from  the  riot  I  make.  Indeed, 
Craven  was  asked  the  other  day  whether  I  was  not  an  idiot. 
Luckily,  my  finances  do  not  keep  pace  with  my  wits,  and  gene- 
rally keep  me  down  two  or  three  steps  lower  than  I  should  other- 
wise be,  which  saves  me  from  becoming  quite  intolerable.  I 
keep  sighing  for  riches,  but  '  nobody  coming  to  marry  me,  no- 
body going  to  die,'  must  be  my  motto.  Tell  Lady  Char  not  to 
write,  for  I  am  coming  to  hear  it  all  myself  so  soon  as  possible, 
and  to  take  my  waiting  with  her  Ladyship.  .  .  .  You  have 
spent  the  whole  of  the  annuity  I  allowed  you  out  of  the  rents  of 
my  estate  in  Eldorado.*  Never  mind,  we  are  all  ruined ;  we 
will  fit  up  my  sister  Agnes's  room  this  spring,  and  then  we  will 
make  Mr.  Berry  perfectly  miserable  by  effecting  a  thorough  re- 
form in  his  apartment. 

Hope  did  very  ill  in  not  giving  me  a  commission  to  buy  old 
plate  for  him.  We  have  it  here  for  its  weight  in  dollars,  and 
beautifully  solid  in  appearance,  whereas  the  manufacture  con- 
sists of  a  thin  plate  of  silver,  which  is  thumped  and  bumped 
into  a  variety  of  flowers  and  patterns  with  punches  and  mallets. 
Under  these  awful  impressions  I  take  my  leave,  assuring  you 
all  of  my  highest  consideration,  and  of  the  delight  with  which 
I  shall  come  again  to  set  an  example  of  morality  and  piety  to 
your  family  in  North  Audley  Street.  There  is  no  room  for  pic- 
tures, besides  which  an  inundation  of  Vandals  is  now  ascending 
the  stairs.  So  adieu,  my  dear  friends,  with  best  love  to  dear 
Mrs.  Darner,  for  whom  I  bring  a  little  chip  of  marble,  to  see 
whether  it  is  good  for  statuary,  and  of  which  there  is  plenty 
here.  Most  affectionately  yours, 

ANACHARSIS. 

*  Mr.  Gell  alludes  to  some  furniture  procured  by  Miss  Berry-,  either  for 
their  own  use  or  for  his,  and  about  which  they  had  corresponded. 


458  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isn 

JOURNAL. 

Sunday,  February  24:th. — At  three  o'clock  I  went  with 
Mrs.  Apreece*  to  Mrs.  Siddons',  at  Westbourne.  Mrs.  Sid- 
dons  received  me,  as  she  always  does,  in  a  manner  which 
flatters  my  internal  vanity  ;  for  she  has  the  germ  of  a 
superior  nature  in  her,  though  burnt  up  by  the  long-con- 
tinued dram  of  popular  applause — '  Datus  in  theatro  ' — 
which  I  know  nobody  who  has  ever  withstood.  Mrs. 
Apreece,  in  our  journey  there  and  back,  entertaining. 

Tuesday,  26th. — Augustus  Fosterf  and  Lord  Morpeth 
called.  They  had  been  to  the  Prince's  levee ;  great 
crowds,  splendid  liveries,  and  hussars  of  all  colours.  He 
very  gracious,  but  speaking  little  to  anybody.  It  began 
at  or  before  two  o'clock,  and  was  over  soon  after  four. 

The  following  interesting  correspondence  between  Pro- 
fessor Playfair  and  Miss  Berry  shows  from  whence  sprang 
the  suggestion  of  the  work  on  a  comparative  state  of 
manners ;  and,  though  not  literally  adopted  by  Miss 
Berry,  was  no  doubt  the  origin  of  her  future  work  on 
'The  Comparative  View  of  Social  Life  in  France  and 
England.' 

Edinburgh,  1st  January. 

MY  DEAR  MADAM, — It  has  long  been  determined  that  the 
letters  of  Mad.  du  Deffand  shall  be  subjected  to  the  ordeal  of 
the  'Edinburgh  Eeview,'  but  I  do  not  believe  that  Rhadamanthus 
Smith  will  be  the  judge  appealed  to  on  that  occasion.  At  all 
events,  you  may  be  sure  that  your  note  will  be  attended  to.  At 
one  time  I  was  afraid  that  the  review  of  Mad.  du  D.  must  have 
come  forward  in  the  last  No.,  which  would  have  occasioned  it  to 
be  done  in  a  hurried  way,  and  not  nearly  so  well  as  I  hope  it 
may  be  in  the  next  No.  which  comes  out,  or  at  least  ought  to 
come  out,  in  February.  You  may  expect  to  see  your  own  work 
as  an  editor,  meet  with  great  commendation  (indeed,  I  think  it 

*  Afterwards  married  to  Sir  Humphry  Davy, 
f  Son  of  Lady  Elizabeth  Foster. 


1811]  LETTER    FROM   PROFESSOR    PLAYFAIR.  459 

cannot  meet  with  too  much);  whether  you  will  so  much  ap- 
prove of  the  reviewer's  opinion  of  Mad.du  D.  or  of  Lord  0. 1  am 
not  quite  sure ;  this,  however,  I  think  I  can  say,  that  the  tone 
of  the  review  will  not  diminish  the  curiosity  of  the  public,  or 
their  desire  to  be  acquainted  with  the  book. 

To  your  questions  about  Scots  law  and  Scots  lawyers,  I  do  not 
believe  that  I  know  enough  of  the  matter  to  give  any  satisfactory 
answer.  It  is  certainly  to  be  regretted  if  the  profligacy  of 
English  manners  find  a  shelter  or  defence  in  the  ruder  and 
more  imperfect  legislation  of  another  country,  but  it  seems  to 
me  that  it  is  not  the  law  of  this  latter  country  that  is  so  much 
to  be  blamed  as  the  morals  of  the  former. 

That  the  laws  of  every  country  must  be  general  rules,  admit- 
ting of  no  exception,  is  unavoidable,  and  that  the  applications 
of  such  general  rules  to  particular  cases  must  often  produce  in- 
justice, and  must  often  shelter  criminality,  is  a  truth  of  which 
every  country  and  every  age  have  been  unfortunate  enough  to 
afford  many  examples.  I  do  not  see  any  more  than  this  in  the 
instance  of  Lord ,  &c. 

Your  questions  about  refer  to  matters  that  I  know 

nothing  of,  but  they  considerably  awaken  my  curiosity,  and  will 
make  me  try  to  be  informed.  At  all  events,  however,  I  think 
I  know  the  answer  that  I  would  be  disposed  to  make  if  you 
would  draw  from  them  or  such  like  instances,  any  conclusions 
against  Scotland  in  general.  The  sophistry  by  which  people 
support  their  prejudices  in  the  case  of  national  character,  and 
many  others  it  were  easy  to  name,  seems  to  me  to  be  this.  (Do 
not  be  alarmed  at  the  word  sophistry ;  I  do  not  think  you  are  a 
person  to  be  deceived  by  anybody's  sophistry  but  your  own,  and 
against  one's  own  sophistry  I  fear  nobody  is  proof.)  In  every 
country  there  is  a  considerable  quantity  both  of  good  and  evil 
which  it  is  impossible  not  to  remark.  When  there  are  any 
prejudices  already  existing  against  the  country,  all  the  good  is 
set  down  to  the  account  of  individual  or  personal  character,  and 
all  the  ill  to  the  account  of  national  and  general  character. 
Thus,  by  particularising  the  one  and  generalising  the  other,  a 
picture  is  made  out  that  seems  to  be  quite  like  nature  and 
perfectly  copied  from  the  truth,  and  at  the  same  time  quite  con- 
formable to  all  the  prejudices  already  entertained.  Now  give 
me  leave  to  say  that  I  have  often  observed  you  doing  exactly 


460  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isn 

what  I  have  now  described ;  that  is,  when  you  met  with  good 
people  or  good  things  in  this  country,  which  might  by  chance 
now  and  then  occur,  you  would  immediately  ascribe  it,  as  you 
probably  was  very  right  in  doing,  to  individual  merit  of  some 
kind  or  other ;  but  when  the  bad  occurred,  which  it  would  do, 
G-od  knows,  but  too  often,  you  put  all  this  down  to  the  score  of 
that  unhappy  nation,  composed  of  Celts  and  Goths,  which  extends 
from  the  Tweed  to  the  Ultima  T/iule  of  the  North.  The  feelings 
of  a  good  mind,  that  takes  an  interest  in  good  people,  and  forms 
attachments  to  them,  are  thus  gratified,  and,  at  the  same  time, 
national  prejudice  is  kept  up  and  wars  strengthened.  You  have 
a  mind,  give  me  leave  to  say,  very  superior  to  all  the  prejudices 
which  it  is  of  most  importance  to  overcome.  To  the  great  idols, 
as  Bacon  calls  them,  to  which  so  much  worship  is  paid  all  over 
the  world,  you  never  bend  the  knee ;  but  there  are  one  or  two 
smaller  images  which  you  seem  to  take  pleasure  in  paying  a 
little  more  respect  to  than  is  fairly  their  due.  They  are  pre- 
judices of  no  great  account,  I  allow,  and  hardly  of  any  moment 
at  all  in  the  estimation  of  the  soundness  of  mental  attainment ; 
yet,  even  from  these  I  would  wish  that  your  mind  was  entirely 
free.  One  is  naturally  most  interested  in  the  perfection  of  that 
which  is  already  excellent. 

You  asked  my  opinion  before  on  another  subject — the  manner 
in  which  you  may  employ  your  leisure  in  some  literary  occupa- 
tion. When  I  received  your  former  letter,  in  which  this  question 
was  put,  I  happened  to  be  with  Lord  W.  Seymour,  and  I  took 
the  liberty  of  stating  the  matter  to  him.  The  idea  that  occurred, 
and  that  he  was  the  first  to  suggest,  was,  that  the  manners  of 
some  Age  distinguished  in  the  history  of  our  country,  would 
make  a  good  subject  for  you  to  study  and  give  an  account  of. 
The  manners,  for  example,  in  the  reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth  as 
compared  with  those  of  the  present  day — I  mean,  of  the  fashion- 
able world  ;  or,  perhaps  the  time  of  Queen  Anne  might  be  still 
better;  there  are  ample  materials  for  it,  and  the  thing  cannot  be 
well  done  but  by  one  who  is  properly  acquainted  with  the 
fashionable  world  at  present,  and  who  has  been  in  it,  with  all 
the  observation  and  thorough  acquaintance  with  it  which  we 
know  you  to  possess.  This  seemed  very  good  to  us  both,  and 
the  sort  of  reading  into  which  it  would  lead  you  would  be  of  a 
pleasant  nature,  not  too  intricate  or  laborious  for  enjoyment. 


1811]  LETTER   TO   PROFESSOR    PLAYFAIR.  461 

Since  that,  on  thinking  over  all  these  things  by  myself,  it  has 
occurred  that  biography  may  offer  good  subjects  for  you. 
Eminent  persons  of  either  sex,  who,  though  well  known,  are  not 
so  well  known  in  the  details  of  private  life  as  they  deserve  to 
be,  are  good  subjects  for  biographical  memoirs  or  sketches,  more 
or  less  particular,  as  circumstances  might  direct.  What  think 
you  of  some  subject  of  this  kind  ?  Your  short  account  of  Mad. 
du  Deffand  is  a  proof  of  how  well  you  would  succeed  in  such  a 
subject.  It  is  written  with  a  great  deal  of  force,  good  sense, 
and  good  taste.  I  would  be  glad  if  you  would  write  me  on  this 
subject. 

K.  Fergusson  is  here  just  now  on  his  way  to  town.  .  .  . 
I  learn  that  he  thinks  of  living  at  Rait  li ;  that  he  finds  himself 
left  with  considerable  encumbrances,  and  by  no  means  rich.  .  .  . 

What  a  business  in  the  political  world !  At  last,  it  would  seem 
that  common  sense  is  to  prevail,  but  by  a  very  small  majority. 

I  understand  Mrs.  A.  Apreece  is  either  in  London  or  is  to  be 
there  soon,  and  I  am  very  glad  to  think  that  you  will  certainly 
become  acquainted. 

I  should  like  to  know  if  you  approve  of  either  of  the  subjects 
above  mentioned. 

With  best  wishes,  many  years  and  happy  ones,  I  remain,  my 
dear  Miss  Berry,  your  respectful  and  affectionate  Friend, 

JOHN  PLAYFAIR. 

To  Professor  Play  fair. 

Feb.,  1811. 

How  shall  I  thank  you  for  so  kindly  taking  the  trouble  of 
suggesting  to  me  some  employment  for  my  useless  time  ?  I  have 
thought  much  upon  the  two  ideas  you  mention.  But  want  your 
clear  head  to  debrouiller  them  a  little  more  before  I  can  fix 
upon,  or  indeed  fairly  judge  of  either,  and  measure  it  with  my 
own  force,  or  rather,  with  my  own  weakness.  Of  reading  and 
reference  I  am  not  afraid,  as  I  read  very  quickly,  and  have 
several  kind  friends  who  would  help  me  to  the  books  I  have  not. 
But  no  biography  at  all  within  my  sphere  occurs  to  me.  The 
other  plan  you  mention  might,  I  should  think,  in  capable  hands, 
be  made  very  entertaining.  .  .  •  I  have  had  for  many  years 
an  idea,  at  times,  wandering  about  in  my  head  of  something  in 
English  like  les  caracteres  de  la  Bruyere.  I  don't  mean  either 
a  translation  or  an  imitation,  but  merely  an  adoption  of  his 


462  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isn 

arrangement,  and  I  have  by  me  a  number  of  scraps  written  with 
a  view  to  this,  some  arranged  and  more  not  arranged,  under  a 
selection  of  the  heads  into  which  he  has  divided  his  work. 
Whether  any  of  this  stuff  could  be  worked  up  into  something 
else,  or  if  it  be  worth  preserving  at  all,  I  have  honestly  and 
truly  no  idea.  When  you  come  to  town  in  May  (as  we  are  led 
to  hope),  you  will  perhaps  take  the  trouble  of  running  over 
some  of  it  and  telling  me ;  as  it  is  a  part  of  no  whole,  I  have  not 
yet  a  parent's  partiality  for  it.  I  can  myself  see  a  thousand 
objections  to  anything  built  upon  or  recalling  to  memory  La, 
Bruyere.  First,  the  perfection  of  the  work  itself,  which  one 
cannot  hope  to  approach ;  next,  the  extreme  facility  with  which 
the  world  would  construe  such  a  work  into  individual  satire, 
and  the  difficulty  which  one  might  sometimes  have  oneself  to 
avoid  it.  In  short,  I  want  somebody  wiser  than  myself,  both  to 
tell  me  what  to  do,  and  how  to  do  it ;  and  then  comes  ever  and 
anon  headache,  triumphant  for  two  or  three  days  together,  and 
so  absorbs  my  existence,  as  not  only  to  make  all  occupation  at 
the  time  impossible,  but  to  damp  all  confidence,  and  destroy  all 
projects  for  the  employment  of  the  hours  left  me. 
Your  friend  Mrs.  Apreece  is  to  pass  the  evening  with  us  to- 
morrow. Agnes  was  much  pleased  with  her  conversation  and 
manner,  and  I  hear  of  her  agreeableness  from  all  quarters.  She 
will  soon  probably,  like  the  rest  of  the  world,  be  too  much  en- 
gaged in  the  dissipation  of  this  great  town  to  have  as  much 
time  to  bestow  upon  real  society  as  she  would  wish. 

The  latest  news  of  Eobert  is  that  he  was  this  day  elected  of 
the  Alfred  Club,  for  which  there  were  314  candidates,  and 
only  eight  vacancies ;  he  was  very  desirous  of  filling  one  of 
them,  and  we  were  very  glad  to  be  able  to  secure  him  a  number 
of  votes. 

Of  politics  it  is  quite  impossible  to  speak.  Come  and  see 
them :  talking  about  them  is  in  vain,  for  all  arguments,  and 
principles,  and  projects  are  overthrown.  I  feel  myself  convinced, 
by  this  last  turn  of  the  wheel  for  the  present  ministry,  of  two 
or  three  probabilities  which  all  parties  equally  disclaim  at 
present,  but  which,  nevertheless,  we  shall  see  take  place,  except 
something  much  more  wonderful  should  occur,  than  the  Prince 
becoming  attached  to  these  people,  who  will  flatter  and  wheedle 
him,  and  discover  talents  and  virtues,  and  then  such  filial  piety 


1811]  LETTER   FROM   HON.    KEPPEL   CRAVEN.  463 

in  him  !  !  !  St.  James's  Square  and  Pall  Mall  to-day  were  full 
of  the  carriages  of  the  Privy  Council,  who  were  in  a  body  at 
Carleton  House,  to  administer  to  him  the  oath  prescribed  by 
Parliament ;  and  on  Tuesday  next,  it  is  said,  he  opens  the  two 
Houses,  but  I  have  a  bet  he  does  it  by  commission.  In  the 
mean  time  the  King  is  almost  well  again — that  is  to  say,  just 
mad  enough  to  desire  to  reign,  which  he  will  do,  so  much  like 
his  son,  and  his  son  so  much  like  him,  that  the  happy  country 
will  never  know  the  difference.  Farewell !  it  is  high  time  to 
recollect  that  you  have  something  else  to  do  than  read  my 
letters.  .  .  .  Remember  me  affectionately,  and  with  many 
thanks,  to  Lord  Webb,  if  near  you ;  and  believe  me,  with  the 
sincerest  regard  and  gratitude,  your  attached  friend, 

M.  B. 

P.S. — The  admirable  lesson  you  give  on  national  prejudices, 
I  really  think  will  prevent  me  ever  exposing  myself  on  the 
subject  again.  It  is  no  excuse  to  say  that  these  prejudices  were 
first  instilled,  and  then  strengthened  by  a  chain  of  unfortunate 
circumstances.  .  .  .  But  I  ought  to  have  known  how  to 
resist  the  series  of  unfavourable  impressions  to  which  I  own, 
with  shame,  having  yielded. 

From  the  Hon.  Keppel  Craven  to  Mws  Berry. 

Lisbon,  Thursday,  March  7,  1811. 

MY  DEAR  Miss  BERRYS  (for  I  mean  to  address  you  both  at 
once), — I  feel  very  reluctant  in  writing  to  you,  being  conscious 
that  our  friend  Anacharsis  must  have  told  you  everything  that 
ever  happened  to  us  both  while  he  was  here,  and  nothing  very 
much  worth  recording  having  occurred  since  his  departure,  un- 
less it  is  the  retreat  of  the  French,  which  has  actually  begun,  so 
much  so  that  all  our  divisions  are  ordered  to  move,  and  Lord 
Wellington's  head-quarters  were  yesterday  morning  at  Santarem. 
Further  we  knew  ijot,  but  suppose  that  the  news  of  the  arrival 
of  our  reinforcements  (which  took  place  on  Monday)  must  have 
urged  the  enemy  to  this  step,  or  that  of  General  Graham  having 
arrived  at  Seville,  which  is  said  to  be  the  case ;  but  this  last 
piece  of  intelligence  I  give  you  only  as  a  report.  I  am  the  very 
worst  person  in  the  world  to  retail  news,  for  I  generally  receive 
it  incorrect  and  report  it  false.  After  this  declaration  you  must 
judge  what  degree  of  credit  you  may  attach  to  that  I  have  given 


464  MISS  BEERY'S  JOURNAL.  [isii 

you.  Sir  J.  Yorke  and  his  fine  squadron  came  in  on  Monday, 
and  I  fancy  sail  again  to-morrow.  He  would  not  come  and 
anchor  under  the  town,  as  there  is  really  scarcely  room  in  the 
Tagus ;  but  I  wish  he  had,  merely  to  surprise  the  Portuguese  with 
the  sight  of  seventeen  sail  of  the  line  so  near  to  them.  We  have 
had  an  exact  representation  of  summer  ever  since  Gell's  depar- 
ture, which  has  increased  my  stock  of  health  to  that  degree  that 
I  am  afraid  of  an  apoplexy,  but  am  going  to  guard  against  such 
an  accident  by  a  little  sea  discipline.  My  cousin  Frederick 
Berkeley,  who  has  lately  been  appointed  to  a  troop  ship,  is  going 
in  a  day  or  two  to  Oporto,  to  fetch  some  Portuguese  recruits, 
and  has  asked  me  to  be  his  companion  in  that  cruise,  which  I 
have  promised,  as  it  will  be  a  convenient  opportunity  of  seeing 
Oporto,  and  there  is  at  present  nothing  to  be  done  at  Lisbon, 
the  theatres  and  balls  having  all  closed  since  the  commencement 
of  Lent,  and  all  my  friends  having  galloped  off  to  the  army  on 
Tuesday  evening.  Some  were  so  kind  as  to  leave  me  the  charge 
of  settling  their  accounts  and  packing  up  their  baggage,  by  which 
agreeable  employment  I  was  taken  up  the  whole  of  yesterday. 
I  hope  to  be  back  in  less  than  a  fortnight,  and  then  have  a  week 
to  prepare  for  my  own  departure  for  England,  which  I  mean,  if 
possible,  to  take  place  by  the  first  of  next  month,  and,  Deo 
volente,  to  embrace  you  (for  that  is  a  privilege  of  all  travellers) 
by  the  15th  of  April. 

.  .  .  Charles  Stuart  is  a  most  delightful  person,  as  you 
well  know ;  he  lets  everybody  turn  his  house  topsy-turvy,  and 
his  dinners  are  quite  delightful,  as  they  possess  the  fundamental 
requisite  for  promoting  agreeable  conversation,  I  mean  being 
well  dressed ;  and  then  he  never  minds  anyone's  costume,  so  I 
indulge  in  the  luxury  of  fancy  dress,  which  is  strictly  forbidden 
at  the  Admiral's  ;  besides  which  they  last  a  very  short  time,  and 
you  may  come  in  and  go  out  whenever  you  please — in  short, 
there  never  was  so  amiable  a  minister. 

.  .  .  Do  you  know  St.  Hermenegild"?  He  was  son  to 
Leovigild,  king  of  the  Longobards,  and  brother  to  Prince 
Recavedus.  He  married  Evarinta,  a  beautiful  Catholic  princess, 
and  lived  in  the  woods  with  her.  His  father,  who  followed 
the  Arian  Schism,  sent  a  furious  priest,  called  Ebbalinus,  at 
the  head  of  an  army  to  seize  him  and  bring  him  back,  and  the 
said  minister  found  this  holy  pair  in  devout  meditation  on  the 


1811]  FROM   MR.    CRAVEN".  465 

top  of  a  hill,  which  hill  walked  away  the  instant  the  soldiers 
tried  to  mount  it,  leaving  in  its  stead  a  chasm  full  of  flames. 
However,  the  prince  returned  of  his  own  accord  to  his  father, 
who,  by  the  instigation  of  the  priest,  put  him  to  death,  which 
was  announced  to  him  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  At  first  it  had  been 
agreed  to  thrust  him  into  the  king's  menagerie,  but  there  the 
lions  licked  his  feet,  and  quite  treated  him  as  a  brother.  So  his 
head  was  cut  off;  notwithstanding  which  he  went  up  to  heaven 
with  it  on,  dressed  in  a  very  handsome  white  robe,  with  a  palm 
in  his  hand,  in  a  cloud  more  beautiful  and  transparent  than  any 
of  Mr.  Orme's  screens,  surrounded  by  cherubims  and  angels 
playing  on  various  instruments,  and  singing  a  chorus  composed 
by  Marus  Portogallo.  All  this  happened  last  Sunday,  and  you 
might  see  it  to-night  again  were  you  going  with  me  to  the 
Portuguese  Theatre,  where  these  martyrdoms  take  place  twice 
every  week,  in  presence  of  a  numerous  and  pious  audience,  who 
show  their  piety  by  clapping  of  hands  and  cries  of  Bravo. 

.  .  .  Pray  have  the  kindness  to  remember  me  most  par- 
ticularly to  Mrs.  Darner.  You  cannot  conceive  how  much  I 
regret  her  giving  up  Strawberry  Hill,  for  I  must  ever  remember 
with  pleasure  the  happy  rainy  days  I  occasionally  passed  there; 
our  embarkations,  disembarkations,  eating  strawberries,  the  wet 
grass  that  adorns  the  Bay  of  Biscay,  and  the  terrific  adventure 
of  my  boat,  driven  by  a  gale  of  wind  into  Mr.  Somebody's  gar- 
den. Let  me  live  in  hopes  that  the  younger  Strawberry  will 
give  me  an  opportunity  of  repeating  those  scenes  of  rural  feli- 
city. Oh  dear!  I  had  forgot  among  them  the  ready-made  shoes 
of  Richmond,  the  surviving  pair  of  which  I  gave  away  a  few 
days  ago,  in  still  a  very  serviceable  state. 

My  kindest  regards  to  Mr.  Berry,  whom  I  hope  to  find  in 
excellent  health.  Do  you  know  what  saudades  means  ?  (don't 
read  sausages)  because  it  is  the  most  comprehensive  word  in  any 
language,  and  there  is  a  flower  called  so  in  this  place  which  I 
want  to  carry  to  England. 

Adieu !  expect  to  see  me  walk  into  your  comfortable  drawing- 
room  some  very  cold  Spring  morning  somewhere  about  a  month 
hence. 

Believe  me,  most  sincerely  and  affectionately, 
Your  faithful 

R.  K.  CRAVEN. 

VOL.  II.  H  H 


,466  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURXAL.  [mi 

JOUKNAL. 

Saturday,  March  9th. — A  man  standing  in  the  pillory* 
in  Oxford  Street,  at  the  end  of  our  street,  completely 
knocked  me  up,  never  having  seen  the  operation  before. 
I  looked  out  of  the  window  for  the  instant  that  the 
wretched  man  was  putting  in,  and  for  one  instant  after- 
wards, when  he  was  assailed  by  such  a  shower  of  every 
sort  of  mud,  filth,  and  horrors,  as  to  give  every  part  of 
him  and  the  machine  one  and  the  same  hideous  composi- 
tion. The  horror  of  seeing  a  wretched,  degraded  being, 
already  exposed  to  the  scorn  and  contempt  of  the  multi- 
tude, thus  treated  by  beings  like  himself;  and  to  see  the 
human  form  thus  vilified,  and  human  creatures — and 
those  mostly  women — thus  treating  it,  seized  upon  my 
irritable  nerves  in  such  a  manner  as  almost  to  give  me 
what  in  my  life  I  never  had  before — an  hysterical  affec- 
tion between  crying  and  screaming.  We  both  fled  from 
the  window,  and  took  refuge  in  my  back  room,  to  hear 
as  little  as  we  could  of  the  noise  of  the  crowd.  It  was 
over,  thank  heaven,  at  one  o'clock,  and  nothing  should 
ever  bribe  me  to  see  such  a  sight  again. 

Sunday,  Wth. — Went  to  church.  Afterwards  walked 
to  Lady  E.  W.,  who  is  going,  I  think,  fast  into 
methodism,  or  melancholy  of  some  sort  or  other. 
Afterwards  to  Mrs.  Howe's.  It  is  good,  after  having 
seen  a  mind  like  the  first,  to  have  the  taste  of  it 
put  out  of  one's  mouth  by  such  a  mind  as  Mrs.  Howe's 
at  eighty-seven. 

Monday,  \\th. — Agnes  called  for  me  soon  after  ten, 
and  we  went  together  to  Lady  Elliot's  ;  a  true  assembly, 
with  all  the  '  my  ladies,'  and  all  their  daughters  in  London, 

*  The  pillory  was  abolished  as  a  punishment  in  all  cases  except  perjury, 
56  George  III.,  1815-16.  The  pillory  was  totally  abolished  by  Act  1  Viet. 
c.  30,  June,  1837.  The  last  who  suffered  this  punishment  at  the  Old  Bailey 
was  Peter  James  Bossy,  for  perjury,  June  24, 1830. — Haydn's  Diet,  of  Dates, 
p.  506-7. 


1811]  MADAME   CATALAN!.  467 

on  one  side  of  the  question  at  least ;  for  of  the  opposition 
there  was  neither  woman  nor  man,  except  one  or  two  of 
the  very  young  sprigs  of  assembly-goers. 

Thursday,  14^.  —  In  the  evening  to  Mr.  Grattan. 
Catalani,  her  husband,  and  a  horrible  sister  of  his,  had 
dined  there.  She  had  sung  a  good  deal  before  we  came, 
and  sung  two  little  things  afterwards,  expressly  for  me. 
Mrs.  Grattan  always  charming  in  her  manner,,  and  he, 
with  whom  I  had  a  good  deal  of  conversation  about 
Haslem's*  book  on  madness,  &c.,  always  entertaining  and 
clever,  in  spite  of  his  odd  manner  and  still  odder  enun- 
ciation. But  they  don't  understand  society  in  their  own 
house.  She  cannot  move  about  to  settle  it,  and  he  takes 
it  as  it  comes.  In  this  very  small  party  all  the  women 
were  sitting  round  the  door  of  one  of  the  two  rooms,,  and 
all  the  men  in  the  other. 

Friday,  ~L5th. — In  the  evening  went  to  Lady  Spencer'sf 
before  ten  o'clock.  An  assembly  in  the  drawing  and 
billiard  rooms  of  all  the  aristocracy  of  opposition,  and 
of  every  Grenville,  male  and  female,  in  the  world. 
The  rooms  are  uncommonly  handsome ;  in  the  old  style 
of  carving,  gilding,  and  crimson  damask,  than  which 
nothing  invented  since  is  handsomer.  Everybody  seemed 
pleased.  Everybody  piqued  themselves  upon  coming 
early,  and  it  is  to  be  repeated  every  Friday.  Lord  Har- 
tington  begged  me  to  give  him  a  little  party  on  Wednes- 
day next,  the  fast  day.  Agnes  went  to  Mrs.  Davenport's, 
where  Tramazzini  was  singing. 

Saturday,  \§th. — I  had  heard  from  Lord  Stafford,  at 
Lady  Spencer's  the  night  before,  that  the  'Scotch  Eeview,' 
with  the  criticism  upon  '  Madame  du  Deffand's  Letters,' 
was  out ;  and  this  morning,  before  I  got  my  own,  Lady 

*  William  Saunders  Haslem,  M.D.,  author  of  the  '  Inquiry  into  the 
Causes  of  the  Extraordinary  Addition  to  th»  Number  of  the  Insane/  pub- 
lished in  1811. 

t  Lavinia,  daughter  of  first  Earl  of  Lucaii,  married,  1781,  to  George 
John,  second  Earl  of  Spencer,  died  1831. 

H  H  2 


468  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isii 

Donegall  sent  me  a  copy  she  had  got  early.  I  ought  to 
be  much  content,  and  I  am.  Praise  and  blame  often 
appear  slight  to  me,  which  strike  others  in  the  light  of 
very  decided  and  satisfactory  praise.  Blame,  or  notice  of 
faults,  there  is  none  ;  so  of  that  I  cannot  complain.  But 
I  am  fastidious,  when  I  ought  only  to  be  thankful. 

Miss  Berry  had  certainly  reason,  on  the  whole,  to  be 
satisfied  with  the  articles  that  appeared  in  the  two  leading 
reviews  on  her  editorship  of  Madame  du  DefFand's  Letters ; 
yet  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  she  felt  the  praise  by 
no  means  equal  to  the  pains  she  had  bestowed  on  her 
task,  and  the  labour  it  had  cost  her.  But  such  is  the 
natural  position  of  the  editor  of  another  person's  writings. 
It  may  be  a  work  of  patience,  of  research,  of  candour,  of 
judgment ;  but  it  is  not  an  original  work,  and  has  no 
claim  to  the  fame  which  may  be  attached  to  the  author 
whose  writings  he  has  thus  been  the  means  of  bringing  to 
light.  Such  parts  of  the  articles  as  related  to  the  editor 
herself  are  here  given,  that  the  reader  may  see  she  had 
at  least  won  the  approbation  and  respect  due  to  her 
diligence,  discretion,  and  knowledge  of  the  subjects  re- 
quired for  her  work. 

Edinburgh  Review,  February  1811. 

The  circumstances  of  this  publication  are  greatly  in  its  favour, 
the  editor  having  left  nothing  undone  that  could  elucidate  the 
text,  or  throw  light  on  the  persons  and  incidents  to  which  it 
refers.  This  was  highly  necessary,  and  a  task  at  the  same  time 
of  no  inconsiderable  difficulty.  The  society  of  Madame  du 
Deffand  consisted  of  a  great  variety  of  persons,  who  though 
conspicuous  and  well  known  at  the  time  when  they  lived,  yet  to 
us  foreigners,  at  the  distance  of  forty  years,  must  many  of  them 
require  to  be  introduced  with  some  historical  detail.  In  this 
respect,  the  editor  has  anticipated  the  wishes  of  the  reader,  and 
has  furnished  him,  very  concisely  and  clearly,  with  all  the  infor- 
mation he  can  desire,  concerning  the  persons  and  events  that 


1811]  MADAME   DU    DEFFAXD.  469 

are  passing  before  him.  This  undertaking  was  in  fact  more 
arduous  than  at  first  appears,  requiring  qualifications  which 
neither  editors  nor  authors  are  always  in  possession  of;  as  it 
could  be  executed  by  no  person  who  had  not  lived  in  the  best 
society  both  of  France  and  England,  and  was  not  well  acquainted 
with  the  history  and  manners  of  the  fashionable  world  in  both 
countries.  One  might  have  looked  long  in  vain  for  one  possess- 
ing these  requisites  among  the  grave  and  learned  bodies  from 
which  the  ranks  of  scholiasts  and  commentators  are  usually 
recruited. 

Then  follow  extracts  from  the  Letters,  with  the  re- 
viewer's comments,  winding  up  with  the  concluding 
passage  upon  the  work  and  its  editor. 

We  must  now  take  leave  of  Madame  du  Deffand,  which  how- 
ever we  cannot  do  without  saying,  that  in  our  opinion  her 
correspondence  makes  a  valuable  addition  to  the  mass,  not  very 
considerable  as  yet  of  printed  letters,  perfectly  natural  and 
unaffected,  and  visibly  never  meant  for  publication.  The  editor 
deserves  well  of  the  public  on  this  account,  and  still  more  on 
account  of  the  judicious  and  enlightened  observations  with 
which  the  text  is  illustrated. 

Quarterly  Review,  May  1811. 

To  the  letters  of  the  Marquise  du  Deffand  and  Mr.  Horace 
Walpole  are  prefixed  a  preface,  and  a  life  of  Madame  du 
Deffand,  by  the  editor.  They  are  written  in  an  excellent  tone, 
and  in  a  style  temperate,  chaste,  and  purely  English.  With 
much  knowledge  of  the  world,  they  evince  a  spirit  of  candour, 
corrected  by  a  strong  judgment  and  sound  principle,  and  are 
evidently  the  production  of  a  mind  enlightened  and  vigorous, 
polished  alike  by  extensive  reading  and  by  intercourse  with  the 
best  society.  The  most  important  parts  of  Madame  du  DefFand's 
character  are  here  accurately  estimated,  and  placed  in  their  just 
point  of  view.  Her  good  qualities  are  not  exaggerated,  nor  is 
the  depravity  of  her  heart  disguised  by  a  misplaced  delicacy. 
On  the  whole,  we  have  read  these  prefatory  pieces  with  great 
satisfaction,  and  in  offering  this  testimony  to  the  merits  of  an 


470  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isu 

anonymous  writer,  we  cannot  avoid  expressing  a  hope,  that  a 
second  opportunity  may  be  soon  given  us  of  performing  so 
agreeable  a  duty. 

In  spite  of  the  just  spirit  in  which  Miss  Berry  was 
reviewed  in  the  '  Edinburgh  '  and  '  Quarterly,'  it  is  clear 
that  comments  were  passed  upon  her  undertaking  in  the 
society  in  which  she  lived,  which  justified  her  view  of 
the  desire  shown  at  that  time  to  check  all  literary  efforts 
in  women.  The  extract  from  Mr.  Mat.  Lewis's  letter, 
published  by  Lady  Charlotte  Bury,  together  with  Lady 
Charlotte's  own  remarks,  show  that  Miss  Berry's  view  on 
this  subject  was  shared  by  other  ladies. 

Extract  from  a  Letter  of  M~  0.  Lewis  to  Lady  Charlotte  Bury. 

Holland  House,  Dec.  9th,  1810. 

I  have  galloped  through  two  volumes  of  Madame  du  Deffand's 
Letters,  and  with  much  amusement,  though  the  anecdotes  are  in 
themselves  of  no  great  value.  .  .  .  Have  you  read  these  letters  ? 
You  know,  of  course,  that  they  were  edited  by  your  friend  Miss 
Berry,  who  has  also  written  the  preface,  the  life,  and  the  notes, 
all  of  which  are  most  outrageously  abused  by  many  persons, 
though,  in  my  opinion,  without  any  just  grounds.* 


*  Note  by  Lady  Charlotte  Bury  on  Mr.  Lewis's  letter,  written  some  years 
later,  after  the  appearance  of  Miss  Berry's  later  work : — '  It  would  be  diffi- 
cult to  account  for  this  outrageous  abuse  were  it  not  an  established  fact  that 
all  women  who  meddle  with  literature,  especially  those  in  the  higher  ranks 
of  life,  place  themselves  in  a  pillory,  at  which  every  impertinent  idler  con- 
ceives he  has  a  right  to  throw  his  rotten  eggs.  Miss  Berry  has,  however, 
established  her  reputation  as  an  authoress  in  spite  of  all  detraction.  Her 
"  Comparative  View  of  Social  Life  in  England  and  France"  is  assuredly  one 
of  the  best  written  and  most  comprehensive  views  of  the  subject  which  can 
issue  from  the  press,  and  combines  all  the  tact  of  woman's  feeling  with  the 
strength  and  terseness  ascribed  to  male  intellect  alone.  This  work,  so 
superior  to  the  ephemeral  fictions  of  the  day,  has  obtained  for  her  the  sober 
and  lasting  suffrage  of  the  public,  the  affection  and  admiration  of  a  wide 
circle  of  friends,  which  it  has  ever  been  her  privilege  to  call  her  own,  and 
their  pride  to  bestow.' 


1811]  THE   PRINCE   REGENT.  471 

JOUKNAL. 

Friday,  March  22nd,  1811. — Went,  about  eleven,  to 
Lady  Hertford's.  We  did  not  get  in  till  near  twelve, 
when  the  Regent  had  not  arrived  from  dinner  at  Lord 
Cholmondeley's.  He  came  soon  afterwards,  while  we 
were  in  the  outer  room,  and  we  saw  the  whole  ceremony. 
A  circle  was  immediately  made,  and  the  Regent,  the 
Dukes  of  Clarence,  Cumberland,  Cambridge,  and  Glou- 
cester, were  all  in  it  at  the  same  time.  The  Regent 
looked  wretchedly,  swollen  up  with  a  muddled  com- 
plexion, and  was  besides  extremely  tipsy — gravely  and 
cautiously  so.  I  happened  to  be  a  good  while  in  the 
circle ;  and  he  at  last  gave  me  a  formal  grave  bow,  with 
Kensington  legible  on  it. 

In  general,  he  speaks  much  less,  both  to  men  and 
women,  than  he  did — it  is  the  fashion  of  the  day  with 
him.  Did  not  get  away  from  Lady  Hertford's  till  very 
near  two  o'clock — the  Prince  still  there. 

Thursday,  April  4th. — Went  to  Lady  Derby's.  The 
same  enormous  crowd  of  all  sorts  of  people  that  her 
assemblies  always  are — the  Regent  there  ;  I  was  in  his 
eye  some  time,  but  no  notice  taken. 

Friday,  bth.  —  At  three  o'clock  went  to  Devonshire 
House,  to  a  practising  of  waltzes,  as  it  was  called.  It 
was,  in  fact,  a  morning  dance,  with  a  cold  dinner  in  one 
of  the  back  drawing-rooms — the  dancing  in  the  saloon. 
It  was  pleasant  enough. 

Sunday,  7th. — In  the  morning  I  went  to  the  Chapel 
Royal  with  Lady  Tancred.  After  having  been  driven 
from  post  to  pillar  for  places,  we  got  two  seats  in  the 
aisle,  close  by  the  singing  boys,  and  heard  the  Bishop  of 
London  read  the  Communion  Service  very  unimpres- 
sively, and  the  Archbishop  of  York  preached  a  very 
gentlemanlike,  sensible  sermon,  but  one  to  which  it 
was  quite  impossible  to  pin  one's  attention,  for  want  of 


472  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isii 

something  to  warm  and  interest  one.  The  music  ex- 
cellent, though  I  think  some  part  of  the  service  better 
set  in  the  York  Cathedral.  The  Chapel  Eoyal  shame- 
fully small  for  the  domestic  chapel  to  the  King's  first, 
and  indeed  only,  palace  in  London  ;  and  the  way  in 
which  money  is  not  only  taken,  but  extorted,  by  every 
doorkeeper,  disgraceful. 

Tuesday,  9th. — In  the  evening  several  people  came. 
Sydney  Smith's  spirits  at  supper  quite  marvellous. 

Wednesday,  I0th. — Went  to  Mrs.  Beauclerc's,*  where 
was  a  small  party  —  of  women  only  ourselves,  Lady 
Harriet  [Leveson  Gower]  and  Lady  Georgiana  [Morpeth,] 
Lady  Harrowby,  and  Mrs.  Locke.  The  old  Duchessf  was 
in  one  of  the  rooms.  I  had  much  talk  with  her  about 
Madame  du  Deffand.  with  whose  letters  she  is  delighted, 
as  having  known  all  the  society  and  persons  mentioned. 

Sunday,  14zA. — I  did  not  go  to  church  in  the  morning, 
but  had  a  long  and  interesting  conversation  with  Thorn- 
ton, about  his  views  and  plans,  which  I  completely 
entered  into,  and  should  be  too  glad  if  I  could  anyhow 
second.  After  five,  went  to  the  Magdalen.  We  got 
-there  early,  before  the  chapel  was  a  third  part  full ;  but 
before  the  service  began  it  was  full  in  every  part,  con- 
taining, I  suppose,  at  least  six  or  seven  hundred  people. 
.Everything  about  it  very  decent,  and  well  kept  and 
ordered.  It  was  well  lighted  up  with  no  less  than 
ninety-six  spermaceti  candles.  The  preaching  not  good; 
the  singing  of  the  hymns  and  psalms  from  the  women 
behind  the  high  screen  of  green  stuff,  which  entirely  hides 
.them  from  the  audience,  agreeable  and  affecting  ;  indeed, 
I  think  the  Evening  Hymn  always  so.  One  or  two  of 
the  voices  were  very  sweet,  and  the  rest  did  in  chorus. 

*  Emily  Charlotte,  daughter  of  Sir  William  Ogilvy  and  the  Duchess  of 
Leicester ;  married,  1799,  to  Charles  George  Beauclerk,  son  of  Topham  and 
Lady  Di  Beauclerk. 

t  The  old  duchess  was  probably  the  Duchess  of  Leinster,  daughter  of 
Charles,  second  duke  of  Richmond. 


1811]  LETTER   FROM    PROFESSOR   PLAYPAIR.  473 

From  Professor  Playfair. 

Edinburgh,  17th  April,  1811. 

MY  DEAR  Miss  BERRY, — .  ...  I  am  very  much  disposed 
to  think  well  of  the  work  you  propose  to  employ  yourself  in, 
and  indeed  to  prefer  it  to  either  of  the  plans  which  had  oc- 
curred to  Lord  W.  and  myself.  Sketches  of  character  of  the 
kind  you  propose  would  give  exercise  to  the  powers  of  discri- 
mination which  (allow  me  to  say  it)  you  eminently  possess,  and 
to  that  turn  for  elegant  and  concise  delineation  of  which  you 
have  lately  furnished  such  good  examples.  I  would,  therefore, 
have  you  think  seriously  of  this ;  it  will  afford  you  a  pleasant 
occupation,  and  some  day  I  hope  afford  pleasure  and  instruction 
to  your  friends  and  the  public  at  large. 

I  am  in  the  next  place  to  make  my  confessions  to  you,  and 
to  tell  you  that  I  am  the  author  of  the  review  of  M.  du  D. 
I  am  sorry  that  it  did  not  fall  into  better  hands,  or  what  I 
regret  more,  that  I  could  not  do  it  better  myself.  Though  I 
had  a  good  deal  of  time  allowed  me,  things  turned  out  so  that 
I  was  much  hurried  in  the  end.  Then  I  was  perplexed  not  a 
little  by  the  great  number  of  things  that  I  admired  in  the 
letters,  and  in  my  wish  to  quote  a  great  deal,  became  bewil- 
dered, and  did  not  quote  many  of  the  things  that  are  best.  I 
have  a  greater  admiration  of  the  force,  vivacity,  and  nature  of 
the  letters  than  I  have  anywhere  expressed.  I  need  not  say 
that  I  very  much  admire  the  work  of  the  editor ;  my  admira- 
tion of  that  I  thought  it  necessary  to  keep  down,  and  to  say 
much  less  than  I  felt.  Soon  after  the  publication  of  the  letters, 
a  review  was  sent  from  London,  or  rather  a  part  of  one,  for  it 
was  not  nearly  complete,  and  though  it  was  evidently  the  work 
of  a  person  friendly  to  you,  there  seemed  so  little  esteem  of  the 
book  in  general,  and  of  the  peculiar  excellences  of  Mad.  du 
D.'s  style,  that  I  instantly,  on  obtaining  Jeffrey's  consent,  deter- 
mined to  try  what  I  could  do.  1  am  conscious  of  having  suc- 
ceeded but  very  indifferently,  but  there  was  some  danger  that 
another  person,  at  least  not  so  desirous  of  succeeding  well, 
might  be  employed.  Nobody  took  a  greater  interest  in  the 
review  than  Professor  Stewart :  he  suggested  many  remarks,  and 
if  I  have  after  all  produced  a  thing  of  so  little  value,  that  fault 
is  my  own,  not  that  of  my  friends. 


474  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isii 

I  hope  you  see  a  good  deal  of  Mrs.  Apreece,  and  like  her 
society  in  London  as  well  as  we  did  in  Edinburgh.  I  hear  from 
her  sometimes.  She  mentioned  that  you  suspected  me  to  be 
the  author  of  the  review. 

My  intention  was  to  have  been  in  London  in  the  beginning 
of  May ;  it  answers  better,  however,  for  Lord  John  Russell,  who 
lives  with  me,  and  means  to  go  to  town  at  the  same  time, 
that  the  journey  should  be  put  off  to  June.  Early  in  that 
month  I  hope  to  have  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you  in  North 
Audley  Street.  I  shall  request  to  be  permitted  to  introduce 
Lord  John  Russell  to  you ;  he  is  one  of  the  most  promising 
young  men  I  have  ever  met  with.  I  shall  not  be  able  to 
make  my  stay  in  London  so  long  as  I  would  wish. 

Farewell,  my  dear  madam,  and  believe  me  to  be,  your  sincere 
and  attached  friend, 

JOHN  PLAYFAIR. 

Saturday,  20#A. — I  walked  out  with  Lady  Hardwicke 
in  the  shrubbery,  to  be  told,  by  Catherine's  desire,  that 
her  fate  is  fixed.  I  was  surprised,  having  no  idea  that 
they  had  been  much  acquainted.  I  rejoice  as  it  is 
pleasing  them  all,  and  as  the  person  in  question*  is  a  man 
that  Lady  Hardwicke  can  marry,  as  well  as  her  daughter 
— a  thing  absolutely  necessary  with  her  darling  Cathe- 
rine. 

Monday,  22nd. — Tittenhanger.  Drove  to  St.  Albans, 
about  three  miles  off.  We  called  on  Lady  Spencer,  who 
was  not  in  the  country.  From  thence  we  went  to  the 
Abbey  church,  for  so  it  was,  and  as  large  as  a  cathedral. 
There  is  a  great  deal  of  very  fine  Gothic  ornament 
applied  to  the  walls  of  a  very  old  Saxon  church,  a  part 
of  which  remains  in  its  primitive  Saxonity.  The  tomb 
of  Humphrey,  the  good  Duke  of  Gloucester,  very  fine, 
but  there  is  another  much  finer;  and  indeed,  on  the 
upper  part,  the  most  beautiful  proportioned  Gothic  pierced 
work  I  ever  saw,  viz.  the  chapel  tomb  of  an  Abbot 

*  Lord  Caledon. 


1811]  KENSINGTON   GARDENS.  475 

Eamrudge.  Rams  are  scattered  all  over  the  friezes, 
followed  by  the  Gothic  letters  nidge,  to  give  his  name. 
The  stone  of  this,  and  all  the  ornamented  parts  of  this 
church,  from  Caen  in  Normandy.  Why  this  ?  I  know 
not. 

Saturday,  27th.  —  Went  at  eleven  o'clock,  with  my 
father,  to  Little  Strawberry  Hill.  In  spite  of  business 
I  had  to  do  or  to  think  of,  I  took  a  melancholy  round  of 
the  place  by  myself — recalling  a  thousand  things  and  a 
thousand  scenes  to  my  memory.  My  melancholy  at 
quitting  this  little  place  is  always  extreme ;  and  now 
that  I  have  no  longer  any  hold  in  the  neighbourhood, 
and  that  this  is  let  for  a  twelvemonth,  probably  longer, 
in  spite  of  all  the  trouble  and  expense  it  saves  me,  of 
which  I  must  rejoice  to  be  quit — the  bidding  adieu  to  a 
home  at  Twickenham  can  never  be  without  a  melancholy 
pang. 

Sunday,  28th. — Went  with  Mrs.  Locke  to  Kensington 
Gardens.  They  were  as  full  as  possible.  Neither  she 
nor  I  saw  a  single  face  that  we  knew,  till  we  met  Lord 
Aberdeen,  and  Mr.  Ward,  who  joined  us.  The  complexion 
of  the  company  in  these  gardens  is  altered  since  I  was 
there  of  a  Sunday  —  always  crowded  with  middling 
people,  yet  all  the  fine  ladies  used  to  come  and  show  off 
their  charms  to  the  admiring  mob  ;  but  now  they  have 
nothing  to  admire  but  one  another. 

I  dined  at  Mrs.  Apreece's ;  the  party,  Sydney  Smith, 
Jeffrey,  Malthus,  Mr.  Chinery,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Tighe,  and 
A.  Turner.  I  sat  by  Malthus,  and  had  a  good  deal  of 
conversation  with  him — interesting,  when  one  gets  over 
his  painful  manner  of  speaking  from  wanting  a  palate  to 
his  mouth,  and  having  had  a  hair-lip — not,  however,  at 
all  unpleasant  in  appearance. 

Tuesday,  May  1th. — Dined  at  Eogers's.  After  dinner, 
Thomas  Moore  sung  a  good  deal — his  own  Melalogue — 
a  thing  with  words  of  his,  set  to  old  music,  which  had 


476  MISS  BEEKY'S  JOURNAL.  [isii 

been  rehearsed  on  the  stage  at  Dublin — something  in  the 
style  of  Collins's  Ode.  I  thought  little  of  it,  although  he 
both  rehearses  the  words  and  plays  the  music  admirably. 

Sunday,  12th. — The  finest  summer  day.  I  went  to 
church,  and,  at  three  o'clock,  to  Kensington  Gardens. 
Never  went  near  the  crowd,  which  was  enormous,  and 
gay  and  beautiful  at  a  distance.  The  smell  of  the  grass 
and  flowering  shrubs,  from  the  recent  rain,  and  the 
freshness  and  luxuriance  of  everything,  perfectly  beauti- 
ful. Such  a  lucky  combination  of  weather  and  season 
does  not  often  occur  in  an  English  spring.  I  have  seen 
years  without  a  single  day  and  moment  in  them  like  this. 

Tuesday,  14^A. —  Went  to  see  West's  picture  at  the 
British  Institution  in  Pall  Mall,  and  to  the  water-colour 
drawings  in  Bond  Street,  West's  picture  is  a  fine  com- 
position, and  has  very  fine  parts  in  it ;  in  the  back 
ground  he  comes  in  with  his  iron  outline  and  his  mistiness 
as  usual.  At  the  water-colours  little  real  good,  but 
Eichter's  things,  which  have  twice  the  genius  of  Heaphy's 
in  the  same  style. 

Friday,  17 th. — In  the  morning  I  went  to  Lady  Charle- 
mont,  at  Nollekens',*  who  is  modelling  a  bust  of  her, — 
badly  enough  as  to  real  taste  and  expression.  Looked 
over  all  his  things.  The  statue  of  Mr.  Pitt,  for  the  Senate 
House  at  Cambridge,  very  like.  In  the  evening  we  went 
to  the  Marcets'jf  in  Eussell  Square,  where  Eacine's  tragedy 


*  Joseph  Nollekens,  a  celebrated  sculptor,  bom  1737,  R.A.  in  1772,  died 
1823,  in  the  eighty-sixth  year  of  his  age,  leaving  a  fortune  of  nearly 
£200,000.— Rose's  Eiog.  Diet. 

t  Dr.  Marcet,  a  learned  physician  and  experimental  philosopher,  born  at 
Geneva,  1770,  educated  at  Edinburgh,  practised  in  London.  He  retired 
from  his  profession  on  coming  into  a  fortune,  in  1820  was  elected  Incumbent 
of  the  Council  and  Honorary  Professor  of  Chemistry  in  the  University  of 
Geneva ;  died  1821. 

Jane  Marcet,  wife  to  Dr.  Marcet,  daughter  of  Mr.  Haldimand,  a 
wealthy  Swiss  merchant  settled  in  London,  born  1769.  Her  earliest  work 
was  '  Conversations  on  Chemistry,'  followed  by  '  Conversations  on  Political 
Economy/  1816,  pronounced  by  Mr.  Maculloch  to  be  'on  the  whole  the  best 


1811]  VISIT  TO  JOANNA   BAILLIE.  477 

of '  Berenice '  was  acted  by  a  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Lullin,  and 
three  other  persons  whose  names  I  could  not  make  out. 
None  of  them  French.  Mr.  Lullin  is  a  Genevois,  and  his 
wife  an  Englishwoman ;  consequently  they  all  spoke  with 
an  accent,  and  none  of  them  had  the  true  recitation  of 
French  dramatic  verse ;  but  as  they  acted  with  a  con- 
siderable degree  of  feeling  and  unction,  and  as  Mrs.  Lullin 
is  a  very  pretty  woman,  with  a  charming  speaking  voice 
and  a  great  expression  of  softness,  it  was  interesting,  and 
sufficiently  well  done  to  make  one  admire  the  beauty  of 
Eacine's  most  French  tragedy. 

This,  I  was  glad  to  see,  was  the  feeling  of  the  whole 
English  audience,  which  consisted  principally  of  the  most 
fashionable  young  people  in  town. 

After '  Berenice,'  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Lullin  gave  us  '  Defiance 
and  Malice,'  really  very  well. 

Saturday,  18th. — I  went  with  Joanna  Baillie  to  Hamp- 
stead,  to  remain  till  Monday.  Dined  before  four,  and 
went  out  upon  the  Heath.  Sat  for  above  two  hours  in  a 
delicious  fine  evening  ;  afterwards  read  over  together '  The 
Two  Martius,'  *  and  criticised  them,  and  likewise  some  of 
my  other  scraps,  which  I  think  Joanna  liked  less  than  I 
expected. 

Sunday,  19th. — Sat  by  the  fire  the  whole  day.  Joanna 
Baillie  gave  us  her  drama  upon  Hope  to  read  ;  it  is  only 
two  acts,  and  I  was  soon  through  it.  Very  poetical,  and 
much  fancy,  as  all  her  things  have ;  but  this  did  not  equal 
my  expectation — how  high  it  was  I  know  not.  It  is  cer- 
tainly a  sufficiently  dramatic  story,  but  not  dramatically 
managed. 

introduction  to  the  science  that  has  yet  appeared.'  Mrs.  Marcet  wrote  on 
various  other  subjects,  and  is  entitled  to  the  lasting  gratitude  of  her 
numerous  readers  for  the  patience  and  skill  with  which  she  disentangled  the 
difficulties  of  various  branches  of  science,  and  rendered  their  study  com- 
paratively easy.  Died  1858. 

*  This  piece,  often  alluded  to  in  Miss  Berry's  Journal,  was  never  pub- 
lished, and  there  is  no  trace  of  the  MS.  amongst  her  papers. — ED, 


478  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isii 

Monday,  27th. — In  the  evening  to  Lady  Hertford's ;  an 
enormous  assembly  ;  all  the  Princes. 

Wednesday,  29th. — Went  to  Lady  Stafford's.  We  got 
into  chairs  in  St.  James's  Street,  the  string  of  carriages 
was  so  long.  1,500  cards  had  been  issued,  and  yet  it  did 
not  make  a  positive  crowd  in  that  great  house,*  except 
near  the  circles  where  the  Prince  stood. 

Thursday,  30th. — Went  with  my  sister  to  Kensington. 
A  numerous  ball ;  the  Princess  mighty  gracious.  I  had 
a  long  and  almost  an  affecting  conversation  with  her, 
because  for  the  first  time  she  seemed  to  feel  her  own 
situation,  while  she  continues  very  good-natured  to 
others. 

Saturday,  June  1st. — In  the  evening  to  Mrs.  Siddons's, 
at  Westbourne  Farm.  Went  before  ten  o'clock.  The 
whole  house  was  illuminated,  on  the  outside  with  coloured 
lamps,  and  in  the  inside  with  candles,  and  every  bush  in 
the  garden  with  lamps.  In  short,  it  was  the  prettiest 
little  Vauxhall  that  could  be,  and  a  vast  many  people 
there.  After  staying  very  agreeably  for  about  an  hour, 
went  to  Kensington.  Music  at  the  Princess's,  and  about 
thirty  people  supped  together. 

Saturday,  8th. — Went  to  Lady  Cork's.f  A  curious 
party,  where,  by  way  of  something  to  do,  she  had  had 
Th  el  wall  J  reading  Milton's  '  Invocation  to  Light,'  so 
abominably  as  to  amuse  or  shock  all  the  company. 


*  Cleveland  House,  since  pulled  down  and  replaced  by  Bridgewater  House, 
the  residence  of  the  Earl  of  Ellesmere. 

t  Mary,  daughter  of  first  Viscount  Galway,  second  wife  of  Edmund, 
seventh  Earl  of  Cork.  Lord  Cork  died  1798,  Lady  Cork,  1840. 

1  Thelwall,  a  miscellaneous  writer,  political  agitator,  and  lecturer  on  elo- 
cution, born  1764,  son  of  a  silk  mercer,  apprenticed  to  a  tailor,  he  was  then 
articled  to  an  attorney,  but  abandoned  that  profession  and  embraced  litera- 
ture as  a  profession.  He  became  a  member  of  the  London  Corresponding 
Society,  and  of  that  of  the  Friend  of  the  People.  He  was  tried  for  high 
treason  with  Home  Tooke  and  Thomas  Hardy  in  1794,  defended  by  Mr. 
Erskine,  and  acquitted.  In  1801  he  became  a  lecturer  on  elocution,  taking 
pupils  to  cure  stammering  and  defects  of  speech.  Amongst  other  works  he 


1811]  THE   PRINCESS   OF   WALES.  479 

Sunday,  Qth. — Dined  with  the  Princess  of  Wales  at 
Blackheath.  Dining-room,  a  la  Gothique,  very  pretty, 
but  the  rest  of  the  house  in  abominable  taste.  After 
dinner,  the  Princess  walked  with  me  in  the  garden,  and 
fell  into  talking  of  her  own  story,  with  which  she  began 
from  her  early  youth,  and  continued  in  detail  to  the  epoch 
of  her  marriage,  and  in  still  greater  detail  since.  Every 
circumstance  of  the  Prince's  behaviour  to  her  at  and  after 
their  marriage  ;  every  circumstance  of  the  contrivances 
for  getting  her  out  of  Carlton  House ;  his  character, 
which  she  knows  perfectly ;  the  Queen's,  which  she 
abhors,  and  whom  she  believes  to  be  her  greatest  enemy; 
her  own  father's  and  mother's,  &c.  &c.  In  short,  after 
coming  in  to  get  some  tea  and  put  on  a  shawl,  she 
resumed  her  walk  and  her  talk  to  me  till  past  one  in  the 
morning.  Luckily,  it  was  the  finest  moonlight  night  that 
ever  was. 

Thursday,  13th. — Dined  at  the  Princess  of  Wales's,  at 
Kensington.  After  dinner,  the  Princess  walked  out  with 
me  on  the  gravel  walk  before  the  windows,  and  resumed 
the  conversation  of  Blackheath,  drawing  me  into  a  window 
and  asking  me  if  I  had  thought  upon  the  conversation  we 
had  the  other  day.  I  am  not  altogether  so  well  satisfied 
with  this  one  as  with  the  other.  It  seems  to  me  that  she 
has  more  to  fear. 

Wednesday,  19^. — Promised  to  dine  at  Kensington. 
Found  nobody  but  Lady  Glenbervie  ready  dressed  for 
the  Eegent's  fete  in  the  evening.  At  eight  Lady  Glen- 
bervie set  off,  leaving  us  three  alone  with  the  Princess, 
and  without  any  hope  of  being  able  to  get  away  till 
she  came  back.  I  took  upon  myself  the  office  of 
Dragon,  and  declared  we  must  all  four  keep  together  the 
whole  evening,  for  fear  any  stories  were  to  be  made  of 

wrote  f  Poems  in  the  Tower  and  in  Newgate,'  '  The  Tribune,'  '  Political 
Miscellanies,'  'A  Letter  on  Stammering,'  'The  Peripatetic,'  and  'The 
Daughter  of  Adoption,'  a  novel ;  died  1834. — Rose's  liiog. 


480  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [mi 

any  of  us  the  next  day,  on  the  only  evening  in  the  year 
when  the  Princess  was  without  any  of  her  ladies. 

We  first  walked  in  the  gardens,  which  had  a  number 
of  people  in  them  ;  then  the  Princess  played  a  great  deal 
on  the  piano,  in  a  manner  to  convince  one  she  had  played 
very  well,  but  had  been  out  of  the  habit  of  playing. 
Afterwards  we  talked  of  her  and  her  education,  and  her 
various  and  curious  governesses,  &c.  &c.,  till  near  twelve 
o'clock,  when  we  supped,  and  in  half-an-hour  afterwards 
arrived  Lady  Glenbervie,  who  had  very  cleverly  done  her 
business  at  the  fete,  seen  everything  but  the  supper,  and 
gave  us  a  very  good  account  of  everything  she  had  seen. 
But  the  Princess  kept  us  so  long  hearing  it  that  we  were 
ah1  exhausted,  and  it  was  past  two  o'clock  before  we  got 
home. 

Monday,  24?A. — Went  to  see  Carlton  House,  which 
remained  with  its  decorations,  and  the  servants  in  their 
state  uniforms,  and  the  Yeomen  of  the  Guard  in  every 
room. 

The  crowd  was  great  at  the  gateway,  and  we  should 
have  had  much  difficulty  of  getting  in,  if  Lady  Ellen- 
borough  had  not  sent  for  Sayer,  one  of  the  Bow  Street 
officers,  who  was  cap-in-hand  to  the  chief-justice's 
kdy. 

Within  the  house,  too,  the  crowd  was  great,  but  not 
such  as  to  impede  one  another,  except  in  the  doorways ; 
all  the  servants  were  uncommonly  civil  and  attentive  in 
accommodating  the  people,  and  making  them  go  the  right 
way.  The  house  is  magnificent,  and  the  Gothic  green- 
house or  conservatory,  where  the  Prince  supped,  though 
ridiculous  for  the  purpose  it  was  built  for,  certainly  made 
a  most  beautiful  and  richly-ornamented  supper  room.  All 
the  plate  was  still  upon  the  table,  and  all  the  magnificent 
gold  plate  upon  the  sideboard,  in  three  ranks,  at  the  top 
of  the  room,  behind  where  the  Prince  sat ;  all  the  knives, 
forks,  spoons,  &c.  &c.,  yet  spread  upon  it,  and  so  few 


1811]  BALL  AT   DEVONSHIRE   HOUSE.  481 

people  to  guard  and  watch  it,  as  really  was  creditable  to 
the  honesty  of  John  Bull. 

The  temporary  rooms  in  the  garden  are  immense,  and 
admirably  contrived,  and  I  dare  say  when  lighted  up 
must  have  been  very  handsome. 

Wednesday,  26th. — To  the  ball  at  Devonshire  House. 
The  ball  brilliant,  from  all  the  women  having  on  their 
Carlton  House  gowns,  and  many  their  feathers.  The 
Prince  there ;  he  passed  me  in  the  drawing-room  when 
there  were  only  a  few  people.  I  was  standing  by  Lady 
Elizabeth  Whitehead,  and  just  behind  Lady  Melbourne,  to 
whom  he  spoke,  but  avoided  letting  his  eye  fall  upon  me. 
So  I  am  satisfied  that  Kensington  sticks  in  his  throat,  and 
qu'il  se  venge  des  grands  sur  les  petites. 

Thursday,  27th. — Left  London  to  go  to  Danesfield. 

Saturday,  29th. — Went  in  Mrs.  Scott's  barouche  to 
Park  Place.  Instead  of  driving  up,  as  formerly,  to  the 
house  to  see  Park  Place,  carriages  turn  up  by  the 
Horse  Shoes,  Lord  Malmesbury  having  bought  all  the 
intervening  land.  •  It  is  impossible  to  describe  the  melan- 
choly I  felt  at  again  finding  myself  at  Park  Place.  We 
entered  it  by  the  kitchen  garden,  and  from  thence  into 
the  little  flower-garden,  where  several  recollections  totally 
overcame  me.  They  needed  not  the  additional  melan- 
choly which  the  forlorn,  the  neglected,  the  ruined  look  of 
everything  gave  them.  Had  I  known  nothing  of  the 
inhabitants  I  could  have  sworn,  only  from  seeing  the 
place,  that  they  cared  little  for  the  country.  Poor  Park 
Place !  how  changed  in  every  particular  !  The  alterations 
made  in  the  inside  of  the  house  are,  I  think,  not  good. 
The  furniture  of  the  library  is  certainly  improved,  for 
there  is  a  fine  collection  of  books  in  it ;  a  folio  edition  of 
all  the  Greek  and  Latin  classics,  probably  having  belonged 
to  Hermes,*  besides  very  fine  copies  of  all  the  diplomatic 
books,  dictionaries,  foreign  topography,  &c.  &c.  I  shall 

*  Mr.  Harris,  father  of  the  first  Lord  Malmesbury. 
VOL.  II.  I  I 


482  MISS  BERET'S  JOURNAL.  [mi 

probably  never  see  it  again,  nor  do  I  wish  it ;  lest  the 
image  of  it  in  its  present  state  should  derange  and  confuse 
my  former  recollections  of  its  beauties,  its  comforts,  its 
inhabitants,  and  my  last  winter  visit  there,  when  I  vainly 
hoped  for  and  looked  forward  to  happiness  within  my 
grasp !  We  returned  by  Medenham  Ferry.  Close  by 
the  ferry  house  is  the  abbey,  which  belongs  to  Mrs.  Scott. 
There  is  a  good  room  for  drinking  tea  in ;  the  rest  in  a 
sort  of  ruin,  except  that  inhabited  by  the  woman  who 
takes  care  of  it.  The  rooms  that  are  said  to  have  been 
occupied  by  Wilkes,  Paul  Whitehead,  &c.,  members  of 
the  famous  or  infamous  club  that  met  here  forty  or  fifty 
years  ago,  are  such  rooms  for  size  and  convenience  as  no 
luxurious  debauchers  would  condescend  to  inhabit  now.* 
There  are  remains  in  the  room  called  Wilkes's  of  a  large 
cradle,  in  which  it  is  said  he  slept.  From  Medenham  a 
beautiful  drive  of  a  mile,  through  hayfields  belonging  to 
Danesfield.  In  the  evening  I  read  out  to  them,  but  my 
spirits  had  not  at  all  recovered  Park  Place. 

Extract  of  a  Letter  to  Mrs.  Darner. 

Danesfield,  June  30th,  1811. 

I  was  at  Park  Place  yesterday.  It  had  rained  much  in  the 
night,  and  was  a  gray,  damp,  melancholy  day,  suiting  well  with 
the  feelings  I  carried  to  it.  Never  did  I  see  a  place  which, 
without  being  much  altered,  is  so  perfectly  changed,  so  triste, 
so  comfortless !  Everything  is  neglected  :  the  seats  all  falling 
to  pieces,  the  trees  overgrown  in  some  places  and  in  others 
dead  and  left  standing,  the  poor  little  flower  garden  with  its 
fountain  dry  and  its  borders  flowerless,  its  little  arcades  over- 

*  This  club  consisted  of  twelve  members ;  the  motto  (from  Rabelais) 
over  the  grand  entrance  was  '  Ce  queje  voudras.'  Although  the  club  became 
notorious,  and  their  disgusting  profanity  was  well  known,  it  proved  no  bar 
either  to  the  reception  of  the  members  in  society  or  to  the  advancement  in 
the  State  of  Sir  Francis  Dashwood,  the  founder,  who  officiated  as  high 
Priest,  and  who  became  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  Lord  Sandwich,  First 
Lord  of  the  Admiralty,  and  Wilkes  everything  that  the  sober  citizens  of 
London  could  make  of  him. 


1811]  MRS.    SHERIDAN.  483 

grown  and  broke,  and  the  thorn,  tree  in  the  middle  let  to  spread 
over  the  whole  space.  Oh,  how  every  step  of  it  affected  me ! 
I  saw  you  and  0*H.  sitting  under  this  thorn  tree  in  its  trim  days, 
and  myself  having  left  you  merely  to  enjoy  the  delicious  sensa- 
tion of  knowing  you  were  expressing  for  me  every  sentiment 
I  could  wish  to  inspire.  I  saw  him  following  me  into  the  laurel 
walk,  and  in  giving  me  a  letter  (which  I  had  accidentally 
dropped)  in  a  joking  manner,  first  convincing  me  of  the  seri- 
ousness of  the  sentiment  I  had  inspired.  I  sat  down  at  the 
end  of  the  library,  and  saw  your  form  at  the  bottom,  on  a 
ladder,  arranging  the  new-placed  books,  and  the  look  you  gave 
and  recalled,  when  you  found  us  sitting  at  the  other  end  of  the 
room,  just  where  you  had  left  us  when  you  returned  again  to 
your  work  ....  I  am  so  glad  I  have  seen  Park  Place 
once,  in  spite  of  all  the  melancholy  it  inspired,,  but  I  should  be 
sorry  to  see  more  of  it. 

JOUKNAL. 

Wednesday,  July  3rd. — Eeturned  to  London. 

Thursday,  l\th. — Went  to  Lady  Cork's ;  a  great  assem-*"\ 
bly  in  her  upper  rooms,  which  are  very  prettily  furnished, 
particularly  the  boudoir,  opening  into  the  conservatory. 
The  Prince  there,  and  all  the  world ;  and  a  numerous 
world  is  still  in  London.  There  were  some  masks,  and 
some  people  singing,  and  Mrs.  Billington  at  a  piano-forte.  | 

Thursday,  Aug.  1st. — I  saw  Mrs.  Sheridan*  by  appoint-"" 
ment  in  the  morning,  at  her  own  house,  about  poor 
Kichardson.  Curious  conversation  on  the  subject  of  her 
husband  and  their  pecuniary  necessities.  She  cannot  get 
101.  to  carry  her  out  of  London.  Spoke  and  acts  most 
kindly  about  poor  Eichardson. 

Friday,  2nd. — Went  to  Mrs.  Villiers',  where  was  a 
regular  ball  of  all  that  remained  in  London  of  dancers, 
and  much  the  usual  tapisserie  of  the  walls  of  a  ballroom  ; 
the  Dowagers  Eutland  and  Essex,  Lady  Clare,  &c.  Mrs. 

*  Miss  Esther  Jane  Ogle,  daughter  of  the  Dean  of  Winchester,  married 
to  Mr.  Sheridan,  1796. 

11  2: 


484  MISS  BERET'S  JOUENAL.  [isn 

Sheridan  (to  my  utter  amazement),  after  the  conversation 
we  had  had  the  day  before,  was  waltzing  away  there,  the 
gayest  among  the  gay.  What  happy  versatility  of  mind ! 
But,  after  all,  what  skin-deep  gaiety ! 

Saturday r,  3rd. — Sat  for  a  long  time  with  Lady  Georgi- 
ana  Morpeth ;  the  first  time  I  have  seen  her  since  her 
father's  death.  She  was,  as  always,  most  right-feeling ; 
and  I  parted  with  her,  as  I  always  do,  with  sincere  affec- 
tion and  regret. 

Sunday,  kth. — Went  to  Tunbridge  Wells. 

The  following  letter,  addressed  to  Lady  Georgiana 
Morpeth,  on  the  subject  of  the  position  to  which  her 
brother  had  succeeded  by  his  father's  death,  is  one  of  the 
many  proofs  in  Miss  Berry's  writings  of  how  justly  she 
appreciated  the  duties  attached  to  the  possession  of 
honours  and  power  : — 

Tunbridge,  9th  August,  1811. 

MY  DEAREST  Gr , — What  you  say  is  what  the   anxious 

mind  of  true,  real  and  deep  affection  must  necessarily  feel  of 
any  person,  however  amiable,  at  his  age,  placed  in  his  trying, 
or  to  use  his  own  just  expression,  awful  situation !  for  awful  it 
is  to  the  thinking  mind,  as  comprising  at  once  the  power  and 
the  occasion  of  being  nobly  distinguished  among  men,  or  in 
spite  of  all  the  lace  and  fringe  of  life,  to  link  to  that  order  of 
beings,  whose  sentiments  high  birth  cannot  ennoble,  whose 
heart  the  blessed  power  of  doing  good  cannot  warm,  and  whose 
character  can  never  rise  to  their  station.  The  more  I  think  of 
my  friend  Hartington,  the  more  I  feel  confirmed  in  my  first 
ideas  on  his  subject,  that  the  being  so  early  called  to  the  per- 
formance of  great,  serious,  and  varied  duties,  will  confirm  all 
the  good  qualities  we  have  already  known  in  him,  and  steady 
and  settle  his  character.  But  not  to  feel  anxious  about  him  for 
the  next  year  or  two,  is  to  be  either  incapable  of  appreciating 
his  present  virtues,  or  insensible  to  his  future  success. 

Saturday,  -10$. —  Dined  at  Mrs.  Tighe's.     The  party 
consisted  of  Miss  White,*  Mr.  Ward,  Mr.  Luttrell,  and 

*  Miss  Lydia  White,  well  known  in  the  literary  society  of  her  time. 


1811]  MEMOIRS   OF  MRS.   HUTCHINSOX.  485 

myself.  Mr.  Luttrell  entertaining,  and  Mr.  Ward  rather 
more  serious,  and  therefore  more  agreeable  than  usual. 
But  his  manners  are  bad,  and  with  a  sort  of  affectation 
of  worldism,  smell  most  strongly  of  never  having  been 
in  any  other  world  than  that  of  London. 

Wednesday r,  Sept.  kth.  —  Tunbridge  Wells.  At  twelve 
o'clock  we  set  out  for  Hever  Castle  ten  miles  from  hence. 
The  view  from  the  little  castle  (for  it  is  smallj  surrounded 
by  the  moat  in  good  preservation,  and  filled  with  water), 
is  charming.  Still  more  interesting  is  the  inside,  which, 
in  spite  of  an  ugly  new  staircase  and  other  disfigurements, 
has  remained  as  it  was  in  the  time  of  Sir  Thomas 
BuUeyny  the  father  of  Anne  Bulleyn.  It  is  now  the 
habitation  of  a  large  farmer.  The  large  dining-room  is 
as  it  was,  with  its  buttery,  its  large  table,  and  some 
cupboards  certainly  contemporary.  There  is  also  a 
gallery  at  the  top  of  the  house,  with  the  old  woodwork 
and  old  ceiling.  The  little  court  remains  unchanged ;  and 
the  great  oaken  entrance-door  under  the  tower  is  studded 
with  thick  nails,  and  is  probably  as  old  as  the  date  of 
Edward  IK 

Extract  of  a  Letter  from  Miss  Berry  to  Mrs.  Darner. 

Tunbridge,  1811. 

I  read  a  great  deal  every  morning,  and  indeed  often  of  an 
evening ;  I  don't  know  if  any  good  will  come  of  it,  it  does  not 
seem  yet  to  have  cleared  my  head  as  to  any  use  I  can  make  of 
it.  But  in  the  meantime,  I  am  more  delighted  with  Mrs. 
Hutchinson  *  than  with  any  book  I  have  read  for  an  age.  She 
was  a  really  superior  woman,  both  as  to  head  and  heart.  Her 
description  and  account  of  her  husband's  attachment  to  her,  is 
the  truest,  the  most  elevated  and  admirable  picture  of  love  and 
true  affection  from  and  to  a  superior  mind  that  can  be  imagined. 
It  fills  up  every  line  of  that  ideal  picture  long  ago  traced  by 

*  '  Memoirs  of  Colonel  Hutchinson,'  by  his  wife,  Lucy,  daughter  of  Sir 
Allan  Apsley,  born  1620.  The  Memoirs  were  not  published  till  1806, 


486  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isn 

imagination,  and  now  -engraved  by  reason  on  my  heart.  And 
in  the  sad  certainty  of  never  meeting  with  it,  I  feel  better 
pleased  with  myself  to  suffer  from  its  absence,  than  to  be  unable 
to  comprehend  or  to  deny  its  existence.  Farewell,  or  I  shall 
grow  romantic. 

Tuesday,  24;th. — We  set  out  for  Mayfield  with  Lady 
Charlemont,  Mrs.  Abercrombie,  Mrs.  Gordon,  and  my 
sister.  A  pretty  village,  with  a  fine  ruin  of  an  ancient 
palace  or  residence  of  the  archbishops  of  Canterbury ; 
the  most  modern  part  is  still  inhabited  by  farmers.  Mrs, 
Tighe,  Miss  White,  Mr.  Abercrombie,  and  Mr.  Tierney 
accompanied  us  on  horseback. 

Wednesday,  Oct.  2nd. — Drove,  with  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Gordon  and  Lady  Erroll,  to  Tunbridge  Castle.  I  had  no 
idea  of  the  beauty  of  the  ruin,  nor  of  the  goodness  of 
the  house  that  they  have  added  or  attached  at  the  side 
of  one  of  the  towers,  between  which  is  the  grand 
entrance-gate.  The  enclosure  of  the  castle  down  to  the 
river  is  a  lawn  and  a  shrubbery.  It  is  at  present  to  let ; 
and  we  went  all  over  it,  Mr.  Gordon  having  some  idea  of 
taking  it. 

Sunday,  27th. — Agnes  and  I  went  to  Mr.  Blake's,*  to 
see  his  drawings,  which  are  admirable.  He  sketches  in 
every  style,  and  always  well.  I  never  saw  a  more  perfect 
amateur. 

Wednesday,  30th. — Eeturned  to  London. 

Sunday,  Nov.  3rd. — In  the  evening  with  young  Law, 
who  talked  to  us  with  great  intelligence  of  Sicily,  where 
he  has  been  spending  five  months. 

Monday,  kth. — In  the  evening  Mrs.  Darner.  I  read 
Alfieri  in  Italian  —  but  what  Italian !  so  stuffed  with 
Tuscanisms,  so  fraught  with  words  immediately  derived 

*  The  late  William  Blake,  Esq.,  of  Portland  Place  and  Danesbury  Wel- 
wyn.  His  remarkable  talent  for  drawing  has  been  transmitted,  and  in  a  still 
higher  degree,  to  his  daughters,  whose  works  have  excited  the  greatest 
admiration,  both  in  private  and  at  the  Amateur  Exhibitions., 


1811]  LETTER   FROM   PROFESSOR   PLAYFAIR.  487 

from  the  Latin,  that  it  is  hardly  to  be  recognised  as  the 
language  of  Boccaccio,  Machievelli,  and  other  Italian 
classics. 

From  Professor  Playfair. 

Edinburgh,  21st  October,  1811. 

MY  DEAR  MADAM, — I  intended  to  have  written  you  a  very 
long  letter,  but  a  problem  I  have  been  engaged  on  this  morning 
has  made  me  forget  the  time  till  it  is  hard  on  the  hour  when 
Sir  John  Sebright's  frank  will  lose  its  efficacy.  .  .  . 

Have  you  been  able  to  follow  out  anything  of  the  plan  of 
reading  and  writing  that  we  talked  of? 

After  leaving  London,  I  stayed  for  a  week  at  Woburn,  and 
set  out  from  thence  with  Lord  J.  Russell  on  a  tour  through  the 
manufacturing  and  commercial  towns  in  the  West  of  England. 
This  turned  out  very  interesting,  and  took  longer  time  than  I 
had  foreseen.  Since  I  got  home  I  have  been  kept  so  close  at 
work  printing  a  text-book  of  Natural  Philosophy,  that  I  only 
got  leisure  enough  to  visit  Raith  in  the  course  of  the  last  fort- 
night. Sir  John  Sebright  and  I,  who  have  become  great  friends, 
went  there  together.  The  party  we  found  there,  though  large, 
was  exceeding  pleasant,  and  I  think,  on  the  whole,  there  cannot 
be  a  pleasanter  house  than  Raith  now  is.  Every  thing  goes  on 
well.  .  .  . 

I  have  been  very  much  amused  and  entertained  by  Sir  John 
Sebright ;  he  is  quite  a  singular  man ;  of  a  powerful  understand- 
ing, irregularly  instructed,  but  possessed  of  much  information, 
great  knowledge  of  the  world,  and  a  familiar  acquaintance  with 
a  vast  number  of  subjects  that  lie  quite  out  of  the  way  of  most 
people.  .  .  . 

I  hope  you  have  been  admiring  the  comet,  who  is  certainly 
one  of  the  most  splendid  guests  that  ever  made  a  visit  to  the 
solar  system. 

Yours,  my  dear  Miss  Berry,  with  the  utmost  affection  and 
esteem,  JOHN  PLAYFAIR. 

Wednesday,  ~L3th. — Before  four  o'clock  Lady  C.  Lindsay 
came  to  North  Audley  Street  in  the  Princess  of  Wales's 
carriage,  to  carry  me  to  Blackheath.  We  arrived  there 
soon  after  five  o'clock.  The  Princess  received  me  with 


488  MISS  BERKY'S  JOUENAL.  [mi 

all  possible  kindness.  After  talking  more  than  half  an 
hour,  Lady  Charlotte  took  me  to  my  apartments,  con- 
sisting of  two  rooms,  and  a  third  for  my  maid.  We 
dined  before  seven  o'clock.  The  Princess,  Lady  Char- 
lotte, and  myself  in  a  small  dining-room.  We  after- 
wards went  down  stairs  to  the  drawing-room,  which 
opens  into  the  greenhouse ;  a  very  warm  and  comfort- 
able room.  We  talked  a  great  deal,  and  separated  before 
one  o'clock. 

Thursday,  14#A. — I  awoke  with  a  bad  headache.  The 
Princess  came  to  Lady  Charlotte  immediately  after  break- 
fast, and  seeing  that  I  was  not  well,  begged  I  would 
remain  quite  quiet  all  the  morning,  telling  me  to  ask  for 
whatever  I  wished  to  have.  I  retired  to  my  own  com- 
fortable room  till  seven  o'clock,  when  I  was  well  enough 
to  go  to  dinner,  and  to  spend  the  evening  with  the 
Princess,  who  was  in  good  humour  and  very  talkative. 

Friday,  Ibth. — The  Princess  came  in  while  we  were 
breakfasting,  and  proposed  a  walk  in  the  garden.  Dr. 
Burney*  dined  and  stayed  here  in  the  evening,  and  we 
had  much  good  conversation.  The  Princess  of  Glou- 
cester and  her  brother  dined  with  the  Duchess  of 
Brunswick,  and  called  upon  the  Princess  in  the  afternoon. 

Saturday,  IQth.  —  The  Duke  of  Brunswick  came  to 
see  t  the  Princess ;  she  afterwards  stayed  talking  for  so 
long  in  Lady  Charlotte's  room,  that  we  did  not  dine  till 
eight  o'clock.  The  evening,  again,  long  conversation  till 
half-past  one  o'clock. 

Sunday,  Vlth. — Very  fine  winter's  day.  The  Princess, 
Lady  Charlotte,  and  I  went  to  Lea  Church ;  the  parish 
of  George  Locke  is  a  mile  from  here.  Small  country 
church,  in  a  charming  situation.  After  church  we  went 
into  his  house :  the  prettiest  parsonage,  with  the  gayest 
and  most  agreeable  view.  His  wife  was  ill,  and  could 

*  Probably  Dr.  Charles  Burney,  son  of  Dr.  Burney,  well  known  for  his 
works  on  music. 


1811]  PRINCESS  CHAELOTTE   AND  HER  MOTHER.  489 

not  see  the  Princess.  From  there  we  went  to  the 
Princess's  kitchen  garden  on  the  Heath,  where  she  has  a 
pavilion  with  two  or  three  rooms  furnished,  commanding 
a  magnificent  view  on  both  sides.  After  luncheon  we 
walked  under  the  wall  of  Greenwich  Park,  which  is  a 
sort  of  Sunday  promenade,  where  one  sees  a  great  many 
people — of  common  people  the  most  part,  not  recog- 
nising the  Princess. 

Monday,  18^. — Next  morning,  after  breakfast,  I  had 
by  chance  a  tete-a-tete  conversation  with  the  Princess  in 
Lady  Charlotte's  room.  It  was  chiefly  on  the  subject  of 
idle  frivolous  correspondence  that  people  would  keep  up 
with  her.  She  had  in  her  hand  a  letter  of  which  she 
was  speaking.  We  were  all  dressed  before  three  o'clock 
for  the  reception  of  Princess  Charlotte,  who  was  to  dine 
with  her  mother.  Princess  Sophia  of  Gloucester  arrived 
just  before,  with  Miss  Dee  :  then  Princess  Charlotte  with 
Lady  de  Clifford.  She  is  very  much  grown  and  improved 
in  figure  since  I  saw  her  last  January  at  Kensington.  I 
don't  know  whether  her  face  is  improved ;  her  mouth  is 
less  pleasing  and  less  resembling  her  father's  than  it  was  ; 
but  her  bust  is  perfect;  her  head  not  too  large,  and 
well  placed ;  has  much  intelligence  in  her  countenance, 
though  the  expression  is  not  very  agreeable ;  her  walk  is 
dreadful,  but  I  think  it  is  only  girlish  affectation,  which 
wih1  cure  itself.  We  dined  by  daylight — seven  women, 
and  not  one  man  ;  an  unheard-of  thing  at  the  Princess's. 
After  dinner  we  went  down  to  the  drawing-room,  and 
there  stayed  till  past  seven  o'clock,  when  the  Princess 
Charlotte  and  her  governess  went  away.  Princess  Sophia 
and  her  lady  went  with  the  Princess  of  Wales  to  the 
Duchess  of  Brunswick,  and  I  departed  for  London. 

Tuesday,  Dec.  3re?. — We  went,  at  two  o'clock,  to  see 
Thornton's  library,  at  which  they  are  at  this  moment 
working.  It  is,  of  all  the  ideas  of  interior  decoration, 
the  most  extraordinary ;  it  is  a  Greek  temple,  like  one 


490  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [mi 

of  those  at  Paestum,  placed  in  the  interior  of  a  room, 
against  the  walls  of  which  the  books  are  arranged,  and 
between  which  walls  and  the  columns  of  the  temple  one 
can  pass  to  the  two  ends.  In  short,  it  is  the  ideas  of 
Gell,  Hope,  and  Mr.  Hopper  (the  architect  employed), 
mixed  and  confused  by  the  orders  of  our  friend  Thorn- 
ton, who  has  not  a  single  idea  of  his  own  upon  these 
subjects. 

Thursday ',  oth. — Went  to  Brighton. 

Friday,  \%th. — Went  with  Lady  Charlotte  to  hear  the 
military  band  in  the  Prince's  Pavilion.  Luckily,  we  only 
heard  two  pieces,  for  the  noise  of  so  many  loud  instru- 
ments in  a  room  (the  dining-room)  which  could  hardly 
hold  them,  was  not  a  remedy  for  my  headache.  After 
the  music,  having  an  order,  we  saw  the  apartments  of  the 
Pavilion.  All  is  Chinese,  quite  overloaded  with  china 
of  all  sorts  and  of  all  possible  forms,  many  beautiful  in 
themselves,  but  so  overloaded  one  upon  another,  that  the 
effect  is  more  like  a  china  shop  baroquement  arranged, 
than  the  abode  of  a  Prince.  All  is  gaudy,  without 
looking  gay ;  and  all  is  crowded  with  ornaments,  without 
being  magnificent.  The  interior  of  the  stables  is  im- 
posing, though  badly  arranged  for  the  comfort  of  the 
horses,  and  will  only  accommodate  sixty  beneath  this 
large  building.  The  riding  house,  which  is  attached  to 
it,  perfectly  suits  its  purpose,  and  is,  I  think,  likely  not  to 
be  finished,  though  it  is  the  only  part  of  the  habitation 
of  the  Prince  which  deserves  preservation.  He  ought  to 
have  a  tennis  court  of  the  same  size,  making  a  pendant 
to  the  riding  house. 

Saturday,  ~L4tth. — Eeturned  to  North  Audley  Street. 

Tuesday,  24:th. — Went  to  Wimpole  with  the  Charle- 
monts. 

Wednesday,  25th. — Went  to  the  dairy,  and  to  see  the 
Gnu,  the  animal  that  Lord  Caledon  had  brought  for  Lord 
Hardwicke  from  the  Cape.  It  is  the  most  singular  animal 


1811]  THE   GNU.  491 

that  I  have  ever  seen,  larger  than  an  ass  of  this  country, 
resembling  no  other  in  particular  ;  having  two  immense 
horns  and  a  ferocious  look,  though  doing  no  harm.  It 
is  a  female,  and  comes  from  a  mountainous  country  far  in 
the  interior  of  Africa,  at  the  north  of  the  Cape. 


492  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isi2 


1812. 

Wimpole. —  Wednesday,  January  ~Lst. — Went  with  Eliza- 
beth *  to  the  school.  The  children  have  always  a  dinner 
on  New  Year's  Day.  It  was  in  the  school  upon  forms 
arranged  as  tables.  The  children  behaved  themselves 
very  well,  and  after  dinner  we  begged  the  schoolmistress 
to  relax  her  discipline  and  allow  a  little  talking.  We  made 
the  children  sing,  and  the  most  perfect  happiness  beamed 
upon  forty-five  young  and  innocent  faces,  f 

Friday,  3rd. — Eeturned  to  London. 

Tuesday,  14fA.  —  Drove  with  Lady  C.  Campbell  to 
Blackheath.  We  found  the  Princess,  who  received  me 
in  the  most  gracious  manner  possible.  Poor  Charlotte 
was  so  overcome  with  fatigue,  that  I  was  left  tete-a-tete 
till  half-past  seven  o'clock,  when  we  separated  to  dress,  I 
almost  dead  with  so  much  talking.  The  toilette  of  the 
Princess  is  always  so  rapid,  that  it  was  impossible  not  to 
keep  her  waiting  a  few  minutes.  Lady  Charlotte  joined 
us  at  dinner,  and  the  evening  passed  very  agreeably. 

Wednesday,  15  th — A  fine  winter's  day.  We  did  not 
see  the  Princess  till  luncheon  at  four  o'clock,  and  from 
that' time  till  seven  o'clock  we  remained  in  conversation  ; 
then  dinner,  and  again  conversation  till  nearly  one 
o'clock. 

Thursday,  ]&th. — I  remained  quietly  in  my  room  till 
three  o'clock,  when  the  Princess  sent  for  me  to  take  a 

*  Lady  Elizabeth  Yorke. 

t  The  desire  to  promote  both  the  education  and  the  recreation  of  the 
children  of  the  poor  has  happily  now  become  almost  wholly  universal  in 
this  country ;  but  not  the  less  honour  is  due  to  those  who  early  in  the  cen- 
tury formed  a  small  minority,  but  who  set  the  example  and  took  the  lead  in 
that  good  work. 


1812]  PRINCE    OF   WALES'S   LETTER.  493 

walk  to  Mr.  Angerstein's  house.  After  luncheon  went 
with  the  Princess  to  the  Duchess  of  Brunswick,  to  whom 
she  presented  me,  and  with  whom  I  had  a  long  talk. 
The  Duchess  sat  in  her  arm-chair  in  the  middle  of  a  fine 
large  drawing-room,  the  Princess  on  one  side,  and  I  on 
the  other.  She  invited  me  to  dine  with  her  the  next 
day ;  but  the  Princess  telling  her  that  I  was  obliged  to 
return  home,  insisted  that  we  should  dine  there  this  day, 
to  which  the  Princess  consented,  and  there  we  were  in 
our  walking  dress  talking  till  five  o'clock,  when  dinner 
was  served.  It  was  a  tolerable  dinner,  with  German 
dishes,  that  they  forced  me  to  taste.  At  half  past  six  we 
took  coffee,  and  returned  to  the  Princess's.  After  half  an 
hour's  conversation,  separated  to  dress  for  the  Princess's 
dinner,  from  which  she  did  not  excuse  us,  though  it  was 
an  impossibility  to  eat  again.  Evening  passed  as  usual. 

Friday,  \lth. — Returned  to  town. 

Thursday,  February  13th. — I  had  a  long  and  very 
agreeable  tete-a-tete  with  the  Duke  of  Devonshire.  He 
thinks  so  well,  so  sensibly,  and  has  so  good  a  heart,  that 
he  always  gives  me  pleasure  when  he  talks  openly. 

Sunday,  16th. — It  is  already  known,  and  they  were 
talking  at  dinner  of  the  letter  which  the  Prince  of  Wales 
has  written  to  the  Duke  of  York,*  telling  him  that  he 
should  keep  the  same  ministers  after  the  18th  of  this 
month,  when  all  restrictions  would  cease,  and  he  would 
govern  completely  as  King.  , 

Wednesday,  26th. — The  morning  at  Devonshire  House, 

*  The  Prince's  celebrated  letter  to  the  Duke  of  York,  announcing  his  in- 
tention of  retaining  the  Tory  administration,  and  thus  renouncing  the  Whig 
party,  whom  he  had  hitherto  regarded  as  his  own  political  friends,  created 
great  indignation,  and  amongst  other  satirical  poems  gave  rise  to  Moore's 
Parody  of  the  Letter,  beginning — 

'  At  length,  dearest  Freddy,  the  moment  is  nigh, 
When,  with  P-rc-v-1's  leave,  I  may  throw  my  chains  by ; 
And,  as  time  now  is  precious,  the  first  thing  I  do 
Is  to  sit  down  and  write  a  wise  letter  to  you.' 
—Moore's  Works,  vol.  v.  p.  223. 


494  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1812 

where  I  found  the  Duke  in  his  library  with  the  Marquis 
Douglas  and  George  Neville,  who  were  looking  over  his 
beautiful  books.  The  Duke  accompanied  us  into  the 
dining-room  to  see  the  new  pictures,  and  he  then  told  me 
of  the  legacy  old  Cavendish  *  had  left  him — nearly 
7,OOOJ.  a  year. 

Tuesday,  March  3rd.  —  In  the  evening  I  went  in 
Kemble's  box,  where  we  found  his  wife,  to  see  '  Julius 
Caesar  ' — Kemble  playing  the  part  of  Brutus,  and  Young, 
Cassius,  admirably  well. 

Wednesday,  4th. — In  the  evening  went  to  the  Ancient 
Music.  We  found  places  near  to  Lord  and  Lady  Derby, 
and  were  not  far  from  the  box  where  the  Eegent  was, 
accompanied  by  the  Dukes  of  Cumberland  and  Cam- 
bridge, and  two  or  three  other  directors,  and  the  faithful 
Lord  Yarmouth.  He  only  spoke  to  Lady  Albemarle  and 
Mrs.  Howe. 

To  the  Countess  of  Hardwicke  from  Miss  Berry. 

North  Audley  Street,  Monday,  March  16,  1812. 

You  will  find  me  with  a  new  friend  in  your  Square,  Lady 
Castlereagh,  who  has  been  so  civil,  and  so  successful  in  curing 
me  of  the  toothache,  that  I  am  going  to  a  small  party  to  her 

*  Henry  Cavendish,  son  of  Lord  Cavendish,  cousin  of  the  Duke  of  Devon- 
shire, died  March  1810.  He  left  property  to  the  amount  of  one  million  two 
hundred  thousand  pounds.  Seven  hundred  thousand  pounds  he  bequeathed 
to  Lofld  G.  Cavendish,  two  hundred  thousand  pounds  to  the  Earl  of  Bess- 
borough,  and  other  legacies  to  the  Cavendish  family.  He  was  a  most  emi- 
nent chemist  and  natural  philosopher ;  he  was  conversant  with  every  part  of 
Sir  J.  Newton's  philosophy,  the  principles  of  which  he  applied  near  forty 
(now  ninety)  years  ago  to  an  investigation  of  the  laws  on  which  the  pheno- 
mena of  electricity  depend ;  he  ascertained,  in  1766,  the  extreme  levity  of 
inflammable  gas,  now  called  hydrogen  gas ;  he  discovered  the  composition 
of  water  by  the  union  of  two  airs ;  laid  the  foundation  of  the  modern  system 
of  chemistry,  &c.  &c.  He  died  at  the  age  of  seventy-nine.  Sir  H.  Davy,  in 
pronouncing  a  high  eulogium  on  him,  said,  '  Since  the  days  of  Sir  J.  Newton 
England  has  sustained  no  scientific  loss  so  great  as  that  of  Cavendish.  .  .  . 
His  name  will  be  an  immortal  honour  to  his  house,  to  his  age,  and  to  his 
country.'— Ann.  Regis,  for  1810. 


1812]          LETTER   TO   THE   COUNTESS   OF   HARDWICKE.  495 

house  this  evening,  and  am  asked  to  all  her  suppers.  You  see 
I  am  creeping  over  to  the  Ministerial  side.  However,  to  save 
appearances  and  my  principles,  if  I  can,  I  am  going  afterwards 
to  your  favourite  Lady  Caroline  Lamb,  who  has  some  sort  of  a 
party  down  at  Whitehall,  to  he  in  the  way  of  hearing  an  early 
account  of  what  is  going  on  in  the  House  of  Peers  on  Lord 
Boringdon's  motion,  which,  by  the  way,  I  believe,  is  put  off.  I 
have  no  time  to  talk  to  you  about  this  motion.  I  was  present 
when  he  started  the  first  idea  of  it  at  dinner,  at  Devonshire 
House,  on  Monday  se'nnight,  which  people  smiled  at,  and 
nobody  replied  to.  But  however  odd  the  motion,  I  should  not 
be  at  all  surprised,  by  what  I  have  since  heard,  of  it  being  com- 
pletely a  manoeuvre  of  Lord  Wellesley  and  Canning,  and  if  it 
led  to  turning  out  Percival  and  his  immediate  adherents. 

The  author  of  the  versification  of  the  letter  is  little  Anacreon, 
not  avowedly,  but  certainly.  You  must  see  likewise  a  certain 
vision,  said  to  be  by  Lord  Byron,  as  well  as  some  lines  on  the 
Princess  Charlotte's  tears  at  the  far-famed  dinner,  and  the 
triumph  of  the  whale  in  the  *  Examiner  '  of  last  Sunday.  The 
prose  squibs  and  abuse  are  endless.  People  begin  to  look  grave 
about  the  license  taken  ;  but  it  is  not  yet,  near  as  great  as  that 
at  the  end  of  Charles  II. 's  reign  was !  .  .  . 

Thursday,  \$th. — Went  to  Lady  Castlereagh's,  where 
there  was  an  assembly  entirely  of  ladies.  There  were  only 
three  men  in  the  room  when  we  arrived.  All  the  male 
world  was  in  the  House  of  Lords  to  hear  the  motion  of 
Lord  Boringdon.*  Near  midnight  we  went  to  Melbourne 
House  to  Lady  Caroline  Lamb.  They  were  at  supper. 
Lady  Holland  with  fifteen  other  ladies  waiting  the  arrival 

*  Afterwards  created  Earl  of  Morley.  The  object  of  Lord  Boringdon's 
motion  was  to  move  an  address  to  the  Prince  Regent  beseech  ing  him  to  form 
an  efficient  administration  that  should  be  so  composed  as  to  unite  the  con- 
fidence and  good  will  of  all  classes.  He  represented  that  in  the  present 
state  of  Ireland,  no  such  confidence  could  be  enjoyed  by  any  administration 
whose  characteristic  principle  was  to  resist  a  dispassionate  consideration  of 
the  civil  disabilities,  under  which  His  Majesty's  Roman  Catholic  subjects 
there  still  laboured.  Lord  Grimstone  moved  an  amendment  which  was  in 
effect  an  expression  of  perfect  satisfaction  with  the  conduct  of  affairs  since 
the  commencement  of  the  Regency.  The  amendment  was  carried  by  a 
majority  of  93. — See  Annual  Register,  1812. 


496  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1812 

of  the  gentlemen  from  the  Houses.  An  hour  passed 
before  they  came.  All  opposition  en  masse,  and  all  the 
Canning  party,  himself  excepted,  with  a  fallen  look,  after 
their  cheval  de  bataille,  Lord  Wellesley,  had  entirely  failed 
them  at  the  hour  of  need,  not  having  chosen  to  open  his 
mouth. 

Wednesday,  2bth. — The  Princess  of  Wales  had  settled, 
on  Saturday  last,  to  come  and  see  us  this  morning  in 
town.  At  four  o'clock  we  sat  down  to  table  in  the  little 
drawing-room.  It  was  a  beautiful  day.  The  sun  shone 
out,  and  everything  appeared  very  bright  and  very  cheer- 
ful. The  Princess  seemed  much  pleased  with  the  com- 
pany and  the  luncheon,  and  fatigued  no  one,  for  at 
half-past  five  she  returned  to  Blackheath. 

Thursday,  April  2nd. — Went  to  Lady  Glenbervie's ; 
Lord  Byron  was  there,  and  I  had  a  quarter  of  an  hour's 
conversation,  which,  I  own,  gave  me  a  great  desire  to  know 
i    him  better,  and  he  seemed  willing  that  I  should  do  so. 

Thursday,  Qth. — I  had  a  great  deal  of  private  conver- 
sation with  the  Princess,  when  I  found  her  much  more 
reasonable  on  her  own  affairs,  and  much  more  capable  of 
listening  to  reason  than  usual.  She  begins  to  understand 
that  she  must  be  prudent,  and  that  prudence  alone  will  dis- 
arm her  enemies — at  least  she  has  no  other  course  to  take. 

Sunday,  12th. — I  went  to  church,  and  afterwards  took 
Lady  Cornewall  *  to  pay  a  visit  to  Catalani  in  her  hermi- 
tage at  Brompton.  It  is  a  small  house  with  a  drawing- 
room,  decorated  with  French  tapestry,  and  all  the  gilding, 
yellow,  crimson,  and  looking-glasses  that  could  be  crammed 
into  it. 

Wednesday,  \bth. — We  went  to  Kensington  ;  dinner  of 
twenty-two  people ;  Canning  and  several  of  his  friends 
and  his  set.  In  the  evening  there  was  an  assembly,  many 
of  whom,  and  we  amongst  others,  were  invited  to  supper. 
The  Princess  was  melancholy ;  I  never  saw  her  so  beat 
*  Wife  of  Sir  George  Cornewall. 


1812]  LORD   BYRON.  497 

down.  She  made  me  sit  by  her  side  for  a  long  time ; 
twice  she  tried  to  speak  and  could  not,  her  voice  always 
failing  her.  It  was  the  recollections  that  were  revived 
by  the  company,  and  not  the  public  affairs,  I  am  quite 
sure,  by  the  answers  she  made  upon  what  I  said  of  the 
politics  of  the  day. 

Saturday,  May  2nd. — Left  '  The  Two  Martius '  at  Sir 
G.  Beaumont's. 

Sunday,  3rd. — Dined  at  Mr.  Montague's  with  Lord 
and  Lady  Hardwicke,  and  Lady  Elizabeth,  Lord  and  Lady 
Elliott,  &c.,  and  Mr.  Peel.  The  latter,  he  who  spoke  so 
well  in  the  House  of  Commons,  has  a  very  agreeable 
countenance. 

Thursday,  7th. — At  the  end  of  the  evening  I  had  half 
an  hour's  conversation  with  Lord  Byron,  principally  on 
the  subject  of  the  Scotch  Eeview,  with  which  he  is  very 
much  pleased.  He  is  a  singular  man,  and  pleasant  to  me, 
but  I  very  much  fear  that  his  head  begins  to  be  turned 
by  all  the  adoration  of  the  world,  especially  the  women.  _j 

Friday,  8th. — Had  a  long  conversation  with  Sir  G. 
Beaumont  in  the  morning  upon  poetry,  &c.  With  all  his 
natural  taste,  he  is  strangely  misled  by  the  dogmas  of 
Coleridge,  Wordsworth,  &c. 

Monday,  ~Llth. — At  dinner  with  my  father  and  sister 
I  received  from  Mrs.  Locke  a  card  which  had  been  sent  to 
her,  and  upon  which  was  the  wonderful  news  of  the  assas- 
sination of  Mr.  Percival  in  the  lobby  of  the  House  of 
Commons.  I  began  by  doubting  it,  but  a  moment  after 
our  servant  said  he  had  heard  it  from  Mr.  Villiers's  *  valet. 
Directly  after  dinner  Agnes  went  to  Lady  Donegal],  and 
I  wrote  to  ask  Mrs.  Villiers  about  it.  The  Villiers'  had  a 
large  dinner,  and  I  saw  several  persons  arrive  who  ought 
to  be  well-informed.  I  received  from  them  complete 
confirmation  of  the  report.  We  went  early  to  Mrs.  G. 

*  Hon.  J.  C.  Villiers,  afterwards  Earl  of  Clarendon,  lived  in  North  Audlej 
Street. 

VOL.  II.  K  K 


498  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1812 

Lamb's,  where  there  was  young  Macdonald,  Mr.  Morrice, 
and  two  or  three  other  people  who  had  been  in  the 
House  of  Commons,  and  afterwards  at  the  examination 
of  the  assassin,*  who  had  not  attempted  to  escape.  Later 
in  the  evening  Lords  Lauderdale  and  Grey  arrived,  who 
had  both  been  with  the  Address  of  the  Lords  to  Carlton 
House.  This  deed,  though  horrible,  is  unfortunately  one 
of  all  countries,  and  is  not  without  its  parallel  even  here. 
But  that  which  is  not  so  is  the  manner  in  which  the 
populace  took  it,  who  surrounded  the  Houses  of  Parlia- 
ment. They  appeared  so  very  little  shocked. 

Tuesday 1 12th. — After  breakfast  I  received  a  note  from 
Lady  Charlotte,  asking  me  ah1  I  had  heard  and  thought 
of  the  assassination. 

Thursday,  14<A. — Drove  as  far  as  Spring  Gardens, 
having  passed  through  the  crowd  of  carriages  from  the 
two  Houses,  who  were  taking  their  Address  to  the  Eegent 
on  the  subject  of  the  assassination  of  Percival. 

Saturday,  16$. — Went  to  Mrs.  Gordon,  where  there 
was  an  excellent  assembly,  and  delightful  music.  The 
four  sisters,  f  Naldi  Tremazzani  and  two  Portuguese. 

Thursday,  21st — I  heard  from  Lady  Grey  £  herself  that 
the  Commons  were  up,  and  that  they  had  left  the  Ministry 
in  a  minority  of  four  upon  the  question  of  their  own  inca- 
pability. In  all  my  life  I  had  never  been  more  astonished. 

*  Bellingham. 

t  The  five  sisters,  Mrs.  Peploe,  Viscountess  Hereford,  Mrs.  Frankland 
Lewis,  Lady  Duff  Gordon,  and  Miss  Cornewall,  were  all  celebrated  for  their 
musical  talents. 

J  Mr.  Stuart  Wortley  submitted  to  the  House  a  motion  for  an  Address  to 
the  Prince  Regent,  praying  his  Royal  Highness  to  take  such  measures  as 
might  be  best  calculated  to  form  an  efficient  administration.  The  motion 
was  in  fact  for  a  vote  of  want  of  confidence  in  the  administration  about  to 
be  formed.  The  previous  question  was  moved  and  lost  by  four,  and  Mr. 
Wortley's  motion  was  carried.  Mr.  Wortley  then  moved '  the  Address  should 
be  carried  by  the  whole  House.'  Mr.  Yorke  moved  the  previous  question. 
Mr.  Wortley  then  withdrew  his  motion,  and  moved  that  the  Address  should 
be  presented  by  members  of  the  Privy  Council  sitting  in  Parliament.  A  divi- 
sion ensued.  Ministers  had  a  majority  of  two. — Hansard. 


1812]  THE   PRINCESS  CHARLOTTE.  499 

Wednesday,  2Tth. — I  got  ready  to  go  to  Blackheath 
with  Lady  Charlotte  Campbell.  We  found  the  Princess 
sitting  under  an  elm  tree  near  the  house;  there  we 
remained  talking  nearly  an  hour.  At  dinner  Sir  James 
Mackintosh,  Sir  H.  and  Lady  Davy,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  G.  Locke, 
young  Burney,  and  Campbell  the  poet.*  The  first  and  the 
last  I  saw  for  the  first  time.  I  am  charmed  with  the 
first,  and  not  at  all  with  the  latter  ;  he  appears  to  think 
too  much  of  himself.  Sir  J.  M.  conversed  very  well 
upon  literature,  upon  his  travels,  &c.,  has  a  quiet  manner, 
and  without  the  least  affectation. 

Thursday,  28th. — In  the  evening  the  Princess  read  to 
us  '  Amelie  de  Mansfeldt.'f 

Friday,  29*A. — The  Princess  Charlotte  and  Lady  de 
Clifford  arrived  just  as  we  finished  our  drive.  We  all 
sat  down  to  dinner  without  making  any  toilette.  The 
young  Princess  was  very  gay,  very  talkative,  in  very 
good  humour,  and  very  — ,  all  one  could  expect  from  a 
young  girl  of  sixteen,  very  quick  and  very  lively,  and 
very  ill  brought  up.  After  dinner  she  played  all  sorts  of 
things  upon  the  piano;.  Her  musical  memory  is  astonish- 
ing. As  to  her  looksr  she  has  grown  and  improved  since 
I  saw  her  in  November ;  with  rouge  she  would  be  really 
striking,  but  she  does  not  walk  any  better,  and  has  not 
dignified  manners.  She  left  between  nine  and  ten  o'clock. 
The  Princess  then  continued  reading  '  Amelie  de  Mans- 
feldt.' 

Tuesday,  June  2nd. — Called  on  Lady  Georgiana  and 
then  on  Lady  Harriet    I  saw  quite  well  from  my  conver- 

*  Thomas  Campbell,  the  poet,  born  at  Glasgow  in  1767 ;  author  of '  Lore 
and  Madness,'  '  Caroline,'  '  Pleasures  of  Hope,'  which  latter  work  placed 
him  at  once  in  the  front  rank  with  the  poets  of  the  age,  '  Lochiel's  Warn- 
ing,' f  Gertrude  of  Wyoming,'  and  many  other  poems.  In  1802  he  became 
secretary  to  Lord  Minto.  In  1806  the  King  granted  him  a  pension  of  200/. 
a  year.  He  continued  his  literary  labours  till  towards  the  close  of  his  life. 
Died  at  Boulogne  1844. 

t  By  Madame  de  Cottin. 

BX* 


500  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [is  12 

sation  with  the  latter  how  the  political  negotiation  was 
going  on. 

Wednesday,  3rd. — Went  to  Lady  Georgiana ;  met  Lady 
Harriet  and  had  a  conversation  with  her  in  another  room 
upon  the  politics  of  the  day  or  rather  the  morning,  because 
it  changes  two  or  three  times  a  day. 

Thursday,  ktli. — We  went  at  three  o'clock  to  Sir  H. 
Davy's  house  to  meet  the  Princess  of  Wales,  who  was 
coming  to  take  herself,  and  to  see  taken,  the  Imperial  Gas. 
I  had  never  before  seen  its  wonderful  effect,  of  which  I 
had  formed  but  a  very  imperfect  idea.  Davy  had  taken 
it,  and  Sydney  Smith,  Sir  J.  Mackintosh  and  Lady  C.  Camp- 
bell, and  the  Princess.  The  dose  administered  to  the 
latter  was  so  small  that  the  effects  were  only  visible  in  the 
eyes  and  upon  the  complexion,  but  upon  the  others  it 
was  an  excitement,  a  vivacity,  in  fact  a  wonderful  intoxi- 
cation of  three  or  more  minutes,  astonishing !  and  so 
delightful  to  themselves  that  they  wished  to  retake  it, 
and  could  not  and  would  not  desist  from  imbibing  the 
dose  which  was  destined  for  them,  so  long  as  the  slightest 
breath  remained. 

Friday,  V2>th. — Went  in  the  morning  to  Lady  Harriet, 
where  I  found  Lord  Granville.  We  were  all  three  agreed 
upon  the  conduct  of  the  Ministers,  or  rather  the  oppo- 
sition. Went  to  Lady  Spencer's,  A  large  party  (for  her). 
Lords  Camden,  Grey,  and  every  one  on  the  opposition 
side  laughing  with  very  bad  grace. 

Sunday,  \kih. — At  eleven  o'clock  we  took  Sir  J.  Mackin- 
tosh with  us  to  Kensington  to  hear  Sydney  Smith  preach 
in  the  Palace  Chapel.  The  Princess  had  begged  of  us  to 
come  to  her  in  her  gallery  ;  she  was  delighted  to  see  Sir 
J.  Mackintosh,  whom  she  did  not  expect.  After  church 
Sydney  Smith  came  in  to  luncheon,  and  then  we  went  to 
see  the  great  apartment,  one  part  only  being  open  and 
many  of  the  pictures  displaced.  We  all  took  leave  of  the 
Princess ;  Sydney  Smith  went  to  Holland  House,  Sir  J. 


1812]  G.   COLMAN   THE   YOUNGER.  501 

Mackintosh  walked  with  us  across  the  garden.  At  half- 
past  ten  we  went  to  Miss  Johnstone's,*  where  there  was 
good  company  and  music.  I  found  Mrs.  Siddons  there, 
who  repeated  to  me  in  a  corner  alone  the  verses  that  she 
was  going  to  recite  on  her  farewell  to  the  public ;  they 
are  by  her  nephew  Twiss,-)-  and  I  thought  them  in  good 
taste. 

Monday,  15th. — Called  by  appointment  on  Sir  G.  Beau- 
mont to  meet  Colman,  J  and  read  with  him  '  The  Two 
Martius.'  As  Sir  George  had  told  him  that  it  was  written 
by  a  woman,  I  owned  myself  to  be  that  woman,  exacting 
at  the  same  time  the  secrecy  which  every  manager  of 
a  theatre  grants  and  keeps  faithfully.  I  read  the  piece  : 
he  stopped  me  each  time  where  he  thought  something 
piquant  could  be  added,  and  all  his  observations  were 
like  a  master  of  the  art.  He  took  away  the  little  piece, 
with  full  permission  to  make  any  alterations  he  liked  :  he 
proposed  returning  it  to  me  with  his  ideas  upon  the 
alterations,  so  that  I  could  make  them  myself.  I  went 
with  Agnes  to  Lady  Hertford  :  the  crowd  was  as  usual. 
The  Regent  and  three  or  four  of  his  brothers,  only  one 
or  two  of  the  Opposition  ;  the  greater  part  were  not  even 
asked. 

Wednesday,  24#A. — I  went  to  Devonshire  House  to  see 
the  library  of  the  late  Dr.  Dampier,  Bishop  of  Ely,  which 
the  Duke  had  just  bought  of  his  heirs  for  10,000/.  The 
books  are  still  on  the  floor  in  one  of  the  drawing  rooms. 
These  books,  with  those  which  he  is  now  buying  at  the 


*  Afterwards  Countess  St.  Antonio  and  Duchesse  Cannizzaro. 

t  Horace  Twiss,  Esq. 

J  George  Colman  the  younger,  born  1762.  He  was  educated  for  the 
bar,  but  his  father's  affairs  demanded  his  assistance,  and  he  undertook  the 
charge  of  the  Haymarket  Theatre  :  this  brought  him  afterwards  into  serious 
difficulties.  He  lived  for  many  years  within  the  '  rules  '  of  the  Fleet,  from 
which  he  was  rescued  through  the  interest  of  the  Duke  of  York,  who  got 
for  him  the  office  of  Licenser  of  Plays.  He  was  the  author  of  many  plays, 
poems,  &c. 


502  MISS  BEKKY'S  JOURNAL.  [1312 

Duke  of  Eoxburgh's  sale,  will   make  one  of  the  best 
libraries  in  the  country. 

Friday,  2Qth. — We  dined  with  the  Princess  at  Ken- 
sington.     The  company :   Lady   C.   Lindsay,    Lady  C. 
Campbell,   Mr.  Lewis,   Sir  H.  and  Lady  Davy,   Sir  J. 
Mackintosh,  Sir  H.  Englefield,  Mrs.*  and  Miss  Pole,  Lord 
Glenbervie  and  Campbell  the  poet,  who  was  to  read  his 
first  discourse  upon  Poetry,  which  he  had  delivered  at  the 
Institution ;  he  did  so  during  the  evening  with  very  good 
effect.     At  dinner,   Lewis  gave  out  a  thousand  betises 
upon  the  subject  of  poetry,  pretending  that  he  found 
Homer  and  Virgil  wearisome.     Campbell's  discourse  ap- 
peared to  be  made  expressly  to  punish  him  and  to  expose 
the  inaptitude  of  these  heterodox  opinions.     Poor  Lewis 
was  in  a  very  bad  humour,  and  did  not  know  where  to 
hide  his  head  during  the  reading,  so  he  pretended  to  be 
sleeping. 

Monday,  29^.  —  I  went  to  the  theatre  in  Lady 
Spencer's  box,  to  see  Mrs.  Siddons  take  leave  of  the 
public. 

Thursday,  July  9th. — We  went  to  Lady  Buckingham- 
shire, to  what  she  called  a  Venetian  dejeuner,  Heaven 
knows  why !  There  were  a  great  many  masks,  several 
hired,  I  think,  from  small  theatres,  because  there  were 
few,  if  any,  masked  as  they  ought  to  be.  There  were 
tents,  lotteries,  and  fortune-tellers  in  the  garden.  In  fact 
it  was  Bedlam  let  loose,  but  very  amusing  and  very  pretty 
—a  hot  summer's  day. 

Monday,  ~L3th. — Walked  at  Chiswick  with  the  Duke, 
from  whom  I  obtained  in  part  the  papers  f  I  wished  for. 
Wednesday,  15th. — At  nine  o'clock  in  the  evening  we 
went  to  Lady  Hardwicke's  for  their  play  ;  I  went  to  the 
green-room  to  assist  in  rouging,  &c.  The  theatre  was 
brilliant,  really  the  prettiest  private  theatre  I  have  ever 

*  Hon.  Mrs.  Wellesley  Pole,  afterwards  Lady  Maryborough, 
t  Lady  Russell's  letters. 


1812]  VISIT   THE    PRINCESS   OF   WALES.  503 

seen.  The  audience  numerous  and  very  well  placed. 
The  Eegent  and  the  Princes,  who  were  expected,  did  not 
come,  except  the  Duke  of  Gloucester ;  the  Regent  sent  to 
say  that  he  hoped  to  be  there  by  ten  o'clock,  but  not  to 
expect  him. 

Friday,  17  th. — In  the  evening  at  Lady  Hardwicke's, 
I  to  be  audience,  Agnes  to  be  behind  the  scenes.  There 
was  a  great  deal  of  company.  The  Princess  arrived 
before  ten  o'clock ;  also  the  Princess  Sophia  and  the 
Duke  of  Gloucester.  At  half-past  one  o'clock  we  went 
down  to  a  superb  supper  ;  140  people  supped  there. 

Saturday,  18^/i — It  was  a  beautiful  day.  The  Princess 
had  desired  me  to  be  at  Kensington  by  two  o'clock. 
Lady  Hardwicke  and  her  two  daughters  came  on  a  visit 
of  etiquette  to  the  Princess,  who  received  them  in  her 
dressing  gown.  She  afterwards  talked  much  and  for  a 
long  time  on  the  subject  of  her  position  vis-a-vis  the 
Princess  Charlotte,  and  of  the  ungracious  reception  she 
met  with  on  her  visit  to  her  daughter  at  Windsor,  this 
day  week,  the  llth  of  the  month,  and  of  the  visit  she  had 
received  the  day  before  yesterday  from  Lord  Liverpool, 
and  of  all  that  passed  ;  but  as  I  intend  to  put  it  all  to 
paper,  it  is  useless  to  write  more  here.* 

Monday,  2Qth. — The  Princess  of  Wales  came  at  two 
o'clock  to  take  me  to  Blackheath.  We  found  young 
Burney  to  meet  us.  Before  dinner,  I  had  a  long  tete- 
a-tete  conversation  with  the  Princess  about  her  situation, 
and  what  she  will  do,  who  she  will  choose  for  the  new 
lady  that  she  is  going  to  take  instead  of  Mrs.  Lisle,  who 
has  resigned  in  a  manner  hardly  fitting,  as  she  has  been 
only  six  weeks  in  service.  At  nine  o'clock  we  set  out, 
the  Princess,  Lady  Charlotte  Lindsay,  Lord  Henry  [Fitz- 
gerald], and  I,  in  her  landau,  and  returned  to  London, 
passing  by  the  way  of  Lady  C.  Campbell's,  which  in- 

*  This  paper  is  not  to  be  found,  and  was  perhaps  never  written. 


504  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1812 

creased  the  distance  at  least  three  or  four  miles.  The 
lightning  which  began  near  Lewisham  threatened  a  storm, 
and  put  me  into  a  state  of  mind  very  little  fit  to  amuse 
a  Princess ;  but  she  knew  my  weakness,  and  without 
sharing  it,  showed  me  all  possible  attention  to  relieve  my 
ridiculous  fears. 

Thursday,  23rd. — LadyHardwicke  and  Elizabeth  called, 
and  we  thought  of  many  arrangements  for  the  evening. 
I  was  tormented  with  a  hundred  notes  to  ask  Lady 
Hardwicke  for  places.  I  showed  them  all  to  her,  and 
always  obtained  what  they  asked.  A  quarter  before  ten 
o'clock  we  went  to  St.  James's  Square  with  Mrs.  Tighe. 
She,  I,  and  Mr.  Ward  were  placed  on  the  third  form 
from  the  stage.  Agnes  behind  the  scenes.  At  ten  o'clock 
the  Eegent  came  with  the  Duke  of  Clarence,  the  Duke 
of  Cumberland,  the  Due  de  Berri,  and  the  Due  de  Bour- 
bon, with  whom  he  had  dined  at  the  Prince  de  Conde's 
at  Wimbledon.  The  Eegent  gave  his  arm  to  Lady 
Hardwicke,  and  sat  in  the  first  row  beside  her  and  his 
two  brothers  at  his  side.  The  two  French  Princes  in  the 
same  row,  on  the  other  side  of  the  middle.  The  Sultana 
was  sitting  behind,  and  would  not  come  forward.  The 
Eegent,  as  well  as  his  two  brothers,  was  very  attentive  to 
the  performance.  The  actors  were  so  frightened  at  their 
august  audience  that  they  never  acted  so  badly,  and  had 
recourse  more  than  once  to  the  prompter,  which  never 
happened  to  them  before,  and  they  were  in  despair  behind 
the  scenes — so  my  sister  said  ;  but  nobody  discovered  it 
but  those  who  had  seen  their  more  perfect  acting  on  last 
Friday.  At  half  past  one  o'clock  the  Eegent  and  his 
brothers  went  to  supper,  foUowed  by  all  the  company, 
except  the  French  Princes,  who  went  away.  Lady 
Hardwicke  sat  by  the  side  of  the  Eegent,  then  the  Duke 
of  Clarence  next,  then  Lady  Hertford,  the  Duke  of 
Cumberland,  and  Lady  Conyngham,  &c.  &c.  The  propor- 
tion of  elderly  ladies  at  the  table  was  too  large.  At  the 


1812]  THE    BATTLE    OF   SALAMANCA.  505 

end  of  the  same  table,  by  the  side  of  Lord  Hardwicke, 
sat  the  Duke  of  Norfolk  and  Lord  Erskine.  The  Prince 
spoke  to  the  Duke  of  Norfolk,  but  made  no  sign  of  re- 
cognition to  Lord  Erskine. 

Tunbridge  Wells. — Wednesday,  August  bth. — I  was  at 
the  hotel  dining  with  Lady  Milbanke,  her  daughter,  Mrs.  -7 
Hervey,  and  Mrs.  and  Miss  Chaloner.  Lady  Milbanke's 
daughter  *  appears  to  have  a  great  deal  of  mind,  and  she 
is  said  to  have  a  good  deal  of  information,  and  is  not  at 
all  affected. 

Monday,  10th. — I  walked  for  nearly  an  hour  with 
Miss  Mercerf  upon  the  Common,  where  we  had  a  long  con- 
versation about  the  Princess  Charlotte.  She  told  me  the 
manner  in  which  the  Prince  conducted  himself  towards 
her,  and  upon  the  subject  of  her  intimacy  with  Princess 
Charlotte.  She  has  not  put  her  foot  in  the  Princess's 
house  since  Easter. 

Monday,  17th. — The  news  of  Lord  Wellington's  splen- 
did victory,^  which  has  been  so  much  talked  of,  has  at 
length  arrived,  Lord  Buckingham  §  having  received  the 
despatches  during  the  night,  had  sent  one  to  each  library 
on  the  Pantiles,  where  everybody  saw  them,  and  were 
talking  of  the  news.  In  the  evening  there  was  a  general 
illumination.  The  Pantiles  were  decorated  very  prettily 
with  branches  of  oak  mixed  with  flowers  and  laurels. 
I  had  often  heard  of  the  beauty  of  an  illumination  at 
Tunbridge,  but  it  very  much  surpassed  my  expectations. 
The  effect  of  Mount  Sion  from  the  Common,  with  its 
rows  of  houses  raised  one  above  another,  and  all  lighted, 
would  have  been  beautiful,  but  for  the  bonfires  which  they 
are  in  the  habit  here  of  making,  by  lighting  furze  upon 


*  Afterwards  married  to  Lord  Byron. 

t  Daughter  of  Lord  Keith,  now  Comtesse  de  Flahault  Baroness  Nairne. 
I  Salamanca. 

§  Marquess  of  Buckingham,  born  1753,  twice  Viceroy  of  Ireland,  in  1782 
and  1787.     Died  1813. 


506  MISS  BEKEY'S  JOUBNAL.  [1812 

the  Common  in  various  places.  It  produces  a  grand 
effect  of  light,  but  the  smoke  prevented  our  seeing  the 
illumination  of  the  village.  The  evening  was  perfect  for 
such  a  fete — quite  fine,  without  a  breath  of  wind. 

Monday,  24^7*. — I  went  to  Lady  Wellington's,*  the 
new  Marchioness.  She  appeared  to  have  suffered  a  great 
deal  from  the  uncertainty  which  everybody  had  been  in, 
for  more  than  a  fortnight,  and  she  spoke  with  an  enthu- 
siasm and  a  worship  of  her  hero  which  was  truly  edifying. 
She  goes  to  London  to-day  to  be  present  when  the  Te 
Deum  is  sung  in  the  Portuguese  ambassador's  chapel  in 
honour  of  the  victory. 

Worthing. — Friday,  September  &h. — Drove  to  Broad- 
water,  a  village  about  a  mile  distant  from  Worthing. 
The  church  is  very  old,  has  belonged  to  an  abbey,  and 
there  is  also  a  fine  monument  erected  to  the  family 
De  la  Warr,  who  formerly  possessed  a  great  deal  of  the 
country  round.  It  is  spoiled  by  white-wash,  but  deserves 
to  be  restored. 

Sunday, ^th. — Drove  with  Lady  Dudley f  in  her  carriage 
and  six  horses  as  far  as  Shankbury.  It  is  the  highest  of 
the  South  Downs,  from  which  there  is  a  splendid  view  on 
all  sides.  The  extraordinary  clearness  of  the  day  per- 
mitted us  to  see  it  in  a  manner  that  does  not  happen 
three  times  a  year.  We  returned  through  the  village  of 
Sompting,  the  prettiest  I  have  seen  in  these  suburbs, 
situated  upon  the  rising  Downs,  shaded  by  fine  trees,  and 
having  a  view  of  the  sea  across  pretty  meadows,  termi- 
nating each  side  by  woods. 

Thursday,  10^. — Went  to  Tunbridge  Wells. 

Saturday,  October  3rd. — I  set  out  to  see  Knowle  with 
Mrs.  Pole  in  her  landau  and  four  horses,  and  with  Lady 

*  Hon.  Catherine  Pakenham,  third  daughter  of  Edward  Michael  Lord 
Longford,  married  1806 ;  died  1831. 

t  Julia  Lady  Dudley,  second  daughter  of  Godfrey  Boseville,  Esq.,  of 
Gussthwaithe,  Yorkshire. 


1812]  THE   FRENCH   AT  MOSCOW.  507 

Burgh ersh  *  and  Charles  Bagot.f  The  carriage  took  us 
to  the  door  of  the  house.  The  outside  is  very  beautiful, 
like  Oxford  Colleges ;  the  first  court  much  resembles 
Oriel  College.  All  is  well  kept.  The  inside  does  not 
correspond  with  the  outside,  or  rather  does  so,  too  much, 
because  the  inside  too  much  resembles  the  interior  of  a 
college  for  a  nobleman's  house.  Long  narrow  galleries, 
badly  lighted,  and  small  rooms  not  en  suite.  There  is  not 
a  single  room  in  which  one  felt  it  would  be  possible  to 
establish  oneself  comfortably.  The  apartment  which  the 
family  occupy,  and  which  all  the  preceding  families  have 
occupied,  is  au  rez  de  chaussee,  and  could  perhaps  be  snug, 
but  there  is  no  comfortable  furniture,  nor  even  furniture 
enough.  There  are  some  very  good  portraits  by  Vandyke, 
by  Sir  A.  More,  and  Jansen ;  but  many  to  which  they 
have  given  any  names  they  pleased.  There  are  several 
of  Sir  Joshua  Eeynolds'  in  the  most  perfect  preservation. 
Amongst  others,  '  The  Fortune-Teller '  and  *  The  Counts 
Ugolino.'  I  had  a  higher  idea  of  the  latter  than  I  have 
upon  a  second  view.  The  figures  do  not  group  well. 
Ugolino  and  the  second  son  are  on  one  side  the  picture, 
and  the  three  other  sons  on  the  other  side.  The  painter 
has  tried  to  unite  them  by  a  kind  of  wall  or  enclosure  of 
stone,  which,  to  my  mind,  has  not  succeeded ;  and  the 
head  of  the  old  man  is  the  head  of  the  old  beggar,  of 
whom  it  is,  in  fact,  the  portrait,  but  it  is  a  portrait  and 
nothing  else. 

Friday,  $th. — Walked  on  the  Pantiles,  read  the  news- 
papers, which  contained  the  extraordinary  letter  of  Lord 
Cathcart  announcing  the  great  defeat  of  the  French,  and 
their  nineteenth  bulletin  dated  Moscow  ! ! !  J  One  might 

*  Daughter  to  Mrs.  Wellesley  Pole. 

t  Hon.  Sir  Charles  Bagot,  married,  1806,  to  Mrs.  Wellesley  Pole's 
daughter. 

f  The  battle  of  Borodino  (called  by  the  French  Moskwa)  was  claimed  as 
a  victory  by  both  sides.  Seven  days  after  the  Russians  were  singing  Te 
Deum  for  their  victory,  the  French  entered  Moscow.— Ann.  Reg. 


508  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1812 

be  almost  amused  at  the  Ministers  being  credulous  enough 
to  believe  all,  and  then  to  let  all  their  credulity  appear. 
Their  friends  thought  to  make  their  excuse  by  saying 
that  the  French  bulletin  was  false  ! ! 
_  Friday,  23rd. — Returned  to  North  Audley  Street. 

Tuesday,  November  10th. — I  went  to  Lady  Crewe's, 
who  gave  a  sort  of  luncheon  dinner,  to  which  we  were 
invited,  to  meet  Dr.  Burney  and  his  sister  Madame 
D'Arblay.*  They  were  neither  of  them  there.  When  we 
entered  a  dozen  ladies  were  sitting  around  the  fire  with 
Miladi.  Lawrence,  the  painter,  the  only  gentleman.  Dr. 
Burney  was  ill  and  could  not  come,  but  at  last  Madame 
D'Arblay  arrived.  I  was  very  glad  to  see  her  again.  She 
is  wonderfully  improved  in  good  looks  in  ten  years, 
which  have  usually  a  very  different  effect  at  an  age  when 
people  begin  to  fall  off.  Her  face  has  acquired  expression 
and  a  charm  which  it  never  had  before.  She  has  gained 
an  embonpoint  very  advantageous  to  her  face.  We  did 
not  talk  much  about  France  ;  but  with  her  intelligence 
there  was  a  great  deal  she  could  tell,  and  much  she  could 
not,  having  a  husband  and  a  French  establishment,  to 
L  which  she  was  to  return  after  the  winter. 

Monday,  %3rd. — In  the  evening  we  went  to  the  play 
at  Drury  Lane  in  Mr.  Coutts's  box.  The  new  theatre 
has  the  finest  form  that  I  have  seen  here,  or  perhaps 
elsewhere.  The  proscenium  is  superb,  though  wide,  for 
the  arrangement  of  the  scenes,  and  the  exits  and  entries 
necessary  on  the  English  stage.  The  ornaments  in 
front  of  the  boxes  are  well  devised — gay  and  brilliant 
without  being  gaudy. 

Thursday,  2Sth. — The  Princess's  carriage  came  with 
Lady  C.  Lindsay.  We  set  out  on  a  thorough  November 
day,  and  at  four  o'clock  we  found  the  Princess  with  the 
luncheon  still  before  her.  We  stayed  talking  with  her  till 

*  Miss  Burney,  authoress  of '  Evelina/  '  Cecilia/  &c. 


1812]  LETTER   FROM    HON.    R.    K.    CRAVEN.  509 

seven  o'clock,  when  she  dismissed  us  to  dress.  I  was 
ready  in  ten  minutes,  yet  she  was  already  at  table  when 
I  went  down.  The  evening  passed  as  usual,  talking  till 
nearly  one  o'clock. 

Friday,  December  4th. — I  went  again  with  the  Hard- 
wickes  to  see  the  gas  lights.  The  proprietor's  house  was 
all  lighted  with  it  for  us  to  see.  After  having  well  studied 
the  effects,  we  went  down  in  the  ceDar,  or  rather  the 
kitchen,  of  the  house  to  examine  the  furnaces,  &c.  &c. 

Sunday,  \%th. — I  have  had  a  long  visit  from  the  Duke 
of  Devonshire.  I  talked  to  him  about  his  papers,  and 
showed  him  the  arrangement  that  I  have  made  of  those 
which  are  curious.  He  was  so  pleased,  and  so  well 
understood  the  assistance  that  I  could  be  of  to  him,  whilst 
amusing  myself  in  making  the  researches  that  I  wish  for 
now,  that  he  has  promised  to  entrust  to  me  a  quantity 
of  letters  of  last  century  that  have  not  been  arranged. 

Tuesday,  15iA. — Went  to  Wimpole. 

These  letters,  received  during  the  year  1812,  being  a 
narrative  of  the  tour  to  the  East  by  Mr.  Gell  and  Mr. 
Craven,  have  been  placed  in  order  at  the  end  of  the 
year,  in  preference  to  placing  them  according  to  the 
dates. 

Eleusis,  Atticshire,  Thursday,  Feb.  27,  1812. 

MY  DEAR  FRIENDS, — You  will  be  quite  mistaken  if  you  faacy 
that  the  pleasure  of  dating  a  letter  from  Vaghi  Colli,  Ameni 
Prati,  is  my  chief  inducement  for  writing,  a  very  rainy  day 
you  will  allow  to  be  a  much  better  occasion,  but  the  best  of  all 
is  that  I  have  meant  to  do  so  for  this  long  time  past,  and  now 
that  I  see  no  immediate  possibility  of  dispatching  my  per- 
formance' to  England,  I  can  no  longer  refrain,  and  so  I  shall 
begin  with  informing  you  that  the  whole  mission  is  at  a  dead 
standstill.  We  are  at  present  at  Athens  waiting  for  our  firman, 
which  we  expected  to  find  there,  and  without  which  there  is  no 
balm  in  Gilead,  or  digging  at  Samos,  Ephesus,  Sardis,  or  poking 


510  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1312 

for  spangles  in  the  Pactolus.  We  thought  at  first  of  going  to 
Smyrna,  and  waiting  for  it  there,  but  there  are  robbers  at 
Sunium  and  French  privateers  throughout  the  Archipelago ;  so 
we  have  sent  the  vessel  we  had  hired  to  know  from  the  Smyrna 
consul  what  we  are  to  do,  and  are  now  waiting  its  return  in 
trembling  expectation ;  and  in  the  mean  time  are  come  to 
Elucidate  the  mysteries  of  Ceres.  I  wish  I  could  give  you  a 
bird's-eye  view  of  our  present  apartment  and  also  sketches  of 
our  different  positions.  Grell  is  sitting  on  the  floor  making  a 
map  of  this  place,  and  fighting  the  splashing  of  the  rain  that 
beats  in  upon  his  paper  through  the  only  window  we  can  suffer 
to  have  open.  I  am  sitting  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  fire,  on 
my  own  bed,  my  table  consisting  of  a  pair  of  blue  trowsers 
bundled  up  into  an  inclined  plane,  that  I  may  catch  the  few 
rays  of  light  that  are  to  be  had,  and  at  the  same  time  the  many 
fleas  which  appear  inclined  to  read  this  letter.  At  my  feet  sits, 
or  rather  lies,  Mr.  Bedford,  in  one  of  those  painful  attitudes 
that  make  one  feel  the  cruel  inconvenience  of  one's  own  legs. 
He  is  mending  the  fractures  of  broken  columns,  architraves, 
which  are  scattered  in  all  directions  about  this  village,  by 
drawing  them  in  a  perfect  state,  such  as  you  will  see  them  in 
when  published  by  the  Society  of  Dilettanti.  Then  our  other 
artist,  Mr.  Gandy,  is  in  the  distance,  trying  in  vain  to  make  a 
lai-ge  writing  desk  lie  flat  and  steady  on  the  top  of  a  small 
round  trunk.  The  perspective  is  filled  up  by  avenues  of  pots 
and  pans,  garlands  of  onions,  and  draperies  of  dusty  cobwebs. 
The  Albanian  peasant  to  whom  the  mansion  belongs  occa- 
sionally comes  in  to  see  what  he  can  steal,  under  pretence  of 
making  up  the  fire,  in  doing  which  he  generally  involves  us  in 
a  cloud  of  smoke  and  dust  for  some  minutes ;  but  think  not  it 
was  always  thus,  for  till  this  day  the  weather  was  so  fine,  that  I 
shaved  every  morning  on  the  flat  roof  of  our  neighbour's  house, 
where  we  also  had  our  breakfast ;  and  we  found  it  so  warm  in 
our  perambulations,  that  a  sudden  thought  struck  us,  and  we 
spontaneously  left  off  cravats,  and  I  have  had  some  notion  of 
dismissing  other  cumbersome  articles  of  dress.  Anacharsis  will 
have  it  that  this  place  is  very  pretty :  I  maintain  it  is  only 
agreeable  and  cheerful,  and  gives  one  perfectly  the  idea  of 
Proserpine  gathering  anemones,  the  beauty  and  quantity  of 
which  is  to  this  present  time  something  quite  astonishing. 


1812]  LETTER   FROM    HON.    R.    K.    CRAVEN.  511 

I  conclude  that  you  are  all  in  London,  and  if  so,  Sir  Harry 
or  Lady  Charlotte  have  probably  told  you  all  our  adventures 
previous  to  our  arrival  at  Athens — such  as  the  festivities  of 
Zante,  our  risks  and  perils  in  a  gunboat,  our  shipwreck  on  a 
desolate  island,  our  being  shot  at  by  an  Etolian  savage,  our 
bathing  at  Patras,  our  visit  to  the  Bay  of  Corinth,  and  finally, 
our  eating  pancakes  for  breakfast.  We  are  the  only  Englishmen 
just  now  in  the  town  of  Minerva,  but  there  are  four  Northern 
artists,  that  is  Germen,  as  Gell  calls  them,  two  of  which  call 
themselves  Barons.  Us  mangent  un  coffre  et  rotent  autour  de 
la  table  with  great  effect,  especially  in  Italian,  where  molto 

i^Pi  C\  r^P'YtP 

j  jj    and  molto   ,         stand  always  for  much  skin  and  pain ; 

but  they  are  very  unassuming  urbane  persons  in  other  re- 
spects. We  have  besides  Mr.  Fauval,  the  French  Consul, 
who  is  the  original  c'est  moi  qui  Vai  decouvert,  and  conse- 
quently very  entertaining.  The  country  about  Athens  is  by  no 
means  so  beautiful  as  most  of  the  other  parts  of  Greece  which 
I  have  yet  seen,  and  the  present  town  is,  moreover,  placed  on 
the  wrong  side  of  the  citadel,  but  it  is  worth  coming  all  the 
way  from  England  to  see  the  temple  of  Theseus  only.  In  point 
of  landscape,  nothing  can  exceed  Zante  in  all  its  parts,  which  is 
an  eternal  garden,  but  will  soon  be  spoilt  by  the  English — I 
mean  as  a  residence.  You  have  both  been  enough  abroad  to 
know  what  nuisances  one's  countrymen  are  unless  they  are  as 
agreeable  as  one's  own  self,  which  never  happens ;  which  re- 
minds me  of  what  rascals  the  Greeks  are.  Oh  !  you  can 
imagine  nothing  like  their  lying,  thieving,  cheating,  overreach- 
ing, intriguing,  caballing  and  plotting.  With  that  it  is  very 
difficult  to  keep  angry  with  them  long,  as  they  are  never 
ashamed  or  enraged  at  being  detected  in  their  iniquities,  and 
their  gaiety  is  never  at  all  impaired  by  your  reproaches,  and  as 
they  are  all  equally  bad,  you  cannot  help  employing  them  the 
next  time  they  come  with  a  smiling  face. 

Gell  is  quite  furious  at  my  finding  time  to  write,  never  con- 
sidering that  he  passes  whole  mornings  in  taking  angles  to  form 
half  a  map,  while  I  scramble  about  doing  absolutely  nothing ; 
though  I  believe  I  have  really  found  out  the  gap  through 
which,  as  my  servant  calls  it,  the  devil  took  away  that  Princess 
to  h — I.  It  is  quite  surprising  what  an  enthusiasm  has  seized 


512  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1312 

all  our  D'rumsticks  for  antiquities,  and  with  what  avidity  they 
undertake  the  most  laborious  journeys  over  rocks  and  precipices 
in  search  of  broken  columns,  when  they  perhaps  would  grudge 
carrying  a  note  from  Albany  to  Portland  Place.  One  of  them 
passes  his  life  in  digging  for  our  artists,  and  was  so  overjoyed 
at  having  part  of  a  peppermint,  which  you  would  never  guess 
to  mean  a  pediment. 

By  the  bye,  I  believe  Ceres,  or  her  descendants  the  Greek 
saints,  have  great  objections  to  have  their  monuments  examined 
and  turned  about  by  English  hands,  for  Gell  and  his  servant 
were  stopped  in  a  research  of  that  kind  by  an  unknown  but 
threatening  voice  which  bade  them  'dig  no  more;'  and  the 
latter  dreamt  of  it,  and  woke  us  all  by  hallooing  aloud :  for  my 
part  I  have  seen  the  shades  of  Ceres  and  Proserpine,  and  I 
expect  more  visions.  Talking  of  visions,  I  am  tormented  by 
bad  dreams,  and  one  of  them  is  that  Lady  C.  Campbell  is  dead ; 
it  has  returned  so  often  that  it  begins  to  make  me  unhappy,  and 
I  long  to  return  to  Athens  for  no  other  reason  than  the  hope  of 
getting  rid  of  it. 

This  place  is  entirely  inhabited  by  Albanians  or  their  grand- 
sons, and  these  have  the  prettiest  dresses  you  can  imagine.  I 
went  into  one  of  their  cottages  yesterday  to  see  a  boy  that  was 
ill  of  an  intermittent  fever,  and  the  child  of  the  house,  about  a 
year  and  a  half  old,  seeing  something  strange  in  a  dark  dress 
(their's  are  always  white),  began  to  scream ;  when  its  grand- 
mother, to  pacify  it,  told  it  I  was  a  dog,  and  began  patting  and 
coaxing  me,  which  so  encouraged  the  brat  that  it  came  up  to 
me  and  made  doggish  noises  at  me,  and  wanted  to  put  some 
bread  into  my  mouth,  which  you  will  allow  was  quite  a  new 
adventure  and  mentioned  in  nobody's  travels. 

Grell  has  had  two  fits  of  the  gout  since  we  left  England,  but 
the  Eau  Medicinale  has  cured  him.  As  to  me,  I  never  was  so 
well  in  all  my  life,  not  even  when  I  wrote  my  name  so  often  on 
the  wall  at  Florence,  which  you  afterwards  saw,  which  was  the 
beginning  of  our  acquaintance. 

Eleusis,  Sunday,  March  1. 

Good  fortune  has  sent  the  Frederick  stein  frigate  into  the 
Pira3us,  not  to  take  us  to  Smyrna  as  we  expected,  but  to  carry 
this  to  Malta,  where  it  is  going  with  dispatches ;  so  to-morrow 
morning  I  ride  off  to  Athens  to  see  the  captain  and  commit  my 


1812]         LETTER   FROM   THE   HON.   KEPPEL   CRAVEN.  513 

letter  to  his  care.  We  learn  that  Frederick  North  is  at  Ohio, 
his  nephew,  Mr.  Douglas,  gone  to  Eussia,  and  Cockerell  the 
architect  reaping  Ionian  antiquities  long  before  us.  Poor  Grell 
is  not  quite  as  well  as  I  wish,  and  I  apprehend  a  return  of  gout. 
It  is  quite  English  March  weather,  with  rain  and  hail,  but 
though  in  a  mud  cottage,  we  have  excellent  fires,  and  when  it 
holds  up,  it  is  so  fine  and  summery  that  I  walked  yesterday 
eight  miles  to  the  top  of  a  horned  mountain,  and  bathed  in  the 
sea  when  I  returned,  finding  it  so  hot.  . 

I  must  now  take  my  leave  of  you,  quite  delighted  at  finding 
a  chance  of  the  letter  going.  Anacharsis  sends  all  manner  of 
loves  to  both  of  you  and  Mr.  Berry,  to  whom  you  will  please  to 
give  my  kindest  regards.  Also  say  a  thousand  kind  things  for 
us  both  to  dear  Mrs.  Darner,  and  if  you  ever  meet  the  '  mode- 
rate horror,'  tell  her  I  often  think  of  her. 
And  believe  me,  dearest  friends, 

Yours  most  sincerely  and  affectionately, 

R.  K.  CRAVEN. 


From  Sir  Wm.  Gell  to  the  Miss  Berrys. 

Smyrna,  May  7,  1812. 

MOST  AGREEABLE  PEOPLE, —  You  are  always  so  kind  and  so 
amiable  to  me  that  you  stand  instead  of  father,  mother,  and 
family  to  me,  and  your  house  instead  of  an  at-home  in  the 
country,  and  that  is  my  excuse  for  writing  to  you  as  if  by  my 
writing  I  prevented  you  from  forgetting  me  amidst  the  gaieties 
of  London.  We  are  at  length  arrived  at  Smyrna,  not,  indeed, 
much  the  worse  for  wear,  but  some  three  months  later  than  we 
intended,  on  account  of  the  horrors  we  have  been  submitting 
to  on  account  of  the  pirates  and  Mainiote  thieves,  who  cut 
off  noses  and  ears  by  way  of  the  least  harm  that  can  happen 
to  you,  and  who  have,  except  for  armed  vessels,  completely 
cleared  the  Archipelago  from  everything  like  a  sail  or  an  oar. 
We  have  done,  however,  a  great  deal,  though  we  have  not  done 
one  single  thing  we  were  sent  about;  for  instance,  we  have 
entirely  discovered  and  put  on  a  new  footing  the  Temple  of 
Ceres  at  Eleusis,  we  have  restored  a  Temple  of  Diana  Propylaea, 
which  people  never  dreamed  of,  and  we  have  completely  arranged 
the  Propylaea  as  large  as  those  of  Athens,  without  wanting  a 

VOL.  II.  L  L 


514 


MISS  BEERY'S  CORRESPONDENCE. 


[1812 


single  member.  All  this  is  much  better  than  the  Asiatic  busi- 
ness in  point  of  interest ;  so  this  is  a  plan  of  it,  for  you  and 
Mrs.  Darner : — 1,  Temple  of  Ceres,  about  180  feet  square,  with 
a  portico  of  twelve  columns  in  front ;  what  think  you  of  that  ? 
5,  a  portal  of  the  Corinthian  order ;  2,  the  Propylsea,  the  inner 
ranges  of  which  are  Ionic ;  3,  a  great  pavement ;  4,  the  Temple 
of  Diana  Propylsea ;  6,  6,  6,  wall  of  the  peribolus.  All  these 
things  are  of  white  marble,  and  we  are  ready  in  between  thirty 
•  nd  forty  plates.  There  is  something  for  you.  We  think  of 


going  hence  to  Sardis  in  a  few  days,  but  the  Turks  are  levying 
troops,  and  therefore  the  shops  are  shut  for  fear  of  the  said 
gentlemen  helping  themselves  to  what  suits  them,  and  all  for 
nothing,  so  we  cannot  get  what  we  want.  We  have  reports  of 
plagues,  which  I  don't,  however,  see  much  reason  to  believe  in, 
though  I  am  certain  Sir  Harry  will  send  for  a  doctor  the  instant 
he  hears  of  anything  from  Turkey.  The  worst  thing  I  now 
hear  of,  is  of  the  Aga  of  Denislen,  who  commands  the  cities  of 
Laodicaea,  their  Apolis  and  Aphrodisias,  and  who  is  now  in  so 
violent  and  outrageous  a  state  of  rebellion  that  nothing  can  touch 
his  feelings.  We  are  now  trying  to  negociate  him  through 
other  rebels,  his  friends,  but  I  have  as  yet  heard  of  no  results. 
At  all  events  I  shall  do  something,  and  have  not  the  least  doubt 
of  Samos  and  Sardis,  Patara  and  Telmissus.  They  threaten 
me  with  the  plague  at  Tralles,  in  addition  to  the  terrible  Aga  of 
Denislen,  who,  if  he  cannot  be  calmed,  will  jockey  me  out  of 
four  of  my  places.  I  must  inform  you,  however,  that  the 
restorers  of  temples,  as  they  thought  after  Vitruvius,  who  have 
published  the  Dilettanti  work,  are  considerably  blown  up,  and 
are  accused  of  having  searched  so  little  that  they  have  falsified 


1812]  LETTER   FROM   SIR   W.    GELL.  515 

the  temples,  particularly  that  of  Bacchus  at  Teos,  most  cruelly. 
Mr.  Cockerell,  I  understand,  says  the  building  is  quite  of  another 
shape  from  that  represented.     The  truth  is,  the  thing  was  not 
understood  in  those  days ;  however,  we  shall  probably  see  what 
truth  there  is  in  this.     We  know  that  the  Dilly  have  published 
Ceres  at  Eleusis  with  six  columns,  and  we  know  that  we  find 
twelve,  and  that  it  was  like  a  Moorish  mosque,  all  supported 
with  pillars,  dotted  about  like  the  mosque  at  Cordova.     This 
country  is  exquisitely  beautiful  and  well  wooded;   the  town 
I  do  not  much  patronise.     The  English  are,  I  think,  rather 
gone  down  in  the  world  since  my  last  visit  to  these  countries. 
The  Dardanelles  expedition  and  Egyptian   have  done  us  no 
good,  though  Miss  Agnes  and  the  Talents  planned  them.     And 
I  shall  seal  to  you  with  a  seal  I  bought,  which  was  that  of 
one  of  the   Persian   satraps   slain  at  the  battle  of  Talavera 
— I  mean  Marathon.    I  don't  think  we  shall  be  home  before 
March  1813,  when  I  hope  you  will  all  have  good  fires  to  receive 
us.    We  have  had  here  the  worst  winter  ever  known  ;  it  snowed 
three  or  four  hours  one  day  at  Athens,  and  was  cold  for  six  or 
seven.     I  have  had  ninety  gouts,  and  drunk  half  my  cellar  of 
Husson.     Moreover,  I  got  it  three  or  four  times  by  going  up 
mountains  to  make  a  map  of  the  sacred  way  from  Athens  to 
Eleusis,  which  '  though  I  say  it  as  should  not,'  is  by  far  the 
best  map  ever  yet  seen  of  any  country,  which  I  mention  to  you 
in  private,  that  you  may  have  the  penetration  of  discovering  its 
merit,  for  of  course  among  the  fine  architectural  drawings,  an 
unfortunate  map  will  make  no  figure  at  all,  though  it  cost  me 
a  great  deal  of  trouble  and  gout,  and,  moreover,  between  sleep- 
ing and  waking,  always  gave  me  deep  ravines  and  glens  in  my 
knees  and  ancles  all  the  time  I  was  laid  up.     I  hope  you  will 
not  be  wicked  enough  to  omit  writing  to  me  at  this  place,  which 
I  see  by  my  instructions  are  our  head-quarters ;  and  as  Lady 
Hardwicke  has  recovered  the  art  of  speaking,  and  is  therefore 
no   longer  fit  to  represent  the  sign  of  the  'good  woman,'  I 
beg  you  will  present  me  most  piously  to  said  Lady  and  her 
Lord.     Pray  don't  suffer  Mr.  Berry  to  set  the  room  to  rights, 
or  to  prevent  the  lighting  of  the  fire,  for  I  am  sure  you  are 
all  dying  of  cold.     Adieu !  my  dears ;  I  kiss  Miss  Agnes  be- 
tween the  eyes  and  salute  the  curls  which  adorn  your  head 
when  you  are  in  a  gala  dress.     I  would  send  something  kind 

1  L    2 


516 


MISS  BERRY'S  CORRESPONDENCE. 


[1812 


to  the  Marchioness  of  Davies  Sl,  and  to  Mr.  Moore,  who  would 

*  have  lent  me  his  carriage  if  I  dared.     Ah,  Mrs.  Harrot,  who 

came  from  the  garret  when  your  mistress  laughed  at  the  Italian 


A   THEEMIAN   LADY.* 

in  my  letter,  remember  how  you  cheated  us  out  of  the  York- 
shire pudding  twice,  and  expect  not  a  fig  from  Smyrna. 

Your  ever  affectionate, 

ANACHAKSIS. 

Pray  remember  me  most  cordially  to  the  Daughter  of 
Phidias. 

*  '  What  is  beauty  but  a  name  ? ' — that  is,  observe  the  beautiful  Lady 
of  Thermia,  an  island  at  which  we  anchored.  '  Beauty  when  unadorned 
's  adorn'd  the  most,' — that  is,  if  people  wear  red  silk  stockings  stuffed  at  the 
ancles  with  cotton,  put  on  fifteen  jackets  and  flounces  all  of  different  colours, 
they  must  look  like  feather-beds  and  walk  like  geese.  There  is  a  beauty  for 
you  who  enslaves  all  beholders  at  Thermia. 


1812]  LETTER   FROM   SIR   W.    GELL.  517 

From  the  Same  to  the  Same. 

Cnidos,  July  3,  1812. 

This  letter  ought  to  be  addressed  to  all  lovers  of  retirement, 
for  there  is  not  a  soul  except  our  own  party  or  its  adherents 
within  three  hours,  which  may  indeed  be  all  the  better  for  us, 
as  the  whole  country  has  the  plague,  from  Pergamo  to  Attalia. 
We  have  voyaged  in  pursuit  of  Dillydandyisms,  sometimes  with 
and  sometimes  without  success,  for  the  last  two  mouths,  in  little 
boats ;  and  as  our  course  was  southward,  and  a  strong  N.  wind 
called  Meltame  blows  all  the  summer,  we  have  always  termi- 
nated our  trips  in  a  very  short  time ;  but  that  is  not  all :  the 
Asiatic  terra  firma  is  plagued,  the  islands  will  not  receive  you 
for  fear  of  the  plague,  you  have  French  privateers  in  all  the 
gulphs,and  behind  every  rock  you  are  in  danger  of  pouncing  upon 
the  Mainiote  pirates, — so  that  I  don't  know  whether  it  will  be 
possible  to  avoid  such  a  series  of  plagues,  or  jockey  such  a 
variety  of  thieves.     At  Samos,  one  of  our  objects  of  research, 
we  lived  three  weeks  in  a  magazine  near  the  ruins,  but  the 
temple  has  only  half  of  one  column  standing,  and  the  brutes  of 
the  place  would  not  let  us  dig ;  in  spite  of  which,  however,  we 
have  a  temple  about  350  feet  long,  ten  columns  by  twenty  of 
the  Ionic  order,  near  seven  feet  diameter ;  we  have  a  sacred  way 
from  it  to  the  city  ;  and  we  have  a  large  city,  the  walls  of  which 
are  very  perfect,  with  an  agora,  of  which  we  have  made  out 
something  with  ornaments,  something  new,  and  the  remains  of 
the  great  mole  which  was  120  feet  high.     We  came  to  Samos 
from  Scio,  where,  oh !  ye  gods,  what  millions  of  gardens  and 
picturesque  towers  in  them,  and  orange  and  lemon  flowers  with- 
out end  !    Thence  Craven  departed  to  Constantinople,  where  he 
will  be  lucky  enough  to  be  presented  by  or  with  Mr.  Liston,  who 
just  arrived  in  time.     We  should  now  expect  him  to  return  to 
us,  but  think  between  all  the  crossings  and  jostlings  we  have 
had  in  a  very  zigzag  course,  the  pirates,  privateers,  and  the 
plague,  he  will  be  a  full  month  in  finding  us  out.    From  Samos 
we  took  our  boat  and  sailed  towards  Cos,  with  a  strong  wind, 
which  would  have  just  carried  us  to  Gaithronisi,  into  the  mouths 
of  the  thieves,  had  we  not  met  with  a  boat  which  had  just 
escaped  them.     We  immediately  turned  about,  and  were  going 
to  give  up  Asia  entirely,  and  retire  to  Delos  till  the  plague  was 


518  MISS  BERRY'S  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1312 

over,  but  we  had  scarcely  reached  the  Cape  of  Trogylium,  under 
M*  Mycale,  when  a  strong  breeze  sprang  up  again  and  tore  us 
along  to  windward  of  the  robbers,  across  the  mouth  of  the 
Meander,  to  the  port  of  the  Jeronta,  or  the  oracle  of  the  Bran- 
chidse,  near  Miletus.  This  was  a  little  corner  peopled  by 
Athenians  and  Salaminians,  where  they  kept  a  kind  of  guard 
against  infection,  though  not  very  strictly.  There  we  examined 
the  temple  of  Apollo  Didymseus,  of  which  the  ruins  are  stupen- 
dous ;  the  columns  are  Ionic,  but  the  Dilettanti  have  published 
their  capitals ;  however  the  height,  and  plan,  and  almost  everything 
else  were  wanting.  How  the  late  mission  did  not  manage  to 
give  more  details  we  could  not  conceive.  We  set  to  work, 
therefore,  and  can  now  give  you  views,  a  map  of  the  place,  a 
plan,  section,  elevation,  and  the  order  complete ;  besides  digging 
up  all  but  one  of  the  statues,  which  are  the  oldest  specimen  of 
sculpture  in  Greece,  with  the  Boustrophedon  inscription,  which 
is  ibis,  on  one  of  them.  We  have 
drawn  and  measured  the  whole  set 
of  these  gentry,  and  as  they  are  in- 

i       vi       •  •    .1       r      i    i        T     i.    11     u 

valuable  in  point  of  style,  I  shall  be 
much  obliged  to  you  to  communicate 

the  account  of  them  to  Mr.  Knight,  and  those  who  are  or  may 
be  concerned  in  the  second  volume  of  Statues  by  the  Dilly's, 
as  they  will  make  a  very  prominent  figure  in  the  same.  That 
with  the  inscription  has  lost  its  body,  but  there  are  several  others 
much  more  Egyptian  than  Greek.  As  to  the  temple,  it  was 
one  of  the  largest  in  the  world,  and  the  heap  of  ruins,  though 
only  three  columns  are  standing,  is  wonderful.  It  had  ten 
columns  by  twenty-one,  was  not  quite  so  broad  as  that  at  Samos, 
but  a  little  longer  ;  there  were  five  or  six  rows  of  columns  sixty- 
four  feet  high,  between  the  front  and  the  Pronaos,  all  which  we 
have  established,  and  the  whole  disposition  of  the  pilasters 
within ;  some  of  the  same  are  given  in  the  first  volume  of  the 
'  Ionian  Antiquities.'  The  columns  are  about  seven  feet  diame- 
ter, but  being  so  very  tall  one  can  only  wonder  that  any  remain. 
The  ornaments  are  very  elegant,  but  the  marble  is  not  so  fine 
as  the  Athenian,  and  the  whole  gives  one  the  idea  of  being  built 
for  the  benefit  of  the  first  earthquake  instead  of  being  erected 
for  eternity,  like  those  of  European  Greece.  We  sailed  from 
Jeronta  to  Cos,  where  we  remained  only  two  days,  and  then 


1812]  LETTER   FROM   SIR  W.    GELL.  519 

went  to  Halicarnassus  (Budrom)  on  the  opposite  coast  of  Caria, 
where  the  Bey  kept  guard  against  the  plague.  It  is  a  most 
beautiful  spot,  and  the  tomb  of  Mausolus  I  have  no  doubt  is 
now  converted  into  the  foundations  of  the  castle,  which  is  a 
picturesque  building  of  the  time  of  the  Knights  of  Rhodes. 
From  Halicarnassus  we  sailed  in  about  three  hours  to  this  place, 
Cnidos,  Capo  Crio,  or  Takir  Boroun.  One  would  not  have  ex- 
pected that  anything  dedicated  to  Venus  should  have  so  com- 
pletely changed  its  nature  as  to  have  become  the  Cold  Cape,  as 
it  is  now  called.  The  place  is  the  most  curious  one  ever  saw, 
but  very  convenient  for  trade  or  defence,  if  its  inhabitants  could 
have  lived  without  eating,  for  there  is  no  cultivable  ground  in 
sight,  yet  the  city  must  have  been  very  large.  The  island  is 
defended  toward  the  sea  by  the  most  magnificent  precipices  I 
ever  saw.  The  walls  and  towers  are  tremendously  strong,  and 
nothing  can  exceed  the  beauty  of  the  ports  or  the  magnificence 
of  the  city  seen  from  the  island ;  where,  besides  many  terraces 
of  the  most  ponderous  masonry,  you  have  in  sight  a  theatre  of 
white  marble  between  two  terraces,  on  one  of  which  we  have  a 
Doric  portico  of  more  than  fifty  columns,  300  feet  long,  over-r 
looked  by  a  Corinthian  temple  of  white  marble,  and  on  the  other 
side  a  terrace,  with  what  I  have  not  yet  discovered.  We  are 
living  in  holes  and  corners,  among  ruined  Greek  churches 
and  bushes ;  but  upon  the  whole  the  place  is  not  unpleasant, 
as  the  wind  is  constant  and  furious,  so  that  we  don't  die  of  heat, 
as  we  otherwise  should  do.  In  the  winter  Capo  Crio  must  be 
the  devil  of  a  place ;  and  certainly  the  sea  which  flies  over  it 
now,  must  then  have  draggled  poor  Venus  most  woefully.  She 
really  might  be  said  to  rise  out  of  the  froth  of  the  sea  here,  for 
the  spray  almost  reaches  us,  and  coming  round  the  corner,  I 
never  saw  anything  so  frightful  as  the  rocks,  so  terrible  as  the 
whirlwind,  or  so  torn  into  dust  as  the  waves. 

July  6. 

Animals,  which  the  sun  invigorates  at  first,  die  of  too  large  a 
dose — a  moral  reflection  upon  the  grasshoppers,  and  locusts,  and 
fleas.  The  former  have  lived  upon  my  pantaloons,  and  the 
latter  upon  me  for  some  days ;  but  the  sun  has  now  silenced 
completely  the  singing  and  skipping  of  the  whole  party,  and 
they  are  giving  up  the  ghost  and  drying  up,  post  haste,  in  all 
quarters.  Yesterday  we  broiled  to  the  tombs  which  adorned  the 


520  MISS  BERRY'S  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1512 

sacred  way.  The  great  people  must  have  had  the  plague,  there 
are  so  many ;  and  a  great  deal  of  money,  they  are  so  solid ;  and 
have  been  very  fine  fellows,  for  most  of  them  are  styled  heroes. 

It  saves  a  great  deal  of  ex- 
pense in  paper  to  say  they  were 
some  thus,  and  others  plain 
towers,  with  massy  cornices  and 
the  sarcophagus  within.  We 
have  found  a  temple  of  the 
Ionic  order,  very  small  but  very 
beautiful ;  but  upon  the  whole  we  have  every  reason  to  believe 
ourselves  cruelly  indebted  to  the  Komans  for  our  specimens  of 
architecture  here.  We  have  had  a  visit  from  the  Aga,  and  as 
he  fell  in  love  with  my  sword,  which  I  could  not  spare,  I  gave 
him  some  pistol  barrels,  with  which  he  rode  off  on  a  mule,  too 
happy,  having  disentangled  with  much  labour  his  Tartar  panta- 
loons from  the  bushes  and  stones.  They  are  made  of  about 
forty  ells  of  thick  sky-blue  cloth.  He  brought  us  two  or  three 
lambs ;  some  yaunti  or  sour  milk,  like  milk  and  lemons ;  some 
Kaimak,  which  is  a  thick  edition  of  the  film  on  boil'd  milk,  very 
good  in  tea  ;  and  he  sent  us  as  many  people  as  we  want  to  dig 
at  Venus,  Apollo,  and  Neptune,  so  that  upon  the  whole  he  was 
of  great  use ;  besides  telling  all  his  people  to  bring  us  what  we 
wanted.  The  natives  are  all  Turks ;  they  are  very  quiet,  and 
sit  at  the  distance  of  fifty  yards  from  our  dens  or  tents  to  see  us, 
not  rushing  in  as  the  Greeks  do.  There  have  been  people  from 
a  great  distance  to  see  the  Milords,  and  they  all  bring  a  present 
of  cucumbers,  melons,  or  whatever  they  are  possessed  of,  for 
which  presents,  however,  we  are  glad  to  pay  them,  for  the  near- 
est village  is  an  hour  and  a-half,  and  the  Agao  village,  who 
makes  good  Kaimak,  is  four  or  five.  The  Cnidian  post  not  being 
regular  since  the  battles  of  Issus  and  Arbela,  I  shall,  I  hope,  send 
this  from  Ehodes.  N.B. — On  the  16th  I  had  the  gout,  and 
was  laid  up ;  the  consequence  was  an  earthquake  ;  so  as  it  was 
very  doubtful  whether  my  ruin  would  stand  without  any  assist- 
ance at  all,  I  bounced  out  at  the  first  shock.  The  jackals  eat  up 
the  sheep,  Mr.  Bedford  fell  ill  of  an  ague,  and  so  we  proceeded 
to  Ehodes,  where  I  now  write  this  on  the  19th.  No  news  of 
Craven,  so  I  give  him  up  for  the  voyage,  as  we  shall  proceed  to 
Maori,  and  to  consult  the  oracle  at  Patara  immediately. 


1812]         LETTER   FROM   THE   HON.   KEPPEL   CRAVEN.  521 

From  the  Hon.  R.  K.  Craven  to  Miss  Eerry. 

Constantinople,  Wednesday,  July  8. 

MY  DEAR  FRIENDS, — I  am  much  tempted  to  defer  the  writing 
to  you  for  some  days,  in  order  that  I  may  impress  your  minds 
with  awe  by  dating  from  Mount  Olympus,  where  I  am  going ; 
but  I  reflected  that  you  might,  at  the  same  time,  be  alarmed 
by  an  idea  that  I  might  have  become  an  eternal  inhabitant  of 
that  elevated  region,  and  I  prefer  addressing  you  as  an  humble 
Christian  to  the  vanity  of  shamming  demigod.  This  letter 
ought  to  be  very  classical,  for  it  will  be  conveyed  by  the  ( Argo,' 
but  I  fear  I  can  only  make  it  commonplace,  being  induced  to 
write  by  the  certainty  of  its  reaching  you  in  safety,  and  not 
costing  much  more  than  it  is  worth.  I  have  been  here  exactly 
three  weeks,  which  are  more  than  enough  to  satisfy  curiosity, 
and  perhaps  too  much  to  be  pleasant,  as  there  is  no  place  I 
should  so  much  dislike  as  a  residence,  notwithstanding  its  na- 
tural beauties,  which  I  acknowledge  to  be  unique.  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Listen  made  their  entree  about  ten  days  since,  and  the  ex- 
minister,  Mr.  Canning,*  returns  to  England  in  the  ship  that 
brought  them  out,  which  was  not  allow'd  to  come  up  higher 
than  the  Darningneedles ;  the  rest  of  their  voyage  being  per- 
form'd  in  open  boats,  in  which  Her  Excellency  slept  every  night 
with  the  common  sailors ;  but  don't  think  I  mean  to  be  scan- 
dalous, her  august  spouse  being  also  of  the  party.  That  is  the 
only  mode  of  conveyance  at  this  time  of  year,  and  is  probably 
the  most  eligible  as  well  as  agreeable,  for  the  north  wind  pre- 
vails so  constantly,  that  a  voyage  in  anything  but  row  boats 
would  be  a  never-ending  undertaking,  and  this  only  lasts  four 
or  five  days. 

I  have  been  divorced  from  the  learned  mission  ever  since  the 
26th  of  May,  when  they  sail'd  from  Scio  to  Samos,  and  are 
since  gone  to  Khodes  and  such  parts  of  the  coast  of  Asia  Minor 
as  the  plague  will  allow  them  to  examine.  This  said  plague 
broke  out  at  Smyrna  the  very  day  after  we  left  it,  and  there  are 
some  feeble  reports  of  its  being  here — that  is,  there  have  been 
what  are  term'd  a  few  accidents  in  the  Turkish  town ;  that  is, 

•  Now  Lord  Stratford  de  Redcliffe. 


522  MISS   BERRY'S    CORRESPONDENCE.  [1812 

people  dying  without  any  apparent  cause  but  the  will  of  God. 
You  need,  however,  not  be  the  least  alarm'd,  for  this  letter  will 
be  quarantin'd,  and  fumigated  very  often  before  it  reaches 
North  Audley  Street,  which  I  calculate  to  be  in  about  three 
months.  The  moment  I  have  visited  the  abode  of  the  gods,  I 
shall  set  off  in  quest  of  my  earthly  companions,  though  I  have 
not  the  smallest  idea  where  I  shall  light  upon  them.  I  visited 
Mitylene  and  the  Troad  in  my  way  here.  At  the  former  place, 
I  was  all  but  stoned  to  death  by  Sappho's  descendants,  who 
would  insist  upon  it  I  came  from  Smyrna  with  the  plague ;  and 
I  was  obliged  to  fly  for  protection  to  the  Bishop,  who  was  very 
gracious,  and  gave  me  a  wooden  spoon  to  scratch  my  back ; 
which  reminds  me  that  Mrs.  Forasti,  a  great  lady  at  Zante,  when 
Mrs.  Airey,  the  Governor's  wife,  complain'd  of  cold,  stirr'd  the 
coals  of  the  brazier  with  a  silver  tea-spoon  she  drew  from  her 
pocket.  Such  are  the  primitive  manners  of  Ionian  dames.  I 
have  seen  the  Sultan  twice.  He  is  like  Lord  Aberdeen,  and 
looks  dignified  in  pale  melancholy.  You  would  long  to  steal 
all  his  horse's  trappings  to  make  sofa-covers  of  the  saddle- 
cloths, and  necklaces  of  the  bridles  ;  but  what  Miss  Agnes  would 
absolutely  die  of,  in  a  transport  of  embroidery  is  the  bazaar  for 
handkerchiefs,  which  is,  indeed,  enough  to  turn  the  most  stoic 
brain.  I  have  never  ventur'd  but  once  in  it.  You  may  hear 
of  the  Seraglio  and  St.  Sophia,  and  the  Seven  Towers ;  but 
nothing  is  to  be  compared  to  the  said  bazaar,  except  it  is  the 
two  caps  which1  are  always  carried  immediately  after  the  Grand 
Signor  when  he  rides  out.  You  must  not  imagine  that  I  am 
deck'd  out  in  Oriental  finery,  like  Lady  Hester  Stanhope.  I 
preserve  my  independence  and  European  over-alls.  She  dis- 
plays hers  by  Turkish  trowsers,  and  rides  a  la  Mameluke  on  a 
fine  Arabian  given  her  by  the  Pacha  of  Cairo,  with  an  alarming 
number  of  pistols  in  her  girdle.  The  fashionable  place  here 
for  the  summer  is  a  village  call'd  Buyukdere,  which  is  anything 
but  retired  ;  at  the  same  time  better  than  this,  and  with  some 
sort  of  society,  as  there  are  the  Foreign  Ministers,  two  of  which, 
the  Spanish  and  Neapolitan,  are  really  extremely  pleasant, 
though  the  former  talks  of  the  bagues  de  la  mer.  Here  there 
are  nothing  but  Dragowomen,  very  ill  calculated  to  support  the 
credit  of  their  husbands'  employments,  if  one  is  to  judge  from 
their  silence.  Count  Italinsky  is  arrived  by  way  of  Russian 


181-2]          LETTER   FROM   THE    HOX.    KEPPEL    CRAVEN.  523 

Minister ;  but  peace  is  not  yet  signed,  and  the  prisoners  of  war 
not  released  from  the  arsenal  here,  so  there  are  some  sceptics 
on  the  subject.  Our  ambassadress  is  a  very  good-natur'd  sort 
of  person  ;  but  I  am  very  much  alarm'd  about  her,  since  I  have 
read  that  there  is  a  fountain  on  the  sea-shore  in  Thrace  which 
has  the  singular  property  of  causing  the  ewes  that  drink  of  it 
to  produce  black  lambs.  The  boats  that  come  from  the  Darda- 
nelles usually  stop  at  every  fountain  they  come  to,  and  should 
Her  Excellency  have  tasted  of  this  prolific  stream,  I  leave  you 
to  judge  of  the  consequences ;  for,  putting  aside  Mr.  Listen's 
feelings  on  the  subjects,  it  will  be  such  an  example  to  the  corps 
diplomatique.  I  wish  you  were  here,  that  I  might  take  you 
to  the  Cumberland  tea-gardens,  under  the  shape  of  a  shiosque 
at  a  spot  call'd  les  Eaux  douces,  which  I  think  you  would 
admire  almost  as  much  as  the  original,  and  where  you  would 
get  some  very  thick  coffee  without  cream  or  sugar,  and  some 
pipes,  both  which  are  acknowledged  to  be  infinitely  superior  to 
tea  and  bread  and  butter.  Mr.  Liston's  private  secretary  is  a 
Mr.  Turner,  whom  I  wanted  to  be  brother  to  your  Miss  Turner, 
though  not  agreeable  enough  to  belong  to  her.  Pray  tell 
her  so,  with  my  kind  remembrance  and  wishes  that  she  were 
here  to  nurse  me  under  the  sufferings  of  a  red-hot  coal,  which 
Miss  Agnes  once  had  on  her  back,  but  which  is  fixed  on  the 
back  of  my  neck,  and  yields  not  to  poultice  or  plaster.  People 
say  it  has  saved  my  life,  and  that  I  ought  to  be  very  glad ;  but 
I  really  am  very  sorry,  for  I  don't  sleep,  and  I  wish  you  would 
cure  it.  After  Brousa  I  am  going  to  Mt.  Athos,  and  fancy  I  am 
going  to  Thessalian  Tempe  and  Thermopylae ;  but  the  fact  is,  I 
am  going  to  hunt  for  Gell,  without  whom  I  am  a  fish  out  of 
water.  If  a  mouse  eats  your  bag  of  salt,  it  is  a  bad  omen ;  also 
if  you  have  two  bags  of  gall,  or  your  liver  is  meagre  and  un- 
usual, you  will  wage  war  with  great  energy  and  violence ;  but 
if  you  meet  a  person  with  one  eye  bigger  than  the  other,  you 
must  spit  three  times  in  his  bosom.  These  are  the  results  of 
my  present  studies,  which  you  may  communicate  to  any  anti- 
quarian you  please.  My  best  regards  wait  upon  Mr.  Berry, 
and  pray,  pray  say  a  thousand  kind  things  for  me  to  Mrs. 
Darner,  and  believe  that  I  am  ever  your  very  affecte  and  sincere 

E.  K.  CRAVEN. 


524  MISS  BERRY'S  CORRESPONDENCE.  [isi-2 

From  Sir  Wm.  Gell  to  the  Miss  Bei^rys. 

Vathi,  Samoa,  Nov.  26, 1812. 

Of  all  people  I  really  think  the  amiable  Queens  of  North 
Audley  Street  were  the  very  last  from  whom  I  expected  a  letter, 
when  my  bug-puzzlers  or  curtains  were  untied  this  morning 
to  admit  a  packet  of  letters  from  Smyrna,  where  the  plague  is 
not  furious  at  present.      It  is  probable  that,  when  I  wrote  last 
to  you,  it  was  from  Capo  Crio  or  Cnidus,  and  in  that  letter  I 
must  have  given  you  the  history  of  the  pranks  of  the  Dilettanti 
up  to  that  time.      We  have  left  nothing  to  be  done  at  Patara  ; 
but  tombs,  and  not  temples,  and  theatres   of  Eoman  times 
(Vespasian)  are  the  chief  objects  of  curiosity  there.      As  to  the 
Oracle  of  Apollo,  there  is  nothing  by  which  it  can  be  traced,  nor 
are  there  any  remains  of  sufficient  antiquity.      Telmissus  was 
certainly  no  more  than  a  fortress,  nevertheless  it  was  a  large 
one,  and  the  theatre  of  great  size.     There  are  no  other  remains 
except  tombs  cut  in  the  rocks,  which  are  curious,  but  I  can  tell 
you  little  of  it,  as  I  was  so  ill  I  could  not  stand  when  I  was 
there,  and  kept  my  bed  for  two  months  afterwards  at  Ehodes, 
to  my  sorrow  and  the  irreparable  loss  of  the  learned  world.     It 
was  in  vain  we  tried  to  get  inland ;   the  plague  always  pre- 
vented us,  and  the  privateers  kept  the  sea  so  well,  that  with  the 
north  wind,  which  did  not  change  till  the  middle  of  October, 
it  would  have  been  impossible  to  escape.    However,  no  time  was 
really  lost,  for  Messrs.  Bedford  and  Grandy  made  a  voyage  to 
Myra  in  Lycia,  whence  they  brought  home  the  richest  collection 
of  tombs,  good,  bad,  quizzical,  and  clockcasical  ever  seen,  which 
I  hope  we  shall  have  published.     At  length,  however,  we  got  to 
Samos,  and  having  discovered  an  opening  on  the   continent 
without  the   plague,  though  it  was  only  three  hours  off,  we 
resolved  on  a  push  for  Aphrodisias,  if  possible,  as  well  as  Mag- 
nesia on  the  Meander.     In  order  to  effect  this,  and  not  to  have 
our  return  intercepted  by  this  happy  malady,  I  found  the  only 
way  would  be  to  send  one  of  the  artists  one  way,  and  one  the 
other.     It  fell  to  Mr.  Gandy's  lot,  therefore,  to  procure  the  true 
and  genuine  Aphrodisiacs  for  the  Society.      To  mine  and  Mr. 
Bedford's  the  introduction  to  the  world  of  the  celebrated  and 
much-longed-for  temple  of  Diana  Leucophryne  at  Magnesia 
Neckclothia  Pennytrumpettata  ad  Mseandrum.    I  do  assure  you 


181-2]  LETTER   FROM   SIR   W.    CELL.  525 

there  is  not  a  grain  of  magnesia  on  the  spot  at  present.  The 
temple,  however,  is  beautiful,  and  only  the  greatest  treasure 
possible  to  artists,  being  cited  for  certain  peculiarities  by  Vitru- 
vius.  It  is  about  100  feet  by  200,  8  columns  in  front  and  15 
in  flanks  of  a  most  beautiful  Ionic, -4  feet  7  in.  in  diameter. 
Among  the  novelties  are  the  Amazonian  Ladies  on  the  frieze. 
The  Amazons  are  ridiculously  little  till  they  jump  from  their 
steeds,  when  they  become  the  most  strapping  heroines  possible. 
As  these  ladies  are  perishing  entirely  by  their  own  ambition,  one 
is  not  so  much  concerned  to  see  them  generally  torn  off  their 
horses  by  the  hair,  as  if  they  had  been  more  civilized  personages. 
Now,  I  shall  tell  you  neither  how  we  lived  in  a  mill  and 
then  in  a  baker's  shop  in  the  rainy  season,  neither  of  which 
had  tight  roofs,  nor  will  I  regale  you  with  an  attempt  to  sub- 
stitute curricles  for  horses,  which  were  drawn  by  two  black 
buffaloes,  which  I  suppose  are  yet  on  their  way  home,  as  they 
went  so  slow.  I  never  saw  them  but  at  first  setting  out,  for  all 
these  things  either  become  known,  or  are  not  worth  knowing. 
I  shall  give  you  an  account  of  Aphrodisias.  First  of  all,  you 
pass  through  Ouzel  Hissar,  where  only  30,000  people  died  of 
the  plague  last  year,  and  then  going  twice  as  far  to  the  crossing 
the  Meander  as  the  distance  hitherto  given  by  travellers,  you 
go  four  times  as  far  as  they  have  called  it  from  thence  to 
Aphrodisias.  The  people  are  great  drunkards,  both  Mussulmen 
and  Mussulwomen,  and  there  are  400  houses  among  the  ruins 
of  as  many  more.  They  care  neither  for  the  devil  or  Dr. 
Solomon,  so  that  the  Mission  had  to  pay  for  whatever  they 
measured.  The  situation  is  a  pretty  plain  watered  by  a  river, 
which,  from  an  inscription,  I  suppose  the  Timilus.  In  the 
middle  of  the  city  is  a  small  hill,  round  the  base  of  which  run 
walls,  built  of  odds  and  ends  of  temples,  Cupids,  giants,  Glauci, 
columns,  festoons,  and  common  stones.  This  beautifully  regu- 
lar work  was,  I  conclude  also  from  an  inscription,  the  work  of 
Constans  or  some  of  those  tasteful  emperors  whose  medals  show 
their  zeal  for  the  arts.  The  temple  of  Venus  is  destroyed,  but 
of  white  marble  equal  to,  if  not  really  Parian.  The  order  Ionic, 
with  6  columns  in  front  by  13.  N.B.  The  names  of  the  sub- 
scribers on  each.  It  would  be  good  if  you  could  get  rid  of 
certain  plinths  under  the  bases ;  but  it  was  built  in  Roman 
days,  when  plinths  were  thought  improvements.  In  front  of 


526  MISS  BERRY'S  CORRESPONDENCE.  [1812 

the  temple  is  a  Propylaeum  of  the  Corinthian  order,  but  alas  ! 
this  has  twisted  columns.  Eound  the  temple  is  an  enclosure 
about  700  feet  long,  by  half  that  breadth.  This  is  also  formed 
of  Ionic  columns,  but  full  of  defects.  There  is  a  theatre 
very  much  ruined,  and  a  circus  very  perfect.  Inscriptions  of 
athletse  and  conquerors  at  all  kinds  of  nose-pulling,  from  all 
parts  of  the  world,  abound.  The  place  must  have  grown  up 
from  some  extraordinary  miracle  committed  by  the  goddess, 
and  by  some  knowing  priest  contriving  the  games.  The  fact  is 
poca  cosa  vale  per  Marie,  though  people  have  said  so  much  of 
it.  Nevertheless,  a  great  number  of  columns  yet  standing 
justify  the  accounts  of  travellers  who  have  called  it  magnificent. 
From  what  I  see  of  the  country,  the  more  you  go  inland,  the 
less  of  Greek  and  more  of  Roman  will  be  your  fate ;  so  that  I 
regret  but  little  that  the  Plague  and  Co.  prevent  our  seeing 
Hierapolis,  and  as  to  Laodicaea,  it  was  entirely  Romanissimo. 
Every  fragment  Mr.  Grandy  found  at  Gruzel  Hissar  (Tralles)  was 
decidedly  Roman ;  and  as  to  Sardis,  though  there  is  a  great 
temple,  the  columns  are  buried  more  than  half,  so  that  to  make 
out  plan,  order,  or  elevation  would  have  cost  twice  the  capital 
of  the  Dandy's.  Magnesia  is  worth  all  Asia.  Indeed,  we  are 
now  very  rich  in  drawings,  really  richissimi.  We  are  coming 
home  post  haste,  if  that  can  be  haste  which  talks  of  3,000 
miles  by  sea,  and  a  certain  quarantine  of  forty  days,  wherever 
we  go.  We  believe  we  shall  manage,  through  Zante,  to  cheat 
some  of  the  imprisonment,  and  to  find  a  passage.  Our  business  is 
over,  and  we  are  only  here  till  H.M.  brig  *  Kite  '  comes  to  know 
our  fate.  In  the  meantime,  I  have  the  pleasure  of  an  ague  for 
my  amusement,  in  consequence  of  our  last  trip  and  more  of  one 
cold  day  here.  The  bustle  in  the  clouds  seems,  however,  now 
over,  and  serenity  is,  I  hope,  reestablished  in  the  atmosphere 
for  some  weeks.  We  were  above  six  months  without  rain,  but 
of  course  we  have  now  had  a  good  dose  of  it,  which,  I  suppose, 
will  do  till  February  or  March.  Pray  remember  me  most 
kindly  to  the  Daughter  of  Phidias.  I  shall  walk  in  to  your 
house  one  very  cold  day  in  March,  till  which  time,  believe  me, 
my  dear  good  friends, 

Your  most  affectionate 

ANACHAESIS. 
Mr.  Craven  sends  his  duty. 


1813]  MISS   BERRY   RETURNS   TO   LONDON.  527 


JOUENAL. 
1813. 

Wimpole,  Friday r,  Jan.  1st. — I  went  to  the  school-feast 
at  two  o'clock  with  Lady  Hardwicke's  two  daughters, 
and  assisted  in  helping  fify-three  mortals,  boys  and  girls, 
from  three  years  old  to  twelve,  with  plum-pudding,  meat 
pies,  and  roast  beef.  The  quantity  that  the  children  eat 
is  astonishing  !  After  dinner  the  prize  for  work  done  by 
each  child  in  the  course  of  the  year  was  given, — the  girls 
for  needlework  and  boys  for  knitting  stockings,  &c.  In 
my  life  I  never  saw  a  happier  assembly  ;  the  little  ones 
who  had  done  nothing  received  each  of  them  a  penny. 
There  were  also  prizes  for  those  who  wrote  the  best, 
and  who  hemmed  the  best,  to  which  I  had  the  honour 
of  contributing. 

Thursday,  1th. — The  little  Krumpholz  left  this  morn- 
ing for  London,  where  she  is  going  to  be  married  very 
suitably.  She  was  much  overcome  last  night  at  leaving 
this  house,  which  has  been  her  home  ever  since  she  was 
thirteen  years  old,  when  Lady  Hardwicke  took  charge  of 
her,  for  the  sake  of  music  and  speaking  French  with  her 
daughters.  She  was  the  daughter  of  the  husband  of  the 
famous  harpist,  Madame  Krumpholz,  by  a  former  mar- 
riage. An  orphan,  without  father  or  mother,  the  Duchess 
of  Bourbon  took  charge  of  her,  had  her  educated  in  a 
convent,  'and  at  the  commencement  of  the  Eevolution 
wisely  found  her  another  protectress. 

Tuesday,  \Wi. — Eeturned  to  London. 


528  MISS  BERET'S  JOURNAL.  [isis 

From  Sir  U.  Price  to  Miss  Berry. 

Foxley,  January  19,  1813 

Here  is  a  most  flaming  ode  on  the  burning  of  Moscow,  &c., 
which  the  author  humbly  lays  at  your  feet.  When  you  have 
recovered  from  your  first  enthusiasm,  I  beg  you  will  exercise 
your  cooler  judgment,  and  send  me  your  criticisms.  It  will  be 
a  strange  thing  if  there  should  be  one  spark  of  fire  in  this  ode  of 
mine,  considering  the  time  and  circumstances  of  its  birth  :  it 
was  composed  almost  entirely  sub  Dio  and  sub  Jove  frigido, 
and  ancle  deep  in  snow ;  for  it  was  exactly  during  the  fortnight 
or  three  weeks  that  the  snow  lay  on  the  ground  before  Christ- 
mas. I  was  then  very  busy,  marking  and  cutting  in  a  wood  at 
some  distance ;  and  sometimes  I  drew  forth  my  hacker  (for  I 
carry  my  Durindana  in  a  scabbard),  and  sometimes  my  paper ; 
now  gave  a  coup  de  liache,  and  then  a  coup  de  crayon ;  and  in 
this  manner  '  I  built  the  lofty  rhyme.'  Thus  far,  indeed,  the 
state  of  the  weather  and  the  ground  might  be  of  use  to  me,  as 
I  could  paint  dal  vero  (tho'  heaven  be  praised,  from  a  very 
diminutive  scale),  the  icy  blast,  the  trackless  snow,  the  piercing 
cold,  &c.  You  will  immediately  see  that  as  far  as  metre  goes, 
I  had  Gray's  Bard  in  my  eye,  '  Numeros,' — I  wish  I  could  add, 
*  animosque  secutur.'  This  subject  is  certainly  a  very  fine  one  ; 
the  principal  actor  one  of  the  most  extraordinary  men  '  that 
ever  lived  on  the  tide  of  times,'  the  burning  of  Moscow  one  of 
the  most  extraordinary,  unexpected,  and  striking  events  that 
ever  took  place,  and  the  motives  and  consequences  not  less  so. 
Had  Gray  been  living,  and  in  the  full  possession  of  his  powers, 
he  could  have  made  a  noble  ode ;  but  you  know  that  poetry  is 
not  my  metier,  and  that,  as  Voltaire  once  chose  to  say  of  him- 
self, '  Je  ne  fais  que  de  la  vile  prose.'  After  all,  if  I  did  not  think 
this  bold  attempt  of  mine  had  some  merit,  I  should  not  send  it 
to  you ;  and  if  you  should  think  it  worth  showing  to  any  of  your 
poetical  and  critical  friends,  do  not  at  first  tell  them  whose  it  is, 
but  let  them  guess.  I  may,  perhaps,  be  well  taken  in  by  this 
request,  and  you  may  write  me  word  that  one  guessed  Parvus 
Pybus,  another,  Sir  James  Bland  Burges,  and  a  third  did 
not  think  the  thing  worth  guessing  at  at  all.  You  will,  of 
course,  show  it  to  Mrs.  Darner,  and  I  hope  she  will  not  be  dis- 
pleased with  the  Finale;  which,  by  the  by,  will  confine  the 


1813]         LETTER   TO   THE   COUNTESS   OP   HARDWICKE.          529 

guessers,  should  there  be  any,  to  a  narrow  choice.  I  sent  an 
early  copy  to  Fitzpatrick ;  and  Rogers  happening  to  come  in  at 
the  moment,  he  could  not  resist  showing  it  him  :  I  have  since 
altered  it  a  good  deal,  and  as  Rogers  had  seen  the  first  sketch,  I 
have  sent  him  this  new,  and  I  hope  improved,  edition.  He  and 
Fitzpatrick  are  the  only  persons  out  of  my  own  family  to  whom 
the  secret  (which  indeed  is  none),  has  been  told.  One  circum- 
stance mentioned  in  these  verses  is  strikingly  confirmed  by  what 
my  nephew  Ld  Tyrconnel  was  an  eye-witness  of :  he  saw  the 
late  governor  of  Moscow  set  fire  to  his  own  magnificent  palace. 
You  may  happen  to  have  seen  in  the  papers  that  Ld  Tyrconnel 
has  been  with  Admiral  Tchesagoff :  it  is  an  odd  circumstance, 
though  certainly  not  of  a  lyrical  kind,  that  the  parson  of  my 
parish  was  the  man  who  married  this  amphibious  hero  to  a 
daughter  of  Commissioner  Proby's ;  and,  to  finish  the  history, 
the  ceremony  was  performed  at  Paddington.  The  only  person, 
besides  Mrs.  Darner,  to  whom  I  wish  you  to  show  my  verses,  is 
my  friend  Sir  Harry  Englefield :  make  him  guess  and  criticise. 

Most  truly  yours, 

U.  PRICE. 

From  Miss  Berry  to  the  Countess  of  Hardwicke. 

North  Audley  Street,  Sunday,  21st  February,  1813. 
.  .  .  I  wish  what  you  say  upon  the  letter  of  the  Princess 
of  Wales  had  been  on  any  other  subject ;  it  is  so  just,  so  clever, 
so  well  expressed,  that  I  should  like  to  have  given  you  the 
credit  of  it  with  a  certain  number  of  people  and  passed  it  off  as 
my  own  with  others  ;  but  upon  this  subject  I  hear  as  much  and 
say  as  little  as  I  can  (I  mean  without  any  affectation  of  silence), 
for  fear  of  being  supposed  to  know  more  than  I  do.  It  was 
reported  yesterday  that  at  the  Council  held  on  Friday,  to  which 
many  Privy  Counsellors  not  Cabinet  Ministers  were  summoned, 
among  others,  little  Abbot,  that  it  had  been  determined  not  to 
adopt  any  measures  upon  the  Princess's  letter.  That  the  Chan- 
cellor* had  absolutely  refused  going  over  the  old  business  again. 
One  shall  know  in  the  course  of  to-day  if  this  is  true.  If  it  is 
(I  mean  that  no  fresh  investigation  is  to  be  proceeded  on),  the 
Princess  may  well  consider  it  as  a  triumph  (pray  Heaven  she 
bears  it  with  moderation ! ) ;  for  after  the  manner  that  all  the 

#  Lord  Eldon. 
VOL.  II.  M  M 


530  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL. 

ministerial  people,  and  all  the  people  speaking  their  language, 
have  lately  expressed  themselves  of  her,  and  of  their  own  diffi- 
culties, for  these  last  two  years,  in  restraining  the  Prince  from 
taking  active  measures  against  her,  it  is  quite  impossible  to 
suppose  they  would  not  now  indulge  the  P.  if  it  were  in 
their  power.  .  .  .  The  report  is,  that  all  idea  of  proceeding 
against  her,  either  upon  old  or  new  griefs,  is  abandoned ;  and 
that  the  Prince's  ill-humour  is  such,  that  neither  ministers  nor 
servants  know  what  to  do  with  him.  .  .  . 

P.S. — Sir  H.  Davy,  who  was  here  last  night,  desires  me  to 
tell  you  that  the  nymph  Fiorina,  whom  he  was  expectiDg  to 
arrive  from  Wimpole  to  his  longing  arms  by  the  waggon  on 
Saturday  (what  a  sinking  in  poetry  !)  is  not  yet  come,  and  he 
begins  to  be  uneasy  about  her.  .  .  . 

Sunday,  March  21st. — Lieutenant-Colonel  Campbell 
and  I  set  out  for  Blackheath  :  we  found  Miss  Knight  with 
the  Princess.  She  was  visibly  touched  by  the  manner  in 
which  we  met  her  and  kissed  her  hand  :  the  tears  were  in 
her  eyes.  Afterwards  she  reseated  herself  and  was  very 
cheerful. 

Monday,  22nd. — In  the  evening  we  had  a  little  party 
of  seventeen  people  for  music,  which  passed  off  very 
agreeably.  After  the  music  they  waltzed ;  they  imitated 
the  opera-dancers,  and  then  acted  proverbs  in  pantomime : 
in  short,  it  so  chanced  they  were  really  gay  and  amused 
themselves. 

Saturday,.  27th. — We  arrived  at  Blackheath  at  five 
o'clock.  I  saw  the  Princess  in  the  garden.  We  walked 
a  little  while;  she  perceived  that  I  was  not  well,  and 
begged  I  would  not  dress.  On  going  down  to  dinner  I 
was  surprised  to  find  Lady  Percival  and  her  son,  a  boy  of 
fourteen  years  old.  Whilst  we  were  at  dinner  the  Duke 
of  Brunswick  came  to  speak  with  his  sister  about  their 
mother's  will.  They  retired  to  the  drawing-room,  and  we 
remained  with  the  second  course  before  us  for  nearly  an 
hour.  Afterwards  the  Princess  and  Lady  Clara  were 


1813]  LETTER   FROM    HON.    KEPPEL   CRAVEN.  531 

engaged  in  making  a  sketch  of  a  letter  and  an  envelope 
to  all  the  executors  of  the  late  Duchess,  as  she  had  named 
seven. 

From  the  Hon.  R.  K.  Craven  to  the  Miss  Berrys. 

From  durance  vile 

In  Malta's  isle.  3rd  of  April,  1813. 

DEAREST  FRIENDS, — The  inclosed  should  have  charmed  your 
longing  eyes  some  two  months  ago,  as  you  will  see  by  its  date, 
but  only  arrived  here  a  few  days  since ;  Gell  will  not  write  it 
over  again,  indeed,  he  has  not  time,  though  people  in  quaran- 
tine have  a  tolerable  share  of  that  commodity  on  their  hands ; 
but  there  are  maps  to  correct,  sketches  to  finish,  journals  to 
revise,  for  this  is,  we  hope,  our  last  resting  place,  and  to-morrow 
sails  the  packet;  so  I  have  burnt  my  former  envelope,  and 
hastily  substitute  this  scrawl :  the  other  was  more  legible  and 
more  worthy  of  being  read,  as  it  contained  an  account  of  Mr. 
Curius'  house  at  Samos,  with  all  its  concomitant  horrors  in  the 
shape  of  bugs,  Greeks,  spoilt  children,  and  tame  rabbits,  all 
things  unknown  in  our  present  abode,  where  there  is  but  one 
engine  of  terror,  viz.,  the  plague,  but  that  terrifies  the  people 
in  the  town  much  more  than  us  its  next-door  neighbours.  We 
shall  be  about  a  week  longer,  and  then  let  loose  upon  the 
streets  of  Valetta  to  find  a  passage  to  England.  Frederick 
North  says  being  in  quarantine  is  the  pleasantest  state  of 
existence  in  the  world,  that  it  is  like  the  gout  without  the  pain 
of  it,  which  is  a  refinement  I  don't  understand.  You  must  not 
mind  Gell's  letters  being  stabbed,  it  is  the  fashion  with  all 
epistles  from  the  Levant.  I  need  not  say  we  are  in  all  haste  to 
get  home,  and  throw  ourselves  at  your  feet ;  we  think  of  you 
every  day  at  dinner,  because  they  send  us  so  few  peas  from  the 
inn,  and  you  are  always  so  lavish  of  them.  We  have  been 
delayed  everywhere — at  Athens  very  pleasantly;  at  Corinth, 
very  much  the  contrary ;  at  Patras,  odiously ;  at  Zante,  very 
well,  because  there  is  a  most  amiable  Governor,  and  an  elysium 
of  orange  groves:  that  Zante  is  a  spot  of  peculiar  grace  and 
loveliness,  and  makes  one  long  to  be  romantic  and  very  young, 
neither  of  which  I  have  felt  for  many  years.  I  have  no  news, 
except  the  Queen  of  Sicily's  pranks,  which  the  papers  will  tell 
you  of.  The  Concannons  are  here — did  you  know  them  ?  They 

M  If  2 


532  MISS  BERET'S  JOURNAL. 

have  wandered  over  Italy,  of  which  their  account  would  make 
you  weep.  Imagine  no  carriages  at  Naples,  and  every  soul  in 
Florence  drowned  in  tears.  ...  I  hope  you  mean  to  be  very 
kind  to  us,  for  we  shall  feel  very  shy  at  reappearing  in  the  world, 
especially  me,  who  am  undergoing  the  noviciate  of  a  downright 
entire  wig,  which  makes  me  feel  as  if  I  had  sham  calves. 

I  find  I  can  talk  of  nothing  but  myself,  but  consider  we  are 
in  the  lazaretto,  dans  cet  affreux  palais  de  la  vengeance,  ou 
respirent  a  la  fois  le  crime  et  1'innocence,  that  is,  perfect  health 
and  all  manner  of  pestilence,  with  which 

I  ever  remain,  your  very  obliged  and  affectionate  friend, 

E.  K.  CRAVEN. 

Monday,  April  12^. — At  one  o'clock  Agnes  and  I  went 
to  the  Bayswater  Gate,  in  Kensington  Gardens,  to  see  the 
City  bringing  their  address  to  the  Princess.*  The  crowd 

»/  o       o 

around  the  palace  was  great  and  kept  increasing  every 
moment,  people  here  flocking  through  all  the  walks  of  the 
garden  in  file  and  in  crowds,  all  coming  to  increase  the 
enormous  circle  around  the  palace  on  the  side  of  the 
Princess's  apartment.  Seeing  the  impossibility  of  getting 
nearer  before  it  was  too  late,  we  left  the  garden  by  the 
little  gate  of  the  palace,  and  passing  through  the  Duke 
of  Kent's  court,  got  into  Lady  Charlotte  Lindsay's  apart- 
ment. Arrived  as  far  as  the  little  drawing.room,  we 
found  nothing  but  preparations  for  a  dinner  of  eight  or 
ten  people,  but  hearing  sounds  in  the  next  room,  I  knocked 
at  the  door,  and  a  voice,  which  I  recognised  to  be  that  of 
the  Princess,  called  out  to  us  to  come-in.  We  found  the 
Princess  with  her  three  ladies  and  Miss  Hayman,all  dressed 
and  eating  in  haste,  awaiting  the  arrival  of  the  Lord  Mayor. 

*  At  a  Common  Hall  convoked  on  the  2nd  of  April,  an  Address  to  the 
Princess  was  moved,  and,  notwithstanding  some  opposition,  carried  almost 
unanimously.  It  stated  '  the  indignation  and  abhorrence  '  with  which  the 
Livery  of  London  viewed  '  the  foul  conspiracy  against  the  honour  and  life 
of  Her  Royal  Highness,  and  their  admiration  at  her  moderation,  frankness, 
and  magnanimity  under  her  long  persecution.'  This  address  sprang  from 
the  report  of  certain  members  of  the  Privy  Council  upon  the  conduct  of  the 
Princess,  and  the  discussion  to  which  this  report  gave  rise  in  Parliament. 

Ann.  Reg. 


1813]        DEPUTATION   TO   THE   PEINCESS   OF  WALES.  533 

When  the  Vice-Chancellor  St.  Leger  announced  that  the 
Lord  Mayor  was  approaching,  the  Princess  went  down 
with  the  ladies,  and  we  at  their  tail,  to  the  dining-room 
of  her  apartment,  where  she  was  to  receive.  After  she 
was  placed  with  her  ladies,  and  Miss  Hayman,  and  her 
Chamberlain,  they  opened  all  the  shutters  to  allow  the 
Princess  to  be  seen  by  the  immense  crowd  collected  in  the 
gardens.  They  applauded  tremendously,  and  showed  every 
possible  mark  of  good- will  towards  her.  At  last,  after  a 
good  half  hour,  the  Lord  Mayor  and  four  Aldermen, 
accompanied  by  more  than  150  Liverymen,  came  in  and 
advanced  towards  the  Princess.  The  applause  at  this 
moment  was  so  great  and  so  noisy,  that  they  were  obliged 
to  threaten  the  crowd  outside  to  shut  the  windows  if  they 
were  not  more  quiet :  this  threat  obtained  a  respectful 
silence.  The  town  clerk  (in  the  absence  of  the  recorder) 
read  the  address  very  well ;  and  the  Princess  read  her  an- 
swer also  very  well,  though  at  the  beginning  the  sentences 
were  rather  too  long  and  difficult  for  her  to  pronounce 
well.  She  began  in  a  low  voice,  which  afterwards  grew 
stronger.  In  the  last  part,  where  she  spoke  of  her  daughter, 
&c.,  she  expressed  herself  with  a  good  deal  of  feeling, 
and  seemed  to  be  moved,  which  had  a  very  good  effect, 
as  well  as  the  deliberate  manner  with  which  she  dwelt 
upon  that  part  in  which  she  spoke  of  the  rest  of  the  Eoyal 
Family.  After  the  address  and  answer,  the  Lord  Mayor, 
the  Aldermen,  and  the  Liverymen  kissed  her  hand,  and 
went  out  by  the  little  room  (where  we  were)  to  join  their 
carriages  in  the  Duke  of  Kent's  court.  When  they  were 
all  gone,  the  crowd  outside  called  so  loudly  for  the  Prin- 
cess, that  her  ladies  begged  of  her  to  show  herself  at  the 
middle  window,  and  then  at  the  doors,  and  then  at  the 
two  ends  of  the  apartment :  this  she  did,  accompanied  by 
her  ladies  and  conducted  by  her  chamberlain,  and,  having 
curtsied  to  the  people,  immediately  retired.  I  never  saw 
a  crowd  that  better  deserved  to  have  its  wishes  gratified, 


534  MISS  BERET'S  JOURNAL.  [isis 

for  it  was  not  a  common  mob,  but  workmen,  small  trades- 
people, mixed  with  well-dressed  people,  and  conducting 
themselves  perfectly.  After  this  ceremony,  which  was 
really  touching  from  the  ardour  of  the  people  to  show 
their  good-will  towards  her,  the  Princess  crossed  the 
apartment,  taking  me  by  the  arm  to  go  back  to  Lady 
Charlotte's  little  drawing-room.  We  there  found  dinner, 
the  guests  being  her  four  ladies  and  we  two,  Mr.  St.  Leger 
and  Mr.  Fox,  who  arrived  during  the  speeches.  After 
dinner  took  leave  of  the  Princess,  finding  the  carriage 
at  Bayswater  Gate ;  sorry  only  to  leave  the  gardens  so 
soon  on  such  a  fine  evening,  enlivened  as  they  were  by 
groups  of  people,  in  addition  to  the  crowd  which  had  sur- 
rounded the  palace. 

n  Wednesday,  May  12th. — I  went  to  Lady  Davy's  in  the 
evening.  There  were  seventy  or  eighty  people  there : 
amongst  others  Miss  Edgeworth,*  who  was  my  object.  She 
is  very  small,  with  a  countenance  which  promises  nothing 
at  first  sight,  or  as  one  sees  her  in  society.  She  has  very 
winning  manners.  She  received  with  much  warmth  what 
I  said  of  my  desire  to  see  the  author  of  her  works,  and  of 
all  the  obligations  that  I  felt  in  common  with  all  our  sex 
towards  one  of  her  genius.  She  said  a  great  many  pretty 
things  of  all  she  had  heard  of  me,  and  of  my  society ;  but 
feeling  that  I  did  not  deserve  them,  it  had  little  effect 
|  upon  me,  and  had  hardly  the  power  of  raising  me  for  a 
Ljnoment  from  the  depression  into  which  I  have  fallen. 

Monday,  24th. — In  the  evening  was  the  question  of  the 
Catholic  Emancipation  Bill,  the  first  clause,  which  gave 
the  Catholics  admission  into  Parliament,  was  lost  by  a 
majority  of  four  votes. 

Tuesday,  2bth. — Went  with  Lord  and  Lady  Charle- 

*  Maria  Edge-worth,  daughter  of  Richard  Lovell  Edgeworth ;  born  1767. 
The  well-known  author  of  many  popular  works  adapted  to  the  understand- 
ing of  all  ages,  and  whose  memory  is  entitled  to  the  gratitude  of  those  who 
in  their  childhood  have  profited  by  her  power  of  combining  and  conveying 
to  others  instruction  and  amusement ;  died  1849. 


1813]  THE   PRINCESS   OF  WALES.  535 

mont  *  to  Blackheath  to  see  the  Princess.  She  was  much 
more  lively  than  the  last  time -I  saw  her  ;  spoke  with  the 
greatest  pleasure  and  impatience  of  being  established  in 
town,  and  of  her  certainty  now  of  having  a  house  there. 

Wednesday,  2Qth. — We  went  to  Mrs.  Marcet's  to  see 
4  Spartacus '  played  by  the  Lullins  and  Eegnier,  who  alone 
remained  of  the  last  year's  troup.  '  Spartacus '  has  all  the 
defects  with  which  we  reproach  French  tragedy :  long 
expositions,  recitals  of  the  effect  of  passions  rather  than 
the  effects  themselves,  though  there  are  some  fine  parts, 
strong  sentiments,  some  striking  couplets,  and  the  denou- 
ment,  which  has  a  grand  effect.  Madame  Lullin  played 
even  better  than  last  year.  They  gave  afterwards 
'  Defiance  et  Malice '  very  well. 

Saturday,  29th. — Supped  at  Lady  Davy's  with  the 
Princess;  there  was  only  Lady  Charlemont  and  Lady 
Charlotte  Lindsay,  besides  ourselves,  and  the  gentlemen 
were  Lord  Byron,  Mr.  Grattan,  Lord  Lansdowne,  Sir  J. 
Mackintosh,  Mr.  Mackenzie,  Mr.  Stuart  of  Glasserton,  and 
Lord  Charlemont.  The  Princess  was  tired  body  and 
mind,  and  as  she  confessed  herself,  nothing  less  than 
intoxicated  with  the  applause  that  she  had  received  at 
the  Opera.f 

Tuesday,  June  1st — Drove  with  the  Duke  of  Devon- 
shire, in  his  curricle,  to  Chiswick,  where  he  showed  me 
all  the  alterations  that  he  was  about  to  make,  in  adding 
the  gardens  of  Lady  M.  Coke's  house  to  his.  The  house 
is  down,  and  in  the  gardens  he  has  constructed  a  mag- 
nificent hot-house,  with  a  conservatory  for  flowers,  the 
middle  under  a  cupola.  Altogether  it  is  300  feet  long. 
The  communication  between  the  two  gardens  is  through 

*  Earl  of  Charlemont ;  married,  in  1802,  to  Anne,  daughter  of  William 
Bermingham,  Esq.,  of  Ross  Hill,  Galway. 

t  '  At  the  Opera  the  other  night,  every  person  stood  up  when  the  Princess 
entered  the  house,  and  there  was  a  burst  of  applause.' — Lady  C.  Bury't 
Diary. 


536  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isis 

what  was  the  old  greenhouse,  of  which  they  have  made  a 
double  arcade,  making  the  prettiest  effect  possible. 

Thursday,  3rd. — Walked  to  Miss  Edgeworth's,  who 
we  found  sitting  at  breakfast  with  her  father*  and  step- 
mother, f  We  heard  he  would  not  allow  his  daughter  to 
go  to  see  the  Princess  of  Wales  Tuesday  last,  because  he 
and  his  wife  were  not  invited.  The  little  woman  herself 
is  always  amiable,  always  natural,  intelligent,  and  sensible. 

Tuesday,  29th. — In.  the  evening  we  had  a  few  people 
at  home  ;  and  Madame  de  Stael,  who  came,  talked,  ques- 
tioned, and  went  away  again  like  a  flash  of  lightning,  or 
t  rather  like  a  torrent. 

Monday,  July  bth. — The  grand  breakfast  at  Carlton 
House  was  given  to-day,  so  all  the  world  was  out  of  doors. 
The  largest  part  of  the  company  assembled  at  three  o'clock, 
not  to  separate  till  four  o'clock  to-morrow  morning — that 
is  to  say,  having  been  present  at  a  fete  which  will  last 
thirteen  hours. 

Wednesday,  lih. — I  went  to  see  the  illumination  J  of 
Lord  Dudley's  house,  §  which  was  very  beautiful.  All 
these  three  days,  or  rather  nights'  of  illumination  have 
been  in  the  finest  weather ;  a  rare  thing  in  this  country. 

Friday,  Sth. — Went  in  the  morning  to  see  the  Indians, 
who  performed  some  juggling  tricks  in  Pall  Mall.  I  was 
very  much  amused.  The  figures,  dress,  language,  and  the 
movements  of  these  two  men,  all  transport  one  into 
another  quarter  of  the  globe ;  their  skill  seemed  almost 
supernatural. 

Tuesday,  20th. — To-day  is  to  be  the  grand  fete  at 
Vauxhall,  so  much  talked  of,  in  honour  of  Lord  Wel- 
lington's victories.  At  ten  o'clock  I  started  with  Mrs. 


^o1 


*  Richard  Lovell  Edge-worth,  born  1744,  died  1817.    He  wrote  with  his 
daughter  Essays  on  Irish  Bulls,  on  Education,  and  various  other  works, 
f  Mr.  Edgeworth's  fourth  wife. 
J  For  the  battle  of  Vittoria. 
$  Dudley  House,  in  Park  Lane. 


1813]  FETE   AT  VAUXHALL.  537 

Montague  in  a  coach,  and  Mr.  Knutzen,  the  Norwegian, 
for  my  cavalier,  and  Mr.  Tisdale*  as  her's.  Before  Carlton 
House  the  carriage  stopped,  and  what  was  my  horror 
when  I  saw  that  we  had  already  got  to  the  tail  of  the 
carriages,  which  extended  from  Pall  Mall  to  Vauxhall ! 
We  were  obliged  to  be  patient ;  I  was  too  thankful  to 
think  I  was  not  in  our  own  carriage,  and  to  know  that 
the  horses  and  the  coachman  that  we  had  were  amongst 
the  best  in  London.  All  the  skill  of  the  coachman  and 
the  strength  of  the  horses  were  necessary  to  draw  us 
out :  there  never  was  such  a  confusion  of  carriages,  with- 
out order,  without  soldiers,  or  any  precaution  whatever 
against  the  accidents  which  must  inevitably  happen  in 
such  an  assemblage.  At  length,  after  two  hours  on  the 
road,  and  many  very  perilous  moments,  we  got  out  of  the 
carriage,  about  half  a  mile  from  Vauxhall,  as  the  only 
means  of  getting  there  at  all.  There  never  was  a  fete 
(even  in  this  country)  at  which  it  was  so  difficult  to 
arrive,  with  so  little  to  tempt  one  to  stay,  and  from  which 
it  was  so  impossible  to  get  away."!*  The  stewards  who 
had  dined  there,  and  were  walking  about  with  their 
wands  of  office,  could  do  nothing  for  those  that  belonged 
to  them.  For  the  most  part  of  the  people  there  was  no 
means  of  eating,  drinking,  or  sitting  down.  We  were 
able  to  do  the  latter  ;  but  when  at  half-past  three  in  the 
morning  we  wished  to  leave,  the  crowd  was  for  a  few 
minutes  terrible,  and  after  getting  through  it,  we  had  to 
walk  for  more  than  a  mile  to  join  the  carriage.  They 
will  not  catch  me  at  such  a  fete  in  this  country  again. 
This  has  cost  more  than  10,000/.,  and  they  had  either 
the  carelessness  or  the  meanness  not  to  pay  the  toll-gate, 


*  Son  of  the  Countess  of  Charleville  by  a  former  marriage. 

t  This  account  affords  a  striking  contrast  to  the  arrangements  now  made 
when  large  crowds  are  expected  to  assemble,  and  particularly  on  that 
remarkable  occasion,  within  the  memory  of  all,  the  opening  of  the  Crystal 
Palace  in  Hyde  Park,  1851. 


538  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [isis 

so  that  each  carriage  was  stopped  for  fourpence.  They 
say  that  13,000  persons  were  present — I  do  not  be- 
lieve that.  The  decoration  was  brilliant,  without  much 
taste ;  the  fireworks  not  better  than  usual,  but  repeated 
three  times  during  the  evening. 

Wednesday,  2\st. — We  saw  Madame  de  Stael  this 
morning  at  her  own  house,  who  very  much  amused  us 
with  her  ideas  of  English  society.  She  will  soon  be  dis- 
gusted  with  it :  I  have  always  prophesied  that. 

Thursday,  22nd. — Went  to  Little  Strawberry. 

Friday,  23rd. — We  went  in  the  morning  for  a  short 
time  to  the  late  Mr.  Walter's*  house,  where  they  were 
selling  all  off  by  auction.  The  magnificence  of  the  drawing- 
room  furniture  is  very  great.  It  is  only  in  this  country 
that  the  editor  of  a  paper  could  live  at  such  an  expense. 

Sir  William  Gell  had  just  returned  at  this  time  .to 
England,  and  was  thus  cordially  welcomed  by  the  Miss 
Berrys : — 

From  Miss  Berry  to  Sir  William  Gell. 

Twickenham,  24th  July,  1813. 

You  can  never  be  half  so  glad  to  see  us  as  we  shall  be  to  see 
you.  In  short,  all  your  particular  friends  have  agreed  among 
themselves  that  they  cannot  do  without  you  ;  so  never  think  of 
being  allowed  to  go  to  Phigalia  again,  except  you  travel  like  a 
Tartar  prince,  with  your  whole  horde  about  you. 

When  we  shall  see  you  here  Heaven  knows,  for  you  will  be 
one  of  the  great  lions  of  London  yourself;  and  you  have  just 
come  in  time  to  save  Mde.  de  Stael's  life,  who  certainly  would 
have  roared  herself  to  death  in  another  week. 

When  you  will  be  allowed  to  go  and  show  yourself  at  the 
country  fairs  I  know  not,  but  I  am  not  without  hopes  that  you 
will,  ere  it  be  very  long,  break  away  from  your  keepers,  and 
give  us  a  look  of  you  here. 

We  have  a  snug  little  den  prepared  for  you.  I  am  ready 
with  a  hearty  embrace,  Agnes  with  another,  accompanied  by  a 
continuation  of  the  old  dispute,  as  good  as  new,  Penelope's 

*  Editor  of  the  Times  newspaper. 


1813]  THE    PRINCESS   OF   WALES.  539 

suitors,  and  endless,  like  her  own  web — and  *  then  Mrs.  Harrot 
descends  from  her  garret,'  to  make  you  such  a  pudding  as  shall 
put  all  other  puddings  to  the  blush,  not  to  mention  an  Alderney 
cow,  which  we  have  hired  on  purpose  to  give  you  as  much  milk 
and  cream  as  you  like,  hot  and  hot. 

And  now  farewell,  for  lions  have  as  little  time  for  reading  as 
for  writing  letters. 

JOUKNAL. 

Sunday,  2&th. — About  four  o'clock  the  Princess  arrived 
very  unexpectedly  with  Lady  Charlotte.  She  had  luncheon, 
stayed  and  talked  till  nearly  five  o'clock,  when  she  was 
obliged  to  take  Gell  to  Brandenberg  House  to  dinner. 
The  Princess  is  melancholy,  and  almost  in  ill  humour, 
now  seeing  more  nearly  the  truth  as  to  her  position. 

Saturday,  3lst. — We  dined  early,  to  go  on  the  water 
from  six  till  past  nine  o'clock :  it  was  a  delicious  evening, 
and  the  scene  at  Bichmond  in  great  beauty.  Here  the 
large  ship,  the  Navigation  Barge,  filled  with  people, 
stopped  for  some  time.  We  rowed,  with  a  hundred  other 
boats  also  filled  \vith  people,  around  the  barge,  on  board 
of  which  they  were  dancing  and  playing  music. 

Tuesday,  August  3rd. — Whilst  Agnes  and  my  father 
were  taking  tea,  the  Princess  of  Wales  arrived,  with  Lady 
Charlotte  Lindsay,  Gell,  his  sister,  and  the  little  Willy. 
There  was  nothing  to  be  done  but  to  give  them  some 
tea  and  coffee.  The  Princess  is  always  in  good  humour, 
and  takes  all  in  good  part  when  she  falls  in  like  a  shot. 
She  took  a  short  walk  in  the  garden,  and  returned  about 
ten  o'clock  to  Kensington. 

Thursday,  19th. — Lady  Glenbervie  and  Lady  Charlotte 
Lindsay  came  this  afternoon.  We  were  under  the  beeches 
with  them  when  the  Duchess  of  Devonshire  arrived,  with 
Madame  de  Stael,  her  daughter,  and  Mr.  Foster,  in  a 
barouche.  We  sat  together  under  the  trees,  and  after 
Lady  Glenbervie  and  Charlotte  were  gone,  Madame  de 


540  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL. 

Stael  related  to  us  for  nearly  an  hour  the  works  that  she 
thought  of  writing,  three  to  be  published  during  her  life- 
time, and  one  after  her  death ;  all  that  with  a  detail  and 
a  rapidity  truly  amusing. 

Miss  Berry's  letter  to  Lady  Hardwicke  gives  a  lively 
description  of  the  last  few  weeks  spent  at  Little  Straw- 
berry. 

Letter  to  Lady  Hardwicke. 

September  llth,  1813. 

Where  are  we,  and  what  have  we  been  about  ?  Why  we  have 
been  keeping  a  guingette  (Anglice,  a  hedge  ale-house),  to  which 
I  have  assigned  the  sign  of  the  *  Cat  and  Bagpipes,'  where 
everybody  has  seemed  to  take  it  for  granted  that  they  were  sure 
to  find  *  Tea  and  coffee,'  *  Hot  roast  and  boiled  every  day,'  and 
1  Dinners  dressed  on  the  shortest  notice.'  Certainly  our  custom 
in  the  chance  line  has  been  great,  to  say  nothing  of  our  beds 
having  been  always  '  slept  in  the  night  before* 

Thus  have  passed  the  six  or  eight  weeks  which  I  had  destined 
to  quiet  reading,  to  Charles  the  Second,  the  Duchess  of  Cleve- 
land, and  many  such  worthies  ! 

But  we  are  now  shortly  going  to  a  retreat  which  we  shall 
certainly  find  sufficiently  retired — I  mean  N.  Audley  St.  Our 
business  here  in  the  public  line,  however  great,  has  not,  as  you 
may  suspect,  been  profitable,  so  that  we  cannot  make  any  fur- 
ther excursions  enfamille  this  year.  We  have,  however,  much 
enjoyed  our  sojourn  at  this  pretty  little  place,  which  was  never 
in  greater  beauty. 

Parting  with  it,  however  necessary,  and  however  I  have  wished 
it,  will  be  a  pang — parting  with  it  for  seven  years ! — for  more, 
much  more,  than  ever  to  me  !  N'en  parlons  plus.  '  Quite  the 
contrary.'  Let  me  tell  you  that  Madame  de  Stael  sticks  to  her 
intention  of  coming  to  you  the  middle  of  November — that  I 
stick  to  my  intention  of  meeting  her,  and  that  Sir  J.  Mackintosh, 
who  in  October  is  going,  not  fox-hunting,  but  paper-hunting,  to 
the  Duke  of  Leeds,  in  Yorkshire,  intends  meeting  us  both  at 
Wimpole  on  his  return, — if  you  and  Lord  Hardwicke  do  not  for- 
bid these  banns.  Long  before  that  time  I  trust  you  will  have 
drunk  your  fill  of  Malvern.  By  the  bye,  drinking  puts  me  in 
mind  of  four  ridiculous  lines,  being  an  account  of  the  travels  of 


1813]  LETTER   FROM   MADAME   DE   STAEL.  541 

the  learned  Person,  which  Sir  J.  Mackintosh  repeated  to  us  the 
other  day,  and  which  I  send  to  Lord  Hardwicke : — 

f  I  went  to  Strasbourg  to  get  drunk 
With  that  learned  Grecian  Brouncke ; 
And  then  to  Leipzig  to  get  drunker 
With  that  more  learned  Grecian  Brouncker.' 

Upon  which  Madame  de  Stae'l  exclaimed,  (Ah  !  que  c'est  joli  !  ' 
an  application  of  the  word  which  amused  me  almost  as  much  as 
the  lines. 

The  said  Stae'l  is  still  at  Eichmond  till  the  end  of  the  month, 
when  her  torrent  of  words  and  ideas  will  no  longer  flow  into  the 
Thames,  but  turn  its  course  towards  London,  and  then  to  Lord 
Lansdowne's,  and  then  into  Staffordshire,  and  then — '  To  Nova 
Zembla  and  the  Lord  knows  where  ; '  but  still  she  sticks  to  being 
at  Wimpole  the  middle  of  November. 

I  trust  and  hope  long  before  that  time  to  have  better  accounts 
of  your  voice  ;  but  if  you  must  still  be  deprived  of  it,  there  can- 
not certainly  be  a  more  convenient  visitor  to  a  dumb  woman 
than  Madame  de  Stae'l. 

The  Dowager  Duchess  of  M.  is  very  much  one  of  the  women 
whom  a  friend  of  ours  calls  virtuous  by  patent.  But  she  has 
very  much  the  manners  of  a  lady,  which  neither  her  patent  for 
virtue,  nor  even  that  of  nobility,  gives. 

The  following  letter  from  Madame  de  Stae'l  to  Miss  Berry 
appears  to  have  been  written  from  some  country  house : — 

Jeudi,  23  Sept. 

Je  vous  dirai  bien  sincerement  que  votre  lettre  m'a  fait  un 
grand  bien.  J'ai  besoin  de  vous  donner  toute  la  confiance  de 
mon  coeur ;  et  cette  amitie,  qui  n'a  point  de  secrets  ni  de  soup- 
cons,  est  tout  a  fait  n^cessaire  a  mon  bonheur.  Je  prefere  votre 
esprit,  votre  caractere,  tout  vous  enfin,  aux  autres,  et  je  vous 
prie  de  me  permettre  de  compter  sur  vous  comme  vous  devez 
compter  sur  moi.  Cette  declaration,  plus  franche  que  celle  des 
Al lie's,  etant  faite,  je  reviens  a  mes  interets  du  jour.  Vous  dinez 
chez  moi  dimanche,  et  je  reviens  demain.  Je  ne  sais  pas  si 
ma  fille  communiera  ou  non  samedi,  c'est  le  ministre  de  la 
paroisse  qui  doit  en  decider.  II  y  a  ici  Lady  Cowper,  Lady 


542  MISS  BERET'S  JOURNAL.  [isis 

Caroline,  les  maris  de  ces  dames,  Mr.  Nugent,  Mr.  Ward. 
Lady  Besborough  est  partie  ce  matin,  et  Lord  Melburne  nous  a 
quitte,  quoiqu'il  fut  assez  bien  apprivoise  avec  moi.  Y  a-t-il  des 
nouvelles  de  la  paix  ou  de  la  guerre  ?  Vous  concevez  de  quel 
interet  cela  est  pour  moi.  Entre  les  Cosaques  et  le  Corse,  je 
vois  bien  peu  d'espoir  de  liberte  pour  la  France,  et  je  ne  sais 
que  souhaiter,  inais  je  sais  tres-bien  que  craindre.  Aimez-moi, 
je  vous  prie,  avec  indulgence  a  de  certains  egards,  parce  que 
vous  avez  su  faire  plus  de  sacrifices  que  moi;  mais  ce  qui 
ajoute  a  votre  merite  c'est  que  nos  caracteres  ont  plus  d'analogie 
que  nos  actions.  Adieu.  Tachez  done  de  guerir  ces  maux  de 
tete.  Voyez  Farquhar ;  il  me  traite.  Adieu. 


JOUENAL. 

Saturday,  September  18th. — We  signed  with  Alderman 
Wood  the  agreement  for  our  pretty  little  house  for  seven 
years  at  one  hundred  and  fifty  guineas  a  year,  he  paying 
the  taxes,  repairs,  and  every  other  expense.  It  is  very 
little  for  property  in  this  neighbourhood,  and  in  such  a 
good  situation.  After  going  round  the  garden,  &c.,  we 
told  him  he  could  take  possession  after  Wednesday  next. 
I  wish  that  the  Wednesday  were  passed,  because  adieux 
are  always  sad. 

Wednesday,  22nd. — Eemoved  to  London.  It  was  fine 
— I  was  very  glad,  bad  weather  would  have  increased 
the  sadness  of  our  adieu  to  Little  Strawberry.  I  took  a 
turn  round  the  enclosure  quite  alone.  The  recollections 
that  my  walk  brought  to  mind  were  all  melancholy. 
During  twenty- two  years  that  I  had  owned  it,  I  had  been 
but  little  happy ;  still  though  I  left  it  with  regret,  I  told 
myself  that  this  separation  was  necessary :  I  had  long 
wished  for  it,  as  that  would  save  us  from  an  expense  and 
from  cares  which  weighed  down  upon  us,  and  which  in- 
creased more  arid  more  every  day.  That  the  last  two 
months  had  perhaps  been  the  greatest  enjoyment  that  I 
had  ever  had  in  the  place,  because  I  was  almost  sure  of 


1813]  MADAME   DE   STAEL. — CCBRAX.  543 

being  quit  of  it.  I  said  to  myself  all  that,  I  felt  the  truth 
of  it,  but  notwithstanding  I  suffered,  and  should  have 
felt  sorry  if  I  had  not  suffered. 

Saturday,  October  2nd. — In  the  evening  Agnes  and  I 
went  to  Sir  J.  Mackintosh's,  where  Madame  de  Stael  had 
dined ;  we  found  there  the  Davys,  Ward,  Lord  Byron, 
Malthus,  Curran  *  the  famous  Irish  advocate,  and  some 
other  men.  Madame  de  Stael  appropriated  as  usual 
Curran,  though  Sir  James  tried  and  succeeded  in  making 
the  conversation  more  general.  Curran's  conversation  is 
eloquent,  but  without  taste. 

Tuesday,  5th. — Saw  Lord  Webb  Seymour.  In  the 
evening  we  went  to  Madame  de  Stael,  where  there  was  a 
very  agreeable  society  of  about  half-a-dozen  ladies  and 
twenty  gentlemen.  One  should  never  have  said,  in  looking 
at  the  company  yesterday,  that  one  was  in  London  in  the 
month  of  October.  London  would  be  really  delightful  if 
it  was  never  fuUer  than  at  the  present  time. 

Wednesday,  6th. — Dined  at  the  Princess's.  The  Prin- 
cess joined  less  in  the  conversation  than  I  ever  saw  her 
before. 

Saturday,  $th. — At  dinner  we  had  Sir  H.  and  Lady 
Davy,  Mrs.  Darner,  Lord  W.  Seymour,  and  Frederick 
Douglas.  In  the  evening,  Madame  de  Stael  and  her 
daughter,  the  two  Kawdons,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Gordon,  Mr. 
Mercer,  Mr.  Ward,  Dr.  Kinnaird,  Mr.  Boswell,  the  Coun- 
tesse  de  Palmella.  A  very  good  little  society,  where 
Madame  de  Stael  and  Ward  talked  a  great  deal  and  very 
well. 

Monday,  l~Lth. — I  went  to  Madame  de  Stael  f  in  the 

*  James  Curran,  born  1750.  He  was  regarded  as  one  of  the  leading 
Irish  patriots ;  greatly  distinguished  by  his  oratory  in  the  stormy  debates  of 
the  Irish  House  of  Commons,  and  by  his  strong  opposition  to  the  union  of 
Ireland  with  England ;  died  1817. 

t  ' .  .  .  S'il  fait  mauvais,  ne  sortez  pas,  et  donnez-moi  seulement  la 
consolation  de  votre  socie'te'  des  que  vous  le  pourrez.  Ma  fille  eat  aussi  bien 
qu'une  rougeole  puisse  la  pennettre.' 


544  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL. 

morning,  knowing  that  her  daughter  had  the  measles. 
I  conversed  quietly  and  agreeably  with  her  for  half  an 
hour. 

Tuesday,  \§th. — Eeturning  home  from  dinner  with 
Madame  de  Stael,  I  found  a  man  sleeping  upon  the  door- 
steps ;  our  servants  called  to  the  watchman  to  take  charge 
of  him.  The  threshold  of  the  door  was  all  covered  with 
blood,  which  had  been  running  from  the  wounds  in  his 
head.  The  poor  man  had  been  ill-treated  in  the  streets, 
he  had  knocked  loudly  at  our  door  for  assistance,  having 
seen  a  light.  At  last  the  watchmen  carried  him  away 
upon  a  stretcher,  that  I  made  them  make  of  a  door  which 
our  men  had  given  them. 

Sunday,  31st. — Dined  at  Kensington  with  Lady  Glen- 
bervie  and  Lady  Charlotte ;  the  other  visitors  were 
Douglas  Kinnaird  and  Mr.  Lewis.  The  Princess  was  in 
good  humour,  but  not  very  cheerful,  and  appearing  to 
find  her  situation  more  hopeless,  without  the  death  of  one 
of  the  two, — which  is  very  true. 

Saturday,  November  Qth. — I  have  seen  the  best  of  the 
illuminations  for  the  great  success  of  the  allies  in  Ger- 
many. Carlton  House  was  very  brilliant,  the  Admiralty 
and  all  the  Government  Offices,  the  Ministers'  houses, 
and  the  houses  of  other  official  men,  but  the  illumination 
is  not  at  all  general,  and  though  this  evening  (Saturday) 
there  were  a  great  number  of  people  in  the  streets, 
towards  Pall  Mall  and  Whitehall  there  was  not  the  least 
confusion,  and  in  our  quarter  perfect  tranquillity. 

Wednesday,  17th. — In  the  morning  I  saw  Ward  for  a 
moment,  and  afterwards  I  was  with  the  Princess  for  an 
hour  at  her  house.*  It  is  anything  but  a  palace,  but  the 
situation  is  good,  and  she  is  certainly  better  lodged  than 
I  have  ever  seen  her  elsewhere. 

Wednesday,  2&th. — They  fired  the  guns  for  the  re- 
establishment  of  the  British  Government  at  Hanover,  and 

*  Connaught  Place. 


18T3]  LETTER   TO   LADY   GEORGIAN  MORPETH.  545 

in  the  evening  we  heard  the  news  of  the  taking  of  St.  Fe 
in  France  by  Lord  Wellington. 

TJiursday,  25th. — At  nine  o'clock  in  the  morning  the 
guns  were  fired  for  the  news  of  the  preceding  evening, 
and  again  between  three  and  four,  for  the  arrival  of  the 
news  of  the  taking  of  Dresden  by  the  Allies.  No  one 
ever  remembered  the  guns  being  fired  three  times  in 
thirty-six  hours,  as  it  has  now  happened. 

From  Miss  Berry  to  Lady  Georgiana  Morpeth. 

November  25th,  1813. 

MY  DEAR  GL, — I  have  appeared  very  ungrateful  in  not  sooner 
thanking  you  for  your  letter  of  the  30th  from  Castle  Howard ; 
but  I  have  the  old,  tiresome,  but  alas  I  too  real  excuse  of  such 
health,  as  actually  eats  up  three  parts  of  my  existence.  I  am 
consequently  left  with  but  a  fourth  part  of  the  time  which  people 
possess  for  the  business,  the  amusements,  and  the  idlenesses  of 
life.  This  makes  me  live  in  a  perpetual  vain  attempt  to  do 
more  than  is  possible. 

The  retirement  of  London,  in  which  I  thought  I  was  going 
to  do  so  much  after  the  dissipation  of  Twickenham,  has  turned 
out,  as  London  always  does  to  me  (except  during  what  is  called 
the  season),  so  agreeable,  so  much  good  society,  and  one  could 
so  well  enjoy  it,  that  I  have  had  just  as  little  time  to  myself  as 
I  had  in  the  country. 

The  Stael  left  Richmond  much  about  the  same  time  that  we 
left  Twickenham,  and  wherever  she  is,  there  will  society  be  also 
— if  it  is  to  be  had  within  ten  miles  a  la  ronde.  Except  during 
her  visit  to  Bowood,  and  now  that  she  is  for  a  week  at  Middle- 
ton,*  she  has  been  constantly  in  town,  giving  very  agreeable 
dinners  and  soirees,  with  two  or  three  women  and  half-a-dozen 
men — dont  ette  se  charge  toute  seule. 

She  is  always  entertaining,  and  I,  who  know  her  so  much  and 
so  well,  will  add  always  good-natured,  and  never  mechanic. 
Ward  and  she  will  amuse  you.  She  thinks  him  handsome,  and 
d'un  joli  tourneur.  I  tell  her  she  has  undertaken  two  miracles, 

*  Seat  of  the  Earl  of  Jersey,  in  Oxfordshire. 
VOL.  II.  K  N 


546  MISS  BEEBY'S  JOUENAL. 

to  make  him  poli  envers  les  femmes,  et  pieux  envers  Dieu. 
And  there  is  no  saying,  if  they  go  on,  what  her  success  may  be. 
En  attendant,  they  make  very  good  company  for  other  people. 

Among  the  agreeables,  we  have  had  Lady  Harrowby  in  town 
for  some  weeks. 

JOUKNAL. 

Wednesday,  Dec.  1st. — We  both  of  us  dined  with  the 
Princess  in  Connaught  Place,  the  first  time  that  she  has 
given  a  dinner  in  her  new  house,  which  is  still  all  upside 
down.  The  company  consisted  only  of  Gell  and  Craven, 
who  arrived  in  town  to-day.  Lady  C.  Campbell  and 
Lady  C.  Lindsay  in  waiting.  The  Princess  was  particu- 
larly melancholy,  wept  when  speaking  to  me  of  herself, 
confessing  herself  entirely  overwhelmed  with  her  situation 
and  her  prospects  for  the  future. 

Tuesday,  1th. — Dined  at  Lord  Stafford's  with  Madame 
de  Stael,  her  daughter,  and  her  son,  Sir  James  and  Lady 
Mackintosh,  &c.  In  the  evening  more  guests,  making  a 
very  agreeable  soiree.  At  dinner  the  conversation  rather 
flagged.  Madame  de  Stael  was  not  excited  enough  ;  it 
appeared  to  me  that  she  only  wanted  that  to  be  as  bril- 
liant as  usual,  though  she  had  to-day  received  the  news 
of  the  death  of  Comte  Louis  de  Narbonne.  One  must 
acknowledge  that  one  could  not  lose  an  old  lover  more 
gaily,  as  it  was  said  of  Charles  the  Vllth  of  his  kingdom. 

Saturday,  llth. — At  nine  o'clock  in  the  evening  I  went 
to  Madame  de  Stael's.  The  Duke  of  Sussex,  Lord  and 
Lady  Liverpool,  Lord  Harrowby,  and  several  diplomats, 
had  dined  there.  In  the  evening  other  ladies  arrived, 
Lady  Stafford  and  her  daughter  Mrs.  G.  Lamb,  &c. 

Sunday,  2Qth. — Dined  at  Madame  de  Stael's  with  Sir 
James  and  Lady  Mackintosh,  Mr.  Ward,  The  Comte  Pal- 
milla,  Mr.  Sharp,  and  her  own  family.  A  very  agreeable 
dinner:  two  or  three  artists  in  the  evening. 

Wednesday,  29th. — Dined  at  the  Princess's :  there  were 


1813]  LETTER  PROM   SIR  UVEDALE   PRICE.  547 

only  Mr.  Craven,  Little  "Willy,*  and  a  young  playfellow  of 
his,  and  Lady  Orme  :  these  dinners  become  insupportable ; 
the  dulness  makes  me  almost  ill  in  the  course  of  a  long 
evening,  only  interrupted  by  the  Princess  singing  with 
Mr.  Craven,  which  is  a  screeching  of  which  no  idea  can 
be  formed  without  hearing  it. 

From  Sir  Uvedale  Price  to  Miss  Berry. 

Foxley,  December  18th,1813. 

.  .  .  .  I  want  your  assistance  in  making  some  inquiries, 
which,  as  you  may  suppose,  relate  to  the  work  about  which  I 
am  very  busily  employed.  I  have  never  told  you  exactly  what 
it  was  to  be,  and  as  I  feel  sure  that  you  take  the  same  interest 
in  my  productions  that  I  do  in  yours — scribetur  tibi  forma 
loquacitur  ;  and,  indeed,  something  of  the  kind  is  necessary  by 
way  of  preface  to  the  inquiries.  If  our  two  publications  should 
happen  to  come  out  at  the  same  time,  we  shall  produce  them 
under  similar  titles,  for  mine  is  intended  to  be  a  *  Comparative 
View  '  of  the  different  opinions  respecting  visible  beauty  ;  other 
kinds  of  beauty  will  of  course  be  often  considered,  but  chiefly 
in  the  way  of  illustration.  Hogarth's  '  Analyses  of  Beauty '  is,  I 
believe,  the  first  book  written  in  our  language  on  the  subject, 
and,  as  far  as  I  know,  in  any  other.  Many  things  in  it  have 
been  laughed  at,  and  are  open  to  ridicule ;  but  it  contains  a 
number  of  just  and  original  observations,  and  Burke's  theory  is 
in  a  great  degree  taken  from  it,  though  he  has  not  acknowledged 
hi§  obligations.  The  principal  writers,  after  these  two,  are 
Knight,  Dugald  Stewart,  and  Alison,  at  least  I  know  of  no 
others.  Alison's  theory  is  at  present  the  most  popular ;  partly  I 
believe  from  its  being  very  flattering  to  the  spiritual  part  of  our 
nature,  and  partly  from  its  having  been  very  highly  spoken  of, 
and  very  ingeniously  explained  and  illustrated,  in  the '  Edinburgh 
Eeview  '  of  1811.  I  will  not  say,  as  Knight  said  to  me  in  one  of 
his  letters  about  Burke's  theory  (giving  one  a  strong  hint  that 
he  should  serve  mine  the  same  sauce),  *  If  I  do  not  cut  up  "  The 
Sublime  and  Beautiful "  root  and  branch,  set  me  down  for  a 
blockhead.'  The  risk  is  too  great  in  case  of  failure ;  for  an 
author  of  nice  sensibility  should  be  less  afraid  of  having  his  head 
*  William  Austen. 
2  N  2 


548  MISS  BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [ms 

laid  on  the  block,  than  of  having  the  block  fixed  to  his  head.  I 
will  venture  to  say,  however,  that,  if  I  am  not  strangely  mis- 
taken, Mr.  Alison's  theory  will  be  found  on  examination,  in 
many  essential  points,  more  like  the  baseless  fabric  of  a  vision 
than  the  strong-based  promontory.  You  will  not  suppose  from 
this  that  I  deny,  or  do  not  feel  and  acknowledge  in  its  fullest 
extent,  the  powerful  influence  of  association ;  I  only  question 
the  exclusive  influence  which  has  been  attributed  to  it,  and  by 
that,  something  may  be  allowed,  where  visible  beauty  is  con- 
cerned, to  form  colour  and  physical  qualities.  Fitzpatrick,  in 
that  exquisite  poem  I  once  read  to  you,  has  settled  the  matter 
most  judiciously,  and  one  might  almost  think  that  he  had  these 
metaphysicians  in  view  when  he  makes  the  Soul  say  to  the  Body, 

Yet  trust  me,  I'm  willing  to  waive  all  dispute ; 
For  though  certain  grave  doctors,  by  few  understood, 
Think  they  flatter  me  much  when  they  call  you  a  brute, 
Those  who  wish  to  divide  us  can  mean  us  no  good. 

So  much  for  my  preface ;  now  for  the  inquiries.  The  review 
was  made  on  a  late  edition  of  Alison ;  my  remarks  on  the  first 
in  1790;  and  I  believe  that  there  was  none  between  the  two. 
This  I  could  wish  you  to  inquire ;  and  also  whether  in  the  last 
edition  there  is  much  that  is  entirely  Dew,  or  whether  there  are 
many  essential  alterations.  The  other  inquiry  I  wish  you  to 
make  is  of  a  more  extensive  kind.  I  believe  I  am  acquainted 
with  most  of  the  English  authors  who  have  written  on  the  sub- 
ject in  question ;  but  I  do  not  know  of  any  who  have  expressly 
written  on  it  in  French.  You  are  likely  to  know  whether  there 
be  any  such  treatise,  or  anything  worth  notice  mixed  with  other 
matter ;  and  if  you  should  not,  your  friend  Madame  de  Stael, 
though  she  may  not  have  turned  her  mind  particularly  to  objects 
of  that  kind,  is  very  likely  to  know  what  has  been  written  on 
them,  and  perhaps  you  will  get  what  information  you  can  for 
me.  I  never  happened  to  be  in  company  with  her,  and  I  thought 
myself  very  unlucky,  particularly  as  Spencer  asked  me  to  meet 
her  one  evening  at  his  house.  I  remember  that  Mdme.  Moreau 
was  likewise  to  be  there.  You  may  very  well  ask  what  could 
keep  me  away.  I  am  almost  ashamed  of  saying  it  was  a  con- 
cert, which,  in  spite  of  my  passion  for  music,  I  should  have 
given  up,  but  it  was  not  only  a  very  choice  one,  but  one  to  which 


1813]  LETTER   FEOM   SIR   UVEDALE   PRICE.  549 

Lady  Douglas  was,  as  a  great  favour,  allowed  to  carry  me.  In 
the  way  there  she  gave  me  an  excellent  account  of  a  conversa- 
tion she  had  overheard  between  Madame  de  Stael  and  Lord 
Erskine.  I  have  not  yet  seen  '  L'Allemagne  ; '  but  your  letter  is 
full  of  it,  and  Lord  Holland,  in  one  of  his,  asks  me,  Have  you 
read '  L'Allemagne '  ? '  Du  bruit  de  Bajazet  mon  ame  importunee ' 
can  have  no  rest  till  I  have  read  it,  and  I  have  no  doubt  of  the 
pleasure  it  will  give  me.  She  is  certainly  a  very  extraordinary 
woman,  even  when  one  considers  the  stock  she  comes  from,  and 
how  highly  bred  she  is,  for  thinking  and  writing. 

Upon  reading  a  few  days  ago  in  the  papers  an  account  of  the 
Queen  of  Naples'  magnificent  reception  at  the  Ottoman  court, 
it  occurred  to  me  that  the  Grand  Signior  might  have  taken  a 
fancy  for  her.  She  carries  me  back  to  Naples,  and  brings  to  my 
mind  her  last  exploit  there,  and  the  blot,  the  only  blot  in  Nel- 
son's character,  when  he  gave  his  sanction  to  such  abominations, 

Against  his  better  knowledge,  not  deceived, 
But  fondly  overcome  with  female  charm. 


END  OF  THE  SECOND  VOLUME. 


LOHDOK 

VBINTBD    BY    SrOTTISWOODX    AND    CO. 
HBW-STMBT  BQUABB 


DA  Berry,  Mary 

536        Extracts  of  the  journals 

33A2  and  correspondence  from  the 

1895  year  1783  to  1852 


--- VOLUME III ---

JOURNALS    AND    CORRESPONDENCE. 


YOL.  III. 


LO\nON 

PniNTED     BY    SPOTTISWOODK     ji  J«  D    CO. 

NEW-STRBET    SQUARE 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2010  with  funding  from 

University  of  Pittsburgh  Library  System 


http://www.archive.org/details/extractsofjourna03berr 


K  Z 


Y. 


iTT(i,,n  limgiMAii  8eC* 


EXTEACTS        ■     '"'""' ^  ^^r,,  o,,uuGTor. 

MEMORffli   LIBKAHY 
UNIVERSITY  OF  PITTSBVHGH 


OF   THE 


JOURNALS    AND    CORRESPONDENCE 


OF 


MISS    BEREY 


FROM    THE     YEAE     1783     TO     1852. 


EDITED     BY 


LADY    THERESA    LEWIS. 


>  1 


>       i  > 

'  I   >  )    . 


>    »    >     .    3 


>  > 


IN    THREE    VOLUMES. 

VOL.  III. 


>  >  J 


LONDON : 

LONGMANS,     GREEN,     AND     CO. 

18G5. 


/  3  7/ 


^ 


rv 


» 

c  o  -c 

c      o      <■ 

■  •  1 


'•..', 


u,, 


JOURNAL 


Am) 


CORRESPONDENCE   OF  MISS   BERRY. 


1814. 

Thursday^  January  Qth.  —  Dined  with  Madame  de 
Stael  at  half-past  five  o'clock,  with  Palmella,*  and  an 
aide-de-camp  of  the  Prince  Eoyal  of  Sweden,  who  had 
just  landed.  It  was  the  same  day  that  the  news  arrived 
of  the  entry  of  the  AlKes  into  Switzerland  and  France. 
One  talked,  thought,  and  breathed  but  of  this  news.  I 
tried  to  persuade  Madame  de  Stael  to  let  us  remain  talk- 
ing by  her  fireside,  instead  of  going  out  in  the  cold  to  the 
play ;  but  she  had  the  Duke  of  Devonshire's  box,  and 
would  take  her  Swedish  aide-de-camp  to  the  theatre. 

Monday^  lO^A. — Before  dinner,  Douglas  Kinnakdf  came 
in,  bringing  with  him  Dawson,J  Lord  Cathcart's  aide-de- 
camp, just  arrived  with  the  despatches  from  the  head- 
quarters of  the  Crown  Prince.  I  was  very  glad  to  see 
him. 

Saturday,  loth. — In  the  morning  went  to  Mrs.  Damer's 
to  meet  the  Princess  of  Wales,  who  was  there  for  her  last 
sitting  for  a  bust. 

*  Portuguese  Minister. 

t  Hon.  Douglas  Kinnaird,  brother  to  Lord  Kinnaird. 
\  The  late  Hon,  George  Dawson  Darner,  brother  to  the  late  Earl  of  Por- 
tarlington. 

VOL.  in.  B 


2  '        MISS   BERRY'S   JOURNAL.  [1814 

To  the  Countess  of  Hardwicke  froTn  Miss  Bei^y. 

« 

North  Audley  Street,  Monday,  Jan.  17, 1814. 

My  dinner  with  the  Genevans,  at  M"^""^  de  Stael's,  turned 
out  less  amusing  than  I  expected.  They,  none  of  them,  know 
anything  of  their  little  Eepuhlic  but  what  they  see  in  the  Eng- 
lish papers ;  but  they  talk  with  perfect  satisfaction  of  the 
restoration  of  their  old  Government,  in  which  (you  may  remem- 
ber) they  were  always  upon  the  point  of  cutting  one  another's 
throats  every  three  or  four  years  ;  but  still,  however,  it  seems 
they  got  on  like  man  and  wife  with  much  satisfaction,  '  kissing 
to-day,  to-morrow  snarling.'  I  much  doubt,  however,  if  any  of 
the  very  little  States  can  return  to  this  sort  of  independence 
upon  the  re-settlement  of  Europe  in  the  present  day.  ]\Iad^  de 
Stael  is  in  despair  about  France.  She  cannot  bear  what  she 
calls  the  humiliation  of  the  Allies  marching  to  Paris.  Slie 
wants  the  annihilation  of  Bonaparte  (which  she  dout  think  will 
take  place),  and  she  don't  want  the  return  of  the  Bourbons.  In 
short,  1  think  she  is  rather  dans  le  vague  de  Vinjinee  in  what 
she  wants  about  France,  except  that  she  wishes  for  a  liberty, 
a  real  constitutional  liberty,  for  which,  I  believe,  PVance  is  no 
more  fit  than  Turkey  ;  but  this  she  won't  bear  to  hear.  Pray, 
bring  your  Mldnifjht  Lamp  to  town  as  soon  as  possible.  Re- 
member, that  the  only  pleasant  quiet  society  will  be  before 
Parliament  meets  in  March,  when  all  the  world  will  go  mad 
together. 

1  dined  at  the  Princess's  with  Knight,  Ward,  Brougham,  and 
somebody  else,  I  forget  who;  which  is  all  at  present  from  your 
half-animated,  and  from  the  animated  half  of  your  faithfully 
atiectionate 

M.  B. 

Thursday^  20th. — The  streets  were  so  full  of  snow,  and 
it  continued  to  fall  so  thick,  that  I  would  not  take  the 
servants  and  iiorses  out.  At  about  four  o'cloi-k  ]\l:idaiue 
de  Sttii-'l  arrived,  saying  it  was  beautiful  weather  to  pay 
visits,  put  her  feet  upon  the  fender,  and  stayed  talking 
Avitli  me  for  nearly  an  lioiu\  Her  conversation  always 
excites  me. 


1814]  LETTERS.  3 

Saturday^  22nd. — The  evening  at  Madame  de  Stael's. 
IVI.  *  and  Madame  de  Lieven  and  other  strangers  there. 

Wednesday.,  26th. — The  thaw  commenced  to-day,  after 
four  weeks  and  three  days  of  continual  frost,  accompanied 
by  a  whole  week  of  thick  fog,  and  after  a  fall  of  snow 
such  as  I  never  remember  to  have  seen  before,  even  in 
the  remarkable  winters  of  1788  and  1795.  The  streets 
have  been  in  a  state  like  a  deep  sandy  road,  and  the  few 
carriages  that  were  out  went  in  the  same  slow  and  silent 
manner. 

Miss  Beny  to  the  Coicntess  of  Hardwicke. 

North  Audley  Street,  Friday  Morning,  Jan.  28,  1814, 

As  the  frost  is  over,  and  there  is  uo  danger  of  your  catching 
cold  by  leaving  off  your  perpetual  wrath,  even  against  me,  who 
you  have  distinguished  above  tout  le  genre  humain  by  its 
excess,  I  will  just  soothe  you  in  a  moment,  and  reduce  you  to 
a  cool,  pleasant,  fresh  tranquillity  of  agreement,  by  telling  you 
that  there  is  nobody  who  desires  and  hopes  for  peace  so  earnestly 
as  myself;  nobody  who  so  deprecates  the  entrance  of  a  Bourbon 
into  France  in,  with,  or  by  our  armies.  If  they  want  them,  let 
them  send  for  them  unbidden,-  unthreatened,  as  we  did  for 
Charles  II.  to  Breda.  If  they  don't  want  them,  let  them  con- 
tinue to  bow  the  neck  under  the  iron  yolce  of  Bonaparte,  or 
let  them  again  try  their  hand  at  their  ridiculous  and  impossible 
Eepublic,  which,  however  it  begun,  would  surely  end  in  a 
second  edition  of  military  despotism  under  some  of  Bonaparte's 
apprentices.  If  you  were  to  ask  me,  or  if  you  were  to  ask  your- 
self, what  Grovernment  (as  an  English  patriot)  you  would  prefer 
to  see  established  in  France,  I  should  say,  and  you  too,  a  mo- 
narchy under  the  Bourbons.  We  know  their  individual  value, 
and  both  them  and  their  country  will  be  sufficiently  anxious  for 
repose  during  the  next  fifteen  or  twenty  years.  But  to  attempt 
putting  them  upon  the  throne,  or  even  to  advance  one  step 
further  in  France  merely  on  their  account,  is  a  madness  of  which 
I  really  beheve  neither  ourselves  or  our  Allies  are  going  to  be 
guilty.    I  am  persuaded  by  all  I  hear  that  peace  will  be  signed 

*  Russian  Ambassador  diu-ing  many  years  in  England. 

b2 


4  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1814 

with  Bonaparte  bfore  the  meeting  of  Parliament.  I  have  three 
wagers  on  this,  and  should  be  willing  to  take  more.  Every 
town  to  which  the  Allies  have  advanced,  and  every  place  they 
have  occupied  in  France,  have  been  defended,  not  with  spirit, 
not  with  effect,  but  with  the  almost  exhausted  efforts  of  people 
incapable  even  of  the  energy  necessary  to  relieve  themselves, 
or  frightened  at  what  might  be  the  possible  consequences  of 
that  relief.  I  verily  believe  that  Lord  Castlereagh  is  wisely 
deceiving  the  Prince,  and  that  while  he  is  paveeing  to  Mon- 
sieur, and  promising  to  be  at  his  coronation,  the  Ministry  are 
letting  all  the  French  Princes  depart  with  the  blessing  one  used 
to  give  to  the  beggars  in  Rome — '  Andate  in  pace  et  Dio  vi 
provede;^  while  they  sign  a  peace  with  Bonaparte,  which, 
unless  France  willingly,  spontaneously,  and  generally  calls  for 
a  Bourbon,  is  the  best  thing  they  can  do.  What  say  you  to  my 
politics  now  ?  Have  I  any  need  of  recantation  from  these 
opinions  ?  Let  me  add,  that  I  honour  you  for  your  maxim  about 
retaliation,  which  I  believe  you  made  yourself,  and  fancied  you 
found  in  H.  More.  What,  indeed,  would  they  do,  even  if  at 
the  gates  of  Paris  ?  Destroy  It  to  destroy  Ilhn  ?  Nothing 
but  a  Cossack  could  think  of  it.  It  is  of  the  Cossacks  and 
Russians  that  Mad"""  de  Stael  is  so  afraid,  and  so  indignant  at 
the  disgrace  of  the  French  being  invaded  by  them.  I  tell  her 
the  disgrace  of  the  French  in  their  Revolution  was  accom- 
plished long  before  they  ever  saw  a  Cossack.  She  knows  what 
I  mean,  and  agrees  with  me;  but  asks  me  with  a  quickness  that 
would  delight  you,  '  Voulezvousdonquecoriseillez  a  une  femme 
f/alante  de  tricher  au  jeu  ?  '  I  am  going  to  dine  with  the  said 
►Stael.  She  always  entertains  me,  sometimes  too  much- — that  is 
to  say,  more  than  my  poor  nerves  can  bear.  She  is  impatient 
for  your  coming  to  town  ;  hopes  I  am  to  contrive  your  meeting, 
as  your  manner,  air,  and  countenance  struck  her  as  something 
that  she  should  like  much.  And  I  really  want  you  to  keep  up 
the  credit  of  our  sex  with  her,  which,  between  ourselves,  en  fait 
d\tfjreinens  d^esprif,  I  know  is  not  very  high  in  her  opinion. 
She  expected  our  women  to  be  more  superior,  and  our  men 
less  so. 

Sunday,   ?>Of/i. — In  \ho  eveniiiu"  Avcnt   to  ^[adaiiie   de 
Stiicl,  who  had  hud  a  dinner  of  gentlemen — some  Gencvcse, 


1814]  VISITS   MADAME    DE   STAEL.  5 

Murray  the  publisher,  &c.  &c.,  and  two  musicians,  who 
accompanied  Albertine  [Madlle.  de  Stael]. 

Tuesday,  February  1st. — Went  in  the  evening  with 
Madame  de  Stael  to  Sir  J.  Mackintosh's  house.  The 
drive  from  here  to  George  Street,  Westminster,  in  the 
present  state  of  the  streets,  is  actually  not  without  danger. 
We  braved  it  alone,  and  were  amply  recompensed  by  the 
very  agreeable  hour  and  a  half  we  passed  at  Sir  James's, 
where  there  were  Mr.  Sharpe  and  Mr.  Wishaw,  &c. 
Madame  de  Stael  was  very  talkative,  and  made  me  some 
curious  confidences. 

Friday,  ^th. — Before  ten  o'clock  went  to  Madame  de 
Stael,  where  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  had  dined,  and  there 
was  also  a  pleasant  small  society  of  thirty  or  forty  people. 

Sunday,  \%th. — At  Madame  de  Stael's  at  seven  o'clock, 
with  Kemble,  Mrs.  Siddons,  Lord  Dillon,  Sir  James  and 
Lady  Mackintosh,  and  an  American,  Mr.  Bazeley.  In 
the  evening,  several  others,  who  did  not  go  very  well 
together ;  and  Madame  de  Stael  was  not  well,  and  not 
in  her  usual  force. 

Tuesday,  l^id. — Dined  at  Mr.  Knight's  with  Lord  and 
Lady  Stafford,  Lord  and  Lady  Lansdowne,  the  three  De 
Staels,  &c.  Madame  de  Stael  had  lost  her  way,  and  had 
been  to  the  door  of  two  other  Mr.  Knights. 

Saturday,  2Qth. — Dined  at  Madame  de  Stael's  ;  there 
were,  besides,  Madame  de  Vandreuil,  the  Comte  Ed. 
Dillon,  Greffuhle,  William  Spencer,  and  the  young 
Chinnery.  Not  a  well-composed  dinner ;  but  as  she  will 
invite  everybody,  that  must  happen  sometimes. 

Sunday,  March  (Jth. — We  were  both  at  the  Princess's, 
by  command,  before  three  o'clock.  I  dined  at  Mr.  Locke's 
with  Madame  de  Stael,  her  daughter,  Mr.  Luttrell,  Eogers, 
William  Spencer,  Campbell  the  poet,  &c.  Madame  de 
Stael  exerted  herself  to  shine  before  Mr.  Luttrell,  and 
succeeded. 

Wednesday,  9th. — I  dined   with   Madame  de  Stael ; 


6  MISS   berry's  journal.  [1814 

nobody  but  Campbell  the  poet,  Rocca,*  and  her  own 
duuirliter.  Madame  de  Stael's  conversation  at  her  own 
fireside  is  excellent — always  amusing  and  always  brilliant. 
After  dinner,  Campbell  read  to  us  a  discourse  of  his  upon 
English  poetry  and  upon  some  of  the  great  poets.  There 
are  always  signs  of  a  poet  critic  and  of  genius  hi  all  he 
does,  often  encumbered  by  too  ornate  a  style. 

Sunday^  l?ith. — In  the  evening  at  Lady  Stafford's, 
where  there  was  a  large  assembly;  but  the  bad  news  from 
Holland,  the  loss  of  so  many  English  officers  of  the  small 
army  which  made  the  unfortunate  attack  upon  Bergen-op- 
zoom,f  arriving  with  the  bulletin  from  the  Government, 
had  saddened  everyone. 

Tuesday,  Ihth. — In  the  evening  I  accompanied  Lady 
Ellenborough  to  Lady  Derby's,  who  had  some  music,  and 
to  Lady  Keith's,  where  there  was  a  valtzing  ball. 

Thursday,  17th. — Dined  at  the  Princess's.  She  was  in 
very  bad  humour,  and  when  I  was  going  to  leave  she 
took  me  by  the  arm  and  made  me  pace  up  and  down  the 
drawing-room  for  nearly  three-quarters  of  an  hour  with 
her.  She  is  perplexed,  and  with  reason,  about  the  lady 
she  must  find  to  replace  Lady  C  Campbell,  if  obliged  by 
her  health  to  leave  her. 

Friday,  2hth.  —  Dined,  for  the  first  time,  at  Mr. 
Wilmot's,J  in  Montague  Square,  with  Lady  W.  Bentinck 


•  Rocca,  privately  married  to  Madame  de  Stael,  1)7  whom  she  had  one 
son. 

f  The  attnfk  upon  the  Ptronp  fortress  of  Borpen-op-zoom  was  ordorod  hv 
Sir  Thoma.s  (Jraluun,  with  4,(XX)  men,  divi(le>d  into  four  columns.  The 
ri<?ht  column,  command(!d  by  Major-Cicneral  SlteiTot  and  lh-i<?.-Qen.  Gore, 
forced  its  way  into  tlio  hody  of  tlu'  place;  hut  the  fall  of  thi'  latter  and  tlio 
dangerous  wounds  of  the  former  tlirew  tlio  column  into  di.^^order.  'J'lu) 
centre  column  was  driven  hark  hy  the  heavy  fire  of  the  place,  and  surrender 
was  all  that  was  left  to  (ieneral  (^ooke  to  save  the  renuiinder  of  his  troops. 
Tlie   number   kilbd    was  .'{(K),  and    IH()0  W(Uinded  or  nuide  prisoners. — Ann. 

\  Mr.  W'ilmot,  afl<'rvvards  Sir  Tiohert  Wilmot  Ilorton,  born  1784,  suc- 
ceeded to   his   father's  baronet<y  in    18.'M.     lie  was  in  Tarliament  and  in 


1814]  GOES   TO   THEATRE    WITH    LADY   CONYNGnAM.  7 

and  her  sister,  Lady  Milicent,  Mrs.  Fraser,  Mr.  Eden,  Mr. 
Campbell  (Cawdor),  Mr.  F.  Douglas,  Mr.  C.  Grant,  Mr. 
Nu2;ent,  and  Mr.  Adair. 

Saturday,  2Gth. — Went  in  tlie  morning  to  Madame  de 
Stael's.  I  found  there  Lord  Lansdowne  alone  with  her, 
and  we  had  a  very  interesting  conversation,  and  a  very 
reasonable  one,  upon  the  affairs  of  France  and  the 
Allies. 

Sunday,  27th. — We  went  to  Madame  de  Stael.  Catalani 
had  dined  with  her,  and  was  still  singing  when  we  got 
there ;  that  is  to  say,  they  made  her  sing  French 
romances,  without  her  knowing  how  to  sing  them,  or 
how  to  pronounce  them. 

Monday,  2Sth. — I  went  with  Lady  Conyngham  to  the 
play,  to  see  Kean  for  the  first  time.*  It  was  '  Eichard  the 
Third.'  It  pleased  me,  but  I  was  not  enthusiastic.  His 
expression  of  the  passions  is  natural  and  strong,  but  I 
do  not  like  his  declamation ;  his  voice,  naturally  not  agree- 
able, becomes  monotonous.  When  I  have  seen  him  in 
'  Hamlet '  I  shall  be  better  able  to  judge  if  he  will  ever 
reach  what  is  now  expected  of  him.  Lady  Conyngham 
left  me  at  Mrs.  Wellesley  Pole's,  where  there  was  a  very 
good  assembly.  The  soi-disant  deputies  of  Bordeaux  were 
there — two  men  who  had  not  the  least  idea  of  good 

office  some  years,  and  was  appointed  to  tlie  Govemorsliip  of  Ceylon,  and 
died  1841. 

Mrs.  Wilmot  was  much  admired  for  her  personal  appearance,  and  was  the 
subject  of  Lord  Byron's  beautiful  lines,  written  after  he  had  seen  her  at  a 
ball,  dressed  in  mourning,  with  silver  spangles  on  her  head  : — 
'  She  walks  in  beauty,  like  the  night 

Of  cloudless  climes  and  starry  skies, 
And  all  that  's  best  of  dark  and  bi-ight 
Meet  in  her  aspect  and  her  eyes,'  &c,  «&c. 
*  Edmund  Kean,  born  between  1787  and  1790,  the  son  of  a  stage  carpen- 
ter and  an  actress  at  minor  theatres.     lie  appeared  as  a  boy  witli  his  mother 
at  booths,  and  on  one  occasion  performed  before  George  III.  with  success. 
His  first  appearance  at  Drury  Lane  was  on  Jan.  26,  1814,  in  the  cliaractor 
of  Shylock.     The  latter  years  of  his  life  were  neither  reputable  nor  prosper- 
ous.    He  died  1883. 


8  MISS   berry's  journal.  [1814 

company.     The  lady  of  the  house,  lier  family,  and  all  her 
party,  had  mounted  the  white  cockade. 

Wednesday,  oOtL — A  small  party  at  home  in  the  even- 
ing, consisting  of  about  ten  ladies  and  twenty-six  gentle- 
men. Joanna  Baillie  has  been  less  reserved  than  usual, 
and  much  pleased  with  Madame  de  Stael,  but  the  latter 
does  not  know  how  to  take  to  a  person  whose  hfe  is  so 
totally  different  from  her  own. 

Extract  of  a  Letter  from  Sir  Uvedale  Price  to  Miss  Ben^y. 

Foxley,  March  29,  1814. 

Since  I  wrote  to  you  last,  I  have  read '  L'Allemagne,'  not  in  the 
usual  way  of  reading,  car  je  ne  coramencais  pas,  par  le  com- 
viencement.  My  neighbour  Peploe,*  who  had  read  it,  called 
upon  me  just  as  I  had  received  it.  He  told  me  the  first  volume 
was  highly  entertaining ;  the  second  less  so,  though  still  very 
amusing;  the  third  very  abstruse,  and  not  very  entertaining. 
He  liked,  however,  particular  parts  which  he  did  comprehend 
as  much  as  anything  in  the  work.  He  told  me,  at  the  same 
time,  that  the  subject  of  the  third  volume  was  distinct  from  those 
of  the  other  two,  being  entirely  on  German  philosophy.  Upon 
this  information.  Lady  Caroline  f  and  my  daughter  having 
eagerly  seized  on  the  first  volume,  I  began  with  the  third,  in 
which  I  found  so  many  new  and  striking  thoughts  and  reflec- 
tions, that,  in  order  to  recollect  and  dwell  upon  them  again,  I 
marked  them  as  I  went  on,  and  a  pretty  task  I  set  myself  I 
The  mere  references  make  a  little  volume.  Though  I  have 
lately,  from  the  nature  of  my  warfare,  been  obliged  to  write  on 
metaphysical  subjects,  mine  is  not  a  very  metaphysical  liead, 
and  there  are  parts  of  the  third  volume  out  of  my  depth  ;  but 
whenever  I  met  with  anything  of  that  kind,  I  satisfied  myself 
with  aj)plying  that  excellent  maxim,  it  faut  comprendre  Vin- 
coiiiprckensible  cuiiiinc  lei.  ...  1  have  now  returned  again  to 
the  first,  and  am  reading  the  whole  through  de  suite,  and  I  find 


*  Samupl  Peploe,  Esq.,  of  GarnMton,  Ilerefordahire. 

t  liudy  Ciiroliiu'  ('iirj)fntt>r,  dmij^liter  of  (V'orge,  first  Earl  of  Tyrconnel, 
married  Uvedale  I'rice,  Esq.,  1774;  died  1820. 


1814]  DEFEAT   OF   BONAPARTE 's   ARMY.  9 

great  pleasure  in  reading  on  without  interruption,  and  great  plea- 
sure also  in  observing,  en  passant,  the  passages  I  had  marked, 
and  to  which,  if  I  had  not  determined  not  to  stop,  I  might  add 
many  more.  I  now  can  follow  the  general  plan  of  the  work  ; 
before,  I  was  dazzled  with  the  blaze  of  diamonds  and  rubies. 
As  far  as  I  can  judge,  her  thoughts  are  not  less  just  than  bril- 
liant. It  must  be  owned,  however,  that  one  is  not  a  very- 
accurate  judge.  Cinn  stupet  inniiineris  acies  fulgoribus ;  in 
this  second  reading  I  shall  endeavour  to  judge  more  soberly. 

JOURNAL. 

Thursday^  ^Ist. — Went,  in  the  Duke  of  Devonshire's 
box,  to  see  Kean  in  '  Hamlet.'  I  must  confess  I  am  dis- 
appointed in  his  talent.  To  my  mind  he  is  without 
grace  and  without  elevation  of  "mind,  because  he  never 
seems  to  rise  with  the  poet  in  those  sublime  passages 
which  abound  in  '  Hamlet,'  and  for  what  is  called  reci- 
tation of  verse  he  understands  nothing. 

Friday^  April  \st. — Dined  with  Madame  de  Stael,  with 
Lord  and  Lady  Hardwicke,  Ms.  York,  Duke  of  Grafton, 
Lord  Darnley,  Sir  J.  Mackintosh,  Comte  Palmella,  and 
Eocca.    Li  the  evening  she  had  a  very  numerous  society. 

Tuesday^  bth. — Li  the  morning  we  heard  the  news  of 
the  defeat  of  Bonaparte's  army,  near  Paris.  Lady  Hard- 
wicke, who  was  at  my  house  at  the  time  when  Mrs. 
Robinson  *  brought  the  bulletin,  went  with  me  directly 
to  Madame  de  Stael.  We  found  Auo^ustus  Foster  cominsr 
out  of  her  room,  he  having  just  heard  the  grandissime 
arguments  of  the  capitulation  of  Paris  to  the  Allies  on  the 
30th  March,  which  had  arrived  since  the  bulletin  that  we 
had  seen.  Madame  de  Stael  was  completely  overcome. 
No  arguments,  no  reply,  no  wit ;  she  showed  true  feeling 
for  what  she  always  calls  her  country.  Albertine  also 
powerfully  affected,  either  for  that  or  another  cause — I 

•  Sister  of  the  first  Lord  Malmesbury,  and  widow  of  the  Hon.  Frederick 
Ilobinson. 


10  MISS   berry's  journal.  [1814 

think  rather  a  mixture  of  both.  Madame  de  Stael  -wns 
touclied  with  the  interest  and  sympathy  that  Lady  Hard- 
wicke  and  I  showed  her.  At  Lansdowne  House  there 
was  a  very  pleasant  party.  All  the  men  were  in  groups 
talking  of  the  great  news  of  the  day  ;  all  the  Foreign 
^Linisters  arrived  in  fiocchi^  who  came  from  a  dinner  that 
Lord  Liverpool  had  given  to  the  Grand  Duchess  of  Ol- 
denburg.* 

Saturday,  dth. — A  dinner  party  at  home.  In  the 
evening,  about  eleven  o'clock,  we  took  our  party  to 
Madame  de  Stael's,  where  we  heard  the  astonishinsr  news 
of  the  abdication  of  Bonaparte,  which  had  just  been 
published  in  a  '  Gazette '  of  ten  lines  long.  One  could 
Imrdly  believe  it ;  one  could  hardly  persuade  oneself  that 
one  was  already  at  peace  witli  all  the  world.  Tliat  the 
struggle  was  over — not  faute  de  combattans,  but  mais  faiite 
de  quelque  ennemi  a  comhattre.  Nobody  could  think 
or  talk  of  anything  but  the  wonderful  news  that  we  had 
just  heard. 

Sunday,  10th. — At  four  o'clock  we  drove  to  the  park, 
and  there  walked  about.  There  was  an  immense  number 
of  people,  a  bright  sun,  universal  gaiety,  althougli  tlie 
people  had  not  yet  been  able  to  take  in  the  idea  that  we 
were  already  at  peace. 

Tuesday,  12th. — We  went  out  to  see  the  illuminations 
as  far  as  Whitehall ;  Carlton  House,  the  Horse  Guards, 
and  the  Admiralty  were  the  only  places  worth  seeing. 
Those  three  were  very  beautiful.  The  crowds  in  the  streets 
were  in  the  best  possible  humour,  and  tliere  was  neither 
accident,  didiciiUy,  nor  confusion  in  any  place. 

Saturday,  \(\fh. — I  went  to  Madame  de  Stael's,  and  T 
stayed  with  her  and  Eocca  for  some  time.  She  talked 
with  mucli  warmth  and  niudi  sentiment  on  the  subject 
of  France,  but  at  tliis  moment  lier  feelings  obscure  her 

•  The  Grand  Duchess  of  Oldonburf^,  sister  to  the  Emperor  Alexander  of 
llussia,  lauded  iu  England  on  the  ^Ist  of  March. 


1814]  THE    KIXG   OF   FRAXCE.  11 

judgment.  Because  France  has  not  delivered  herself  from 
her  t^Tant  she  will  not  hope  anything  really  good  for  her, 
and  will  only  believe  in  the  re-establishment  in  totality  of 
all  the  old  prejudices,  which  is  not  possible. 

Wednesday,  20th. — I  went  this  evening  to  see  Lady 
H.  Leveson,  to  arrange  our  going  to  her  sister's  em])ty 
house  to  see  the  entry  of  the  King  of  France.  The 
streets  and  the  park  were,  before  twelve  o'clock,  filled 
with  people  and  carriages  ;  the  latter  were  not  allowed 
to  enter  the  park.  At  five  o'clock  we  saw  seven  car- 
riages of  the  Prince  Eegent's  pass,  drawn  by  six  horses, 
in  dress  livery,  preceded  by  several  hundreds  of  gentle- 
men on  horseback,  and  accompanied  and  followed  by  a 
detachment  of  Light  Horse  and  the  Blues ;  but  that  was 
all  we  saw,  because  from  Park  Street  the  distance  was 
too  great  to  see  well  into  the  carriages,  and,  if  we  could 
have  seen  so  far,  the  people  on  foot,  and  the  crowd  on  the 
rails  and  walls  of  the  park,  would  have  prevented  our 
doing  so.  The  people  took  off  their  hats  and  saluted  the 
carriages  as  they  passed  with  much  goodwill,  but  Avith- 
out  the  least  enthusiasm. 

Thursday.  21st. — Eveiybody  who  wished  to  see  the 
King  of  France  went  to  Grillon's,  in  Albemarle  Street, 
where  he  lodged.  I  was  not  amongst  the  number,  but 
during  all  the  day  one  could  hardly  pass  through  the 
streets,  there  were  so  many  carriages  and  people  on  foot. 
He  went  to  see  the  Prince,  and  in  the  evening  there  Avere 
a  great  many  people  at  Carlton  House.  All  who  were 
not  there  went  to  Lady  Jersey's,  where  there  was  a  very 
agreeable,  and  not  too  numerous  a  society. 

Saturday.,  2^jrL — The  King  of  France  left  London  at 
nine  o'clock  this  morning.  K  about  the  same  interval 
elapses  between  the  visits  of  the  Kings  of  France  to 
London,  we  shall  not  see  another  for  500  years.* 

*  Sixteen  years  later,  Charles  X.  sought  an  asylum  on  British  ground  j 
and  in  eighteen  years  more,  Louis  Philippe  was  driven  to  do  the  same. 


12  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1814 

Sunday,  2-^th. — At  seven  o'clock  clined  ^\^th  the  Prin- 
cess at  Kensington,  with  Lord  and  Lady  Charlcniont,  Lord 
G.  Leveson  Gower,  Lord  Boringdon,  Mr.  Canning,  Lady 
Crewe,  Mr.  Gell,  Lord  Byron,  Mr.  and  Miss  Grattan,  and 
Mr.  Phmket.  A  well-composed  dinner  and  tolerably  agree- 
able ;  but  the  Princess  has  not  the  same  cheerfuhicss  to 
excite  others  as  she  had  at  one  time. 

Tuesday,  May  Zrd. — Dined  at  Lady  Stafford's,  with 
Madame  de  Stael,  her  daughter,  Mr.  Schlegel,  Eocca,  Lord 
J.  Kussell,  Dr.  Holland,  &c.  Li  the  evening  we  went 
with  Madame  de  Stael  and  her  party  to  the  Exhibition  of 
Pictures,  lighted  up  in  Pall  Mall,  Avhere  we  found  every- 
body, and,  amongst  others,  the  Princess  of  Wales. 

Friday,  Qth. — At  six  o'clock  Madame  de  Stael  came, 
and  had  an  agreeable  tete-a-tete  with  me.  She  made  me, 
as  usual,  some  extraordinary  conlidences,  speaking  witli 
perfect  openness.  She  always  amuses  and  interests  me  ; 
I  take  leave  of  her  with  great  re2;ret. 

Saturday,  7th. — In  the  evening  at  Lady  Eomilly's.* 
Dr.  Marcet  has  arrived  from  Paris,  which  he  left  last  Wed- 
nesday, at  five  o'clock  in  the  morning.  The  moment  he 
entered,  Madame  de  Stael  seized  upon  him.  He  was 
instantly  surrounded  by  a  circle,  whilst  she  examined 
and  cross-examined  him.  He  bore  this  trial  very  well, 
answerintj  to  all  witli  much  intellitiience.  He  had  seen 
the  King  enter  ;  was  upon  the  steps  of  the  Tuileries  when 
he  went  upstairs.  Louis  XVHL  was  received  with  much 
joy,  much  goodwill,  but  no  enthusiasm.  He  conducted 
himself  wonderfully  under  the  trying  circumstances  in 
wliich  lie  found  himself  placed.  I  left  Lady  liomilly's 
with  Madame  de  Staiil,  in  order  to  have  a  few  minutes 
alone  witli  her.  I  left  her  at  the  door,  and  not 
without  emotion  ;  but  emotion  is  not  what  she  excites, 
nor  what  she  feels  (exce[)t  momentarily).     She  does  not 

•  Wife  of  Sir  S.  Rorailly,  dauKhter  of  Mr.  Garbett,  of  Kuill  Court,  Here- 
fordshire; married  17'J8;  died  Itild. 


J 81 4]      LETTER  FROM  HON.  J.  W.  WARD  TO  MISS  BERRY,         18 

dwell  long  enough  upon  anything ;  life,  characters,  and 
even  feelings  pass  before  her  eyes  like  a  magic  lantern. 
She  spends  herself  upon  paper,  and  runs  through  the 
world  to  see  all,  to  hear  all,  and  to  say  all — to  excite  her- 
self, and  to  give  it  all  back  to  the  world,  and  to  the  society 
from  whence  she  has  drawn  it.* 

Extract  of  a  Letter  from  Miss  Berry  to  Mrs.  Darner. 

London,  May,  1814. 
.  .  .  I  parted  with  Madame  de  Stael,  non  sans  atten- 
drissement  de  ma  part,  late  on  Saturday  evening-.  She  set  off 
for  Paris  early  on  Sunday  morning.  I  own  I  much  regret  her 
absence.  She  had  a  frankness  with  me,  and  a  power  of  exciting 
my  mind.  Now  she  is  gone,  while  I  am  regretting  her,  she 
will  never  think  more  of  me  till  we  meet  again.f  I  know  her 
well,  with  all  her  faults,  ridicules,  and  littlenesses,  and  yet  she 
is  a  very  superior  creature. 

From  the  Hon.  J.  W.  Ward  to  Miss  Berry. 

Paris,  Wednesday,  May  11,  1814. 
I  should  have  written  to  you  before,  but  I  wished  first  to 
look  about  me  and  see  what  the  place  contains.  Paris  is  cer- 
tainly at  this  moment  the  most  wonderful  show-box  in  the 
world.  It  has  within  its  walls  as  many  live  emperors,  kings, 
generals,  and  eminent  persons  of  all  kinds,  as  the  ingenious 
Mrs.  Salmon  ever  exhibited  in  wax.  Of  the  five  great  sovereigns 
of  the  Christian  world,  four  are  here  actually  present,  and  we 

•  Lord  Byron  appears  to  have  had  the  same  impression  of  Madame  de 
Stael's  ready  means  of  finding  consolation  by  exciting  sympathy.  Her 
second  son  was  killed  in  a  duel  in  Germany,  to  which  Lord  Byi-on  thus 
alludes : — '  Madame  de  Stael  Holstein  has  lost  one  of  her  young  barons.  .  .  . 
Corinne  is  of  course  what  all  mothers  must  be,  but  will,  I  venture  to  pro- 
phesy, do  what  few  mothers  could — write  an  essay  upon  it.  She  cannot  exist 
without  a  gi'ievance,  and  somebody  to  see  or  read  how  much  grief  be- 
comes her.' 

t  Madame  de  Stael  certainly  appreciated  Miss  Berry  more  than  she  was 
inclined  to  believe,  judging  by  the  following  passage  in  a  letter  from  a  friend 
to  Miss  Berry,  dated  1815  : — 'Madame  de  Stael  told  a  person  who  repeated 
it  to  me,  that  she  had  loved  you  the  best,  and  thought  you  by  far  the 
cleverest  woman  in  England.' 


14:  MISS   berry's    journal.  [1814 

have  every  eminent   military  commander   in    Europe   except 
Bonaparte   and    Bernadotte.       I   say   nothing  of  princes    and 
prime  ministers,  though  they  are  here  in  plenty ;    but  under 
the  present  circumatances  they  are  not  sufficiently  considerable 
to  deserve  notice.     This  is  very  curious  ;  at  least  to  those  that, 
like  me,  partake  largely  in  the  gratification  the  vulgar  feel  in 
.staring  at  famous  people.     But  what  is  a  matter  of  greater 
interest  and  greater  surprise  is  to  see  France — to  see  the  great 
nation  that  only  a  few  months  ago  seemed  so  near  realising  its 
old  plan  of  universal  dominion — not  only  beaten,  but  delivered 
over  bound  hand  and  foot  to  foreign  masters.     '  Ukases '  in  the 
Eussian  tongue,  addressed  to  the  non-ruling  part  of  the  popu- 
lation of  France,  are  everywhere  stuck  upon  the  walls.     One 
walks  in  safety  about  the  streets  of  Paris,  under  the  protection 
of  Count  Sacken,  the  governor  of  the  place.     You  are  stared  at 
when  you  speak  French  at  the  gate  of  the  French  ganison  town 
through  which  you  are  going,  and  are  obliged,  if  you  can,  to 
explain  yourself  in  German  to  the  Keiseiiiche  that  receives  your 
passport.     This  appears  very  strange  to  me,  and  you  that  have 
seen  France  under  such  different  circumstances  would  hardly 
think  yourself  awake.     In  this  pleasant  and  honourable  situa- 
tion, the  common  people  seem  as  gay  and  self-satisfied  as  ever. 
The  day  I  got  to  Paris,  it  happened  that  the  Emperor  of 
Russia  went  out  to  Compiegne  to  welcome  the  King.     In  every 
village  and    town  through   which  I  passed,    I   found    the   in- 
habitants collected ;  their  houses  were  adonied  with  flowers  and 
laurels,   and   everything   seemed   to   indicate  that   they  were 
awaiting  the  approach  of  some  victorious  French  generals,  or 
celebrating   the  anniversary  of  some  great  national   triumph. 
I  must  observe,  however,  that  tho'  they  received  the  foreign 
princes  better  than  one  could  expect,   they  showed  no  great 
enthusiasm  at  the  first  appearance  of  their  own  sovereign.    The 
place  from  whence  I  saw  the  ceremony  of  his  entrance  into 
Paris  was  near  the  gate  of  St.  Denis.     The  ceremony  was  as 
magnificent  as  possible,  and  the  crowd,  of  course,  prodigious ; 
but  I  thought  the  applause  feeble  for  the  occasion.     They  cried 
'  Vive  le  llul '  from  a  recollection  that,  under  those  circumstances, 
it  would  be  wrong  to  omit  it.    In  short,  the  applause  resembled 
a  little  that  which,  at  private  theatricals,  is,  by  the  well-bred 
part  of  the  company,  bestowed   upon  the   lady  of  the  house. 


1814]       LETTER  FROM  HON.  J.  W.  WARD  TO  MISS  BERRY.         15 

The  fact,  I  believe,  is,  that  the  people  have  become  quite  callous 
by  what  they  have  suffered  for  the  last  twenty  years,  and  that 
no  public  event  makes  much  impression  upon  them.  They  are 
generally  well  inclined  to  the  Bourbons — not,  however,  as  a 
positive  good,  but  as  the  least  of  the  evils  they  are  likely  to 
endure.  There  are,  however,  I  understand,  a  great  many  mal- 
contents ;  and  the  army  is  still,  in  general,  attached  to  the  late 
Emperor.  But  the  different  bodies  of  which  it  is  composed 
have  no  means  of  union,  or  indeed  of  communication  ;  no  indi- 
vidual in  whom  they  confide,  and  round  whom  they  could  rally; 
and  in  peace  (if  the  Court  manages  tolerably  well)  they  will 
rapidly  crumble  away,  so  that  I  see  no  great  danger  from  that 
side. 

You  see  the  King  has  rejected  the  Constitution  with  as  little 
ceremony  as  he  would  send  away  a  dish  at  dinner  that  he  did 
not  like.     This  event  will  probably  excite  quite  as  much  sensa- 
tion in  England  as  it  does    in   France.     I  cannot   find   that 
anybody  here  cares  about  the  matter.     The  Constitution  was 
generally  disapproved  of,  and  the  framers  of  it  still  more  gene- 
rally despised ;  so  the  rejection  of  it  appeared  quite  a  matter  of 
course.     So  that  for  three  weeks  the  King  will  reign  in  the  old 
way — by  divine   right — at   the   end  of  which   period   he  has 
graciously  promised  to  produce  a  newer  Constitution,  more  to 
his  own  taste,  and,  he   flatters  himself,  more  to  that  of  his 
people.     He  will  doubtless  keep  his  word,  but  they  don't  seem 
to  have  been  very  particular  in  taking  securities  for  the  per- 
formance of  it.     He  is  now  a  Tory  King,  but  he  has  engaged  to 
become  a  WTiig  King  by  the  beginning  of  June,  and  that  is 
enough  for  them.     What  it  will  all  end  in,  I  am  at  a  loss  to 
guess ;  I  mean  what  it  will  end  in  'practically — for  it  signifies 
mighty  little  what  is  the  letter  of  the  Constitution  they  go 
through  the  mummery  of  framing  or  swearing  to,  and  printing 
and  publishing  in  a  double  number  of  the  '  Moniteur.'     I  am 
afraid,  however,  that  a  moderate  pacific  despotism  is  the  best 
thing  that  awaits  them. 

I  have  seen  hardly  any  French  society,  and  I  understand  from 
persons  that  have  far  better  means  of  access  to  it  than  myself 
that  there  is  not  much  to  see.  It  had  been  very  much  spoilt  by 
the  despotism  of  the  last  ten  years,  and  particularly  by  that  uni- 
versal employment  of  spies  which  formed  so  conspicuous  a  part 


16  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1814 

of  the  Emperor's  system.  Very  little  company  was  collected 
except  at  the  houses  of  the  Ministers,  some  of  which,  it  is  said, 
were  agreeable  enough — that  is,  I  suppose,  as  agreeable  as  any 
places  can  be  without  liberty  and  without  confidence.  The 
present  circumstances  of  the  country  are  not  particularly  well 
calculated  to  restore  society  to  its  ancient  ease  and  gaiety.  The 
old  and  new  materials  cannot  mix  very  harmoniously,  and  it 
will  probably  end  in  there  being  two  societies,  each  detesting 
and  abusing  the  other.  Besides,  Paris  is  at  this  moment  a 
garrison  town,  and,  what  is  worse,  a  town  garrisoned  by  foreign 
troops ;  and  tho'  the  lower  order  of  people  seem  to  take  the  pre- 
sence of  all  these  strangers  quietly  enough,  yet  the  better  sort, 
I  understand,  feel  a  little  more  for  the  utter  disgrace  and  sub- 
jugation of  their  country,  and  one  ought  not  to  be  surprised  if 
they  don't  open  their  houses  for  the  purpose  of  entertaining 
Count  Sacken  and  the  Hetman  Platow.  I  honour  them  for 
being  sorry  for  those  events  at  which  I  feel  nothing  but  joy. 
Lord  Wellington  was  here  for  a  few  days :  his  dukedom  met 
him  on  his  arrival.  He  was  received  in  a  manner  that  could  not 
but  give  great  pleasure  to  every  Englishman.  He  seems  quite 
unspoilt  by  success.  He  has  not  even  contracted  that  habit  of 
silence  and  reserve  which  so  often  accompanies  dignity  and  fa- 
vour, even  when  they  produce  no  more  unfavourable  change. 
But  he  is  just  as  he  was — gay,  frank,  and  ready  to  converse.  I 
counted  myself  lucky  in  meeting  him  one  of  the  days  he  was  here, 
at  Aberdeen's,  with  Schwartzenberg,  Stadion,  and  Prince  ^laurice 
of  Lichtenstein.  Stadion  observed  that  he  believed  he  had  never 
been  engaged  against  Bonaparte  in  person.  The  Duke  of  W. 
answered  instantly :  '  No,  and  I  am  very  glad  I  never  was. 
I  would  at  any  time  rather  have  heard  that  a  reinforcement  of 
forty  thousand  men  had  joined  the  French  army,  than  that  he 
had  arrived  to  take  the  command.'  I  had  heard  the  opinion 
ascribed  to  him  before,  but  I  was  glad  to  find  he  had  the 
liberality  to  repeat  it  after  Bonaparte's  fall.  You  know  he  is 
to  be  our  Ambassador  here.  His  presence  may  inspire  the 
Marshals  of  France  with  some  respect :  or,  to  speak  more  pro- 
perly, may  keep  up  that  sentiment  in  their  minds.  Nor  is  that 
such  an  easy  matter  as  you  will  think,  wlien  I  tell  you  the 
topic  Ney  chose  to  dwell  upon  the  other  day,  at  Lord  Castle- 
reagh's  table,  in   presence  of  Lord  Wellington   and   seven   or 


1814]      LETTEE  FROM  HOX.  J.  W.  WARD  TO  MISS  BERRY.  17 

eight  more  foreign  generals,  by  all  of  whom  the  French  had  at 
sundry  times  been  defeated.  It  was  the  invasion  of  England  ; 
a  project  which,  Ney  said,  had  always  met  with  his  warmest 
approbation,  and  of  the  success  of  which,  if  it  were  attempted, 
he  had  always  felt  quite  confident.  The  Emperor,  he  owned, 
had  treated  it  as  more  hazardous,  and  as  an  undertaking  more 
fit  for  a  partisan  than  a  general,  but  that  his  own  opinion  had 
remained  unshaken. 

Bonaparte's  improvements  in  Paris  are  quite  magnificent  and 
in  the  best  possible  taste.  They  were  all  executed,  too,  for 
a  sum  of  money  which,  compared  with  the  resources  of  such  a 
country,  is  quite  trifling.  Twelve  millions  (francs)  were  set 
aside  annually  for  the  purpose,  and  never  touched  upon  on  any 
pretence  whatever.  I  hope  the  present  Grovernment  will  not, 
out  of  envy  or  stinginess,  leave  unfinished  what  he  had  begun 
so  well.  I  understand  that  the  tone  at  Court  is  to  treat  France 
as  almost  ruined  by  the  late  Grovernment.  I  don't  believe  a 
syllable  of  it.  The  taxes  and  the  conscription  pressed  hard  for 
the  last  years  of  the  war,  but  a  country  cultivated  like  a  garden 
from  one  end  to  the  other  is  far  enough  from  ruin,  and  if  there 
is  but  tolerable  skill  and  honesty  in  the  Grovernment,  and  if  the 
people  are  but  tolerably  well  affected,  the  financial  difficulties 
must  quickly  disappear.  If  there  is  much  fuss  made  about 
them,  it  must  be  considered  as  a  symptom,  not  of  poverty,  but 
of  mismanaofement  and  discontent. 

Talma  has  not  played  often  since  I  came  to  Paris,  so  that  I 
did  not  see  him  at  all  till  last  night,  then  it  was  only  in  an  act 
and  a  half  of  full  play,  the  story  of  which  is  not  well  adapted 
to  the  French  stage — '  Hamlet,'  by  Mr.  Duels.  But  I  was  ex- 
tremely struck  with  him,  and  think  he  deserves  all  his  repu- 
tation. Perhaps  I  was  more  surprised  than  pleased  at  the 
manner  in  which  he  delivered  some  passages,  but  it  would  be 
quite  idle  to  set  one's  own  hasty  notions  against  the  deliberate 
system  of  so  great  an  artist.  It  is  not  impossible,  however,  that, 
like  Kemble,  he  may  have  his  whims. 

Altogether,  these  theatres  are  delightful.  They  are  really  a 
resource,  which  in  London  they  are  not.  All  within  a  stone's- 
throw  of  the  good  part  of  the  to'vvn,  and  of  a  size  for  hearing 
and  seeing.  Then,  too,  the  power  of  taking  a  box  and  keeping 
it  to  one's  self  all  the  evening,  makes  an  immense  difference. 

VOL.  III.  C 


18  MISS    berry's   journal.  [1814 

I  complain  of  nothing  but  their  changing  the  piece  after  tlie 
boxes  are  taken,  which  is  a  downright  cheat.  For  instance, 
everybody  to-night  expected  to  see  the  *  Misantrope,'  which 
had  been  in  the  bills  these  three  days,  and  this  morning,  with- 
out any  reason  assigned,  they  changed  it  to  *  Le  Philosophe 
malgre  lui.' 

Literature  seems  to  be  at  a  low  ebb.  They  may  write  what 
they  please  now,  but  the  talent  for  liberal  discussion  is  quite 
gone  for  want  of  use.  I  have  not  been  able  to  get  any 
pamphlet  upon  the  present  state  of  affairs  that  isn't  absolutely 
contemptible — except  Chateaubriant's,  which  you  have  seen, 
and  which,  to  do  it  justice,  is  almost  good  enough  to  have  been 
a  prize  declamation  at  either  University.  I  have  bought  Mr. 
Schlegel's  book  about  the  drama,  which  they  have  translated 
and  printed  here,  but  I  have  not  had  time  to  read  much  of  it. 
This,  however,  I  see  plainly ;  that  if  these  confounded  Germans 
get  only  a  little  more  into  fashion,  one  must  begin  one's  education 
anew.    Not  above  one  half  of  what  they  say  is  intelligible  to  me. 

There  are  a  great  many  English  here ;  however,  I  think  the 
stock  don't  increase ;  as  many  go  as  come.  They  proceed  in  the 
old  way — grumbling  and  enhancing  the  price  of  everything. 
I  am  told  that  china  in  particular  is  now  as  dear  as  it  is  in 
London.  Those  that  came  first,  however,  got  bargains.  Kin- 
naird,  I  understand,  has  bought  much  and  well. 

The  last  twenty  years  have,  I  suspect,  very  much  altered  the 
relation  betwixt  the  two  countries  on  things  in  which  the 
French  used  to  be  our  acknowledged  superiors.  We  have  been 
advancing,  and  they  have  receded,  so  that  in  taste  and  elegance 
we  are  much  nearer  a  match  for  them  than  we  were.  The 
Paris  fashions  in  dress  used  to  be  regularly  and  servilely  copied, 
and  perhaps  they  will  be  so  still,  but  I  confess  I  see  nothing  in 
them,  worth  following.  The  dress  of  the  men  has  nothing 
remarkable  in  it,  except  that  nobody  looks  clean.  The  women 
are  chiefly  distinguished  by  a  sort  of  bonnet  three  stories  liigh, 
and  by  far  the  most  horrible  superstructure  that  was  ever  piled 
upon  the  human  head.  It  pervades  the  country  like  a  pesti- 
lence, and  you  see  nothing  else  from  the  pier  of  Calais  to  the 
Opera  House  at  Paris.  The  rest  of  the  dress  by  no  means 
atones  for  the  demerits  of  the  bonnet.  It  is  a  slovenly  con- 
fused-looking thing,  which  renders  the  female,  and  indeed  the 


1814]  LETTER   FROM    IIOX.    KEPPEL   CRAVEN.  19 

human,  form  almost  indistinguishable.  There  are  many  pretty, 
and  a  thousand  agreeable-looking  women  here,  but  none  that  I 
have  seen  are  very  beautiful,  except  the  Marechale  Augereau 
and  a  INIadame  Dubois — to  which  list  I  must  add  a  peasant  girl 
in  a  village  fifty  miles  off,  handsomer  than  either. 

I  don't  mean  to  stay  here  long,  but  to  return  to  England 
and  put  '  mine  house  in  order,'  with  a  view  to  a  longer  flight. 
Before  I  go,  however,  I  have  a  sort  of  project  of  going  from 
here  to  Orleans,  and  down  the  Loire  to  Tours.  All  that  I  have 
hitherto  seen  of  this  '  beautiful  France  '  is  as  ugly  as  sin  ;  but 
everybody  joins  in  praising  the  banks  of  the  Loire,  and  I  am 
therefore  anxious  to  see  them  just  at  the  beginning  of  the  fine 
season. 

Believe  me,  yours  very  sincerely, 

J.  W.  W. 

To  the  Miss  Berry s  from  the  Hon.  Kejopel  Craven. 

Paris,  Saturday,  March  14. 

My  deak  Friends, — If  I  had  been  assisting  at  the  expiatory 
mass,  which  is  now  performing,  for  the  murder  of  the  Royal 
Family,  I  could  not  be  expiating  my  neglect  in  not  writing  to 
you  sooner,  and  I  believe,  of  the  two  ceremonies,  I  am  more 
pleased  at  the  last,  though  I  did  everything  I  could  to  obtain  a 
ticket.  The  nation,  or  rather  the  town  of  Pare,  is  highly 
pleased  at  this  act  of  their  sovereign,  parce  que  c^est  dans  les 
convenances,  et  puis  il  ne  peut  alter  an  spectacle  avant  cela, 
so  you  may  imagine  how  anxious  they  are  to  see  it  over.  I 
send  you  some  pamphlets,  which  daily  abound,  and  are,  as  you 
will  see,  mostly  very  flat.  I  must,  however,  except  that  one 
against  Caulincourt,*  which  appears  to  me  more  an  invective 
against  the  Senate.  The  said  Caulincourt  is  under  the  special 
protection  of  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  who  made  him  dine  with 
him  one  day  that  he  had  invited  Monsieur.  This  last  did  not 
know  it  till  afterwards,  for  he  had  refused  to  see  him  till  he 
could  justify  himself  with  regard  to  the  Due  d'Enghein.  How 
he  has  succeeded  in  doing  this,  the  pamphlet  will  tell  you. 

*  Ar.  Aug.  Lon.  de  Caulincourt,  Due  de  Vicenza ;  bom,  1772.  Celebrated 
as  a  diplomatist  during  the  reign  of  Napoleon,  He  always  solemnly  denied 
the  charge  of  being  concerned  in  the  mui-der  of  the  Due  d'Ensrheiu.  Died, 
1827. 

c2 


20  MISS   berry's   JOURXAL.  [1814 

Of  political  affairs  I  don't  know  much  what  to  say,  and  I  am 
assured  that  if  I  did,  it  would  by  no  means  be  prudent  to 
enlarge  upon  the  subject  in  a  letter  that  goes  per  post.  As 
this  will  be  carried  by  Mr.  Greffuhle,  I  don't  feel  under  the  same 
restraint.  It  is  evident  that  the  great  mass  is  pleased,  and 
breathes  a  freer  air  ;  but  few  are  satisfied,  and  many  are  alarm'd. 
The  marshals,  and  in  general  all  Bonaparte's  creatures,  are  very 
assiduous  in  their  attentions,  and  even  Savary,  who  is  never 
spoken  to,  goes  to  the  Tuileries  every  levee  day.  Berthier  and 
Ney  are  the  highest  in  favour  to  all  appearance,  and  I  fancy 
deservedly  so.  Eugene  Beauharnois  is  returned,  and  was  well 
received.  Josephine  continues  at  Malmaison,  much  respected 
and  esteemed.  A  person  I  know,  assured  me  that  he  went  there 
at  the  time  Bonaparte  was  still  at  Fontainebleau,  and  found  her 
and  the  Keine  Ilortense,  and  many  others  of  the  family,  busily 
engaged  in  trying  on  dresses  to  receive  the  Emperor  of  Eussia 
and  King  of  Prussia.  All  the  Royalists  are  in  despair  at  Bona- 
parte having  reach'd  Elba  without  any  further  molestiition  than 
some  fright,  a  little  dirt,  and  many  vive  le  Boi.  They  seemed 
to  take  it  for  granted  that  the  commissioners  appointed  to 
escort  him  would  have  taken  better  care  of  him,  or  that  at  least 
the  English  frigate  which  convej^'d  him  would  have  steer'd  for 
Botany  Bay. 

A  Monsieur  de  ]\Ionbreton,  whose  wife  I  met  at  a  friend's 
house,  and  who  is  chambellan  de  la  Princesse  Borghese,  saw 
him  at  some  place  where  they  cross'd  each  other,  and  where  he 
had  an  interview  with  his  sister,  and  tried  to  prevail  on  her  to 
accompany  him,  and  do  the  honours  of  his  '  sullen  isle ; '  but  she 
was  going  to  her  sister,  the  Queen  of  Naples,  the  only  crown'd 
branch  of  the  tree,  and  could  not  go  to  a  p<(>/s  si  vudsdin  ; 
besides  whicli,  like  Poppsea  or  Livia  (I  forget  which)  she  can't 
live  without  milk  baths  every  day,  and  I  fancy  it  is  a  scarce 
article  in  the  new  kingdom.  I  must  digress,  to  inform  you 
that,  even  during  the  Ixuasian  campaign,  Jerome  could  n<»t 
exist  without  a  bath  composed  of  champagne.  I^ut  to  return  to 
the  fallen  hero:  he  had  a  long  conversation  witji  this  Mon- 
breton  ;  said  he  was  perfectly  satisfied,  that  the  Bourbons  were 
good  ])('0|)1(',  that  it  wa,s  the  legitimate  dynasty,  and  he  was 
willing  at  any  future  time  to  tjike  a  command  in  their  armies, 
tnais  (In,  resie  je  in  I  lalsse  un  royaume  en  assez  viaiivais 
etat.      After  this  he  went  down  among  the  mob  that  had  as- 


1 81 4]  LETTER   PROM   HON".    KEPPEL   CRAVEN.  21 

sembled  to  stare  at  him,  and  b}^  whom  he  was  not  recoo^nised, 
being  in  an  Austrian  uniform  to  escape  a  small  degree  of  lapi- 
dation,  which  had  been  threatened  at  the  former  stao-e.  He, 
however,  made  himself  known,  and  behaved  with  a  sort  of 
courage  and  humour  which  disarm'd  their  rage,  and  they  were 
very  nearly  crying  Vive  rEmpereur  when  be  left  them.  It 
seems,  on  his  arrival,  he  inspected  the  fortifications,  and  named 
General  Bertrand  (the  only  one  of  his  companions  who  has  fol- 
low'd  him)  Mhiistre  de  VInUrieur. 

Since  writing  the  above,  I  am  told  that  he  has  not  landed  at 
Elba ;  but  that,  on  the  contrary,  the  captain  of  the  English 
frigate,  finding  that  he  had  sent  3,000  men  there  previous  to 
liis  arrival,  would  not  let  him  leave  the  ship,  and  is  now 
cruizing  about,  waiting  for  orders. 

You  know  Paris  too  well  for  me  to  describe ;  but  the  im- 
provements and  additions  are  wonderful,  not  always  in  good 
taste,  but  the  effect  imposing,  from  magnitude  of  space  and 
plan.  The  column  in  imitation  of  Trajan's  is  very  good,  but 
the  costume  of  the  modern  soldiers  is  not  favourable  to  the 
beauty  of  the  bas-reliefs.  The  Museum  is  magnificent  beyond 
imagination.  There  is  a  very  pretty  new  bridge  at  Chaillot, 
and  two  iron  ones  for  foot  passengers.  The  theatres  much  the 
same,  but  they  have  lost  some  of  the  old  vehement  screamers  at 
the  opera,  and  I  think  their  successors,  however  desirous  they 
may  be  of  equalling  them,  have  not  the  physical  means.  Poor 
L'Aine,  whom  you  must  remember,  was  sent  off  long  since, 
because  the  Empress  jMarie  Louise  could  not  help  laughing 
when  she  heard  him  for  the  first  time  ;  and  as  it  was  a  solitary 
instance  of  her  ever  having  laughed  while  in  this  country,  her 
august  spouse  was  piqued,  and  desired  him  to  go  and  faire  les 
delices  de  Bordeaux.  Madame  de  Stael  arrived  on  Thursday 
evening,  but  I  have  been  given  a  wrong .  direction,  and  never 
could  find  her  out  all  yesterday.     Her  book  is  published. 

There  is  a  report  to-day  that  the  King  has  been  requested  by 
our  Government  to  destroy  the  works  at  Cherbourg,  and  by  the 
Austrians  to  dismantle  Strasbourg,  and  that  he  has  replied  that 
sooner  than  consent  to  either,  he  would  willingly  return  to 
Hartwell  House.  There  is  a  'good  deal  of  discontent  among  the 
labouring  class,  who  want  work,  of  which  there  is  plenty,  but 
no  money  to  pay  it.  There  are  also  great  complaints  relative 
to  the  relaxed  state  of  the  police,  and  it  is  evident  that  th 


22  MISS   BERRY'S    JOURNAL.  [1814 

National  Guard  has  it  all  to  do.  These  are  very  good  friends 
with  the  foreign  soldiers  ;  but  the  French  troops  of  the  line  are 
always  quarrelling  with  them,  and  there  has  been  some  fighting, 
or  rather  affrays.  I  enclose  a  letter  for  Lady  C.  Campbell, 
which  I  fear  will  not  be  very  satisfactory,  as  it  is  scarcely  pos- 
sible to  give  her  the  intelligence  she  wishes;  but  I  have  done 
my  best.     My  kind  regards  wait  on  Mr.  Berry  and  Mrs.  Darner. 

Believe  me  ever, 
Yours  most  affectionately  and  sincerely, 

li.  K.  Craven. 

JOURNAL. 

Sunday ,  16th. — Dined  at  Mr.  Whitbread's,  with  Lord 
Holland,  the  two  American  envoys,  Lord  J.  Eussell,  &c. : 
fourteen  in  all.  Lady  Elizabeth  and  myself  the  only 
ladies. 

Thjtr.'^dny^  1  ^tli. — I  dined  Avitli  the  Bishop  of  London, 
the  Archbishop  of  York,  his  wife,  a  son  of  theirs  and 
his  wife,  Miss  Fanshawe,  &c.,  and  then  went  to  Devon- 
shire House,  wdiere  the  Grand  Duchess  had  dined.  When 
we  arrived  a  large  circle  was  in  the  saloon.  Tlie  Grand 
Duchess  was  holding  a  drawing-room,  with  Madame  de 
Lieven  for  lady-in-waiting,  who  was  presenting  to  her  all 
who  desired  it.  The  Duke  of  Devonshire  introduced  me 
to  her,  in  order  to  be  presented  to  the  Grand  Duchess. 
The  Grand  Duchess,  I  know  not  Avhy,  spoke  to  me  in 
French  ;  she  had  spoken  English,  and  very  good  English, 
to  all  the  other  ladies.  She  began  by  remarking  that  I 
had  travelled  a  great  deal,  and  then  spoke  of  Italy ;  she 
hoped  to  see  much  of  wliat  there  was  to  see  in  England, 
&c.  Tliis  lasted  for  perhaps  about  five  minutes.  Her 
conversation  corresponds  well  with  her  countenance, 
whi(  li  is  very  intelligent,  and  her  manner  is  very  dig- 
niiicd  and  very  gracious.  Slic  left  Devonshire  House,  as 
she  does  from  all  other  ])arties,  soon  after  eleven  o'clock. 

Saturday.,  21.st — At  twelve  o'clock  T  went  with  tlie 
Whitbreads    and  their  second  daughter  to  Freemasons' 


1814]  THE   GRAND   DUCHESS   OF   OLDENBURG.  23 

Hall,  to  an  annual  meeting  of  subscribers  and  others  to 
the  National  Education.  The  Duke  of  Sussex  was  pre- 
sident, the  Duke  of  Kent  on  one  side,  and  the  Princess  of 
Wales  on  the  other,  with  three  of  her  ladies.  Whitbread 
spoke  very  well,  and  several  others  well  enough  to  be 
interesting.  The  Duke  of  Sussex  presided  wonderfully 
well.  The  two  Princes  and  the  Princess  were  received 
with  great  applause,  and  the  Princess  with  enthusiasm, 
when,  before  the  meeting  separated,  Mr.  Whitbread 
thanked  her  for  having  publicly  shown  herself  as  the 
friend  of  such  an  institution.  About  twelve  o'clock  in 
the  evening  went  to  Lady  Dairy mple  Hamilton's.*  The 
assembly  was  one  of  the  most  brilliant  I  have  seen  this 
winter.  The  supper  arranged  upon  five  tables  ;  at  the  one 
in  the  middle  sat  the  Prince  of  Orange,  whose  countenance 
and  manners  pleased  me  much. 

Monday^  2%rd. — In  the  afternoon  I  received  a  note 
from  Lady  Pembroke,  saying  that  the  Grand  Duchess 
would  receive  me,  with  Lady  Douglas,  at  half-past  six 
o'clock.  Accordingly  we  went  together  to  the  Pulteney 
Hotel.  We  found  Madame  de  Lieven,  one  of  the  Eus- 
sian  ladies-in-waiting,  and  an  officer  in  the  drawing-room, 
with  ]\Iiss  Knight  in  waiting  upon  Princess  Charlotte,  who 
was  with  the  Grand  Duchess  in  her  private  room.  Li 
about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  the  door  opened  and  the 
Grand  Duchess  entered,  accompanied  by  the  Princess 
Charlotte  and  the  Prince  of  Orange.  The  Grand  Duchess 
turned  first  to  Lady  Douglas  and  then  to  me,  talking  with 
ease  and  grace,  remembering  that  I  had  been  presented 
to  her  at  the  Duke  of  Devonshire's,  &c. ;  then  she  turned 
and  spoke  to  the  Princess  Charlotte,  who,  after  a  few 
minutes,  went  away,  and  so  did  we.  In  the  evening  at 
Lady  Hertford's.  Madame  de  Lieven  told  us  from  the 
Grand  Duchess  that  she  had  regretted  seeing  us  for  so 

*  Lady  Dalrymple  Hamilton  (afterwards  Lady  .Tane),  wife  of  Sir  Hew 
D.  Hamilton,  daughter  of  Viscount  Duncan,  sistfi*  of  the  bit^  I'laii  of 
CamperdoAvn. 


24  MISS   berry's  journal.  [1814 

short  a  time,  and  desired  us  to  come  again  on  Smiduy  at 
six  o'clock. 

The  followiniz  letter  from  Madame  de  Stael  to  Miss 
Eerry  seems  to  have  been  written  little  more  than  a  fort- 
ni^dit  after  she  left  Eno;land  : — 

Ce  25  Mai.     Paris  :  rue  de  Crenelle  St.  Germain,  No.  105. 

Je  suis  presque  fachee  de  ne  vous  avoir  pas  ecrit  la  premiere. 
J'y  pensais  si  souveut  que  j'aurais  de  me  donner  le  merite  et  le 
plaisir  de  vous  le  dire.  A  present  j'ai  dix  eboses  a  vous  de- 
mander,  et  j'ai  I'air  touie  interessee.  Enfin,  commenoons. 
Faites  dire  a  Wilberforce  (si  Mackintosh  n'a  pas  recu  ma  lettre) 
que  I'empereur  de  Kussie  m'a  dit  (]ue  Tabolition  de  la  traite  des 
negres  aurait  lieu  dans  le  congres.  Quel  homme  que  cet  em- 
pereur  de  Russie !  Sans  lui  nous  n'aurions  rien  qui  ressemblat 
a  une  constitution.  II  est  a  merveille  pour  moi ;  il  vient  chez 
moi,  et  il  faut  que  vous  soyez  assez  bonne  pour  dire  cela  negli- 
gemment  aux  Russes,  afin  qu'ils  me  respectent.  N'en  voila-t-il 
pas  assez  ?  INIais  j'ose  vous  dire,  qu'en  vous  donnant  tout  cet 
embarras  je  vous  prouve  que  vous  n'etes  pas  pour  moi  une  cor- 
respondante,  mais  une  amie ;  car  il  faut  que  j'aime  beaucoup 
pour  demander  le  moindre  service.  Combien  je  regrette  Playfair ; 
on  ne  trouve  pas  dans  toute  la  France  un  pareil  homme.  Je 
sais  des  nouvelles  de  votre  amie  Madame  de  Coiguy ;  elle  vit 
assez  heureuse,  elle  aime,  elle  est  aimee,  d'un  homme  de  sa 
societe,  Bruno  de  ]iirsgelin  ;  elle  a  ete  vivemont  pour  les  Bour- 
bons, et  sa  position  est  amelioree  en  tout.  J'ai  vu  I'autro  Madame 
de  Coigny — toujours  la  meme  excepte  par  le  visage.  II  semble 
que  la  France  entiere  est  comme  cela.  J  ai  \\u  appartement 
que  je  voudrais  coder  en  partant  pour  la  Suisse  le  l*""  de 
juillct ;  il  est  tout  beau  et  pas  chcr.  Voulez-vous  roflfrir  de  ma 
part  a  Lady  Jersey  ?  Encore  pardon.  Vous  devricz  me  donner 
quelques  commissions  pour  Paris,  afin  (jue  jo  fussc  im  peu 
capable  de  vous  lemoigncr  toute  ma  reconnaissance.  Vous 
u'aurez  les  souvc^aius,  scion  uion  avi.s,  que  vers  les  premiers 
jours  de  juin.  li'Kmpereur  de  Russie  vent  voir  la  constitution 
j)roclamee.  Que  diti's-vous  de  riiidigne  coiiduite  de  Ferdinand 
VII.  ?      Est  il  vrai  que  les  Anglais  y  ayent  vn  i\\\vh[uv  part  ? 


1814]  VISIT   TO    THE    PRINCESS   OF   WALES.  25 

J'espere  que  non.  Dites-moi  ce  qu'on  ea  dit  a  Londres  ;  I'em- 
pereur  de  Kussie  s'en  indigne  a  Paris.  Voyez  cet  empereur,  qui 
est  uue  production  aussi  extraordinaire  en  Eussie  qu'un  aloes. 
Adieu,  chere  amie;  ecrivez-moi  et  pensez  a  moi. 

Quand  viendrez-vous  ?     Je  demanderai  votre  jeune  Anglais  a 
Mr.  Ward  demain. 

JOUENAL. 

Sunday,  2dth. — Tlie  Princess  sent  for  me  at  three 
o'clock.  She  made  Lady  Charlotte  read  to  me  the 
letters  that  had  passed  between  the  Queen  and  her  on 
the  subject  of  the  drawing-rooms.*  They  were  good,  but 
too  long,  and  sometimes  marked  by  AVhitbread's  want  of 
taste,  who  dictated  them.  At  six  o'clock  Lady  Douglas 
and  I  went  tosjether  to  the  Grand  Duchess.  We  were 
received  by  Madame  de  Lieven.  The  Duchess  Dowager 
of  Buccleusfh  arrived  a  few  minutes  later.  We  waited 
more  than  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  when  the  door  of  the 
little  drawing-room  opened  and  M.  and  Madame  de 
Mireveldt  f  entered.  Madame  de  Lieven  presented  us 
all  three  to  Madame  de  Mireveldt,  and  I  told  her  I  ought 
to  meet  her  with  a  letter  of  Prince  Maurice  de  Lichten- 
stein  in  my  hand.  She  looks  clever,  and  as  if  slie  had 
been  very  pretty,  but  has  not  the  face  my  imagination 
had  painted.  As  soon  as  they  were  gone  we  went  with 
Madame  de  Lieven  to  the  Grand  Duchess,  who  received 
us  with  her  usual  grace  and  intelligence,  talking  a  great 
deal  to  the  Duchess  about  her  famdy  and  England,  and 
to  me  about  Italy  and  Mce,  with  a  warmth  and  an  interest 
that  were  charming.  I  was  sorry  that  my  two  companions 
did  not  excite  her  to  talk  more ;  and  as  for  myself,  being 
the  least  distinguished  person  of  the  company,  I  did  not 

*  The  correspondence  arose  in  consequence  of  the  Queen  having  given 
notice  to  the  Princess  of  Wales,  in  a  letter  dated  May  24,  that  the  Prince 
of  Wales  desired  that  she  might  not  attend  the  two  drawing-rooms  to  ho 
held  in  the  ensuing  month. — See  Annual  Register,  p.  348. 

t  The  Aubtrian  Ambassador. 


26  MISS    berry's   journal.  [1814 

like  to  take  too  prominent  a  part  in  the  conversation. 
We  stayed  witli  her  about  twenty  minutes. 

Tuesday^  June  7th. — I  felt  so  unwell  that  I  hardly 
thousiht  I  should  be  able  to  see  the  entiy  into  London  of 
tlie  Emperor  of  Eussia,  the  King  of  Prussia,  his  sons,  and 
all  the  foreigners,  which  has  turned  everybody  out  so 
early.  Agnes  went  to  Lady  Glenbervie's  at  twelve  o'clock, 
and  I  followed  them  at  two.  Charing  Cross  and  White- 
hall were  entirely  blocked  up,  and,  they  say,  the  road 
was  a  line  of  carriages  as  far  as  Dartford.  In  the  mean- 
while,  the  Emperor  was  already  at  the  Pulteney  Hotel, 
with  his  sister,  having  entered  quietly  in  Count  de  Lieven's 
carriage,  and  the  King  of  Prussia  and  his  sons  passed  by 
the  Horse  Guards  to  go  to  their  apartments  at  St.  James's 
Palace.*  After  havini^  waited  more  than  an  hour  lookinix 
at  each  other  on  Lady  Glenbervie's  balcony,  we  decidetl 
upon  walking  home  through  St.  James's  Park,  which  we 
happily  accomplished,  notwitlistanding  an  immense  crowd 
on  all  sides.  We  saw  notliing,  nor  heard  anything  except 
the  guns  being  fired  in  the  pjirk  to  announce  the  ai'rival 
of  the  sovereigns  in  their  a{)artments. 

Wednesday,  Sth. — Walked  tliis  morning  with  Gell  and 
Sir  G.  Cayley  to  the  Green  Park,  opposite  the  Pulteney 
Hotel,  wliere  tlie  Emperor  lodged.  The  crowd  of  car- 
riages and  pedestrians  in  Piccadilly  was  enormous,  anil 
there  were  also  a  great  many  people  in  tlie  park  walking 
backwards  and  forwards,  expecting  tliat  he  woukl  sliow 
liimseh'  at  tlie  balcony  of  the  window,  which  he  did  at 
last.  He  bowed  several  times  to  the  people,  who  cheered 
him  very  much.  He  has  a  fine,  tall,  manly  figure,  with 
a  clear  complexion,  and  a  good  open  countenance,  with- 

•  The  rnndiict  nf  the  Emperor  and  the  King  of  Prus.xin  on  this  occa-sion 
was  sinpulnrly  wnntinp  in  llic  courtesy  which  was  duo  both  to  the  Sovereijni 
nml  the  pfopli'  wlio  -were  prepared  to  welcome  their  nirival.  '  Avnnt-cou- 
riera  and  detaclimcnts  of  drn;,'oon.s  were  seen  on  the  mad  liours  after  they 
had  pa.ssed,  and  tlio  Prince  Kopent'a  servants  and  liors(>s  were  hept  waiting 
aa  a  relay  ou  Shooter's  Hill.' — See  Anmial  lirrfistcr,  \^\\,  p.  AW. 


1814]  THE    KING   OF   PRUSSIA.  27 

out  remarkable  intellio-ence.     He  was  dressed  in  a  scarlet 

CD 

uniform,  with  liglit  blue  braid,  witliout  embroidery,  and 
only  wore  the  Order  of  the*  Garter.  He  was  going  to  pay 
his  first  visit  to  the  Queen,  and  then  dine  at  Carlton  House. 

Thursday,  dth. — It  was  very  fine,  and  it  was  said  that 
peace  would  be  proclaimed  to-day  at  one  o'clock.  I 
wished  to  see  this  ceremony,  and  we  went  with  Mr.  Play- 
fair  in  the  landau  first  before  the  gate  of  St.  James's 
Palace,  and  then  to  Charing  Cross.  In  every  part  the 
crowd  was  immense  ;  all  met  together  with  the  same 
intentions  as  ourselves,  but  the  proclximation  was  not 
read!  It  appears  to  me  that  the  Government  ought 
to  have  given  notice  of  this,  in  order  that  the  people 
might  not  have  been  disappointed  in  the  hope  of  hearing 
so  great  a  blessing  announced.  From  Charing  Cross  we 
went  towards  the  Palace,  intending  to  take  a  walk  in  the 
park  by  entering  at  the  stable-yard,  but  the  carriage  was 
stopped  by  the  crowd  in  the  courtyard,  and  by  four  or 
five  of  the  Prince's  carriages  in  dress  livery,  waiting  at 
the  door  of  the  apartment  where  the  King  of  Prussia 
and  his  sons  lodged,  to  convey  them  all  to  a  Chapter  of 
the  Garter  at  Carlton  House,  where  the  King  of  Prussia 
was  to  be  presented  with  the  order.  We  waited  till  we 
saw  him  and  all  his  court  pass. 

Friday,  10th. — In  the  evening  I  went  to  Mrs.  Villiers', 
where  there  was  a  dance.  The  Kino;  of  Prussia's  brother 
was  there,  and  some  other  foreigners.  The  Prince  of 
Orange  danced  a  quadrille. 

Tuesday,  1-Uh. — Took  Mr.  Playfair  with  us  to  see  the 
panorama  of  the  Battle  of  Vittoria. 

From  Madame  de  Stael  to  Miss  Beriy. 

Ce  14  Juin.     Paris  :  Plotel  de  Tamerzum, 

Rue  de  Grenelle  St.  Germain.  Xo.  105. 

Pourqnoi,  ma  ch^re  amie,  n'ai-je  pas  de  vos  noiivelles  ?  Je 
vous  ai  repondu  il  y  a  (juinze  jours,  et  vous  m'oubliez  deja. 


28  MISS  berry's  journal.  [isu 

comme  si  vous  etiez  une  de  nos  fri voles  Fran^aises.  C'est  vous 
cepeudaut  qui  puissiez  me  dire  des  nouvelles,  car  nous  sommes 
ici  dans  uu  calme  plat,  heureux 'de  n'etre  plus  persecutes  et 
transportant  toutes  nos  flatteries  a  de  plus  honuetes  gens  que 
J:5ouaparte,  niais  sans  conserver  pour  cela  plus  de  dignite  en  nous 
memes.  Cependant  a  la  fin  nous  serous  libres,  parceque  rien 
en  ce  genre  ne  retrograde  definitivement,  mais  I'exemple  de 
I'Espagne  et  du  Piemont  ne  nous  est  pas  salutaire.  Quont  a  la 
societe,  elle  est  encore  nidle,  il  s'en  rassemble  quelciues  debris 
chez  raoi,  mais  il  n'y  a  point  d'ensemble,  et  je  serais  deja  partie 
pour  la  Suisse  si  je  ne  cliercbais  pas  a  me  faire  paA'er  ici  du 
depot  de  mon  pere — chose  pour  laquelle  j'obtiens  plus  de  paroles 
que  de  fait.  Le  sacre  va  ramener,  je  crois,  beaucoup  d" Anglais 
a  Paris,  car  c'est  a  Paris  meme  qu'on  croit  qu'il  aura  lieu.  La 
ducbesse  de  Devonshire  m'ecrit  qu'on  me  prete  beaucoup  de 
projets  depuis  mon  depart  de  Londres.  Cela  m'inquiete. 
Daignez  me  dire  ce  qui  en  est ;  je  serais  si  triste  de  perdre  la 
bienveillance  de  I'Augleterre.  J'y  veux  retouruer  le  printems 
prochain.  Que  ferez-vous  ?  Comment  se  porte  votre  pere  et 
votre  soeur  ?  Albertine  demande  une  place  dans  votre  sou- 
venir. Dites  un  mot  pour  moi  a  ceux  de  mes  amis  que  ne 
m'ont  pas  o\ibliee.  On  ne  peut  se  rappeler  qu'a  ceux  qui  se 
souvienuent  de  vous.     Je  vous  embrasse  de  toute  mon  ame. 


JOUENAL. 

Friday^  \lth. — In  the  evening  at  Lady  Castlerengh's 
larjie  assembly,  where  the  Emperor,  King  of  rriL>.sia,  and 
all  tlieii'  court  were.  The  Emperor  arrived  at  one  o'clock 
in  the  morning,  having  that  day  dined  witli  the  mcrcliants 
in  tlie  City,  afterwards  been  to  Drury  Lane  'J'heatre, 
and  then  to  Lord  Grey's,  before  coming  to  Lord  Castle- 
reagli's. 

Sdtnnltji^  ISth. — Dined  at  Mr.  Baring's  witb  tbe  Prince 
Paul  de  Wirtcmberg.  M.  and  Madame  de  Portalis,  and 
a  half-dozen  other  foreigners.  Tlie  Prince  and  Princess 
Castel  Cicala,  Sec.  Went  with  tbe  Hardwickes  to  a  ball 
at  Devonsbire  IIousc.     Tlie  Duke  was  not  returned  from 


1814]  FfiTE   AT   CHISWICK.  29 

the  grand  dinner  at  Giiildliall  given  this  day.  Towards 
twelve  o'clock  the  King  of  Prussia,  his  son,  all  the  court 
and  foreigners  arrived,  the  Emperor  excepted,  who  sent 
his  excuses,  having  returned  so  late  from  the  City,  and 
having  letters  to  write.  They  waltzed  a  little.  The 
supper  was,  I  heard,  mngnificent.  I  did  not  remain  to 
see  it.  The  Duke  returned  from  the  City  with  such  an 
inflammation  in  his  eyes  that  he  retired  before  supper 
also, 

Sunday,  Idth. — It  rained  all  the  morning,  and  was 
very  unsuitable  for  a  fete  champeire.  However,  before 
tAvo  o'clock  the  rain  ceased,  and  we  set  out  for  Chis- 
wick  before  three  o'clock,  taking  Mr.  Playfair  with  us. 
On  our  arrival  we  were  told  that  the  Duke  of  Devonshire 
was  not  able  to  appear  on  account  of  his  inflamed  eye. 
His  two  sisters  and  their  husbands  did  the  honours 
admirably.  The  King  of  Prussia  arrived  veiy  early,  and 
left  with  his  sons  for  Oatlands  before  the  luncheon.  The 
Emperor  came  with  his  sister  between  three  and  four 
o'clock.  The  luncheon  was  served  in  the  house.  The 
Emperor,  &c.,  sat  in  the  little  gallery  at  a  table  with  about 
thirty  people.  Afterwards  the  Emperor  and  his  sister,  to 
whom  tiie  Prince  Eoyal  of  Wirtemburg  gave  his  arm, 
and  about  a  dozen  others,  walked  round  the  garden.  We 
were  amono;  the  number.  The  Grand  Duchess  recomised 
me,  asked  after  my  health  with  her  usual  graciousness. 
The  Emperor  gave  his  arm,  during  the  walk,  to  Lady 
Georgiana  [Morpeth],  and  the  Prince  of  Orange  to  Lady 
Jersey.  Eeturued  to  London  between  six  and  seven 
o'clock. 

Monday,  20th. — We  dined  at  home,  and  before  ten 
o'clock  went  to  the  fete  given  by  White's  Club  at  Bur- 
lington House.  We  got  out  of  the  carriage  in  Cork 
Street  at  Mr.  Knutzen's,  who  accompanied  us  on  foot ;  it 
was  only  to  cross  the  street  to  enter  at  the  door  made  for 
sedan  chairs.     There  was  neither  crowd  nor  difficulty, 


30  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1814 

and  at  supper  we  found  ourselves  witli  Lady  Ilardwicke 
and  lier  family  in  tlie  large  dining-room,  where  Lord 
Hardwicke,  as  steward,  had  a  table  appropriated  to  him. 
The  coolness  of  the  canvas  room,  where  tliey  supped, 
refreshed  every  one  so  much  tliat  it  greatly  diminished 
the  usual  fatigue  of  such  assemblies.  After  liaving  seen 
all  the  world,  we  departed  as  we  entered,  without  diffi- 
culty and  well  pleased  with  the  fete. 

Wednesday,  22nd. — In  the  evening  at  the  Princess  of 
Wales's,  where  there  had  been  a  dinner  of  the  Granvilles, 
Levesons,  Cowpers,  &c.  The  Emperor  and  the  King  of 
Prussia  left  London  for  Portsmouth. 

Thursday,  30/A. — I  had  the  Duke  of  Devonshire's  box 
to  see  Kean  in  '  Othello.'  I  wished  to  think  liim  the  great 
actor  they  say  he  is,  but  I  cannot. 

Friday,  July  \st. — In  the  evening  I  went  to  the  masked 
ball  given  by  the  Watier  Club  at  J^nu'lington  House.  I 
returned  home  very  well  pleased  with  my  evening.  Tlie 
garden,  which  they  had  converted  into  a  room,  was  very 
])retty,  but  the  ball-room  was  already  dirty,  and  the  fete 
had  not  the  eclat  of  White's  ball. 

Monday,  4:th. — Went  to  Lady  Corke's,  where  there 
was  a  fete  given  in  honour  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington, 
who  was  compelled  to  hear  an  ode  sung  in  his  praise. 

From  the  Princess  of  W(des  to  Miss  Berry. 

July  1, 1814. 
Dear  Berrina, — As  various  reports  have  been  spread  in  the 
^SIctropoHs  concerning  my  daughter's  marriage  with  thi'  Prince 
Hereditary  of  Orange,  I  thiulc  I  may  venture  by  the  Box  I  take 
the  hberty  of  furwanUug  to  you,  as  a  specimen  of  Dutch  gal- 
lantry and  respect  to  Ins  venerable  E.\-mother-in-la\v,  in  send- 
ing over  from  the  Hague  'Zwiebacks'  as  an  ap()h)gy  for  his 
former  kinthiess  when  in  this  country;  and  being  informed  that 
you  are  so  fond  of  tiiem,  I  j)resent  them  Inimblyand  respectfully 
for  the  Diaphragm  of  your  stomach  ;  and  may  you  each  time 
think  of  your  absent  friends  while  eating  them. 


1814]  LETTER   FROM    TRINCESS   OF    WALES.  31 

With  sentiments  of  the  highest  regard  and  attachment,  I  am 
proud  to  subscribe  myself 

Your  most  sincere 

and  affectionate 

C.  P. 

Knowing  the  interest  you  always  kindly  take  in  all  my  con- 
cerns, my  dear  Berrina,  I  enclose  to  you  a  Copy  of  a  letter  I 
sent  yesterday  to  Lord  Castlereagh.  You  may  show  it  to  Mrs. 
Damer  and  all  your  friends. 

'  June  30,  1814. 

'  The  Princess  of  Wales  acknowledges  the  receipt  of  Lord 
Castlereagh's  letter  of  yesterday  evening,  which  contains  a 
proposal  from  the  Crown  to  offer  her  a  revenue  due  to  the 
rank  and  station  in  which  she  has  been  placed.  As  no  con- 
ditions whatever,  derogatory  either  to  her  rights,  her  rank,  or 
her  honour,  have  been  annexed  to  this  act  of  justice,  the  Princess 
of  Wales  accepts  it  unquestionably,  in  order  to  prove  to  Par- 
liament that  she  is  never  averse  to  any  proposal  coming  from 
the  Crown  to  replace  her  in  the  proper  splendour  adequate  to 
her  situation,  and  to  throw  no  unnecessary  obstacles  in  the 
way  to  obstruct  the  tranquillity  or  impair  the  peace  of  mind  of 
the  Prince  Eegent.' 

JOURNAL. 

Tuesday,  bth.  —  The  Princess  sent  for  me  to  read  a 
letter  that  she  had  sent  to  the  Speaker.* 

Thursday,  1th. — After  dinner  drove  in  the  park.  It 
was  the  Thanksgiving  Day  for  the  Peace,  and  the  parks 
were  all  tlironged  with  people. 

Saturday,  dth. — In  the  evening  at  Lady  Castlereagh's. 
At  the  foot  of  the  staircase  we  met  Blucher,  who  came 

•  This  letter  to  the  Speaker  was  relating  to  a  proposed  increase  of  the 
Princess  of  Wales's  allowfince.  '  On  July  8th,  the  reports  of  the  committee 
being  brought  up,  I^ord  Castlereagh  called  the  attention  of  the  House  to  a 
letter  to  the  chair  from  the  Princess  of  Wales,  in  which  she  intimated  that 
it  would  be  more  satisfactory  to  her  if  the  vote  of  the  conmiittee  for  an 
allowance  of  50,000/.  were  reduced  to  35,000/.' — Annual  Reyidvr,  1814, 
p.  145. 


32  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1814 

"with  Lord  Stuart  from  a  dinner  at  Carlton  House,  and 
Blucher,  being  tlie  worse  for  it,  had  great  difficuky  in 
getting  up  stairs.  He  wished  to  be  introduced  to  me  ;  he 
shook  hands,  having  been  taught  here  that  tliis  was  the 
height  of  pohteness  and  fasliion. 

TueMlay,  12th. — At  three  o'clock  I  went  to  Lady 
Buckinghamshire's  breakfast ;  a  very  amusing  party,  as 
usual ;  several  masks,  amongst  others,  a  woman  as  a 
monk.  I  took  her  first  for  Madame  de  Lieven,  but  it 
was  the  Duchess  of  Sussex.     Nobody  recognised  her. 

Wednesday,  20th. — Ronald  has  arrived  from  Holland. 
He  left  Brussels  Thursday  14th,  and  was  in  London  on 
Saturday  evening  the  IGtli.  We  gave  up  all  the  fetes 
the  last  days  of  our  stay  in  London :  the  ball  given  by 
the  general  officers  to  the  Duke  of  Wellington  at  Bur- 
hngton  House  on  Monday  the  18th,  and  the  concert 
and  ball  given  by  the  Duke  of  Devonshire  at  Devonshire 
House  on  Wednesday  the  2()th. 

Thursday,  2\i<t. — At  half-past  three  o'clock  we  set  off  to 
find  tlie  vessel  at  Wapping,  and  after  taking  possession  of 
our  stern  cabin,  went  on  deck  to  look  around  us.  Nothing 
can  surpass  the  beauty  and  interest  of  the  Thames  as  far  as 
Gravesend.  We  passed  it  before  it  was  dark.  There  was 
little  wind,  and  consequently  very  little  motion  in  the  boat. 

Friday,  2'2>id. — I  got  up  at  five  o'clock,  a  beautiful 
morning.  We  were  about  twenty  leagues  the  other  side 
of  the  Nore — the  wind  witli  us.  Towards  the  evening 
we  were  obliged  to  tack  duiinir  some  hours  on  the  coast 
of  Xoifolk.     Saw  Cromer  and  its  lightliouse. 

Saturday,  23r</.  —  We  found  ourselves  vis-a-vii  to 
Flamborough  Head  with  another  brilliant  liglitlumse. 

Sunday,  2\th. — Were  ris-a-n's  to  Scai-boi'ougli  Castle, 
scarcely  any  wind,  and  tlie  sea  like  a  lookiiig-gla.ss.  The 
repose  of  all  at  sun-rise  was  striking,  and  soon  after- 
wards a  slight  wind  arose,  which  increased  towards  the 
evening,  and  took  us  very  fast,  and  with  very  little  move- 


1814]  VOYAGE   TO   RAITH.  33 

ment,  to  the  north  of  Holy  Island  before  eleven  o'clock 
in  the  evening.  Before  twilight  we  had  passed  Duns- 
borough  Castle  and  Bamborough  Castle,  both  making  a 
fine  eflect  from  the  sea.  We  also  passed  through  a  group 
of  small  islands  called  Fearn  Islands,  upon  the  largest  of 
w^hich  there  is  a  lighthouse,  and  two  inhabitants,  a  man 
and  his  wife,  to  keep  up  the  fire. 

Mondaij^  Ihlh. — I  got  up  soon  after  four  o'clock :  another 
beautiful  morning.  We  had  got  far  up  the  Frith  of  Forth, 
and  opposite  Dunbar.  Further  on  we  passed  Tantallon 
Castle,  a  ruin  which  has  a  fine  effect  from  the  water.  All 
the  coasts  of  the  Frith  are  much  finer  than  any  part  of 
the  coast  of  England.  The  approach  to  Leith  and  Edin- 
burgh, which  seem  to  unite  in  one  on  arriving  by  sea,  is 
one  of  the  finest  coup-d'ceils  I  ever  saw.  We  arrived  in 
the  port  of  Leith  at  nine  o'clock  in  the  morning,  during 
the  most  beautiful  weather,  and  amidst  all  the  noise, 
fracas  and  bustle  of  a  much-frequented  seaport,  we  em- 
barked to  cross  the  Frith  for  Eaith.  There  was  much 
wind,  which  obliged  us  often  to  tack  to  make  Pettycue 
(the  little  port  of  Kinghorn). 

Raith,  Sunday,  i^lst. — I  began  working  at  '  Lady  Eus- 
sell's  Letters.' 

During  Miss  Berry's  visit  at  Eaith,  the  Princess  of  Wales 
determined  to  leave  England,  and  from  that  time  it  does 
not  appear  that  the  Princess  and  the  IVIiss  Berrys  met 
again,  but  once,  in  Switzerland.* 

*  Letter  of  the  Princess  of  Wales  to  a  friend,  published  in  the  '  Memoirs 
of  the  Times  of  George  IV.,'  by  Lady  Charlotte  Berry,  1814 : — '  Aug. 
7. — I  am  on  the  eve  of  sailing,  which  will  be  to-morrow  evening  as  soon  as 
the  wind  is  favourable,  in  the  '  Jason  '  frigate.  Captain  King  represents  Jason 

himself  ...  If  the  present  wind,   which  is  favom-able  to  land  at  , 

continues,  we  shall  amve  by  the  12th  of  August.  By  the  15th  1  hope  to 
be  at  Brunswick.  I  intend  only  to  remain  in  my  native  country  ten  or 
fifteen  days,  after  which  I  shall  set  out  immediately  for  Switzerland  in  the 
beginning  of  September.  My  intention  stiU  is  to  remain  at  Naples  for  the 
winter;  but  in  case  disturbances  should  commence  there  against  Mm'at,  ol 
course  I  should  prefer  to  be  the  winter  at  Rome  or  Florence.' — p.  47. 

VOL.  III.  D 


4  MISS    berry's   journal.  [1814 


Monclai/,  August  loth. — Lord  Eosslyn  *  and  liis  eldest 
son,f  a  very  pretty  boy  of  about  twelve  years  old,  arrived 
here. 

Saturday,  20th. — Lord  Eosslyn  read  to  us  'Lara,'  Lord 
Byron's  new  ttile.  It  strongly  marks  his  manner  of  think- 
jnn-  and  writins:!:.  It  is  a  sort  of  conthiuation  of  the  '  Corsair.' 

Sun(lai/,21st. — I  read  '  Swift's  Life'  in  the  new  edition 
of  his  works  by  Walter  Scott.  It  does  not  appear  to  me 
that  there  is  much  that  is  new. 

Wednesday,  2-ith. — I  retired  to  my  room  to  give  way 
to  those  bitter  tears  caused  by  the  recollections  of  other 
days.  I  very  rarely  allow  myself  now  these  fits  of 
despondency  to  which,  even  in  my  youth,  I  was  subject ; 
but  sometimes,  in  spite  of  me,  all  these  recollections 
return  with  irresistible  force.  I  suffer  from  what  I  am, 
from  what  I  have  been,  from  what  I  might  have  been, 
and  from  what  I  never  shall  be.  And  all  that,  notwith- 
standing the  strong  feeling  which  ought  to  blot  out  all 
the  others,  that  hfe  is  passed  for  me ;  I  have  no  longer 
any  effort  to  make,  nor  any  part  to  play,  but  that  of  dying 
in  peace. 

Thursday,  2oth. — ]\Iiss  Kinlock  brought  the  sad  news 
of  the  deatli  of  the  Duchess  of  Buccleugh,J  on  the  twelfth 
day  of  her  confinement.  One  cannot  conceive  a  greater 
loss  for  her  family,  her  husband,  and  a  large  cii'cle  who, 
in  various  ways,  have  depended  u\Km  her. 

Sunday,  28/A. — There  is  an  Anglican  Cha|)el  at  Kircaldy. 
It  is  only  necessary  to  attend  the  Scottish  Church  for  one 
month  to  become  a  fierce  Episcopalian.     It  is  im})ossible . 
to  bear  the  dulness  and   the  rejietition   of   the  Scotch 
cler'^y  while  all  the  aicompaniinents  to  the  service  are 

•  Janu'S  Ak'xamkT  second  Earl  of  Rosslyn,  lu-phcw  to  Lord  Chancellor 
J.oughboroujfh. 

t  Tin-  ]>rtsi'iit  V.nr\  of  IJosHlvn. 

J  I  Inrrict  CiiUitriiic,  youiigcsl  diiugliter  of  Thomas  lirst  Viscount  Sydut-y  ; 
iiuuricd  171)5. 


1814]  VISIT   BLANTYRE.  35 

Avanting  that  can  elevate  the  soul  and  supply  the  tone  of 
feeling  which  is  wanting  in  them. 

Tuesday^  September  Gth. — I  was  buried  in  my  MSS. 
letters,  and  did  not  leave  my  room  all  day. 

Wednesday,  2Sth. — Agnes  and  I  went  in  the  waggon  to 
the  LakeKhiL>horn.  She  drew;  lAvalked  round  the  lake, and 
went  into  two  labourers'  cottages  belonging  to  the  farm. 
One  showed  great  poverty,  but  was  better  furnished  than 
such  a  cottage  in  England  would  have  been,  but  all  in  a 
state  of  dreadful  diit.  I  received  the  first  hospitality 
that  has  ever  been  offered  me  of  the  kind  in  Scotland. 
The  good  woman  gave  me  some  very  good  milk.  Here 
everything  was  better  than  the  other  cottage.  There  was 
all  that  was  necessary  for  comfort  in  a  peasant's  home, 
but  the  same  disgusting  state  of  dirt  prevailed  every- 
where. 

Saturday,  October  Sth. — Went  to  Bothwell  Castle. 

Sunday,  oM. — It  was  very  fine,  and  we  drove  to  the 
other  side  of  the  river  to  Blantyre.  Agnes  drew,  and  I 
renewed  the  date,  or,  rather,  added  a  second  one  to  the 
name  Berrina,  Avritten  by  me  in  the  year  1808  upon  the 
bark  of  a  tree  in  the  little  ravine  at  Blantyre.  I  added 
the  word  Addio,  which  may  well  consecrate  every  place 
I  visit  now. 

Monday,  Zlst. — We  went  to  dine  at  Hamilton  after 
tea.  The  Marchioness  *  sang  a  good  deal,  and  thougli  I 
had  heard  her  singing  so  much  praised,  it  did  really  sur- 
pass my  expectations.  I  never  heard  Itahan  better  sung ; 
never  heard  a  voice  so  sweet  and  so  flexible,  or  so 
capable  of  expressmg  all  and  executing  all. 

Thursday,  November  \^th. — The  snow  appears  abnost 
gone  fi'om  the  valley ;  it  is  freezing  hard ;  still  fine  winter 
weather.  Under  better  auspices  than  yesterday,  we  ;ire 
again  on  our  road  at  half-past  nine  in  the  morning,  having 

•  Susan  Eupliemia,  second  daughter  of  "William.  Btckford,  Esq.,  of  Font- 
hill  Abbey  J  married  1810;  died  1869. 

1)2 


36  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1814 

only  thirty  miles  to  do,  and  tlie  Queensferry  to  pass 
before  arriving  at  Raith.  The  horses  fell  down,  three 
times,  the  roads  being  slippery,  and  we  walked  three 
miles  to  Linlithgow.  There  we  waited  two  hours,  to 
have  the  fresh  horses  roughshod.  We  amused  ourselves 
while  waiting  by  seeing  the  Palace,  a  very  picturesque 
ruin  on  a  small  hill  at  the  end  of  the  town,  and  nearlv 
surrounded  by  a  very  pretty  little  lake,  the  most  ancient 
part  built  by  our  Edward  I.,  and  the  most  modern  by 
James  I.  and  Charles  I.  when  Prince  of  Wales.  Tiie 
whole  was  burnt  down  in  1745.  The  fountain  in  the 
court  must  have  been  very  pretty,  but  very  little  suited 
as  an  ornament  to  a  cold  and  wet  country  like  this.  The 
room  is  shown  where  Queen  Mary  was  born.  The  cold 
must  have  been  unbearable  in  tliese  large  stone  buildings, 
with  the  long  corridors,  and  no  means  of  heating  them. 
It  was  half-j)[ist  two  o'clock  before  we  arrived  at 
Queensferry,  and  then,  alas  !  the  postilion  found  out  that 
he  had  brought  us  a  road  that  could  only  be  crossed  with 
the  carriao;e  at  low  tide ;  the  carriajje  was  obliged 
to  go  a  round  of  two  or  three  miles.  We  ]iassed  the 
water  ourselves  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  and  at  three 
o'clock  the  carriage  passed  also,  but  at  the  inn  there  were 
no  horses  ;  I  wished  to  have  four,  knowing  that  we  should 
be  late.  After  great  difficulty  we  got  two,  with  a  boy  of 
tAvelve  years  old  to  ride,  and  we  started  from  the  inn  at 
half-]xast  tliree  o'clock  to  go  seventeen  miles.  We  had  only 
gone  two  miles  when,  upon  a  descent,  the  horse  that  the 
little  boy  was  on,  j)ulled  so  hard  tliat  the  reins  broke  in  his 
hands.  James,  seeing  what  liad  happened,  had  scarcely 
time  to  jump  oil' the  box  and  prevent  the  horses,  carriage, 
and  all  being  thrown  down  at  least  fifteen  or  twenty  feet 
deep  from  tiie  road.  I'lscaped  from  this  danger,  wliat  was 
to  be  done  ?  James  thought  the  little  boy  incapable  of 
manamiiLT  the  horses,  but  adileil  that,  haviui^  often  ridden 
as  postilion,  he  would  tkive  us  safely,  he  mounting  the 


1814]  ARRIVAL  AT   RAITII.  37 

horse  and  the  httle  boy  tlie  box,  and  thus  we  continued 
oui*  jomniey  for  a  wliile ;  but  our  dilhculties  were  not  over. 
In  places  the  road  was  covered  with  ice,  our  horses  were 
not  roughshod,  and  at  each  ascent  we  got  out  to  hgliten 
the  carriage,  and,  without  the  assistance  of  seven  or  eight 
men  whom  we  met  on  the  road,  we  should  never  have  made 
the  ascent.  It  was  already  very  dark,  the  lamps  were 
lighted,  and  fortunately  the  night  was  fine.  At  eight 
o'clock  we  reached  the  road  at  the  entrance  of  the  park  to 
Eaith.  It  was  too  rough  and  too  dark  to  avoid  the  holes, 
and  in  one  violent  jolt  the  poor  little  fellow,  who  was 
either  asleep  upon  the  box  or  did  not  know  how  to  hold 
on,  fell  under  the  wheels  of  the  carriage.  We  stopped 
directly,  and,  almost  dead  with  fatigue  and  fright,  it  was 
with  great  difficulty  we  had  the  strength  to  pick  him  up, 
and  put  him,  half  dead  as  he  appeared,  inside  the  car- 
riage. My  sister  held  him  while  Harrot  ran  to  the  lodge, 
and  I  followed  as  I  could.  Arrived  at  the  lodge,  we  placed 
him  motionless  upon  the  lodgekeeper's  bed  ;  we  sent  for 
a  doctor,  and  we  went  sadly  on  our  way  to  Eaith.  We 
arrived  at  half-past  eight  o'clock.. 

Friday,  llth. — The  boy  was  much  less  hurt  than  we 
expected.  He  came  this  morning  to  Eaith,  and  was  well 
enough  to  return  with  his  horses,  which  appeared  to  me 
surprising. 

Thursday,  17th. — A  fine  day,  but  with  a  hurricane  of 
wind.  I  went  out  at  twelve  o'clock  with  the  sportsmen 
for  a  battue  for  pheasants,  quite  close  to  the  house.  I  saw 
one  kiUed  ;  but  sport  so  near  is  only  fit  for  sportsmen  ;  for 
those  who  look  on  it  as  such,  is  quite  another  thing  to  seeing 
the  death  too  near  dealt  in  cold  blood  to  a  creature  in  as 
much  enjoyment  of  its  life  as  its  murderers.  After  having 
seen  one  fine  pheasant  fall,  I  tried  to  subdue  the  effect  that 
that  had  upon  my  nerves,  and  I  continued  my  walk  with  the 
sportsmen ;  but  a  poor  little  rabbit  that  was  killed  almost 


o8  MISS   BERRY'S   JOURNAL.  [18U 

at  my  feet,  convinced  me  tliat  I  was  not  made  for  sporting, 
and  I  veiy  quickly  retraced  my  steps. 

Monday,  2Sth. — Left  Eaith  for  Edinburgh. 

From  tJie  Honourable  Keppel  Craven  to  Miss  Berrys. 

Naples,  Wednesday,  Nov.  30,  1814. 

My  dearest  Friends, — .  ...  I  cannot  pretend  to  give  you  an 
account  of  our  adventures  since  I  last  wrote,  because  they  are 
too  numerous,  and  not  entertaining  unless  you  call  seeing 
Rome  in  four  days  an  amusing  circumstance.  There  were  two 
ladies  appointed  by  Sua  Santita,  to  accompany  us  in  our  anti- 
quarian researches,  and  I  understand  they  have  not  yet  recovered 
the  velocity  of  our  dances  through  the  Vatican,  St.  Peter's,  the 
Capitol,  and  other  tea-gardens.  Besides  these  antiquities,  we 
had  to  look  at  and  venerate  those  which  have  lately  been  trans- 
planted there — I  mean  sundry  sovereigns  pulled  down  from 
pedestals,  and  onl}^  waiting  the  issue  of  the  Congress  to  know  if 
ever  they  are  to  remount  them.  Oh,  could  I  but  do  justice  to 
the  Old  King  and  Queen  of  Spain,  or  their  son,  the  infant  Don 
Francesco,  who  was  meant  for  a  Cardinal,  but  is  in  fact  a  little 
red  dog ;  or  their  daughter,  the  Queen  of  Etruria,  who  walks 
on  her  knees,  or  her  son,  who,  wonderful  to  relate,  is  a  very 
pretty  monarch,  or  their  cousin,  the  Duchess  de  Chablais,  who 
is  daughter  to  tlie  King  of  Sardinia  and  widow  of  his  brother, 
n(;t  forgetting  the  Pope,  who  blessed  us  all  in  a  passage,  and 
entertained  our  lady  for  half-an-hour  in  private !  Then  there 
was  Prince  and  Princess  Canina,  formerly  Lucien  Bonaparte, 
who  gave  us  a  ball,  and  the  ex -King  of  Holland,  wlio  h:us  lost 
the  use  of  an  arm,  and  Sir  Humphry  and  Lady  Davy,  who 
mean  to  pass  the  winter  there,  and  the  Al)be  Taylor,  an  Irish 
])ri()r  of  St.  Clement's  (not  in  \he  Strand),  and  artists  and 
jninces,  and  cardinals,  and  no  tlieatres  except  the  [  ]  ;*  and 
then  the  ]*ope's  escort,  who  were  all  run  away  with  by  their 
liorsos,  it  l)eing  the  first  time  they  ever  rode  and  the  others 
carried.  Then  think  of  Velletri,  where  we  slept  at  a  gentleman's 
house,  where  :dl  the  four  ladies  were  in  Latona's  state  before 
she   found   the  Island  of  Delos.       Moreover,  let  me  introduce 

•   \\'oi-a  ille^ble  in  the  MS. 


1814]  LETTER   FROM    THE    HON.    KEPPEL    CRAVEN".  39 

Terracina  to  your  notice,  where  we  had  a  horse-race,  which  killed 
a  little  boy  whom  Dr.  Holland  afterwards  brought  to  life,  and  a 
firework  and  a  ball  where  they  danced  the  Lavandrina — a  very 
pretty  quaint  conceited  dance,  in  which  you  scratch  your  knees, 
as  I  hope  to  show  you  when  I  return  from  my  travels.  There 
ended  the  holy  part  of  our  journey,  and,  would  you  believe  it, 
still  greater  honours  awaited  us  in  the  Neapolitan  territories. 
At  the  frontiers  a  regiment  of  hussars,  yea,  as  good  as  any  of 
our  boasted  10th,  7th,  or  15th,  an  ecuyer  de  la  Cour;  and  at 
Moli  di  Gaeta,  where  we  slept,  the  Due  de  San  Teodoro,  Gfrand 
Marechal,  with  sundry  other  eminent  personages.  But  this  was 
nothingto  Capua,  where  all  the  garrison  turned  out,  and  cut  off  our 
carriage  from  the  Princess's,  by  which  means  she  arrived  at 
Avenue  half  an  hour  before  her  suite  ;  but  that  did  not  signify, 
as  King  Joachim  himself  was  there  to  hand  her  out ;  and  there 
we  all  dined  with  him,  and  then  galloped  into  Naples,  neck  and 
heels,  to  the  sound  of  vain  acclamations  and  artillery. 

The  next  day  we  visited  the  Queen,  and  were  visited  by  her,  and 
then  again  went  to  dine  at  the  palace,  and  afterwards  to  a  con- 
cert in  her  apartments.  Then  the  following  to  the  opera  with 
their  Majesties — the  theatre  illuminated  on  the  occasion ;  and 
then  we  went  to  bed,  from  which  we  have  never  stirred,  except 
for  dinner,  and  once  to  kill  wild  boars  ;  and  now  the  court  is  at 
Caserta,  and  we  go  there  to-morrow  for  one  day.  Now,  are  we 
not  wonderful  people  ?  We  have  a  fine  house  in  the  Chiaja,  but 
not  large  enough  for  the  whole  household,  so  Anacharsis  and 
self  inhabit  another  at  a  convenient  distance,  and,  what  is  much 
more  agreeable,  a  great  deal  nearer  the  town.  They  have  pulled 
down  the  figante,  and  put  up  an  ugly  fountain  instead,  but  there 
are  many  improvements  since  our  time.  The  King  is  very  ga}^ 
and  good-humoured,  and  wears  a  fancy  dress  a  la  Henri  IV., 
with  castellated  boots,  white  feathers,  scarlet  sleeves  sometimes, 
and  a  straight  sword.  The  Queen  is  very  clever,  pretty,  and 
well-mannered,  and  everybody  is  very  good-humoured  and 
toadying,  except  the  weather,  which  has  been  raining  for  the  last 
week,  accompanied  by  three  little  earthquakes,  but  no  eruption 
of  the  mountain,  Avhich  is  very  hard.  The  English  here  are 
Lady  Oxford  and  her  children.  Lord  F.  Montagu,  Lord  Sligo, 
]\Ir.  and  Mrs.  Graham,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Proctor,  and  a  few  name- 
less men,  but  there  are  many  expected.     We  all  live  in  the 


40  MISS    berry's   journal.  [1814 

hope  that  no  political  change  may  take  place,  which  would  be 
very  disagreeable,  as  one  must  be  interested  for  people  who  are 
so  kind  to  me. 

Thursday,  Dec.  \. — I  was  interrupted  by  a  flight  of  grandees, 
which  has  been  the  cause  of  my  getting  into  another  month.  Our 
Caserta  scheme  is  at  an  end,  as  it  rains,  so  their  Majesties  have 
prepared  a  dinner  and  play  for  nothing,  which  I  am  rather 
ashamed  of.  By-the-by,  San  Carlo  is  nearly  fitted  np,  and  very 
magnificent,  and  they  have  an  excellent  troupe,  both  singing 
and  dancing,  with  all  which  they  contrive  to  give  the  most 
tiresome  spectacles  I  ever  beheld.  There  was  a  French  theatre, 
but  that  has  been  shut  up  ever  since  the  alliance  with  Austria. 
There  are,  indeed,  very  few  Frenchmen  employed,  and  that 
only  in  the  military  department,  which  has  been  brought  to  a 
state  of  perfection  hitherto  unknown  in  any  part  of  Italy.  This 
paper  is  so  transparent  that  any  one  may  read  what  it  contains  ; 
but  as  that  will  save  them  the  trouble  of  breaking  the  seal, 
which  they  otherwise  would  do,  it  is  rather  an  advantage.  I 
have  just  got  a  letter  from  Lady  C.  Lindsay,  who  inhabits  your 
house  at  Nice,  and  says  there  is  some  of  your  comfort  still 
extant  in  it. 

Edinburgh,  TJiursday,  December  1st. — At  twelve  o'clock 
I  had  a  rendezvous  with  Mdlle.  de  Lally  at  the  hotel.  All 
that  I  know  of  her  situation,  and  the  more  she  told  me, 
and  the  letters  she  showed  me,  have  truly  wrunp^  my  heart. 
What  a  sad  trial  is  hers !  and  she  feels  it  in  all  its  bitterness, 
and  I  had  hardly  strength  to  express  how  much  I  felt  and 
how  much  I  pitied  her  misfortunes  so  little  deserved.  She 
was  hardly  gone,  wdien  Playfair  and  Lord  Wehh  came  to 
take  us  a  walk  in  the  streets  of  the  old  town.  Xothiuij  is 
more  picturesque  than  the  irregularity,  tlie  height,  and  the 
grotesque  forms  of  its  buildings.  We  went  by  the  Lawn 
Market,  and  going  down  by  the  West  13ow,  we  crossed 
the  Grass  Market,  from  whence  there  is  the  finest  view  of 
the  castle  on  the  southern  side.  From  tlience  we  went 
lip  by  the  old  walls  of  the  town  to  Heriot's  Ilospit^d,  a 
fine  building  uf  the  time  of  Chai'les  I.,  one  of  the  best 


1814]  ARRIVAL   AT   NORTU   AUDLEY   STREET.  41 

works  of  Liigo  Jones.  After  going  the  round  of  the 
enclosure,  we  crossed  one  part  of  '  the  Meadow,'  a  fine 
pubhc  walk,  quite  unfrequented. 

Tuesday,  Qth. — Left  Scotland,  reached  Morpeth.  I  am 
sorry  to  say  that  England  not  only  appears  to  me  a  less 
fine  country  and  less  picturesque  than  Scotland,  but  much 
less  well  cultivated,  and  less  appearance  of  agricultiural 
prosperity  and  wealth. 

Wednesday,  1th. — We  left  Morpeth  at  ten  o'clock,  in  a 
very  hard  snowstorm ;  everything  covered  several  inches 
thick  before  our  arrival  at  Newcastle  at  twelve  o'clock. 
Here  we  passed  the  rest  of  the  day. 

Thursday,  Sth. — The  weather  mild  and  wet, 

Friday,  9th. — Arrived  at  Ferrybridge  early. 

Saturday,  10th. — It  froze  hard  in  the  night,  and  before 
twelve  o'clock  it  began  to  snow  faster  than  I  ever  saw  it ; 
it  was  several  inches  deep  before  we  arrived  at  Newark. 

Sunday,  11th. — The  thaw  begun  again,  and  all  the 
roads  were  in  water  this  morning.  Got  no  farther  than 
Wansford. 

Monday,  12th. — Slept  at  Stevenage. 

Tuesday,  loth. — Arrived  at  North  Audley  Street  soon 
after  two  o'clock. 


42  MISS   berry's    journal.  [1815 


1815. 

The  first  two  montlis  of  tliis  year  afTord  nothing  worth 
extracting  from  the  Journal.  That  time  was  spent,  witli 
the  exception  of  a  short  visit  to  Wimpole,  in  North 
Audley  Street,  wlien,  in  spite  of  Miss  Berry's  constant 
weakness  of  health,  their  house  was  always  open  to  receive 
their  friends. 

JOURNAL. 

February  5th. — In  the  evening  at  home,  Lady  Stuart 
and  her  niece,  Aug.  Foster,  Mrs.  Darner,  Sir  II.  Engle- 
field,  &c.  &c.  Aug.  Foster  took  the  opportunity  of  pro- 
posing to  the  niece.  Miss  Hobart,*  which  we  did  not  know 
till  some  days  afterwards. 

From  Madame  de  Stael  and  her  Daughter  to  Miss  Beimj. 
Ce  3  mars,  Paris :  Rue  de  Grenelle  St.  Germain,  No.  15. 

Je  suis  affligee,  my  dear  Miss  Berry,  de  u'avoir  poiut  reou  de 
vos  nouvelles  depuis  moii  depart  d'Augleterre.  II  taut  pourtant 
que  je  vous  demande  si  vous  vous  interessez  au  mariage  d'Al- 
bertiue  avec  M.  de  Broglie.  Nous  allous  passer  le  priutetnps  ot 
I'ete  en  Suisse.  N'y  a-t-il  aucuue  chance  pour  que  vous  veniez 
ni'y  voir  ?  II  me  semble  que  ce  voyage  ue  fatiguerait  pas  M. 
voire  p^re.  Parlez  de  moi  a  voire  soeur.  Combien  de  fois  n'ai-je 
pas  regrette  nos  entretiens  ;  il  n'y  a  point  de  feninie  qui  puisse 
vous  faire  ou])lier.     Albertine  demande  a  tiuir  cette  lettre. 

Est-ce  vrai,  dear  Miss  Berry,  que  vous  m'aimez  uu  pen,  et 
que  men  sort  vous  interesse  ?  II  est  fort  heureu.x,  beaucoup  plus 

•  Albinia  .Inno,  (lnu;;liti'r  of  llmi.  ficorifo  Voro  Ilobart,  second  son  of  the 
third  ]']arl  of  Buckingbumshiiu ;  married,  March  1815,  to  Sir  Augustus 
Foster. 


1815]  Bonaparte's  escape  from  elba.  43 

que  je  ne  merite.  J'espere  revoir  un  jour  TAngleterre,  et  vous 
amener  toutes  les  personnes  qui  m'interessent.  En  attendant, 
soyez  assez  bonne  pour  prier  mes  amis  anglais  de  ne  pas 
m'oublier — W.  Spencer,  Anacreon  Moore,  &c. :  et  puis  rappellez- 
moi  au  souvenir  de  Mile,  votre  sceur.  Quant  a  vous,  j'espere 
que  vous  savez  que  je  suis  Yours  for  ever, 

Albertine  de  Stael. 

Monday^  March  Qth. — They  are  beginning  to  assemble 
in  the  streets,  and  to  break  the  windows,  and  to  knock  in 
the  doors,  on  account  of  the  Corn  Bill,  now  in  the  House 
of  Commons. 

Wednesday,  Sth. — In  the  evening  we  expected  a  few 
people,  bufmost  of  them  were  in  fear  of  the  crowds  which 
still  continued. 

Friday,  10th. — We  heard  in  the  morning  of  the  fearful 
news  of  Bonaparte's  escape  from  the  Island  of  Elba,  and 
of  his  arrival  in  France.  I  could  not  at  first  feel  alarmed 
about  it.  I  could  not  imagine  a  nation  so  degraded  and 
so  stupid  as  to  wish  again  for  a  military  despotism,  after 
having  gone  through  so  dreadful  an  experience  of  it. 

Tuesday XUh. — Went  to  Coutts's  to  see  if  there  was  any 
news  from  France  ;  there  was  none  at  four  o'clock.  What 
a  moment  is  the  present ! 

Wednesday,  Ibth. — The  Hardwickes  and  Frederick 
Douglas  stayed  late  with  us  ;  he  gave  a  very  good  account 
of  his  interview  with  Bonaparte  at  the  Island  of  Elba. 

Sunday,  \^th. — The  news  from  France  grows  worse. 

Monday,  20th. — Everyone  was  on  tenter-hooks  all  day 
for  news,  which  became  every  moment  more  terribly  im- 
portant. Bonaparte  had  quietly  passed  Lyons.  Can  one 
doubt  the  rest — in  a  nation  so  debased  ?  I  was  at  Lady 
Georgiana's  [Morpeth]  in  the  morning  when  she  received 
a  note  with  the  news  that  Mr.  Frederick  Lamb*  sent  from 
Paris.     There  is  no  longer  any  hope ! 

•  lion.  Frederick  Lamb,  afterwards  Lord  Beauvale,  son  of  first  Viscount 
Melbourne. 


44  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1815 

Tuesday^  2Ast. — We  were  sitting  at  liome  all  the  morn- 
ing in  order  to  hear  the  news  from  France. 

Wednesday,  22nd. — There  is  no  longer  much  doubt 
that  Buonaparte  is  in  Paris,  but  we  have  not  yet  the 
certixinty. 

Tuesday,  2Sth. — Lord  and  Lady  Eliot*  arrived  about 
four  o'clock  and  brought  us  to-day's  Gazette ;  that  is  Avhat 
everyone  looks  for  now  witli  the  greatest  impatience, 
though  certain  to  find  in  it  some  distressing  news.  The 
declaration  of  the  Congress  at  Vienna  upon  Bonaparte's 
escape  is  in  this  Gazette.  They  '  talk  it  well,'  but  eji 
attendant  it  says  that  Bonaparte  is  akeady  at  LiUe,  and 
the  poor  King  at  Ostend. 

This  letter,  from  a  friend  at  Nice,  addressed  to  Miss 
Berry,  is  without  signature,  but  not  Avithout  interest, 
as  retracing  the  feelings  inspired  by  the  startling  event 
that  threatened  to  plunge  all  Europe  again  into  Avar  and 
confusion. 

Nice,  March  3rd,  1815. 
I  think  you  may  be  uneasy  about  me,  dear  Berrina ;  and  as 
you  will  certainly  liear  the  event  in  public  affairs  Avliich  must 
necessarily  excite  so  much  sensation — to  say  nothing  more  serious 
— I  lose  no  time  in  saving  you  unnecessary  anxiety  about  private 
individuals.  At  present  we  are  all  tranquillity,  and  the  seat  of 
disturbance  lies  not  in  this  peaceful-  quarter ;  but  read  the  fol- 
lowing lines,  and  judge  of  our  consternation. 

The  day  before  yesterday,  Bonaparte  landed  at  or  near  Cannes, 
with  five,  six,  or  eight  hundred  soldiers,  and  two  pieces  of  can- 
non; he  met  with  no  obstacle,  but  remained  quietly  on  the  shore 
till  eleven  at  night,  disembarking  their  b;iggage,  ammunition, 
&c.  itc. ;  then  proceded  to  Grasse,  but  did  not  sleep  in  the  town. 
He  took  up  Ids  lodging  in  a  barn  or  outiiouse.  He  sent  twenty- 
five  or  thirty  suldicrs  to  Antibes  with  t)rdcrs  to  tak(^  the  place. 
It  is  a  fortiiied  town,  and  there  is  a  garrison  therr;  of  course  these 
handful  of  men  wcrv  detained  prisoners,  and  the  command  not 

•  William  Lord    lUiot,   iiftcrwnnKs   Karl  of  St.  (uTinaiiis,  fatlior  of  the 
preaent  eorlj  married,  181-1,  Subuu,  daughter  of  Sir  Johu  Mordauut,  Bart. 


KSlo]  LETTER    FROM    THE    PRINCESS    OF   WALES.  45 

obeyed.  Bonaparte  tarried  not  to  dispute  about  trifles,  hut  set 
off  about  the  middle  of  the  day  yesterday,  and  reached,  it  is 
said,  Castelane,  a  place  twelve  leagues  from  Grasseon,  the  route 
to  Grap  and  Grenoble,  which  route  it  is  imagined  he  is  to  follow. 
ThiLs  far  is  certain  ;  the  flying  reports  are,  that  Bonaparte  dis- 
tributes proclamations,  saying  he  is  come  to  the  liberation  of 
his  faithful  subjects,  that  the  eagles  are  on  the  wing,  will  perch 
from  spire  to  spire,  and  soon  reach  those  of  Notre  Dame.  He 
pays  any  price  for  horses,  and  for  all  other  things  demanded 
of  him.  The  prince  of  Monaco  was  detained  by  a  party  of 
Bonaparte's  soldiers  on  his  road  here;  they  led  him  to  Bonaparte, 
who  asked  him  where  he  was  going.  '  Home,'  was  his  reply. 
'So  am  I,'  rejoined  the  other,  and  dismissed  him.  I  leave  you  to 
make  all  comments,  one  is  tired  of  making  conjectures.  Some 
people  suppose  this  step  to  be  taken  in  desperation ;  others 
imagine  that  it  has  long  been  in  agitation ;  one  must  abide  the 
issue  with  awe  and  apprehension.  Some  bloodshed  must  surely 
follow,  and  the  idea  of  more  war  sickens  all  feelings  of  humanity. 
One  is  as  astonished  at  this  event  as  if  it  had  not  been  the  least 
probable.  One  party  blame  the  English  for  having  allowed  him 
to  escape — as  if  the  English  were  to  blame.  The  fact  is,  our 
honest  bonhommie  is  not  done  justice  to — we  are  not  liked  on 
the  Continent.  In  this  last  affair,  how  could  anybody  suppose 
it  would  have  been  otherwise  ?  They  whipped  the  naughty  boy, 
and  put  him  in  a  corner,  and  supposed  he  would  stay  there. 

From  the  Princess  of  Wales  to  Miss  Berry.* 

The  23rd  of  Marct,  1815,  on  board  H.  M.  Ship  Clorinda. 
My  dear  Miss  Beery, — Thank  God,  here  I  am  and  out  of 
Naples  in  four-and-twenty  hours.  I  left  it  after  Napoleon  made 
his  escape!  You  are  such  good  Greek  scholer  that  yoii  will 
understand  so  well  the  true  derivation  of  the  word  critic,  which 
I,  poor  stupid  /mp,  believe  meant  and  signifies  judgment;  hence 
I  presume  some  personns  who  have  not  well  understood  the  ori- 
ginal, and  have  seen  the  English  translation  of  the  primitive, 
have  of  course  concluded  that  judgment  in  the  legal  sense  in 
which  it  is  frequently  used  as  equivalent  to  condemnation, 
which  is  in  the  present  instant  the  case  of  Murat  and  Madame 

*  The  spelling,  &c.,  are  copied  from  the  original. 


46  MISS   berry's  journal.  [1815 

Murat's  conduct  toward  all  Europe,  and  I  am  rather  inclined  to 
be  of  that  opinion ;  what  Whitbread  and  Brougham  may  think 
I  do  not  know  now,  but  of  late  years  the  greatest  number  of 
critics  have  been  amongst  the  lawyers  ;  many  of  these  gentle- 
men, from  despair  perhaps  of  ever  rising  to  the  bench  of  West- 
minster Hall,  have  placed  themselves  on  the  bench  of  the  great 
Theatre  and  playhouse  of  the  world,  where  they  have  exerted 
their  judicial  capacity  and  have  given  judgment,  i.e.  condemned 
without  mercy;  but  still,  my  dear  Miss  Berry,  in  reality  there  is 
another  light  in  which  these  modern  critics  may  with  great  jus- 
tice and  propriety  be  seen,  and  this  is,  that  of  a  common  slan- 
derer. If  a  person  who  prys  into  the  characters  of  others  with 
no  other  design  but  to  discover  their  faults,  and  to  publish  them 
to  the  world,  deserves  the  title  of  a  slanderer  of  the  reputation 
of  personnes  with  whom  they  have  been  for  some  month,  a  more 
odious  vermin  on  society  can  receive  such  horrible  guest  more 
worthy  of  them ;  for  which  reason,  dear  Miss  Berry,  I  shall  be 
silent  about  Naples,  king,  queen,  ministers,  les  belles,  et  les 
beaux  ;  but  in  short  or  in  long,  I  hate  Naples  from  all  my  heart, 
and  shall,  under  no  consideration,  ever  think  to  return  there.  I 
think  as  Shakespeare,  when  he  says — 

Who  steals  my  purse,  steals  trash  :  'tis  somethinpr,  nothing ; 
'Twas  mine,  'tis  his,  and  hath  been  slave  to  thousancU  j 
But  he  that  tilches  from  me  my  good  name, 
Robs  me  of  that  which  not  enriches  him, 
But  makes  me  poor  indeed. 

Besides,  did  I  possess  the  able  pen  of  Horace,  Aristotle,  and  Lon- 
ginus  among  the  ancients,  Dacier,  Bossuet  among  the  French, 
and  some  more  about  us  dear  English  personnes.  I  shall  only 
now  assure  you,  dear  Miss  Berry,  that  I  am  very  anxious  indeed 
to  return  to  your  dear  country  as  soon  as  a  certain  Great  Gentel- 
man  should  be  save  out  of  this  great  world  in  the  newt.  I  shall 
certainly  return,  there  is  no  society  whatever  in  any  part  of  the 
globe  except  in  London,  though  I  must  assure  you  I  have  been 
extremely  well  every  way  as  a  Queen  of  Shiba;  but  Iu'Uls!  {Je 
'It  ai  jamais  irtmve  encure  wii  Salomon).  You  may  ejusily  imagine 
what  a  delightful  journey  I  made  from  Naples  to  Livurno  with 
dear  Lady  C'harlotte  Lindsay,  Mr.  North,  and  Doctor  Holland. 
If  everything  go's  on  quiet  in  France  I  shall  go  to  Nice,  and  be 
with  dear  Lady  Charlotte  Campbell,  to  meet  Mrs.  Darner,  and 


1815]  LETTER   FEOM    THE    PRINCESS   OF    WALES.  47 

to  passe  our  summer  at  the  Lago  di  Como ;  our  winter,  heaven 
knows,  for  the  present ;    but  having  now  a  very  good  frigate 
under  my  order,  I  shall  certainly  go  to  Lisbon,  if  Italy  should 
go  to  the  devils.     I  wish  you  would  come  to  see  me  anywhere. 
Mr.  Craven  is  to  go  to  his  mother  ;  poor  Gell  is  still  a  great  suf- 
firir  from  the  gout,  and  remains  for  the  present  at  Naples,  with 
a  pension  of  2001.  for  his  life.     Lady  Elizabeth  Forbes  is  going 
to  England,  with  a  pension  of  2001.   for  life ;    she  must  re- 
main with  her  sister.     Lady  Charlotte  and  her  husband  I  hope 
mil  be  with  me  a  great  deal.     Mr.  St.  Leger  I  expect  in  a 
month,   and  Elizabeth  Campbell,  the  daughter  of  dear  Lady 
Charlotte   Campbell,    shall   be   my  bedchamber    woman,    and 
always  aside  with  me ;  but  in  case  a  very  agreeable  Englishman 
should  come  in  my  way,  I  certainly  would  wish  to  fix  him  to 
my  court.     My  expense  has  been  so  great,  it  would  be  impossi- 
l)le  to  live  in  London  for  me  for  the  present. — I  shall  be  very 
quiet  in  my  little  Nottshell  for  some  time,  and  I  trust  quiet,  as 
happiness  is  no  more  for  me  in  this  world.     I  wish  much  to  be 
remembered  to  all  my  really  good  friends.     Sicard*  has  been 
obliged  to  go  to  England  on  my  pecuniary  business,  which  it 
seems  is  in  a  great  confusion  at  the  present.     My  best  love  to 
la  *  fausse  Agnaise,'  your  good  father,  and  take  for  yourself  the 
same,  my  dear  Berrina,  a  revoir  bientot    dans  ce    monde  ou 
dans  I'autre;  mais  croyez-moi  toujours,  absent  ou  present, 

Votre  sincere  amie,  C.  P. 

I  am  just  at  the  Lion's  Den — I  mean  to  say  the  Island  of  Elba, 
which  is  opposit  my  writing-table ;  a  dead  calme  is  just  coming 
on,  and  the  ship  is  at  anchor ;  but  dear  Willy  says,  '  Princess, 
we  are  not  at  anchor,  but  it  is  the  most  beautifull  wind  possible 
for  Leghorn,  where  we  shall  sleep  to-night.'  Not  a  tree  to  be 
seen.  I  have  Napoleon's  courier  with  me,  which  is  quite  a 
treasure  to  me,  faithful  and  prudent.  I  shall  keep  him.  Sicard 
is  quite  delighted  with  him.  He  is  a  Milanais,  and  has  been  in 
Russia  with  him ;  he  is  now  doing  the  business  of  Sicard  in  his 
absence.  I  have  received  three  very  comfortable  letters  from 
my  daughter,  and  heaven  grant  that  I  may  see  her  soon  again. 

*  An  honest  elderly  German  servant. 


48  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1815 

JOURNAL. 

Saturday,  April  22nd. — I  went  with  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Crauford  to  see  ]\Irs,  Wilmot's*  tragedy,  'Ina.'  I  never  saw 
a  more  brilliant  audience  at  the  theatre,  nor  a  pit  better 
adapted  to  render  Avhat  one  must  after  all  call  justice;  but 
the  piece,  in  spite  of  some  energetic  hues  and  the  whole 
being  written  m  a  pure  style,  entirely  fails  in  interest; 
there  were  neither  touching  situations  nor  striking  charac- 
ters. At  the  fourth  act  the  pit  began  to  make  its  judg- 
ment heard ;  then  followed  noise,  and  in  the  middle  of 
all  this  the  piece  finished  with  a  great  majority  of  disap- 
probation. I  was  truly  sorry  for  the  author,  who  was 
commencing  her  dramatic  career,  and  whom  one  should 
have  liked  to  see  sufficiently  encouraged  by  success  to 
make  further  efforts.  One  would  willino-ly  attribute  the 
failure  of  the  piece  to  the  badness  of  the  actors,  who  were, 
in  fact,  deplorable  ;  but  the  judgment  of  the  pit  was  too 
strongly  pronounced. 

Professor  Playfair  to  Miss  Berry. 

April  30th,  1815. 

My  dear  Miss  Berry, — If  the  duration  of  human  life  is  to 
be  measured  not  by  the  revohitions  of  the  sun  and  moon,  but 
by  the  revolutions  in  liuman  affairs  (which  seems  the  true  way 
of  computing),  it  has  been  longer  in  the  course  of  the  present 
generation  than  at  any  former  period  since  the  days  of  JNIethu- 
selah.  The  terras  of  human  life  must  be  multiplied  by  ten  at 
least,  in  order  to  make  a  fair  comparison  between  the  longevity 
of  the  present  race  of  mortals  and  those  of  any  other  time 
within  the  last  3000  years.  In  this  way  I  now  consider  myself 
as  having  lived  considerably  more  than  600  years. 

liut  to  speak  in  sober  sadness,  for  such  is  the  sentiment  that 
suits  the  present  condition  of  the  world,  what  do  you  say  to  the 
late  revolution  ?     What  a  change  from  last  year  I     And  to  add 

•  Uarberiim,  dniiij-litor  of  Sir  Dmloner  Ogle,  widow  of  Valeutine  Wiliuot. 
Esq.;  imirrietl,  Ifcilll,  tu  Lord  Diicro. 


1815]  LORD   BTROJT.  49 

to  all,  to  mend  the  hlunders  and  inprovidence  of  our  rulers  the 
nation  is  again  to  be  plunged  into  war.  Nothing  better  can 
come  of  selecting  the  weakest  and  most  narrow  set  of  politicians 
that  the  country  contains  for  administering  her  affairs  at  the 
most  eventful  crisis  of  her  history  or  of  the  history  of  Europe. 
I  cannot  think  we  are  justified  in  going  to  war  neither.  To 
say  that  Bonaparte  has  broken  the  treaty  is  childish ;  he  was 
in  fact  a  banished  man,  a  prisoner,  and  there  is  nobody  in  a 
similar  situation,  if  he  had  possessed  the  courage  and  the  means, 
that  would  not  have  tried  to  deliver  himself.  If  the  French 
wished  to  be  delivered  from  him,  it  might  be  right  to  inter- 
pose in  their  behalf;  but  of  this  there  is  no  appearance,  and  the 
measure  they  are  pursuing  of  putting  arms  into  the  hands  of 
the  people,  will  bring  that  matter  to  the  test.  We  should  put 
ourselves  on  the  defensive,  but  more  I  think  will  be  an  absurd 
and  criminal  measure  in  those  who  advise  it.  This  is  the  face 
that  things  appear  to  me  to  wear,  far  as  I  am  from  the  sources 
of  information  or  the  knowledge  of  opinion  in  the  better  in- 
formed circles.  I  should  like  to  know  what  you  think.  But 
too  much  of  politics.     How  is  your  health  ? 

I  have  no  hopes  of  visiting  France,  and  at  present  have  no  view 
of  travelling  but  through  the  intellectual  world,  where  happily 
no  passports  are  necessary,  no  inconvenience  from  bad  inns, 
impositions,  &c.  &c.  For  one  who  has  lived  600  years,  it  is 
perhaps  the  best  way  of  travelling. 

I  am,  with  sincere  esteem  and  affection. 

Yours, 

John  Playfair. 

Monday^  May  Sth. — Lord  and  Lady  Bjrron  persuaded 
me  to  go  wi,th  them  to  Miss  White.  Never  have  I  seen 
a  more  imposing  convocation  of  ladies  arranged  in  a  cii^cle 
than  Avhen  we  entered,  taking  Wilham  Spencer  with  us. 
Lord  Byron  brought  me  home.     He  stayed  to  supper. 

Friday,  12th. — Went  with  Mrs.  Tighe  to  the  Argyll 
Eooms  to  see  the  first  representation  of  the  French  plays 
to  which  I  had  subscribed.  All  the  best  company  in 
London  were  there.  The  representation  was  not  much 
worthy  of  its  audience. 

YOL.  III.  E 


)  >  >  J  I 
>      > 


I  >  I  >   > 

» > » >> 

>  >  >  > 
I 

>  >  J  > 
■  >  >  1  I 


>  >  >  >  > 

>  »  >  >  > 


>  >  1  >  » 

>  >     > 


>  I   I  >    s 


50  MISS    berry's   journal.  [1815 

Monday^  ISth. — In  the  evening  we  went  to  Mrs.  Ciin- 
liffe's,*  where  there  had  been  a  dinner  to  Walter  Scott,  &c. 
She  sang  some  Enghsh  ballads  without  accompaniment 
deli<j:htfullY. 

Wednesday,  17th. — In  the  evening  at  Mrs.  Cunliffe's. 
She  gave  us  some  music  ;  after  dinner  singing  with  Mr. 
Nugent  and  Greville  Howard  some  Itahan  airs  very  well. 

Monday,  2dth. — I  was  in  Lady  Hardwicke's  box  at 
DrurvLane,  to  see  Joanna  Bailhe's  'Family  Lejiend'  acted 
for  the  benefit  of  Mr.  Bentley.  It  succeeded  better  than 
I  expected  ;  the  piece  is  really  interesting,  and  the  interest 
is  sustained,  and  does  not  finish  with  the  catastrophe  of 
the  heroine.  It  could  not  have  been  worse  acted  ;  how- 
ever the  fine  lines,  spoilt  as  they  were,  were  appreciated 
and  applauded  by  the  pit. 

From  the  Hon.  Keppel  Craven  to  the  Miss  Berrys. 

Naples,  May  31st,  1815. 

My  dear  FiiiENDS, — After  a  very  long  but  involuntary  silence, 
during  which  you  have  probably  given  us  up  for  lost,  I  liave  at 
last  a  prospect  of  sending  you  some  tidings  of  your  forsaken 
Vice-Chamberlains,  and  have  ventured  on  a  large  sheet  of  paper 
as  a  proper  vehicle  for  them  ;  for  I  mean  them  to  contain  also  the 
fortunes  and  misfortunes  of  our  late  sovereigns,  whom  it  is  now 
treason  to  call  otherwise  than  Monsieur  et  Madame  le  Marechal  et 
la  Marechale  JNIurat.  The  final  overthrow  of  those  meteors  will  be 
known  to  you  before  you  get  this,  but  I  suppose  you  will  not  be 
averse  to  hear  some  of  the  particulars,  ami,  therefore,  without 
furtiier  preamble,  shall  inform  you  that  soon  after  the  unfor- 
tunate proclamation  in  favour  of  the  independence  of  Italy,t 

*  Emma,  daiiyhter  of  first  I>ord  Crowi> ;  marrii>il,  180U,  to  Foster  Cun- 
liile  OHley,  Esq.,  oldest  sou  to  fir  Foster  CunliHe,  Bart. 

t  As  soon  aa  tlie  intellijienco  reached  Naples  of  Napoleon's  landing, 
Miirat  railed  together  his  council,  and  announced  iiis  determination  to 
adliere  to  his  Aiinfriaii  alliance.  Wlieii  lie  reachml  Lyons  he  unulo  known 
that  he  considered  the  cause  of  Napoleon  as  liis  own,  and  required  a  pniisajre 
tlirnngh  tlif  Koman  States  for  two  of  liis  divisions.  Die  Pope  retired  to 
J'lurence.  Murat  entered  tlie  I'apal  dominions  Mardi  "I'l,  and  issued  at 
Iviuiiui  a  proclumation  ciilliny  upon  nil  the  Italians  to  adscrt  their  iudeptn- 


1815J  LETTER    FROM    HOX.    KEPPEL   CRAVEN.  51 

which  proved  favourable  only  to  the  downfall  of  its  author, 
suspicions  began  to  be  entertained  that  the  energies  of  the  King 
of  Italy  were  not  quite  on  a  par  with  the  hopes  of  the  sovereign 
of  the  South  ;*  and  when  the  Monitore  delle  duo  Sicilie,  more 
properly  called  the  Mentitore,  announced  that  he  had  retired  to 
concentrate  his  forces,  some  retlecting  persons  surmised  that  the 
advantages  gained  by  the  Neapolitan  army  might  be  problema- 
tical, and  that  the  Austrian  army  was  not  so  contemptible  as  it 
at  first  was  supposed.  About  this  time  Madame  Mere  and  our 
brother  of  Westphalia  arrived,  also  his  Eminence  our  uncle,t 
and  they  were  shown  about  at  the  theatres,  illuminated  on  the 
occasion,  and  Jerome  took  possession  of  the  little  Fraucavilla 
palace,  commonly  called  the  queen's  bathing-house,  which  you 
may  remember  opposite  the  Corcelle.  At  our  present  house  we 
frequently  saw  his  Majesty  receiving  despatches  in  the  garden, 
which  no  doubt  reminded  him  of  his  defunct  possessions  at 
Cassel. 

On  the  20th  of  April  our  worthy  relatives  set  sail  in  two 
ships  for  France,  but  the  contrary  wind  forced  them  into  Baia, 
and  they  came  back,  the  ships  returning  into  the  harbour  from 
which,  alas  !  they  were  never  to  gO'  but  in  possession  of  the 
English.  The  day  after  a  French  brig-of-war  came  in  with 
Napoleon's  circular  letter  to  all  the  European;  powers  ;  but 
when  all  these  again  proposed  sailing,  three  English  men-of-war 
appeared  off  the  bay,|  and  cruized  there  day  and  night,  creatine- 
an  undefined  sensation  in  the  breasts  of  the  natives  of  this  city, 
and  some  similar  emotions  in  those  of  the  English.  Messenirers 
were  sent  by  the  queen,  who  was  acting  as  Kegent,  and  many 
were  the  voyages  which  Lord  Oxford  undertook  to  ascertain  the 

(lence,  and  liberate  themselves  from  the  dominion  of  foreigners  ;  asserting 
that  80,000  Neapolitans  under  the  command  of  their  king  were  hastenin"- 
to  their  assistance. 

•  In  a  letter  from  Lord  William  Bentinck  to  Lord  Castlereagh,  dated 
January  7,  1815,  he  speaks  of  Murat  having  entertained  views  of  aggran- 
disement, and  by  possessing  himself  of  the  whole  South  of  Italy  he  could 
render  himself  independent,  whatever  might  be  the  event  of  the  war. — Atm. 

t  Cardinal  Feseh. 

X  In  consequence  of  arrangements  made  between  Lord  Burghersh,  the 
English  minister  at  Florence,  and  Captain  Campbell  of  the  Tremendous, 
the  latter,  in  the  beginning  of  Maj',  sailed  tO'  the  Bay  of  Naples,  accom- 
panied by  a  frigate  and  a  sloop  of  war. 

£  2 


52  MISS   berry's  journal.  [1815 

object  of  their  unremitting  attentions.  The  answers  were  at 
first  rather  vague,  but  in  a  few  day«  they  assumed  a  more  posi- 
tive shape,  and  the  noble  earl  was  informed  that  they  had 
certain  communications  of  the  advance  of  the  Austrian  army, 
and  of  the  probable  necessity  under  which  her  Majesty  would 
find  herself  compelled  to  seek  protection  under  the  English  flag. 
These  messages  were  not  official,  and  consequently  no  one  was 
bound  to  believe  them ;  and  as  the  Mentitore  went  on  giving 
very  favourable  accounts  of  the  army,*  always  ending  with  the 
ottimo  stato  of  the  king's  health,  the  court  and  government 
appeared  satisfied,  as  they  said  it  was  impossible  the  English 
could  make  war  without  giving  three  months'  notice,  as  was 
stipulated  in  the  armistice ;  but,  nevertheless,  it  was  evident 
that  Naples  was  in  a  state  of  blockade,  as  no  ships  were  allowed 
to  leave  it,  and  my  cousin.  Lady  Elizabeth,  who  was  going  in 
one  under  French  colours,  received  instructions  from  Captain 
Campbell  that  he  could  not  let  it  pass,  and  had  taken  a  French 
frigate  which  was  sent  to  Sicily.  People  began  to  stare,  the  more 
so  when  the  ministers  who  had  accompanied  the  king  to  head- 
quarters returned  with  somewhat  long  faces,  declaring  that  he 
had  only  retired  to  please  the  English  Government,  who  had 
assured  him  if  he  proceeded  he  should  be  attacked. 

On  the  6th  of  May,  intelligence  was  received  of  a  glorious 
and  complete  victory  obtained  by  King  Joachim  over  the 
Austrians  at  Solentino ;  he  had  only  time  to  write  to  the  queen 
from  the  field  of  battle  with  a  pencil,  in  the  true  warlike  style, 
promising  further  details.  A  bulletin  was  published,  the  cannon 
fired,  and  tlie  queen  ordered  the  civic  guard,  who  were  raised  to 
maintain  tranquillity  in  tho  -city,  to  be  assembled  for  the  pur- 
pose of  being  reviewed  by  her.  Their  review  was,  however, 
put  off  for  a  few  days,  which  led  us  to  suppose  that  the  victory 
had  not  been  so  decisive  as  was  expected,  especially  as  the 
promised  details  never  arrived,  and  the  few  regular  troops  that 
had  been  left  were  ordered  to  join  the  army  with  all  possible 
speed.  On  the  10th  intelligence  was  received  that  the  victory, 
if  ever  there  had  been  an}^  had  been  followed  by  defeat,  retreat, 
desertion,  starvation,  nmtiny,  and  all  the  disasters  that  can 
befall  an  army ;  it  was  also  known  that  the  Austrians  hjvd 
entered  the  kingdom  in  various  (juarters,  and  they  were  even 

*  Tlie  arinv  eustnincd  a  series  of  defeats  from  the  Austriaus. 


1815]  LETTER    FROM    HOX.    KEPPEL   CRAVEN.  53 

reported  to  be  at  Capua.  This  was,  however,  not  the  case,  as 
Prince  Achilles  Lucien,  and  the  Infantas  Letizia  and  Louisa, 
accompanied  by  their  grandmamma,  and  followed  on  the 
ensuing  day  by  their  uncle,  made  the  best  of  their  way  to  Gaeta ; 
but  it  could  not  be  doubted  that  matters  were  drawing  to  a 
conclusion,  as  the  English  ships  every  day  came  a  little  further 
into  the  harbour,  and  made  no  scruple  of  their  intention  of 
taking  the  two  Neapolitan  ones  which  were  at  anchor.  It  was 
odd  enough,  however,  that  on  the  11th  Captain  Campbell  sent 
in  word  that  vessels  under  French  colours  might  depart  unmo- 
lested, and  sent  word  to  a  French  frigate  which  they  had  chased 
into  Graeta  so  to  do.  On  board  this  last,  Mrs.  M.  and  Gene- 
vieve set  sail,  and  from  hence  went  all  French  vessels,  including 
the  identical  brig  which  carried  Napoleon  from  Elba  to  France, 
which  had  come  here  afterwards  to  refit. 

That  same  day  the  queen  on  horseback  reviewed  the  civic 
guard,  with  a  degree  of  composure  and  courage  which  charmed 
us  all.  The  said  guard  had  declared  their  determination  to 
maintain  order  and  tranquillity  in  the  town  to  the  best  of  their 
power,  but  had  especially  determined  not  to  defend  it  against 
any  invading  force. 

On  the  12th,  the  public  attention  was  excited  to  its  utmost 
pitch  of  anxiety,  when  the  English  ships  were  seen  close  in  the 
harbour,  within  gunshot  of  all  of  us  inhabitants  of  the  most 
fashionable  part  of  the  town.  Then  it  was  that  a  convention 
was  signed  between  Campbell  of  the  Tremendous,  and  the' 
queen ;  she  giving  up  the  ships  and  stores  in  the  arsenal,  and 
he  ensuring  her  and  her  property  safety  and  protection  on  board 
his  ship.*  The  king  was  not  included  in  this  convention.  The 
ships  were  immediately  taken  possession  of,  and  their  crews 
landed ;  but  the  queen  remained  in  the  palace,  and  did  every- 
thing that  was  requisite  to  preserve  the  public  tranquillity 
Tindisturbed,  in  which,  aided  by  the  civic  guard,  whose  be- 
haviour is  above  all  praise,  she  succeeded. 

It  seems  Captain  Campbell,  though  he  had  not  agreed  to  it 

•  Madame  Murat  Ikaving  sent  P.  Cariati  to  negociate  for  the  surrender, 
the  tei-ras  dictated  by  Captain  Campbell  were,  that  the  ships  of  the  line  in 
the  bay  should  be  given  up,  that  the  arsenal  of  Naples  should  be  delivered 
over,  ai}d  that  these  captures  should  be  at  the  joint  disposal  of  the  English 
Government  and  of  Perdiuand  the  Fourth  of  Naples. — Aim.  lieg. 


54  MISS    BERRY'S   JOURNAL.  [181 -I 

in  the  signed  convention,  had  assured  her  verbally  that  he  would 
convey  her  to  France ;  but  she  several  times  was  uneasy  for  fear 
he  should  not  do  so,  as  also  at  the  suspicion  that  he  might  not 
ofrant  a  similar  favour  to  those  she  wished  to  take  with  her;  and 
there  were  several  'pouv  parlers  on  the  subject,  in  which  the 
Duke  of  Bedford  at  her  request  took  a  part. 

In  the  mean  time  of  the  king  little  was  known,  except  that 
he  was  at  Capua  trying  to  capitulate  with  the  Austrians,  but 
abandoned  by  most  of  the  army,  who  had  dispersed  all  over  the 
country,  and  in  the  town  itself,  which  was  full  of  soldiers  wan- 
dering about  in  a  variety  of  uniforms,  and  officers  with  despair 
and  shame  on  their  countenances. 

On  Thursday  evening,  the  .18th,  two  proclamations  were  pub- 
lished, one  calling  on  the  inhabitants  to  pay  in  advance  the  tax 
on  lauded  property  and  houses,  due  two  mouths  hence;  and  the 
other  from  the  king,  assuring  them  that  whatever  might  happen, 
he  would  not  draw  the  horrors  of  warfare  on  the  capital,  and 
would  sooner  sacrifice  himself  than  expose  them  to  it.  This 
calming  potion  was  of  «hort  effect,  when  two  hours  after  he 
himself  arrived,  and  it  was  supposed  that  he  meant  to  defend 
the  town,  which  threw  it  in  no  small  alarm.  It  seems,  how- 
ever, that  if  ever  he  had  so  rash  an  intention,  he  soon  gave  it 
up  ;  for,  after  remaining  the  whole  of  the  19th  in  the  palace,  he 
left  it  at  night  with  few  followers,  and  embarked  for  Ischia  on 
the  coast  opposite,  but  not  immediately  from  Naples  itself. 

The  Austrians  refused  to  capitulate  with  him,  and,  as  you 
will  have  seen,  treated  with  Generals  Carascosa  and  Coletta,  ap- 
pointed by  the  existing  Government,  and  a  deputation  from  the 
town  itself.*  During  most  part  of  the  day,  wiiile  he  [Mm-at] 
remained  here,  he  walked  on  the  terrace  of  the  palace,  some- 
times with  the  queen,  sometimes  with  his  officers,  I  tut  always  in 
a  state  of  great  agitation,  and  gesticidating  most  vehemently  for 
the  benefit  of  the  multitude  who  assembled  in  the  Strada  (lei 
Figante;  but  they  never  uttered  any  threat  against  him,  although 
perfectly  convinced  that  it  was  his  last  promenade  there. 

*  On  fill'  20tli  a  juilitnrv  convnnlion  wns  ontorod  mio  hy  ftoiifral  rnras- 
oosa,  coiiiiiimKli.'r-in-cliicl'  of  tlio  Noapolitmi  nrmv,  (it'iit'nil  Nicpjtfr;.'-  on 
the  part  of  Austria,  (tciieral  Coletta  on  that  of  Na]>le9,  and  Lord  Unr^lici'sh 
on  that  of  (Jrcat  Hritain.  The  abdication  of  Murat  was  tii-st  insisted  on, 
&.C. — Anil.  lictj. 


1815]  LETTER    FROM    HON.    KEPPEL   CRAVEN.  55 

The  most  strange  of  all  the  strange  steps  that  were  taken,  was 
that  day  in  the  shape  of  a  Constitution  given  to  the  people  of 
Naples,  and  printed  and  stuck  up  against  the  walls.  I  could  not 
get  a  sight  of  it,  nor  have  seen  any  one  who  has  read  it,  for  there 
were  but  few  copies,  and  those  all  torn  down  the  following  day ; 
but  you  will  allow  that  it  was  well  timed. 

On  the  20th  Lord  Exmouth  came  in  with  a  considerable  fleet, 
and  anchored  in  the  bay  :  the  agitation  among  the  lower  classes 
grew  stronger,  as  well  as  the  alarm  among  the  higher,  and  at 
about  four  o'clock  the  prisoners  in  the  Vicaria,  to  the  number  of 
2,000,  made  an  effort  to  force  their  way  out,  and  nearly  suc- 
ceeded, as  they  had  set  fire  to  the  doors  and  actually  burnt  one 
down.  The  queen  had  charged  Greneral  Pepe,  a  great  friend  of 
ours,  to  collect  what  scattered  soldiers  he  could,  and  who  would 
submit  to  serve,  to  assist  the  civic  guard  in  their  duties,  and 
with  these  this  dangerous  attempt  was  quelled,  but  not  without 
the  severest  measures ;  for  they  were  forced  to  throw  hand- 
grenades  among  them,  and  fire  upon  all  those  who  showed 
themselves  at  the  burnt  door,  which  they  continued  doing  with 
astonishing  perseverance  for  a  long  time.  When  overcome,  they 
said  they  were  ready  to  capitulate,  and  the  conditions  granted 
to  them  consisted  in  shooting  thirty  of  the  ringleaders,  and 
placing  an  increased  guard  over  them. 

That  evening  I  saw  the  queen  for  the  last  time,  and  found 
her  surprisingly  cool  and  composed ;  indeed,  her  conduct  to  the 
last  was  most  praiseworthy,  and  if  it  had  been  unmixed  with 
some  little  unworthy  deceptions,  must  have  called  forth  univer- 
sal admiration.  The  palace  itself  was  a  scene  of  confusion  that 
beggared  all  description :  the  courts  full  of  horses  running 
about  loose,  and  starved  grooms  trying  to  steal  them  away ;  the 
staircase  crowded  with  packing  cases ;  dismayed  dames  de 
palais  taking  their  last  waiting,  ministers  holding  their  last 
councils,  and  secretaries  writing  their  last  despatch,  amidst 
waiting  maids  gnawing  chicken-bones,  the  only  meal  of  that 
day.  The  queen,  pale  and  worn  out,  but  looking  ver}^  pretty, 
sitting  in  her  state  bedroom,  which  is  fitted  up  in  very  bad 
taste  with  some  of  the  most  valuable  fragments  found  at  Pom- 
peii  and  Herculaneum,  preserving  all  the  grace  and  good  man- 
ner of  a  French  petite^mattresse  to  the  last,  and  taking  leave  of 
us  as  if  she  was  going  on  a  party  of  pleasure,  interlarding  her 


56  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1815 

farewell  speeches  with  compliments  to  the  English  nation, 
which  I  understand  she  has  since  not  been  so  lavish  of.  That 
night  she  went  on  board,  leaving  the  provisional  government  in 
the  hands  of  the  municipality.  On  the  following  day,  Sunday 
the  21st,  the  lazzaroni  began  their  operations,  and  early  in  the 
morning  all  the  Strada  Toledo  and  the  square  before  the  palace 
was  impassable  for  carriages.*  The  municipality  had  very  impru- 
dently neglected  to  ask  Lord  Exmouth  for  any  force  whose  pre- 
sence could  have  intimidated  them,  and  till  they  did  make  the 
request  he  never  offered  any,  though  he  issued  a  proclamation, 
declaring  that  he  and  the  Austrians  were  come  to  restore  Ferdi- 
nand to  his  throne;  but  this  only  added  fuel  to  the  flame,  as  it 
"was  a  name  inseparable  in  the  minds  of  the  lazzaroni  from  the 
ideas  of  pillage  and  murder,  which  they  had  entertained  the 
moment  a  change  of  dynasty  became  probable.  They  came 
half  naked  before  the  palace,  exulting  in  the  length  of  their  hair, 
which  they  consider  as  the  most  convincing  proof  of  loyalty  and 
fidelity  to  the  old  Nasone,  as  they  affectionately  call  him,  and 
in  a  very  unequivocal  manner  demanded  the  sacking  of  the 
palace,  saying,  'iZ  sacco  cl  tocca,' and  proving  that  it  was  an 
unheard-of  thing  that  a  king  should  be  re-established  in  his 
rights  without  their  pillaging  his  palace,  and  all  those  of  the 
nobility.  The  old  red  cockade  was  immediately  mounted  on  all 
hats,  but  the  lazzaroni  were  driven  back  by  the  civic  guard, 
who  used  two  pieces  of  cannon  as  the  most  eloquent  arguments 
against  them,  which  however  were  never  fired  ;  they  dispersed 
these,  but  assembled  in  various  other  parts  of  the  town  and 
suburbs,  and  many  being  armed  with  the  muskets  and  swords 
which  the  deserting  soldiery  had  sold  almost  for  nothing,  they 
frequently  attacked  the  patrols,  and  the  most  summary  but 
necessary  measures  were  employed  to  repress  their  k^yalty ;  I 
mean  shooting  and  swording  them  without  mercy,  so  that  dur- 
ing that  and  the  following  days  at  least  600  were  sacrificed,  and 
everything  is  comparatively  quiet.  That  very  evening  a  detach- 
ment of  English  Marines  landed,  and  a  few  Austrians  entered 
the  town;  and  the  next  day  the  whole  Austrian  army  and  Prince 
Leopold  came  in,  and  the  old  banners  flew  on  all  the  forts. 
Another  extraordinary  spectacle  took  place  on  that  occasion, 

•  The  (lisiurbanccs  wliich  lirolio  out  at  Naples  onusod  tlie  possession  of  it 
by  the  Allies  to  bu  uuticiputcd  by  one  day. — Ann,  liig. 


1815]  LETTER   FROM    HON.    KEPPEL   CRAVEN.  57 

which  was  the  bivouac  of  most  of  these  troops  in  all  the  squares 
and  streets  by  the  light  of  the  moon,  and  the  general  illumina- 
tion. Our  dear  Neapolitans  consoled  themselves  a  little  by 
stealing  the  horses  of  the  sleeping  Austrians,  who  having  their 
arms  through  the  bridles,  never  dreamt  of  knives  that  could  cut 
them.  Several  of  these  were  sold  for  half-a- crown  (the  horses), 
but  the  Neapolitan  cavalry  themselves  had  given  the  example 
when  the  grand  dispersion  took  place  before  and  in  Capua.  It 
seems  that  one  principal  cause  of  this  universal  solution  of  the 
army  was  a  report  that  a  considerable  Neapolitan  force  would 
be  placed  at  the  disposal  of  the  Austrians  to  take  out  of  the 
country,  on  which  supposition  whole  regiments  walked  off,  and 
the  officers  in  despair  divided  the  military  chest  among  them- 
selves. 

On  the  23rd,  through  the  haze  produced  by  a  most  intense 
sirocco,  the  fleet  of  English  transports  bearing  ours  and  the 
Sicilian  forces  appeared  early  in  the  morning,  and  on  the  25th 
all  these  landed ;  the  admiral  who  escorted  them  returning  to 
Messina  for  Ferdinand,  who,  hearing  there  might  be  some  fight- 
ing, said  he  would  remain  at  Messina  till  the  steps  of  his  throne 
were  clear  of  all  warfare,  and  he  i?  now  expected  every  moment.* 
His  son  Leopold,  who  has  assumed  for  a  time  the  reins  of 
government,  gives  universal  satisfaction  by  his  moderation,  and 
still  more  by  his  manner  of  receiving  all  those  who  imagined 
their  various  employments  at  the  late  court  would  devote  them 
to  exemplary  vengeance ;  and  these  include  two-thirds  of  the 
principal  nobility.  They  are  endeavouring  to  reorganize  the 
army,  which  Avill  be  no  easy  matter,  as  Joachim  was  five  j^ears 
making  it  what  it  was,  and  the  breath  of  one  campaign  has  scat- 
tered it  in  all  directions. 

Two  Austrian  colimms  have  marched  into  the  provinces, 
which,  I  believe,  are  in  a  state  beyond  their  doctrine.  In  some 
places  the  towns  have  declared  themselves  republics,  and  large 
collections  of  brigands,  under  the  title  of  free  corps,  infest  all 
the  roads,  so  that  travelling  is  quite  at  an  end,  and  even  the 
immediate  vicinity  of  the  town  is  unsafe.  Most  of  these  corps 
are  composed  of  soldiers  themselves,  who,  having  taken  their 
arms  with  them,  have  no  resource  but  this  for  subsistence  ;  and 
I  fear  the  country  is  past  recovery,  for  the  Austrian  army  is  no 

•  Ferdinand  returned  after  nine  years'  absence. 


58  MISS    berry's   journal.  [1815 

small  load  on  a  people  already  overbiirthened  with  taxes,  which 
cannot  be  taken  off.  The  town  is  now  quiet,  and  has  reassumed 
a  portion  of  its  former  vivacity,  though  T  must  say  that  Punch 
went  on  with  the  most  laudable  perseverance  during  the  whole 
of  the  tumults.  In  these  a  couple  of  priests  have  shone  conspi- 
cuous,— one  by  exciting  the  populace  against  the  civic  guard, 
and  the  other  in  trying  to  gain  admittance  to  Prince  Leopold  to 
kill  him ;  for  he,  as  well  as  his  father,  is  declared  to  be  an  irre- 
vocable Jacobin  for  killing  nobody,  and  not  permitting  the  pil- 
lage of  the  town,  on  which  they  had  so  firmly  depended,  that 
marriages  were  settled  and  dowries  promised  on  the  respective 
shares  of  the  booty.  The  following  song  has  been  composed  by 
the  disappointed  loyalist : — 

E  venuto  o  Principino,  [o  means  il] 

E  si  a  fetto  .Tacobiuo  ; 

3Io  viene  o  Nasone,  [ino  means  presently] 

E  si  fa  francmasone — 

Poveri  lazzaroni. 

On  the  2oth  the  queen  sailed  for  Trieste,  having  chosen  that 
place  in  preference  to  England.  The  admiral  (Lord  Exmouth) 
had  agreed  verbally  to  her  going  to  France,  and,  in  consequence, 
the  Duchess  of  Bedford  had  offered  to  accompany  her  as  far  as 
that  coast  (for  not  one  of  the  native  ladies  Avent  with  her)  ;  but 
on  the  arrival  of  the  Austrians  and  our  Minister,  this  hope  was 
withheld,  and  the  choice  of  England  or  Austria  offered  ;  and  she 
chose  the  latter,  apparently,  and  I  must  say  with  reason,  much 
hurt  at  this  breach  of  promise,  and  also  displeased  at  the  un- 
couth way  in  which  the  admiral  treated  her.  I  conceive  this 
may  become  the  future  subject  of  some  discussion  among  these 
iiigh  and  mighty  powers,  who  are  very  angry  with  us  poor  tra- 
vellers for  saying  that  we  think  she  has  not  been  well  treated : 
and  I  dare  say  you  will  tliink  us  be-Murated,  for  which  Miss 
Agnes  devotes  us  to  the  infernal  deities.  Gell  and  I  fare  rather 
worse  than  the  rest,  as  the  queen — Madame  la  Marechale  (I 
beg  Lord  Burghersh's  pardon) — sent  for  us  at  the  beginning  of 
her  dilficulties,  as  her  oldest  acipiaintauce  among  the  English  ; 
but  we  being  then  at  Ischia,  the  Duke  of  I^cdford  was  applied 
to,  who  was  in  every  respect  a  much  more  eligible  personage. 
She  remained  four  days  on  board,  which  I  should  tliiuk  was 
punishment  enoujjfh  for  all  the   misdemeanours  she  may  have 


o 


1815]  LETTER    FROM    IIOX.    KEPPEL    CRAVEX.  59 

committed,  as  she  was  present  at  the  arrival  of  the  British  and 
Sicilian  troops,  beard  all  the  salutes  fired  in  honour  of  Ferdinand, 
and  was  besides  insulted  by  the  boats  of  the  mob,  who  provoked 
Captain  Campbell  so  much,  that  he  fired  into  one.  She  was  to 
call  at  Graeta  for  her  children.  The  only  Neapolitan  who  accom- 
panies her  is  Count  Zurlo,  late  Minister  of  the  Interior;  the 
others  are  M.  de  Levron,  a  Frenchman  who  commanded  the 
cavalry;  General  Macdonald,  Minister-at-War;  and  Count 
Mesbourg,  also  French,  and  Minister  of  P^inance.  He  persuaded 
her  to  delay  sailing  and  wait  for  the  admiral,  and  thereby  cer- 
tainly prevented  her  going  to  France,  which  Lord  Exmouth,  un- 
biassed by  others,  would  have  allowed,  as  in  fact  he  had  at  first 
done. 

Grell  and  myself  having  been  at  Ischia  for  a  few  days  previ- 
ous to  all  these  great  events,  are  reported  to  have  been  negocia- 
ting  a  retreat  for  the  king ;  if  so,  we  succeeded  very  ill ;  for, 
after  staying  one  night  in  the  town  of  Ischia,  he  went  to  a  house 
where  he  had  tried  to  lodge,  but  could  not,  on  account  of  its 
being  occupied,  and  where  his  niece,  the  Duchesse  de  Corigliano, 
then  was.  But,  so  far  from  being  well  received,  his  appearance 
spread  dismay  throughout  the  family,  and  he  was  requested  not 
to  expose  them  to  the  danger  of  having  given  him  a  refuge.  He 
luckily  perceived  avessel,and  finding  it  carried  one  of  his  generals 
who  was  very  obnoxious  to  the  Neapolitans,  embarked  on  board 
of  it,  with  his  niece,  two  of  his  nephews,  and  General  Eosetti, 
one  of  his  aides-de-camp,  leaving  three  more  of  his  followers 
to  shift  for  themselves:  these  were  the  Duke  de  Rocca  Romana, 
his  Master  of  the  Horse ;  the  Marquis  of  Guiliano,  Princess 
Castelcicala's  half-brother ;  and  M.  de  Beaussement,  another  of 
his  aides-de-camp.*  These,  after  remaining  another  day  in  the 
island,  also  found  a  vessel  in  which  they  escaped — injudiciously 
enough,  as  Prince  Leopold,  hearing  they  had  been  left,  sent  after 

*  Murat  escaped  to  Toulon,  and  refusing  the  offer  of  an  asylum  and 
honourable  treatment  offered  to  him  by  the  Emperor  of  Austria,  retired  to 
Corsica.  There  he  endeavoured  to  rally  together  those  who  had  served 
with  him  at  Naples,  and  on  the  8th  of  October  etTected  a  landing  in  Cala- 
bria. His  attempts  to  raise  a  cr\'  in  his  favour  were  fruitless.  He  endea- 
voured to  make  his  way  back  to  the  shore,  but  was  surrounded ;  in  his 
march  some  were  killed,  and  the  rest  made  prisoners.  A  military  commis- 
sion was  assembled,  which  condemned  Murat  to  be  shot,  and  the  sentence 
was  executed  on  the  loth. — Ann.  liey. 


60  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1815 

them  to  beg  they  would  return,  and  be  assured  of  his  protection. 
Rocca  Roraana  is  paiticuhirly  to  be  pitied,  as  he  was  a  ruined 
man,  and  personally  attached  to  Joachim,  having  besides  lost 
his  only  son  at  the  defeat  of  Macerata,  whom  he  saw  shot  before 
his  eyes,  and  carried  on  his  horse  into  the  town.  Three  days 
after  their  departure,  a  party  of  Sicilian  soldiers  entered  the 
house  where  Joachim  had  been,  killed  a  servant,  and  pillaged  or 
destroyed  all  the  furniture  and  property  in  it,  the  master  of  it 
being  all  the  time  a  most  determined  supporter  of  Ferdimind. 
I  believe  I  have  now,  to  the  best  of  my  power,  given  you  a  tole- 
rably faithful  account  as  far  as  reached  my  knowledge  of  the 
events  which  have  taken  place  in  this  most  charming  of  all  resi- 
dences. I  shall  only  add  a  few  words  more  respecting  your 
acquaintances  here,  which  are  in  tolerable  good  number.  The 
Rawdons  have  been  wanting  to  go  for  a  long  while,  but  now 
their  friends  the  Austrians  are  come,  I  suppose  will  not  be  so 
impatient.  The  Duke  of  Bedford  carries  this  to  England ;  his 
Duchess  stays  either  here  or  in  some  other  part  of  It^ily,  to 
nurse  Lady  Jane  Montague,  who  cannot  recover,  though  she 
may  linger  some  time.  The  Oxfords,  with  their  children,  dogs, 
and  birds,  are  embarked  on  board  a  transport  bound  to  Leg- 
horn. The  Ords  also,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bowles  (late  Miss  jNIonta- 
gue)  also.  The  rest  of  the  Montagues,  Knutson,  and  all  the  other 
men,  are  going  I  fancy  to  Rome.  Ward  has  been  very  unwell 
for  this  week.  Gell  has  suifered  much  from  gout.  I  am  wait- 
ing for  a  summons  from  my  mother.  In  the  meanwhile  we 
have  a  most  excellent  house,  a  terrace  full  of  flowers,  a  garden 
full  of  orange-trees,  and  the  only  good  tea  in  all  Naples,  which 
I  hope  you  will  taste  next  year.  We  have  heard  from  our 
Princess,  who  is  touralizing  at  i\Iilan,  on  the  Lake  of  Como, 
with  Lady  Charlotte  Campbell.  I  conclude  the  other  Charlotte 
is    arrived ;  if  so,  let  her  read  the  history  of  our   campaign. 

•       •       *       •        CCC*  i\lC» 

JOURNAL. 

Tuesday,  June  20th. — Saw  a  great  many  people  in  the 
morning,  all  expecting  great  news  of  the  armies. 

Wednesday^  'l\st. — Li  the  evening  we  had  some  ("om- 
pauy  very  late.     ^\x.  Fazakerley  brought  the  news  of  the 


1815]  THE    BATTLE    OF   WATERLOO.  61 

great  battle  of  the  18th  in  Flanders,  between  Bonaparte 
and  Wellington,  from  which  we  have  come  out  covered 
with  glory,  and  gained  a  victory  which  one  must  hope 
will  be  decisive,  as  it  has  been  bought  with  a  great  loss  of 
blood.  The  news  arrived  in  London  at  1 1  o'clock  at  night, 
by  a  carriage  in  which  were  seen  the  French  eagles  and 
the  French  standards.  The  carriage  went  to  the  Ministers' 
houses,  and  all  the  world  was  out  of  doors  during  the  best 
part  of  the  night,  asking  news  of  their  neighbours. 

Thursday^  22nd. — All  the  details  that  one  hears  of  the 
victory  of  the  18th  show  that  it  was  one  of  the  most 
sanguinary  battles  that  ever  took  place,  and  contested 
with  an  unexampled  fury  and  determination.  I  went 
to  Lord  Palmerston's,  where  I  saw  the  '  Gazette,*  and 
examined  the  large  map  of  the  country  with  Fanny 
Temple.* 

Sunday^  2hth. — In  the  evening  at  Lord  Guildford's. 
Smith  f  (the  '  Eejected  Addresses ')  sang  several  songs,  the 
merit  of  which  consisted  in  the  words,  which  are  very 
epigrammatic. 

Sunday^  July  2nd. — Before  dinner  I  had  a  conversation, 
which  interested  me  very  much,  with  Sir  J.  Mackintosh, 
on  the  subject  of  the  Eussell  letters ;  and  he  so  much 
praised  my  arrangement,  the  notes,  &c.,  as  to  make  me 
feel  quite  proud. 

Friday,  7th. — Mrs.  Lewis  and  Miss  Cornewall  took  me 
at  seven  o'clock  with  them  to  the  Jewish  Synagogue  in 
Duke's  Place  ;  we  went  by  water  to  the  stairs  at  London 
Bridge,  from  thence  we  walked  to  the  synagogue.  The 
service  had  already  begun,  and  was  in  full  chorus.  The 
s3magogue  is  rather  fine  and  large,  hke  Freemasons'  Hall. 

*  Hon.  Frances  Temple,  sister  to  Lord  Palmerston;  married,  1820,  to 
Captain  Bowles,  R.X. 

t  James  Smith,  one  of  the  two  brothers,  Horace  and  James,  who  were 
joint  authors  of  the  '  Rejected  Addresses.'  James  also  wrote  some  of  the 
most  successful  of  Charles  Mathews's  entertainments,  comic  songs, 
'Brambletye  House,  a  Novel/  &c.    He  was  bom  1775,  died  18u9. 


02  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1815 

The  service  without  dignity,  and  in  no  Avays  imposing.  I 
.^lioiild  certainly  never  be  tempted  to  become  a  Jewess  by 
tlie  illusion  of  the  senses. 

Saturday,  Sth. — In  the  evening  we  had  a  few  persons. 
The  news  is  arrived  of  the  capitulation  of  Paris  to  the 
Duke  of  Wellinfjton. 

Thursday,  loth. — Went  to  Tunbridge. 

Saturday,  loth. — Upon  Bishop's  Down  Ave  met  Dord 
Grantham,*  who  had  just  arrived  direct  from  Paris,  which 
lie  liad  left  last  Wednesday  night.  He  had  entered  Paris 
with  the  Duke  of  WeUington,  and  saw  the  kind's  arrival, 
Ijaving  remained  there  nine  days. 

Sunday,  Idth. — In  the  evening  at  Lady  Ilardwicke's, 
where  we  met  Lord  Grantham,  &c.  W"e  made  him  tell  us 
all  that  he  saw  at  Paris,  and  of  the  excellent  conduct  of 
our  troops. 

Monday,  \lth. — Worked  at  my  MSS.  in  the  morning. 

Tuesday,  ISth. — Worked  at  my  MSS.  in  the  morning. 

Wednesday,  2(j th. — I  only  went  out  for  a  short  time  to 
read  the  papers,  in  which  is  Captain  Maitland's  letter, 
announcing  the  arrival  of  Xapoleon  Bonaparte  upon  his 
vessel  at  Torbay.  Wonderfid  event!  Whoever  should 
have  predicted  this  six  months  ago  would  have  been 
thought  fit  for  a  madliouse. 

Extract  of  a  Letter  from  3fis8  Berry  to  Mrs.  Darner. 

Tunbridge  Wells,  Sundftv,  23rd  July,  1815. 

The  rapid  course  of  public  events,  all  one  more  wonderful 
tlian  the  other,  which  have  taken  place  within  this  lai^t  month, 
leave  all  comment,  as  well  as  all  cak'ulati<in,  at  a  distance.  You 
little  thuu<,'ht  that  your  friend  at  Paris  wduUI  be  in  England 
before  yourself,  and  that  your  bust  may  return  to  that  country 
it  never  oiir/ht  to  have  left,  without  going  out  of  the  possession 

•  Tlmmn.'*  IMiilip  IJoliiiisou,  third  T^ord  r.rnntlinm;  1>orn  1781:  became 
I'^nrl  (le  (irev  on  the  death  ol'  his  matvyrmd  aimt,  Auuibcl  Couutess  dc  Ure}-, 
Itlili;  diedleoU. 


1815]  LETTER   FROM   MRS.    DAMER  63 

of  the  person  to  whom  you  gave  it.*  Before  I  close  this  letter 
to-morrow,  we  shall  probably  have  heard  of  his  arrival  in  an 
English  port.  This  last  triumph  of  the  English  character  for 
good  faith  and  truth  is  indeed  flattering.  We  shall  not  sully  it 
by  our  conduct  even  to  him ;  strict  confinement  and  security 
for  his  person  seems  all  that  is  thought  of  for  him.  The  state 
of  France  appears  almost  as  wretched  as  ever.  They  have  got 
rid  of  Bonaparte,  it  is  true ;  but  when  will  they  get  rid  of  the 
moral  degradation  which  his  reigfn  fixed  on  them  ?  How  will 
they  put  the  band  of  janissaries,  which  must  for  ever  prevent 
anything  like — I  will  not  say  liberty,  but  a  stable  government 
being  established  among  them  ?  Somehow  or  other  these  people 
must  be  got  rid  of;  and  if  the  nation  is  too  weak  and  too  base 
to  do  it  for  themselves,  the  rest  of  Europe  (for  their  own  sakes) 
must  do  it  for  them.  They  have  now  the  opportunity,  and  I 
trust  they  will  not  neglect  it;  for  if  peace  and  the  habits  of 
peace  are  not  soon  restored  both  to  France  and  to  England,  we 
shall  witness  a  new  order  of  social  society  in  both  countries, 
when  war  will  be  the  habitual  state,  and  peace  only  occasionally 
recurred  to.  The  constitution  of  no  regular  healthy  govern- 
ment, no  more  than  of  any  healthy  individual,  can  support  such 
dram-drinking  to  the  mind,  as  the  life  of  Europe  for  these  last 

•  Mrs.  Darner  received  a  handsome  snuff-lDox  in  return  for  tlie  bust  of 
Mr.  Fox ;  and  the  subjoined  inscription,  now  placed  within  the  box,  tells  its 
own  story.     It  was  bequeathed  by  Mrs.  Darner  to  the  British  Museum. 

'  This  box  was  given  by  the  Emperor  Napoleon  of  France  to  the  Honoui- 
able  .-Vnne  Seymour  Damer,  a.s  a  ''suuvenir  "  (the  word  he  used),  in  conse- 
quence of  her  ha^^ng  presented  him  with  a  bust  of  Mr.  Fox  executed  in 
marble  by  herself.  The  bust  had  been  promised  at  the  Peace  of  Amiens, 
was  finished  1B12,  and  sent  to  France,  where  it  remained,  but  was  not 
presented  till  May  1,  181o,  when,  by  command  of  His  Imperial  Majesty, 
Anne  Seymour  Damer  had  an  audience  for  that  purpose  at  the  Palais 
Elvs^e,  where  the  Emperor  then  resided.' 

The  box  is  in  gold,  enamelled,  of  an  oval  form,  and  has  on  the  top,  out- 
side, a  portrait  of  the  Emperor  Napoleon,  -svithin  a  circlet  of  twenty-seven 
brilliants.  The  above  inscription  is  engraved  on  a  loose  gold  plate  which 
tits  into  the  box. 

At  a  Committee,  8th  November,  1828,  'the  Principal  Librarian  announced 
that  he  had  received  a  gold  snuff-box,  set  with  diamonds,  and  ornamented 
with  a  finely  executed  portrait  of  the  Emperor  Napoleon,  bequeathed  to  the 
Trustees  by  the  late  Hon.  Mrs.  Damer,  under  the  injunction  of  ne\er  allow- 
ing the  portrait  to  be  copied,  or  the  box,  imder  any  pretence,  to  be  taken  out 
of  the  collection.' 


64:  MISS   BERRY'S   JOURNAL.  [l815 

two  years.  We  have  all  been  living  much  too  hard ;  we  must 
take  up  and  accustom  ourselves  to  the  plain  regular  diet  of 
peace. 

Extract  of  a  Letter  from  Miss  Beiiry  to  Mrs.  Darner. 

Tunbridge  Wells,  Wednesday,  2nd  Aug.,  1815, 
I  too  could  have  given  you  many  details  of  the  battle  of 
Waterloo  (John  Bull  knows  nothing  of  the  name  of  Mont  St. 
Jean,  no  more  than  he  does  of  that  of  HocJistet),  for  I  have 
seen  a  number  of  most  interesting  letters  from  officers  engaged 
in  it,  and  some  of  the  wounded  since  their  return.  ...  If 
you  have  felt  the  battle  of  Waterloo  as  *  a  soldier's  daughter,' 
OS  it  was  universally  felt  here,  and  above  all,  as  it  was  felt  by 
all  those  engaged  in  it,  its  glory  and  its  results  have  absorbed 
every  other  feeling.  ...  I  have,  as  you  know,  always  thought 
and  said,  that  things  in  general  appeared  in  a  very  different 
liffht  when  viewed  from  this  island  and  from  the  continent  of 
Europe.  But  whatever  the  prospect  of  the  rest  of  Europe 
might  be,  I  can  hardly  think  that  anything  I  should  see  would 
prevent  my  thinking  the  French  character  nationally  degraded 
by  the  military  despot  who  has  reigned  over  them  for  these  last 
twelve  years,  his  regime  completing  what  the  twelve  preceding 
years  of  revolution  had  begun.  I  hardly  think  I  should  see 
their  army  in  any  other  light  than  a  band  of  janissaries,  who 
with  the  usual  protocol  of  his,  common  to  all  parties,  in  their 
mouths,  of  love  of  liberty  and  their  country,  drive  before  them 
twenty-six  millions  of  people,  to  whom  they  have  succeeded  in 
giving  habits  of  ivar,  of  which  one  half  are  too  weak  and  igno- 
rant to  see  the  consequences,  and  all  too  base  to  oppose  them. 
But  opposed  they  must  be;  and,  like  you,  I  am  so  far  from 
expecting  peace  during  the  present  occupation  of  Paris  by 
foreign  troops,  that,  dreadful  as  it  is,  I,  and  all  peaceable  minds, 
must  desire  to  see  further  war  if  the  present  French  army  can- 
not be  put  down  without  it.  If  Kocca  or  any  other  military 
man  complains  of  this,  and  of  the  loss  of  all  the  victories  bought 
by  their  blood  and  their  brilliant  valour,  ask  them  whom  they 
liave  to  blame  i)ut  B<inripnrt(\  who  nctunlly  made  thes(>  national 
virtues  odious  ;nid  incoiii])atiltle  with  those  of  other  countries. 
If  they  would  be  content  with  military  despotism,  and  tine  roads 
and  fine  buildings,  in  (lod's  name  let  them  have  it,  but  not  in  a 
manner  that  is  to  impose  their  disgrace  on  other  people.    .    .    . 


1815]  SOCIETY  AT   PARIS.  65 

From  the  Duke  of  Devonshire  to  Miss  Berry. 

Paris,  August  2,  1815, 

If  a  line  will  do,  here  it  is,  but  it  will  be  a  very  unsatisfactory 
one,  for  besides  the  hurry  of  seeing  sights  and  staring  at  every- 
thing till  I  am  giddy,  those  occupations  prevent  one's  getting 
at  much  information  of  what  is  going  on.  The  sovereigns  seem 
to  be  composing  themselves  into  the  state  they  were  in  at 
Vienna.  They  appear  very  little,  except  at  the  theatres ;  they 
are,  however,  going  to  exert  themselves,  I  suppose,  from  the 
dismay  which  people  connected  with  the  King  and  Grovernment 
appear  to  feel.  Fouche  thinks  everjrthing  doing  as  ill  as 
possible  for  the  King  and  for  France.  They  are  incensed  with 
the  Prussians,  who  extort  immense  sums  of  money,  and  when 
the  prefets  refuse,  fill  their  houses  with  soldiers.  They  have 
seized  upon  the  models  of  the  frontier  towns,  and  indeed  the 
whole  collection  at  the  Invalides,  and  they  are  packed  up,  and 
some  gone  to  Berlin.  I  saw  them  before ;  they  are  beautifully 
made,  and  extremely  accurate  ;  there  is  one,  of  the  Battle  of  the 
Bridge  of  Lodi,  with  the  houses  on  fire,  astonishingly  put 
together.  At  the  Louvre  they  have  taken  about  thirty  pictures, 
some  by  Rubens ;  but  it  is  difficult  to  know  which  by  the  cata- 
logues, as  they  were  not  regularly  hung  and  numbered.  More 
are  coming  down  every  day.  Having  begun,  there  is  no  knowing 
where  they  are  to  stop,  or  how  it  may  tempt  the  other  Powers ; 
as  yet  there  is  no  harm  done. 

The  P'rench  cut  their  jokes  as  usual.  At  the  Duke  of  Welling- 
ton's ball,  the  women  talked  of  having  danced  sur  le  tombeaw 
de  la  jjcdriei  and  they  call  the  King,  Louis  V inevitable.  The 
ball  was  dull  and  formal,  with  very  few  women ;  the  King  of 
Prussia  the  only  sovereign  there.  Two  Russian  grand  dukes, 
Nicolas  and  I  forget  what,  are  very  handsome  and  well-behaved, 
and  much  liked  by  those  who  have  seen  them.  Every  day  I 
am  more  delighted  with  the  magnificence  of  the  buildino"s  and 
country,  the  way  of  life,  and  the  theatres.  Mdlle.  Mars  re- 
appears to-night,  and  Talma  to-morrow.  The  most  ridiculous 
and  the  most  characteristic  thing  is  a  ballet  at  the  Opera,  and 
the  excessive  applause  it  has.  The  story  is  the  Battle  of 
Waterloo ;  the  scene,  Paris ;  the  imperial  guards  beaten,  come 
back  and  inform  the  national  guards  of  their  disaster;  a  young 
lady  hears  that  her  lover  is  killed,  but  an  English  officer  arrives 

VOL.  III.  F 


66  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1815 

•with  him,  having  saved  his  life,  upon  which  tmit  clanse  apropos 
de  tout,  with  white  lilies,  and  plenty  of  Scotchmen  are  intro- 
duced, which  puts  the  audience  in  raptures.  At  the  other 
theatres  there  is  nothing  but  le  hoii  Iloi  Henri,  who  is  not  very 
warmly  received,  Lut  no  contrary  feeling. 

Your  most  sincere  friend, 

Devonshire. 

Thursday,  August  Zrd. — Worked  at  my  MSS.  all  the 
morning. 

Monday,  7th. — Lady  Elizabeth  Yorke,  Agnes,  and  I 
remained  all  the  morning  at  Penshurst — they  to  draw,  I 
to  go  over  the  church  and  the  old  garden.  I  found  the 
former  less  interesting  than  I  expected ;  there  are  only 
two  or  three  old  tombs  of  the  Sidneys.  The  garden,  with 
its  terraces,  the  balustrades  of  the  steps,  &:c.,  recalls  more 
than  any  other  part  of  the  enclosure  the  idea  of  its  former 
magnificence.  In  some  of  the  rooms  on  the  ground  floor, 
opening  to  the  garden,  there  are  still  some  curious  speci- 
mens of  Delft  and  Fayence. 

Sunday,  loth. — At  church  there  was  a  sermon  very  well 
adapted  to  enforce  the  duty  of  a  collection  for  the  wounded 
at  Waterloo.  The  plates  were  held  by  Lady  Ilardwicke, 
Lady  Ely,  Lady  Donegall,  and  Mrs.  Yorke.  They  received 
at  the  chapel  doors  194/. — a  veiy  large  contribution. 

Friday,  ISth. — In  the  evening  Agues  and  I  went  to 
Lord  Harrowby's,  where  the  Ilardwickes,  Madame  Moreau, 
and  Le  Baron  Arnim  had  dined ;  there  were  also  present 
their  eldest  son.  Lord  Sandon,  and  M.  de  Puysegur.  Little 
Susan*  sang  a  great  deal,  and  very  prettily,  with  the 
Jjaron  and  the  Marechale. 

Friday,  September  I'lnd. — In  the  evening  went  at  ten 
o'clock  to  the  Princess  Sophia's,  where  there  was  an 
assembly  of  everybody,  as  little  amusing  as  any  other 
assembly;  liowever,  I  t:ilked  with  Lady  llarrowby,  and 
I  was  not  therefore  bored. 

•  Lady  Susau  Kyderj  maniod,  1817,  to  Viscount  Ebriujjton;  died  1827. 


1815]  MISS  o'neil.  67 

Sunday,  October  l6/.— I  took  leave  of  Playfair  (who 
was  going  away  early  in  the  morning)  with  great  regret. 
He  is  not  only  a  man  of  the  most  enlightened  mind,  but 
one  of  the  kindest  disposition  I  know.  I  flatter  myself 
he  very  sincerely  reciprocates  the  friendship  we  have  for 
him. 

Friday,  20th. — In  the  evening  Agnes  and  I  went  to 
Lady  Templetown's  * — there  was  no  one  there.  Lady 
Templetown  was  amusing  herself  ^vith  cutting  out  my 
profile  on  paper,  which  was  really  very  like. 

Wednesday,  2bfh. — Left  Tuubridge  and  returned  to 
North  Audley  Street. 

Monday,  oOth. — In  the  evening  I  went  to  the  play,  in 
the  Duke  of  Devonshire's  box,  with  Lady  Tancred,  A. 
Turner,  my  father,  sister,  H.  Tancred,  and  E.  Oswald. 
Saw  Miss  O'Neil  f  in  Jane  Shore ;  she  acted  it  in  a  very 
charminG"  and  interesting;  manner. 

Monday,  November  loth. — At  the  play  to  see  Kean  in 
Tamerlane.  His  acting  is  well  adapted  to  playing  de- 
testable characters.  The  piece  is  after  the  French  style, 
full  of  long  speeches.  The  part  of  Tamerlane  does  very 
well  for  Pope,  who  recites  verse  tolerably. 

Saturday,  2hth. — Went  to  Covent  Garden,  in  the 
Kegent's  box,  with  Madame  Moreau,  her  daughter,^  her 
governess,  and  her  secretary.  The  piece  was  '  The 
Gamester ; '  §  Miss  O'N'eil  as  Mrs.  Beverley  very  good. 

Saturday,  December  2nd. — Canova  has  arrived.  The 
pleasure  of  seeing  us  again  did  not  persuade  me  at  first 
that  he  thought  of  us  after  so  man}^  years,  but  very  soon 

*  Lady  Mary  Montagu,  only  daughter  of  John,  fifth  Earl  of  Sandwich  ; 
married,  1790,  to  Viscount  Templetown. 

t  Misa  O'Neil  made  her  first  appearance  in.  London  in  October  1814. 
Her  beauty  is  celebrated  in  theatrical  annals.  After  a  brief  but  brilliant 
career,  she  manied  Sir  "William  Bercher,  and  retired  into  private  life. — luq). 
Diet,  of  Univ.  Bioff. 

t  Madame  Moreau's  only  daughter ;  married  the  \lscomte  de  Courval, 
owner  of  the  fine  Castle  of  Puson,  near  Laon. 

§  Tragedy  by  Nicholas  Rowe;  bom  1673  >  died  1718  j  published  in  1703. 

v2 


G8  MISS  BERRY'S   JOURNAL.  [l815 

his  recollection  of  a  thousand  little  circumstances  durincj 
our  stay  at  Rome,  more  than  thirty  years  ago,  convinced 
me  that  it  was  really  us  that  he  sought,  and  his  joy  at 
seeing  us  again  was  truly  flattering,  and  truly  characteristic 
of  the  head  and  heart  of  an  Italian.  He  introduced  a 
brother  to  us,  an  abbe,  and  he  left  us,  promising  to  come 
again  before  his  departure,  ]\Ionday  or  Tuesday. 

Sunday^  ord. — We  had  a  second  visit  from  Canova,*  his 
brother,  and  a  Eoman  sculptor  of  the  name  of  D'Este. 
The  same  deliiiht  at  having  met  us  aizain,  the  same  ex- 
pressions  of  friendship,  and  the  old  feelings  of  admiration, 
which  were  really  gratifying  after  so  long  an  absence. 
In  the  evening  went  with  Madame  Moreau  to  Madame 
de  Lieven.  There  were  the  diplomats  as  usual,  and 
amono-st  them  Madame  Sturman,  a  little  Frenchwoman, 
the  wife  of  the  Austrian  Commissary,  who  is  going  to  the 
Island  of  St.  Helena  to  guard  Bonaparte. 

Friday,  Ibth. — In  the  evening  at  Lady  Hardwicke's, 
who  leaves  to-morrow  for  Paris.  I  hate  adieux — though 
these  were  less  sad  to  me,  as  I  hope  they  are  not  for  long. 

Tuesday,  10th. — In  the  evening  went  to  Lady  DonegaU's, 
where  Miss  O'Neil  had  dined.  Miss  O'Xeil  is  in  society 
what  she  is  on  the  stage — gentle,  pleasing,  and  interestinjr. 

Saturday,  2.3/y/. — We  went  to  Drury  Lane  Theatre 
with  Mr.  and  Mi's.  Baring,  to  see  '  The  Merchant  of 
Bruges,'  and  '  The  Maid  and  the  Magpie.'  The  first  is  by 
BeauuKjnt  and  Fletcher — very  little  interesting;  the  second 
bolii  touching  and  interesting,  translated  from  the  French, 
the  story  taken  from  their  causefi  ccll'bres,  which  I  have 
always  considered  as  a  field  fertile  in  dramatic  subjects. 

•  The  most  intimato,  inseparable  of  all  liis  friends  wns  his  hnlf-hrother, 
the  Abhnte  Sartori  Canova  (son  of  his  niotlicr  hv  ht'r  second  niamape), 
wlio  from  the  year  1H(M)  nssidod  entirely  with  him,  and  to  wliose  sole  and 
Facred  friendship  he  confided  at  his  death  the  execntion  of  his  most  che- 
rislied  desig^ns. —  Works  of  Cmwva,  liiojjraphical  Mom.  by  Count  Cicoj^nara. 


1816]  BENJAMIX   CONSTANT.  69 


JOURNAL. 
1816. 

TJmrsday,  January  18^/i.— Went  in  the  morning  to 
Lady  Stuart's  pew  in  Whitehall  Chapel,  to  see  the  eagles 
and  the  flags  taken  at  Waterloo,  and  to  hear  the  sermon 
preached  by  the  Bishop  of  London  in  thanksgiving,  to-day 
being  the  day  appointed  for  it.  There  was  too  Uttle 
ceremony,  too  little  military  music,  and  a  sermon  (by  the 
little  I  could  hear  across  the  incessant  couo-hinc^  of  the 
congregation)  too  political  for  the  pulpit. 

Friday,  19 th. — In  the  evening  at  Di^ury  Lane,  to  see 
'  A  New  Way  to  Pay  Old  Debts.'  *  Kean  is  excellent  and 
detestable  in  it.  Piece  interesting  ;  very  rare  thing  in  our 
old  plays  revived. 

Sunday,  February  Ath. — Dined  at  Mr.  Bourke's,f  with 
M.  and  Madame  Benjamin  Constant,  J  the  General  Fla- 
haut  and  Sebastiani,  Prince  Esterhazy,  Neuman,  Comte 

•  By  P.  Massinger ;  born  1584 ;  died  1640. 

t  Danish  Minister. 

X  Benjamin  Constant,  born  at  Geneva  1767.  His  family,  French  Pro- 
testants, had  taken  refuge  in  Switzerland.  Thi-ough  life  M.  Constant  was 
the  consistent  defender  of  civil  and  religious  liberty.  He  was  exiled  at  the 
same  time  as  Madame  de  Stael,  by  the  First  Consul.  After  wandering  for 
a  time  over  Europe,  he  settled  at  Gottingen,  where  he  married  a  Hanoverian 
lady.  In  1814  he  returned  to  Paris,  full  of  hope  that  in  the  new  state  of 
affairs  France  might  regain  some  liberty,  and  in  1815  he  committed  himself 
against  Napoleon ;  yet,  strange  to  say,  after  one  personal  interview,  left  him 
Conseiller  d'Etat.  After  the  second  return  of  the  Bourbons  ho  devoted  him- 
self to  literature,  and  in  1819  took  part  in  the  Chamber  of  Deputies,  where 
he  distinguished  himself  by  his  eloquence  as  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  oppo- 
sition. He  was  the  author  of  many  political  works ;  also  of  '  Walstein  :  a 
Tragedy,'  &c. ;  he  died  towards  the  end  of  1830.  Benjamin  Constant  pub- 
lished a  novel,  in  three  volumes,  called  '  Adolphe,'  in  1816.  This  may  have 
been  the  work,  enlarged,  of  which  Miss  Berry  writes. 


70  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1816 

Berendingen  (the  Envoy  of  Wirtemberg),  and  Mr.  Cosfeldt. 
General  Flahaut  is,  as  they  told  me,  very  Hke  Eobert. 
Constant  spoke  very  little. 

Wednesday,  \^tJi. — Li  the  evening  at  the  Boiirkes, 
where  there  had  been  a  dinner.  Lady  Holland,  Madame 
de  Lieven,  &c.,  and  where  Benjamin  Constant  read  his 
romance  or  history ;  I  do  not  know  what  to  call  it,  as  he 
has  not  given  it  a  name.  It  is  very  well  written — a  sad 
and  much  too  true  a  history  of  the  human  heart,  but 
almost  ridiculously  so  wdth  the  company  before  whom  it 
was  read.  It  lasted  two  hours  and  a  half.  The  end  was 
so  touching,  that  it  was  scarcely  possible  to  restrain  one's 
tears,  and  tlie  effort  I  made  to  do  so  made  me  positively 
ill.     Agnes  and  I  both  burst  into  tears  on  our  return  home. 

From  A.  Canova  to  Miss  Bemj. 

Ho  il  piacere  d'  iuviarle  due  stnmpe  della  mia  Venere,  ed  una 

del  Gruppo  di  Amore  e  Psiche :  piccolo   segno   in  vero  della 

tenera  stima  e  del  rispetto  cbe  io  nutro  per  Lei ;    ma  q\iesti 

due  sentiment!  sono  si  grandi,  e  passano  talmente  ogni  misura, 

che  io  dispero  di  poter  mai  darle  di  essi  alcuna  prova  esterua 

che   non   sia    piccioli  [ ]  Serva   almeno   la  presenta   al 

principal  oggetto  di  rammentarmi  a  Lei,  e  di  assicurarla  che  io 

tengo   propriamente  vicine  al   cuore  le  pomesse  a  Lei  fatte. 

Grradisca  nel  tempo  stesso  il  buon  volere  che  mi  guida  a  farle 

cosa  grata,  e  adempia  il  voto  che  sempre  io  faccio,  di  rivederla 

un'  altra  volta  fra  noi.     Mi  confermi  cosi  dolce  speranza;    si 

ricordi  talora  di  me,  come  io  vivo  memore  sempre  delle  di  Lei 

gentili  maniere  e  delle  qualitii  amabili  che  adornano  il  suo  bel 

cuore  e  consolano  quello  di  chiunque  s'avvicina,  e  che  io  invidio 

tanto.     Quegli  sentimenti  desidero  comuui  colla  di  Lei  sorella, 

ch'  egualmcnte    io   stimo  e  onoro ;    siccorae  di  essi   pure  vuol 

esscr  ]);irt('ripo  mio  fratcllo,  che  si  place  ricordarsi  alia  di  Loro 

menioria,  meutre  io  particolarmente  mi  pregio  exsere. 

Suo  at.  obh.  servitore, 

Antonio  Canova. 
Rome,  23  febbrnio  181 0.» 

I  have  the  pleasure  of  sondinpr  you  two  ongravinps  of  my  Venus,  and 
one  of  the  group  of  Cupiil  and  Psycho — a  small  token,  truly,  of  the  sincere 


1816]  LEAVE    LONDON   FOE  SITTING  BOURNE,  71 

On  the  6th  of  February  1816,  Lady  EUzabetli  Yorke, 
third  daughter  of  the  Earl  and  Countess  of  Hardwicke, 
was  married  to  Sir  Charles  Stuart,  English  Ambassador  at 
Paris.  Lord  and  Lady  Hardwicke  having  taken  a  house 
there,  invited  Miss  Berry  to  join  them.  The  invitation 
was  accepted,  and  she  placed  herself  for  the  passage  and 
journey  under  the  convoy  of  a  lady  and  her  son  with 
whom  she  had  no  previous  acquaintance.  Miss  Berry's 
Journal  during  her  visit  at  Paris,  though  partly  written 
in  her  usual  diary,  is  given  in  greater  detail  in  the  letters 
addi'essed  to  her  sister,  avIio  remained  in  London. 


J  0  U  E  N  A  L. 

Tuesday^  27th. — Left  North  Audley  Street  for  Sitting- 
bourne. 

Wednesday,  2Sth. — There  was  a  storm  during  the 
night.  The  weather  to-day  is  fine,  clear,  and  cold,  with 
a  north-east  wind.  I  was  at  Dover  at  half-past  one.  The 
wind  favourable ;  and  if  the  sea  does  not  become  too 
rough,  we  shall  embark  to-morrow  at  ten  o'clock,  with 
the  tide  serving. 

Thursday,  2dth. — The  cold  continues,  with  a  favourable 

esteem  and  of  the  regard  wliicli  I  cherish  for  yoii ;  but  these  two  feelings 
are  so  deep,  and  so  surpass  all  measure,  that  I  despair  of  ever  being  able  to 
give  any  adequate  external  proof  of  them.  This  may  at  least  serve  the 
principal  object  of  bringing  me  to  your  recollection,  and  of  assuring  you 
that  I  hold  close  to  my  heart  all  promises  made  to  you.  May  you  accept 
the  good-will  which  prompts  me  to  do  anything  agreeable  to  you,  and  at 
the  same  time  fulfil  my  constant  wish  of  seeing  you  once  more  amongst  us. 
Pray  confirm  this  pleasant  hope,  and  sometimes  think  of  me,  while  I  retain 
the  most  lively  recollection  of  your  charming  manners  and  the  amiable 
qualities  which  adorn  your  good  heart,  and  which  make  happy  whatever 
enviable  person  comes  near  j^ou.  I  beg  to  express  the  same  sentiments 
towards  your  sister,  whom  I  esteem  and  honour  equally,  in  which  my 
brother  also  joins,  and  hopes  to  be  remembered  by  you;  while  I  particu- 
larly pride  myself  on  being 

Your  attached  humble  servant, 

AjfiONio  Canova. 


72  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1816 

wind.  We  sailed  from  tlie  pier  at  half-past  ten  o'clock, 
I  only  saw  my  companions  at  the  time  of  our  embarkation. 
Mrs.  P.  was  occupied  with  her  own  affairs,  and  her  son 
was  thrown  out  of  a  whiskey  in  the  streets  of  Dover 
when  coming  to  pay  me  a  visit;  fortunately  I  had  no 
need  of  their  help.  My  trunks  were  scarcely  looked  at 
at  the  Custom  House.  I  remained  on  deck,  wrapped  in 
everything  I  had  that  was  warm  ;  the  cold  was  excessive, 
and  contributed  almost  as  much  as  the  motion  of  the 
vessel  to  sea-sickness.  At  the  side  of  the  Calais  pier  we 
were  delayed  in  landing,  because  my  comj^anions  had 
forgotten  to  furnish  themselves  with  a  passport ;  but  being 
well  known  there,  they  allowed  them  to  pass,  and  we 
were  just  three  hours  from  one  inn  to  the  other.  This 
other  was  not  the  excellent  Hotel  of  Quillacq,  but  the 
Lion  d' Argent,  kept  by  an  Englishman,  and  as  bad  as 
the  other  is  good.  At  dinner  we  had  a  visit  from  the 
Governor,  the  poor  old  Comte  de  Cehe,  who  was  for  so 
lonfi;  in  England.  I  do  not  know  whether  this  little  old 
man  considers  it  a  duty  to  give  a  welcome  to  all  the 
English  who  arrive  ;  if  so,  he  must  have  enough  to  do. 

Friday^  March  \st — Up  early,  to  start  at  eight  o'clock. 
Beautiful  weather,  and  the  roads  very  good.  We  stayed 
at  Berney,  being  too  late  to  reach  Abbeville. 

Saturday,  2nd. — Ixeached  Beauvais  in  less  than  twelve 
hours. 

Sunday,  Srd. — I  arrived  in  the  Eue  d'Anjou,  at  Lady 
Hardwicke's,  before  four  o'clock. 

Extract  of  a  Letter  to  Miss  Agnes  Beri^j. 

Hue  d'Anjou,  Sunday  Evening,  ."ird  March  1816. 
Well,  clearest  Agones,  I  arrived  at  least  two  hours  before  I  was 
expected.  My  letter  aunounciuf^  the  certainty  of  my  setting 
out,  and  my  hopes  of  gettinj^  here  to-day,  never  reached  Lady 
Hardwicke  till  late  last  ni^dit.  liut  no  matter  ;  my  reception 
•was  buch  as  to  make  all  announcing  unnecessary,  and  to  make 


o 


1816]  TRIAL   OF   SIR   ROBERT   WILSON.  id 

me  (as  I  am  sure  it  would  you)  rejoice  that  I  had  come 

As  to  all  my  letters,  and  all  my  visits,  and  all  my  commissions 
here,  I  shall  take  them  very  leisurely,  and  endeavour  to  enjoy 
the  sort  of   quiet  which  I  think  one  of  the  great  charms  of 

a  Paris  life My  journal,  therefore,  to  you,  which  I  shall 

begin  from  this  day,  will  often,  I  dare  say,  be  much  less  inte- 
resting than  you  expect,  and  you  may,  perhaps,  think  me  very 
dull,  and  doing  nothing,  when  I  am  spending  my  time  most 
agreeably.  Read  as  much  of  my  letter  to  dear  Aunt  Anne  as 
you  please  ;  I  know  she  will  not  think  me  over  vain  for  boast- 
ing of  my  kind  reception,  and  I  am  sure  we  owe  her  all  due 

communication  of  letters I  am  longing  to  hear  from 

you  and  my  father,  on  whom,  certainly,  my  chief  anxiety  will 
fall  during  my  absence.  For  myself,  taken  singly,  my  age 
makes  me  feel  a  sort  of  independent  indifference  which  is  very 
useful,  and  leaves  one  much  at  liberty  to  enjoy,  as  far  as  one  is 
able,  what  falls  in  one's  way. 

Thursday,  7th. — The  trial  of  Sir  Eobert  Wilson,  &c., 
they  say  comes  on  this  week.  K  women  go  to  the  trials 
a  la  Cour  d' Assises,  which  I  have  been  assured  they  do,  1 
shall  take  care  to  be  one  of  the  audience.  He  is  to  be  tried 
for  high  treason,  and  they  say  strong  circumstances  have 
come  out  which  make  his  case  worse  than  was  expected. 
It  was  denied  in  England,  but  is  true,  that  having  asked 
Sir  Charles  for  two  passports — one  for  his  brother-in-law, 
and  another  for  a  Major  Locock — the  first  he  used  for 
himself,  the  second  for  Lavalette.  Bruce,  who  is  only 
considered  as  an  accomplice,  said  to  his  avocat,  after  a 
considtation,  '  Ne  trouvez  vous  pas  qu'il  y  h  quelquechose 
de  tres  romanesque  dans  ma  situation  ? '  Admiral  Linois 
and  General  Boyer*  were  tried  yesterday  at  their  own 

•  Charles  Alexandre  Linois ;  born  1761 ;  a  distinguished  admiral,  was 
taken  prisoner  by  the  English  in  17'.)3.  He  was  released  in  less  than  a  year, 
on  condition  he  was  exchanged  for  Sir  Sidney  Smith ;  this  liobespierre 
refused,  and  Linois  delivered  himself  up  again  as  prisoner  of  war.  He 
returned,  in  time,  to  France,  and  was  in  active  service  till  the  year  1806, 
when  he  was  again  made  prisoner,  and  remained  in  England  till  1812.  He 
was  then  appointed  Uovernor  of  Guadaloupe  by  Louis  XVIII.     The  colony 


74  MISS    berry's   journal.  [1816 

desire.  I  have  not  yet  heard  tlie  result,  about  wliich 
nobody  seems  to  care  twopence,  altliougli  it  was  thought 
they  would  be  condemned. 

Saturdaij,  Hjth. — I  saw  Mdlle.  George  and  Talma  in 
'  Britannicus.'  She  is  a  fnie  actress — that  is  to  say,  having 
been  admirably  taught,  and  executing  everything  she  has 
been  taught  with  a  magnificent  theatrical  figure  ;  her  face 
not  imlike  Mrs.  Ferguson's,  grown  very  fat,  and  set  on 
the  shoulders  of  a  tall  woman.     Talma  is  excellent,  and 

the  dresses,  costumes,  and  decorations  superb.    ]\Ii"s. is 

here,  and  is  thought  exceeding  good  company ;  receives 
all  the  very  best  French  society,  gives  dinners  and  balls,  and 
has  even  had  the  honour  of  being  suspected  of  being  im 
peu  libre  dans  ses  principes,  for  having  given  a  ball  in 
Lent,  at  which  the  King  requested  the  Due  de  Berri  would 
avoid  appearing.  ...  I  saw  Eliz.,  chez  moi,  for  a  few 
minutes,  at  her  return  from  court,  in  all  her  beaux  atours., 

and  remarkably  well  she  looked Her  success  here 

among  the  French  is,  I  assure  you,  great,  and  she  has 
already  more  French  acquaintance  than  I  dare  be  sworn 
any  Ambassadress  has  had  since  the  days  of  Lady  Stor- 
mont  or  any  other  one  du  ban  vieux  terns. — Sent  for  Bar- 
rois,  and  saw  him  yesterday.  He  is  as  mad  as  Bedlam  on 
the  subject  of  politics,  and  consequently  very  entertain- 
ing ;  he  has  promised  to  come  to  me  often  of  a  morning, 
and  to  bring  me  a  sight  of  all  the  forbidden  political 
books 

Tuesday. — In  the  evening  went  to  the  Theatre  Francois, 


vras  attacked  l)y  tlio  Eiifj-lish  in  1815.  Admiral  Tiinois  and  fionoral  Boyor 
were  imprisoned,  and  both  tried  on  account  ol'  their  change  of  aHegiunce  on 
the  return  of  Honaparto.  Admiral  Linois  was  unanimously  acquitted  by 
the  Council  of  War. 

Ji^ugeno  Kdouard,  I$aron  de  Boyor-Peyroleau.  lie  entered  tlie  army  in 
]7!)."{,  was  constantly  employed,  and  served  with  considerable  distinction. 
lie  was  in  command  at  (luadaloupo  at  the  time  of  the  battle  of  Waterloo. 
He  wa.s  condtMnncd  to  deatli  by  a  (-ouncil  of  War;  the  sentence  was  after- 
wurda commuted  to  three  years'  imprisonment. — Did.  tics  ConUiitpuraims, 


1816]  FKEXCII    ACTORS   AND   ACTRESSES.  75 

and  saw  Mdlle.  Duclienois,  Mdlle.  George,  and  Talma,  in 
'  Aeameinnon'  and  the '  Avocat  Patelier.'  .... 


Extract  of  a  Letter. 

Thursday^  lith. —  ....  I  was  last  night  at  the 
Varietes,  and  saw  my  old  acquaintance,  Brunet,  and 
the  now  more  famed  Potier,  in  two  parts.  He  is  excel- 
lent— nature  itself — so  that  it  is  impossible  to  believe 
yourself  at  the  theatre.  His  calembourgs  are  frequent,  des 
impromptus^  fait  a  loisir  of  course,  but  received  by  the 
parterre  with  raptures.  Of  the  pieces  I  own  I  thought 
little  ;  they  would  soon  tire  and  disgust  one.  '  Jocrisse, 
Chef  des  Brigands,'  which  I  had  heard  was  very  good,  is 
no  other  than  '  Bobinet,  the  Bandit,'  and  I  think  Liston 
makes  more  of  it  than  Brunet.  To  the  Theatre  Fran9ois 
I  shall  go  oftenest ;  there,  one  is  sure  of  being  really  inte- 
rested and  entertained.  Luckily,  Lady  Hardwicke  likes  it 
of  all  things.  I  have  not  yet  seen  Mdlle.  Mars.*  From  the 
play  we  returned  home,  near  eleven,  changed  our  dress 
and  went  to  the  GrefTulhes,  who  receive  every  Wednesday 
evenins^,  and  we  were  not  too  late.  Their  house  is  mas^- 
nificent ;  it  was  Savary's  (the  Due  de  Roorg's),  to  whom 
Bonaparte  gave,  M7Z  beau  matin,  a  million  francs  (43,000/.) 
to  buy  and  furnish  this  house.  That's  what  you  call  a/r^^, 
equable  government,  when  the  sovereign  can  give  you,  or 
me,  or  anybody  he  pleases,  forty  or  fifty  thousand  pounds 
out  of  the  public  funds,  and  nobody  say  Bo  to  him  for  so 

doing Our  Englishmen's  trial  is  again  put  off 

sine  die ;  whenever  it  takes  place  I  shall  be  there.  General 
Boyer,  you  would  see  by  the  papers,  was  sentenced  two 
days  ago  to  be  shot,  but  they  said  last  night  that  the 

*  Mdlle.  Mars  appeared  first  in  1793,  in  children's  parts,  and  gradually 
rose  to  eminence.  She  was  much  encouraged  by  Mdlle.  Coutat,  to  whose 
parts  she  succeeded  in  1812.  The  extraordinary  charm  of  her  acting,  her 
voice,  her  countenance,  and  her  accent,  must  be  well  remembered  by  many 
still  alive. 


76  MISS    berry's   journal.  [1816 

punishment  was  to  be  changed  to  deportation.  Of  all  this, 
however,  one  hears  nothing,  and  from  those  I  live  with, 
necessarily  perhaps,  less  than  elsewhere,  so  that  I  long  to 

get  hold  of  people  whom  one  can  set  talking 

Friday,  loth  March. — Our  dinner  yesterday 

at  Pozzo  de  Borgo's*  was  a  grand  formal  affair,  given 
to  I'Ambassade  d'Angleterre  ;  consisted  of  twenty-six  per- 
sons. You  would  have  been  delighted  with  tlie  accueil 
the  Due  deEiclielieuf  gave  me ;  it  was  realbj  Oi\mQ.i\\ — really 
as  if  he  had  been  happy  to  be  carried  back  to  the  days 
and  the  remembrances  of  his  youth.  He  led  me  into 
dinner,  sat  by  me,  led  me  out  again,  shook  my  hand  half-a- 
dozen  times,  and  was  remarked  never  to  have  been  lately 
seen  so  gay  in  company.  He  is  very  much  like  what  he 
was  as  a  young  man — very  thin,  very  good-looking,  singu- 
larly like  a  gentleman,  with  very  gray  hair,  very  much 
curled  over  his  head.  He  asked  after  you  with  great  kind- 
ness, and  insisted  on  coming  to  see  me ;  this  he  may  never 
find  time  to  do,  but  I  am  sure  he  has  the  intention.  He 
talked  freely  of  affairs,  and  not  in  a  very  consolatory 
manner ;  fears  that  France  is  not  at  the  end  of  her  ills, 
nor  Europe  very  likely  to  enjoy  peace.  One  could  not,  as 
j'ou  may  suppose,  much  develope  these  ideas  at  a  dinner ; 
but  I  shall  be  very  glad  to  meet  him  again.  It  will  not  be 
at  Sir  Charles's  to-morrow,  for  this  dinner  at  Pozzo's  was 
a  mixture  of  the  two  parties,  as  you  will  see  by  the  list — 
Talleyiand  and  the  Marechals,  the  Due  de  liichelieu,  and 
some  other  of  the  present  ministers  and  courtiers ;  whereas 


•  Ruasian  Amhassndor  at  Paris;  a  native  of  Corsica. 

t  The  Miss  JJerrys'  acquaintance  with  Arniand  ]"]manucl  Duplossis,  Due  do 
Bichelieu,  dated  back  as  far  as  1784,  when  they  were  at  .Mdiitiielier;  bom 
]70().  lie  retired  to  Vienna  durinj,'  the  French  Kevolution,  joined  the  anny 
of  Snwarrow,  and  distinjriiislicd  himself  at  the  taking  of  Ismail  from  the 
Turks.  He  was  afterwards  ajip(iinte<l  riovernor  of  Odessa,  in  the  IJussian 
service,  from  ISO.*?  to  1814,  after  wiiich  be  returned  to  Paris,  and  wius 
invested  by  Louis  XVIll.  with  various  high  offices  of  8tat«.  lie  retired 
from  office  l«lti  J  died  1821. 


1816]  TALLEYRAND.  77 

Sir  Charles  is  not  to  mix  tliem,  but  to  have  Talleyi^and 
and  all  his  set  to-morrow,  and  the  others  another  day. 
Talleyrand  !  could  you  see  him  !  Such  a  mass  of  moral 
and  physical  corruption  as  he  appears  in  my  eyes,  inspires 
me  with  sentiments  so  far  from  tliose  with  whicli  I  look 
up  to  great  minds  and  great  exertions,  that  I  should  be 
very  sorry  to  be  obliged  to  express  what  I  feel  about  him. 
He  speaks  very  little  in  company  at  any  time,  and.  Sir 
Charles  says,  looked  very  sulky  yesterday ;    to-morrow, 

perhaps  he  may  be  in  better  humour The 

weatlier  is  beginning  to  be  good,  and  I  was  yesterday  out 
on  foot,  which  you  know  is  my  delight.  We  had  a  walk 
in  the  Ambassador's  garden,  which  is  delightful,  and,  like 
our  own,  opens  into  the  Champs  Elysees.  There  one  sees 
a  great  many  of  the  trees  barked  round  by  Austrian  and 
English  cavalry ;  but  they  are  carefully  planting  others 
whenever  a  tree  has  been  injured,  and  this  is,  as  far  as  I 
have  yet  see?i,  the  only  degdt  of  the  foreign  troops  per- 
ceivable ;  but  they  say  the  Bois  de  Boulogne  is  almost  en- 
tirely laid  waste 

March  IQth. — Mdlle.  Mars  is  not  Mdlle.  Coutat.  I  have 
no  doubt  I  shall  think  her  as  perfect  an  actress  as  all  the 
rest  of  the  world  do ;  but  her  countenance,  and  the  first 
look  of  her,  disappointed  me.  It  is  an  intelhgent  but  a 
vulgarish  face,  not  rachete  by  any  real  beauty.  The  parts, 
too,  I  should  think,  were  not  very  favourable  to  the  de- 
velopment of  her  greatest  talents.  Victorine,  in  '  Le  Phi- 
losophe  sans  le  savoir,'  and  Madame  Something  (I  could  not 
make  out  the  name),  in  '  La  Comedienne,'  a  new  and  I 
think  bad  piece,  though  it  has  been  well  received.  But 
what  a  perfect  thing  is  French  comedy !  the  representa- 
tions of  their  Hfe  and  their  manners  are  so  perfectly 
natural,  that  all  idea  of  a  theatre  vanishes ;  and  as  they 
admit  of  much  more  conversation,  and  less  action  and 
bustle,  on  the  stage  than  we  do,  one  often  feels  oneself 
admitted  into  the  interior  of  a  private  house,  and  hstening 


78  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1816 

to  their  family  arrangements.  I  long  to  see  Mdlle.  Mars 
again,  for  perfect  she  is,  and  perfect  I  have  no  doubt  I 
shall  find  her  ;   but  I  had  perhaps  heard  too  much  to  be 

struck  at  first  sight My  last  letter  talked  to 

you  about  our  three  wise  heads  here.  The  Due  de  Eiche- 
lieu  told  me  the  trial  would  certainly  take  place  the  1st 
of  April,  and  he  added,  '  Us  seront  quittes  pour  deux  ans 
de  prison.''  Car.  may  tell  this,  if  she  pleases,  to  the  *  *  *  *  *^ 
without  just  saying  that  I  heard  it  from  the  lips  of  the 
First  Minister  of  France.  All  tlie  ^;gz//>/t^  here  expect 
something  (they  know  not  what)  to  take  place  in  this 
month  of  March,  which,  indeed,  after  the  pretty  equipee  of 
last  year,  I  don't  wonder  at  their  supposing  must  always 
produce  some  marvellous  change  ;  but  what  they  want, 
not  even  Barrois  himself  can  tell.  Many  are  persuaded 
thaj;  le  petit  Napoleon  is  actually  at  Fontainebleau.  Very 
few  beheve  the  father  to  be  really  at  St.  Helena.  But 
what  signifies  all  this  ?  For  my  own  ideas  of  things,  I  can- 
not help  thinking,  que  cela  ira  ;  but  not  without  Europe 
being  aux  p>rises  darmes  half-a-dozen  times,  and  tliis  be- 
wildered people  exhibiting  a  few  more  proofs  of  their 
profound  moral  degradation. 

Maixh  17th. — I  have  been  lucky  hitherto  about  my 
dinners.  The  Comte  Alexis  de  Noailles  led  me  in  yesterday, 
and  I  sat  between  him  and  the  Duke  of  Wellmgton,  with 
whom  I  had  a  great  deal  of  very  interesting  convei*sation. 
The  simplicity  and  frankness  of  his  manners,  and  the  way 
in  wliich  he  speaks  of  public  afliiirs,  are  really  tliose  of  a 
great  man;  although,  talking  of  the  allied  sovereigns,  their 
views,  &c.  &c.,  he  says  ive  found  so-and-.so — we  intend 
such-and-such  things — quite  as  treating  de  Coiinmne  a 
Couronne.  I  diverted  him  inucli  witli  B.  Constant's  idea 
of  his  never  returning  to  tetat  de  simple  citoyen.  Tlie 
Duke  told  me  at  dinner  tliat  B(inaparte  would  never  do 
justice  to  Marmont,  or  pardc^u  his  defeat,  till  he  saw  liis 
(Duke  of  Welhngtun's)  account  of  the  action  m  which 


181C]  THE    DUKE   OF   WELLIXGTOX.  79 

he  bad  beat  Marmont ;  and  Marmont  has  since  acknow- 
ledged his  obligation  to  the  Duke,  which  is  much  in  a 
person  naturally  so  insolent  (to  the  Enghsh  in  particular). 
The  Duke  added,  that  Bonaparte  had  always  waited  for, 
and  depended  on,  his  accounts  of  the  actions  in  wliich  he 
was  engaged  with  the  Frencli,  to  judge  of  his  generals' 
conduct,  and  seemed  proud,  as  well  he  might,  of  such  a 
decisive  proof  of  confidence  in  his  truth  and  honour, 
hardly  less  glorious  than  the  great  events  which  called  for 
their  exercise.  The  Duke  told  me,  in  speaking  of  the 
mihtary  disposition  which  all  Europe  had  acquired  during 
these  last  twenty  years,  that  such  was  its  preponderance, 
and  such  its  effects  on  the  armies  collected  last  year  in 
the  second  crusade  against  France,  that  at  tlie  time  the 
armistice  was  concluded,  and  the  allies  were  rather  blamed 
for  maldng  peace  so  suddenly,  and  allowing  such-and- 
such  terms,  they  were  hardly  themselves  masters  of  their 
own  troops,  or  able  to  control  their  intentions,  and  were 
dreading  that  some  unforeseen  event  might  have  disco- 
vered tliis  dangerous  secret.  Alexis  de  Noailles  was  very 
agreeable  and  entertaining  too  ;  he  is  a  depute^  and  one  of 
the  most  violent  moderes.  The  dinner  was  of  twenty-six 
or  twenty-seven  people,  but  almost  all  Talleyrand's  gang, 
headed  by  that  old  incarnation  of  corruption  himself  .  . 

....  Lady  H heard  from  the  Duke  of  Welhngton 

himself  many  particulars  of  the  battle  of  Waterloo.  In 
answer  to  a  number  of  women's  questions,  one  day  at  the 
Ambassador's,  as  to  what  degree  of  exultation  he  felt  at  the 
victory  when  won,  and  of  grief  and  feehng  at  the  moment 
for  the  fall  of  friends,  he  replied,  with  his  usual  natural  un- 
affected simple  manner,  he  had  httle  time  to  feel  either  till 
long  after  all  was  over — '  /,  who  saw  the  battle  four  times 
lost  that  day.'  In  the  evening  there  was  a  ball  at  the 
Duke  of  Wellington's,  to  which  I  went,  feeling  myself  not 
tired,  and  willing  to  see  the  inside  of  the  Elysee  Bourbon, 
the  last  house  Bonaparte  inhabited  in  Paris,  now  the  abode 


80  MISS    berry's   JOURXAL.  [1816 

of  an  English  Commander-in-Chief,  surrounded  by  a  guard 
of  French  soldiers !  .  .  .  .  Enter  Florian  de  Kergolay. 
Florian  is  a  much  better-looking  man,  of  near  fifty,  than  he 
was  at  twenty.  He  seemed  really  glad  to  see  me,  and  en- 
quired most  kindly  and  particularly  after  you.  We  had  a 
talk  of  near  an  hour  too;ether  before  I  took  him  into  Lady 
Hardwicke's.  He  is  an  ultra  Royalist ;  so  that  I  have 
luckily  found  acquaintances  in  all  the  different  parties,  whom 
I  can  make  talk  and  talk  to.  I  am  to  dine  to-morrow 
with  Florian  enfamille,  to  be  introduced  to  his  wife,  who 
was  a  Mdlle.  de  la  Lucerne,  niece  to  the  Ambassador  we 

had  in  England I  am  just  returned  from  seeing 

Madame  de  Fleury ;  we  had  a  great  deal  of  conversation, 
and  she  speaks  with  all  her  former  precision  and  clever- 
ness  Everybody  is  wearing  feathers  here,  and 

their  price  is  enormous. 

Extract  of  Letter. 

Piiris,  March  20th,  181C. 

.  .  .  My  dinner  at  Florian's,  on  Monday,  was  a 
curious  one.  Before  he  got  back  from  the  Chamber,  the 
elder  brother  entered,  which  was  a  great  rchef ;  for  with 
him  I  had  no  difficulty  in  making  conversation.  He  was 
our  only  society,  with  their  three  children,  who  dined  with 
us.  They  are  all  ultraissime  Royalists^  and  more  pro- 
foundly benighted  in  ignorance  and  prejudices  than  any 
of  the  many  other  parties  wliich  divide  this  bewildered 
country  —  although  they,  like  hundred  otliers  of  all 
parties,  sincerely  wish  the  peace  and  liappiness  of  France  ; 
but  how  to  compass  it,  the  honest  and  well-meaning  have 
not  the  smallest  idea,  or  plan,  or  view  in  common  with 
one  another,  while  the  knaves  act  in  perfect  unison  with 
the  general  corruption  of  the  nation.  ...  I  must 
give  my  Journal,  with  as  few  observations  as  possible,  and, 
keeping  to  facts,  leave  comments  till  we  meet.     I  left  the 


1816]  M.  DE  VAUBLANC'S   ESCAPES.  81, 

Kergolays  between  seven  and  eight,  with  no  disposition 
to  return  to  a  woman  who,  I  am  sure,  took  me  for  a 
Repuhlicaine  Anglaise^  and  never  wished  to  see  my  face 
again ;  but  I  was  much  entertained  to  have  seen  hers  for 
once,  and  the  manner  in  which  that  sort  of  person  takes  up 
pohtics  in  France  at  tliis  moment.  From  thence  I  went  to 
the  Frangois,  where  I  saw  '  Figaro,'  and  I  was  amused  with 
detecting  some  parts  they  left  out.  ...  I  have  so 
much  more  to  do,  and  above  all  to  hear  and  see,  than  I  have 
eyes  or  ears  for — and  I  know  how  much  I  shall  regret 
hereafter  not  setting  down  a  number  of  things  that  are 
passing  before  me ;  but,  alas  !  I  feel  a  cruel  falling  off  in 
my  former  powers  of  attention,  memory,  and  combination. 
To-morrow  I  go  for  the  first  time  to  the  Chambre  des  De- 
putes. Lord  H and  I  go  into  the  diplomatic  box.  I  saw 

Barrois  yesterday  ;  he  is  obliging,  as  usual,  and  is  getting 
something  curious  I  want  in  the  memoir  way.  All  my 
friends,  on  all  sides,  give  me  things  to  read,  for  which  I 
have  no  time,  except  I  were  to  sit  up  all  night,  which  I 
have  no  inclination  to  do.  Elizabeth's  success  in  French 
society  (and  I  have  now  had  opportunities  of  hearing  it 
from  all  sides,  without  any  suspicion  how  much  it  interests 
me)  is  2:)erfect ;  and  he  is  very  sensible  of  it. 

Extract  of  Letter. 

March  27th. — M.  de  Vaublanc,*  the  Ministre  de  Vlnte- 
rieur,  told  me  yesterday,  at  dinner  at  the  Ambassador's, 
that  during  the  Kevolution  he  had  been  five  times  de- 
nounced, twice  condemned  to  death,  but  never  taken ; 
that  his  means  of  escape  had  been  always  the  same — 
taking  a  stick  in  his  hand,  and  a  shirt  in  his  pocket,  tra- 
versing France  in  all  directions  on  foot ;  and  on  these 
expeditions  he  had  never  been  recognised  but  once,  and 
then  saved  by  a  woman.     His  country  he  was  determined 

*  M.  de  Vaublanc  took  refu^re  in  1797,  for  a  time,  in  Switzerland  and  in 
Italy.     He  re-organised  L'Institut  in  1816  :  he  was  himself  a  writer. 

VOL.  III.  tt 


82  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1816 

never  to  leave,  as  he  believed  the  emigrations  from  it  had 
been  one  of  the  most  certain  causes  of  the  long  continu- 
ance of  its  evils  ;  and  that  he  never  could  submit  to  be 
reckoned  among  those  '  que  je  ne  veux  pas  nommer!  He 
has  the  countenance  and  conversation  of  a  plain,  intelligent, 
sensible  man.  I  had  heard  him  speak  in  the  morning  in 
the  Chambre  des  Deputes,  on  an  article  of  the  budget, 
very  much  in  that  character,  and  very  much  in  the  tone 
that  a  minister  ought  to  address  a  representative  assembly. 
The  question  was,  whether  of  douze  centimes  (I  make 
use  of  their  denomination  because  I  am  not  certain 
of  the  integral  parts  to  which  they  belong)  —  to  be 
levied  by  the  departmental  administrations  on  them- 
selves —  ten  centimes  or  eight  were  to  remain  with 
them,  and  four  centimes  or  two  be  paid  into  the  general 
treasury  for  the  use  of  the  State,  or  rather,  I  should  say, 
to  be  left  at  the  disposal  of  the  Minister  of  the  Interior, 
for  the  general  purposes  of  his  particular  administration. 
And  it  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  the  opposition,  who  were 
here  the  ultra-Eoyahsts,  those  who  are  for  allowing  every- 
thing to  the  King,  and  are,  in  fact,  against  a  representative 
government  at  all — were  those  who  insisted  on  leaving  the 
smallest  sum  at  the  disposal  of  the  King's  ministers,  and 
carried  their  point ;  thus  acting  (from  almost  opposite 
motives)  exactly  the  part  of  a  popular  opposition  in 
England.  M.  de  Vaublanc  seemed  to  think  it  a  point  of 
less  importance  than  it  appeared  to  me,  as  immediately 
relative  to  the  general  internal  administration  of  the 
friends  of  the  country. 

Extract  of  Letter. 

Paris,  Friday,  March  29th. 

I  was  yesterday  very  well  entertained  with  Ward, 
Nugent,  and  Luttrell  and  our  landlord,  Comte  de 
Ecederer,*    who    dined   with    us ;    afterwards   went    to 

*  Comte   de  Ecederer,  Peer  of  France,  and  Member  of  the  Academy; 


1816]  SOCIETY  AT   PARIS.  83 

Madame  Moreaii's,  where  there  was  a  concert.  It  was  more 
disagreeable  as  to  arrangement  than  a  concert  in  London ; 
because  all  the  women  were  seated  in  three  rows  of  chairs 
round  an  oval  room,  without  a  possibihty  of  moving,  or 
of  a  single  man  getting  near  them.  ...  At  twelve 
o'clock  we  went  to  Talleyrand's  ;  that  is  to  say,  chez  la 
Comtesse  Edmond  de  Perigord,  his  niece,,  i.e.  a  daughter 
of  the  Duchesse  de  Courland,  whom  he  has  separated  from 
his  nephew,  to  whom  she  was  married.  She  is  not  five- 
and-twenty,  and  has  a  head  more  hke  a  pretty  serpent 
than  anything  I  know.  Here  we  found  music  again  ;  it 
was  only  Blangini  at  the  pianoforte,*  and  Mdlle.  Kenaud 
and  another  professor  singing.  The  society  did  not  con- 
sist of  above  twenty-five  people — all  his  old  set  of  gam- 
bling women. 

The  Duchesse  de told  — —  that  he  would  hear 

of  httle    tracasseries  at about  her  daughter,  the 

Duchesse  de and ,  but  that  she  was  happy  to  tell 

him  their  connection  was  quite  at  an  end — '  Car  vous  sentez 
bien  tout  ce  qu'une  mere  doit  eprouver  pour  I'honneur 
d'une  fille,  et  pour  vous  chre  la  verite,  ^^  n'ai  jamais  fort 
appr Olive  cette  liaison  ! ' 

Extract  of  Letter. 

Sunday,  31sf. —  .  »  I  have  been  this  morning  to 
the  review  of  the  Garde  Eoyale,  between  eight  and  ten 
thousand  men,  in  the  Champ  de  Mars.  The  brightness  of 
the  sun  (though  as  cold  as  an  east  wind  could  make  it), 
and  the  crowds  of  common  people  and  of  carriages,  made 
it  very  gay  ;  and  as  we  did  not  take  too  much  of  it,  I  was 

born  in  February  1754.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Constituent  Assembly  at 
the  beginning  of  the  Revolution,  and  a  Minister  of  Napoleon  during  the 
Empire.    He  died  suddenly,  December  1835. 

*  Joseph  Marc  Marie  Felix  Blangini,  well-known  musician  and  com- 
poser ;  born  at  Turin  1784.  He  was  the  author  of  several  operas  that  met 
with  success  at  the  time,  but  is  best  remembered  now  by  his  '  Noctm-nes.' 

»2 


84  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1816 

very  glad  I  went.     Madame  in  an  open  carriage  drawn 

by   six    horses,    went    up    and    down    the    hnes    after 

the  princes  and  their  etat-major  on  horseback.     At  each 

end  of  each  line  as  they  approached,  the  people  crowded 

on  the  rising  bank  which  encloses  the  Champ  de  Mars. 

The  princes  were  received  with  considerable  acclamation 

and  '  Vive  le  Eoi ; '  she  with  very  little  ;  and  but  few  hats 

touched  or  white  handkerchiefs  waved.     In  short,  she  is 

hated  by  the  people,  and  supposed  to  breathe  nothing  but 

vengeance  and  bigotry ;  while  her  manners,  by  what  I 

can  learn,  are  not  captivating  or  conciliating  to  those  of 

higher  rank.      Madame  de  Gontaut  and  Madame  de  la 

Ferronaye,  who  you  remember  in  London,  are  the  two 

ladies  appointed  to  meet  the  new  Duchesse  de  Berri  at 

the  Pont  de  Beauvoisin.     If  she  resembles  in  beauty  the 

other  Neapolitan  princess,  les  nouvelles  appuis  a  V Empire 

des  lis  which  are  to  arise  from  this  marriage  will  be 

pretty  sticks.     .     .     .     Eeturned  home  by  the  Pont  de 

Jena.     Grand  construction  in  all  ways,  but  much  less 

beautiful  than  the  Pont  St,  Trinitk  at  Florence. 

April  Ist. — :  .  .  The  letter  of  the  Duke  of  Wel- 
lington to  the  King  is  only  known  here  through  the 
medium  of  the  Enghsh  papers,  and  I  individually  have 
not  yet  seen  the  paper  in  which  are  the  abstracts.  If 
such  a  letter  exists,  it  is  the  dictates  of  all  the  Alhed 
Powers,  of  whom  the  Duke  of  Wellington  is  only  the 
mouth,  as  being  their  commander-in-chief  as  well  as 
ours.     .     .     . 

April  2nd. — In  the  evening  at  the  Fran9ois,  with  Lord 
and  Lady  Hardwicke :  '  L'Homme  du  Jour.'  Mdlle.  Mars 
dans  la  '  Jeune  Personne ; '  I  am  not  yet  enchanted  with 
her. 

Miss  Bei^y  to  Madame  de  Stael. 

Paris,  April  2,  1816. 
I  find  myself  here  in  the  midst  of  old  acquaintances  whom  I 
am  very  glad  to  meet  again,  and  of  new  acquaintances  I  am 


1S16]  PERFORMANCE    OF    '  ATHALIE.'  85 

very  glad  to  make ;  in  short,  amusing  myself  like  a  queen,  or 
rather,  as  queens  never  do.  By  a  fortunate  chance  I  have 
found  old  acquaintances  in  every  faction  that  now  agitates  and 
divides  this  country — this  country,  so  wonderful  by  its  combina- 
tion of  esprit  and  of  folly,  of  enlightenment  and  ignorance  ! 
I  have  conversed  with  ministers,  with  the  ultra-royalists,  with 
the  moderes  enrages  et  non-enrages,  and  I  shall  tell  you  what  I 
think  of  them  when  we  meet  in  England  or  on  the  shores  of  the 
Lake  of  Geneva. 

Extract  of  Letter. 

Paris,  Sunday,  7th  April,  1816. 

.  .  .  Yesterday  I  dined  at  Madame  Moreau's,  with 
the  Due  de  Eicheheu,  Marechale  Macdonald,  and  seven 
or  eight  other  people.  I  was  glad  after  dinner  to  get  a 
little  conversation  with  M.  Laine,  the  President  of  the 
Chamber  of  Deputies,  and  before  I  returned  home  there 
came  in  two  or  three  men  whom  I  was  glad  to  see,  such 
as  M.  Hyde  de  Neuville,*  the  most  violent  ultra-Eoyalist 
in  the  Assembly.     .     .     . 

Monday  Morning. — Mdlle.  George  looked  Athalie  glo- 
riously last  night,  and  spoke  most  of  it  with  great  effect ; 
but  le  petit  Joas  was  a  little  miserable  girl,  who  had 
neither  voice  nor  dme,  and  was  always  on  the  point  of 
making  a  curtsey.  The  high  priest,  too,  spoke  the  whole 
part  as  if  out  of  a  deep  cavern,  and  slower  than  Kemble 
in  his  slowest  moods.  I  was  less  enchanted  than  I  ex- 
pected to  be  (for  I  never  saw  'Athalie'  acted  before). 

*  M.  Hj^de  de  Neuville,  son  of  an  English  button  manufacturer,  estab- 
lished in  France.  In  1797  he  first  took  part  in  political  life,  belonging  to 
the  '  Clichy  '  party,  who  were  bent  on  the  overthrow  of  the  then  Govern- 
ment. He  became  one  of  the  most  active  agents  at  Paris  for  the  Royalist 
party.  At  the  end  of  1799"he  was  acting  in  concert  with  G.  Cadourdal 
Dandigni  et  Bourmont.  His  arrest  was  ordered,  but  he  escaped  to  England. 
In  1805  he  sailed  from  Spain  to  America.  On  the  return  of  the  Bourbons, 
in  1814,  he  was  appointed  to  various  foreign  missions,  and  after  1815  took 
an  active  part  in  the  Chamber,  always  on  the  side  of  Veodreme  droite.  He 
was  again  sent  as  Minister  to  the  United  States,  fi-om  which  he  returned  in 
1822. 


86  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1816 

But  then  came '  La  Belle  Fermiere,'  the  prettiest  and  best- 
acted  second  piece  that  can  be  conceived.  In  short,  again, 
there  is  no  entertainment  like  the  French  theatre.  I  went 
to  see  the  Duchesse  d'Escars,*  at  the  top  of  the  Tuileries  ; 
I  had  been  prevented  going  the  other  night.  He  is  Premier 
Maitre  d'Hotel  de  Eoi.  They  are  lodged  in  an  apartment 
of  five  or  six  small  low  rooms,  up  I  know  not  how  many 
steps,  like  an  entresol  just  under  the  roof  of  the  house. 
Here  were  all  the  French  people  we  meet  in  society 
wherever  we  go,  and  a  few  English,  those  principally  who 
go  to  Court.  The  young  French  women  are  by  no  means 
now  accueillante  in  their  manners  to  any  strangers,  and  far 
less  to  those  of  my  age  ;  they  are  as  much  like  our  own  as 
possible,  only  without  half  their  beauty  and  look  of  women 
of  fashion.  So  that  it  is  never  in  these  sort  of  large  par- 
ties that  one  makes  any  acquaintance,  nor  does  one  want 
it ;  one  goes  to  see,  and  for  once  or  twice  it  is  very  enter- 
taining, and  I  was  glad  to  see  the  interior  of  the  Tuileries. 
....  Tell  M.  Constant  that  I  think  M.  Laine  a  very 
sensible  man,  and  his  manner  and  clearness  in  summing 
up  the  debates  and  stating  the  questions  in  the  Chamber 
admirable. 

Extract  of  a  Letter. 

Tuesday^  April  9tk. — Want  of  confidence  in  all  parties, 
from  a  too-well-proved  want  of  truth  in  all  parties,  is 
actually  the  one  only  great  evil  of  this  country  at  present. 
It  needs  not  another  to  conduct  it,  as  it  is  doing,  to  the 
very  brink  of  another  dissolution  of  government,   if  it 

*  The  Due  d'Escars ;  bom  1747 ;  married,  first,  the  daughter  of  Laborde, 
the  banker,  and  held  a  place  at  Court.  In  1791  he  emigrated,  and  was  sent 
by  the  royal  family  on  a  mission  to  the  Court  of  Sweden.  He  remained  there 
till  after  the  assassination  of  Gustavus  III. ;  was  then  sent  to  Berlin, 
entered  the  Prussian  army,  and  married,  secondly,  Madame  de  Nadaillac. 
She  was  exiled  by  the  Imperial  Government  of  France  to  the  Isle  Margue- 
rite, and  afterwards  allowed  to  retire  into  Touraine.  The  Comte  d'Escars 
was  created  Duke  in  1816. 


1816]  .    FRENCH   POLITICS.  87 

escapes  it.     On  the  29th  of  March  the  ministers  carried 
their  proposed  law  on  the  subject  of  the  quaUfications  of 
the  electors,  and  the  pecuniary  modes  of  election.   At  this 
all  the  Tuileries  people,  the  King's  friends  as  they  call 
themselves,  were  in  dudgeon,  and  the  ultra-Eoyalist  party 
in  the  Chambre  des  Deputes  so  outrageous,  that  yesterday 
they  wanted  to  smuggle  in  the  report  their  committee  had 
made  on  it,  in  the  midst  of  the  discussions  on  the  budget, 
without  having  given  any  formal  or  due  notice  to  the 
president,  and   so  to   carry  some   violent   amendments, 
which  would  have  placed  the  elections  entirely  in  the 
hands  of  the  Court.     Now,  then,  would  be  the  moment  to 
dissolve  this  Assembly,  who  have  a  decided  majority  against 
the  King's  ministers,  and  thus  leave  the  Government  with- 
out power  and  the  country  without  confidence.    But  mark 
to  what  moral  impotence  an  absence  of  truth  and  good 
faith  inevitably  leads.      The  ministers  possessing  neither 
the  confidence  of  the  Court  nor  that  of  the  country,  nor  of 
the  Chambers  ;  abused  within  their  walls  for  every  liberal 
measure  as  a  mark  of  weakness,  and  without  them  for 
every  indication  of  vigour  as  a  mark  of  despotism — the 
ministers  are  still  averse  to  the  dissolution,  from  a  dread 
(a  very  vain  one,  I  venture  to  think)  of  meeting  a  Chamber 
yet  more  difiicult  to  deal  with,  from  perfectly  opposite 
sentiments  ;    while  the   deputies,  although  boasting  the 
perfect  freedom  of  their  elections,  are  frightened  out  of 
then"  wits  at  being  sent  back  to  their  constituents,  and 
have,  most  of  them,  I  am  persuaded,  so  little  internal  hope 
of  being  again  returned,  that  they  will,  if  possible,  raise 
the  standard  of  revolt  in  their  provinces  for,  not  against, 
the  overweening  power  of  the  Crown,  and  against,  not  for, 
the  rights  of  the  people  ;   and  this  while  thinking  them- 
selves (and  many  of  them  really  being)  good  Frenchmen 
and  desiring  the  happiness  and  welfare  of  their  country. 


8B  MISS   BEERY's   journal.  [1816 

Extract  of  a  Letter. 

Wednesday,  10th. — In  the  morning  I  went  with  the 
Marechales  Moreau  and  Macdonald  to  see  the  whole  inte- 
rior of  the  Luxembourg,  now  arranged  for  the  House  of 
Peers,  as  it  was  before  occupied  by  Bonaparte's  Senate. 
The  whole  of  its  arrangements  and  decoration  is  the  thing 
in  best  taste  that  I  have  seen  in  France. 

JOUENAL. 

We  passed  through  an  orangery  to  go  to  the  grand 
staircase,  where  there  are  more  than  a  dozen  marble 
statues  in  niches,  of  different  persons  who  played  a  part  in 
the  Eevolution,  but  not  one  of  the  heroes  of  the  Eeign  of 
Terror.  Two  or  three  committee-rooms  are  also  surrounded 
with  thermes,  upon  which  are  placed  marble  busts  of  the 
most  remarkable  characters  of  the  last  twenty-five  years  ; 
some  of  them  good,  but  the  most  part  very  bad.  The 
House  of  Peers  is  the  same  size,  form,  and  arrange- 
ment as  the  Chamber  of  Deputies,  but  more  magnifi- 
cently furnished  with  dark-blue  velvet.  The  salle,  into 
which  the  King  retires  when  he  goes  to  the  Assem- 
bly, contains  four  enormous  pictures  of  the  battles  of 
Bonaparte,  now  covered  with  green  cloth  tightly  nailed 
over  them.  The  bust  of  the  King,  in  bronze,  is  now  placed 
upon  a  platform,  between  four  columns  of  porphyry, 
where  stood  a  full-length  statue  of  Bonaparte,  and  he  still 
remains  in  painting  opposite,  upon  the  ceihng,  as  a  Mars, 
with  a  Victory  offering  him  a  crown  of  laurels. 

The  Eubens  Gallery,  with  Marie  de  Medicis  on  the  ceil- 
ing, painted  by  Eubens,  is  in  the  most  perfect  preserva- 
tion ;  it  surprised  me  by  the  beauty,  the  variety,  the  rich- 
ness of  its  colouring,  and  by  the  composition  of  many 
of  the  pictures.  Two  other  rooms,  containing  seaports, 
by  Vernet,  surpassed  my  expectations.  I  cannot  say 
the  same  for  the  History  of  St.  Bruno,  by  Le  Sueur,  of 


1816]  THE    HORSES   AND    CARRIAGES   OF    PARIS.  89 

wliicli  I  had  heard  so  much  when  they  were  in  the  inte- 
rior of  the  Capucins'  Convent,  and  where  it  was  difficult 
to  see  them.  With  the  exception  of  two  or  three  (particu- 
larly that  of  the  '  Death  of  St.  Bruno '),  I  hke  neither  the 
composition  nor  the  colouring,  not  even  the  drawing. 
From  the  Luxembourg  we  went  to  the  Fauxbourg  St. 
Marceau,  to  the  Convent  of  the  '  Dames  Anglaises,'  who 
receive  young  ladies  as  boarders,  to  see  the  daughter  of 
the  Marechale  Macdonald.  I  went  for  a  moment  in  the 
tribune  of  the  church,  where  six  old  women  were  perform- 
ing the  service,  with  fifty  young  girls  for  their  audience. 
This  convent  is  beginning  only  to  be  re-established  in  its 
ancient  domicile.  In  the  time  of  the  Eevolution  it  had 
been  used  as  a  prison  for  women,  and  the  '  Eeligieuses ' 
for  a  long  while  were  permitted  to  act  as  gaolers.  The 
Assembly  met  yesterday,  and  carried  their  point  in  the 
teeth  of  King  and  ministers,  against  the  removal  of  a  fifth 
of  the  deputes  this  year,  thus  voting  their  own  perma- 
nent existence  for  the  five  years  at  least  allowed  by  the 
charter.  Again  I  say,  this  is  the  moment  for  the  King 
to  use  his  power  of  dissolving  them,  and  thus  throwing 
himself  on  the  nation  for  the  hopes  of  a  set  of  represen- 
tatives who  will  better  understand  and  follow  his  real 
interest,  as  well  as  their  own.* 

Extract  of  Letter. 

Paris,  Saturday,  April  13. 

Friday. —  .  .  .  Good  Friday  was  the  6e5#  and  only 
really  good  day  we  have  had  since  I  have  been  here.  I 
went  with  Madame  Moreau  in  a  smart  English  landau 
to  Longchamps,  where  all  the  English  received  the  con- 
soling assurance  that  the  worst  Sunday  that  ever  shone  on 
Hyde  Park  produces  twenty  times  more  handsome  equi- 
pages than  this  one  day  of  gala  for  all  the  horses  and 

*  The   Chambers  were  dissolved  the  6th  of  September  of  this  year, 
1816.— ilf.  £. 


90  MISS   BERKY's   journal.  [1816 

carriages  of  Paris.  In  short,  this  sort  of  luxe  is  not  yet 
returned  to  be  the  fashion,  and  Longchamps  was  a  string 
of  dirty  cabriolets  and  hackney  coaches,  interspersed  with 
here  and  there  a  clean  barouche,  and  one  or  two  foreign 
coaches  and  four.  Here,  however  I  was  very  well  amused 
with  the  people,  the  lookers-on,  &c.  &c.,  and  remained  till 

past  six  o'clock. 

Extract  of  Letter. 

Monday  Morning,  April  15. 

.  .  .  Yesterday  it  was  a  regular  and  violent  snow-storm 
here  the  whole  day  after  twelve  o'clock,  and  I  believe  the 
whole  night.  Everything  this  morning  remained  covered 
with  an  inch  or  two  of  snow,  like  the  middle  of  winter,  and 
all  the  tender  green  of  the  shrubs,  and  buds  of  the  trees, 
bowed  down  with  a  weight  of  snow.  It  has  now,  at  mid-day, 
disappeared,  but  a  wind  is  blowing  as  cold  as  Christmas, 
and  it  has  just  been  hailing.  Never  was  there  so  late,  nor 
so  bad  a  season  here ;  however,  as  Madame  de  Stael  said, 
it  is  the  fashion  not  to  mind  it  here,  and  so,  in  the  very 
midst  of  it,  at  three  o'clock  yesterday,  we  went  to  L'Eghse 
de  I'Oratoire,  now  given  to  the  Eeformed  religion,  from 
the  principal  minister  of  which  we  had  obtained  permis- 
sion, after  his  service  was  over,  to  have  ours  (of  the  Church 
of  England)  read,  and  the  communion  administered,  which 
was  done  by  Pepys  and  another  young  clergyman  here, 
and  which  we  all  received,  with  above  a  hundred  others, 
before  a  considerable  audience  of  common  French  people 
(for  of  course  the  church  was  open),  and  I  could  not  but 
remark  the  serious  attention  and  curiosity  with  which 
they  marked  everything  that  was  going  on.     From  the 

church,  in  the  same  violent  snow-storm,  I  returned 

In  the  evening  I  went  to  Princess  Jablanouski's,  princi- 
pally to  see  Madame  Valesska  (I  don't  spell  the  name 
right).  Well,  after  all  I  had  heard  of  her  at  Naples,  I  ex- 
pected to  find  a  person  who,  if  not  handsome,  was  in  teres  t- 
ing,  was  elegant,  looked  animated,  or  languishing  and 


1816]  THE   JARDIN   DES    PLANTES.  91 

tender.  Rien  de  tout  cela.  She  is  a  large  square  woman, 
not  very  unlike  the  cut  of  Madame  Constant,  and  not  more 
than  six  or  seven-and-twenty 

JOUKNAL. 

Monday^  15th. — '  In  the  evening  at  the  Francois — '  La 
Mort  de  Pompee.'  In  'La  Mort  de  Pompee '  they  have  been 
obliged  to  leave  out  six  or  eight  hues  of  the  first  tirade ; 
enough  remains  throughout  the  piece  to  furnish  strong 
allusions,  but  the  time  is  past  or  not  arrived  when  they 
are  made. 

Extract  of  Letter. 

Paris,  Sunday,  April  21, 1816. 

.  I  know  not  how  long  I  may  be  kept  at  the 
trial  of  our  Englishmen,  which  begins,  of  course,  early. 
They  will  be  acquitted  of  everything  but  extreme  folly, 
from  which  no  tribunal  on  earth  can  clear  them.  Bruce 
is  to  debiter  his  own  defence,  which  will  probably  be 
sufficiently  romanesque  to  be  very  entertaining.  .  .  . 
On  Wednesday.,  17 th,  I  went  all  round  the  Boulevards  to 
the  Jardin  des  Plantes,  where  Lady  Hardwicke  and  Eliza- 
beth met  us,  and  we  had  a  charming  walk  ;  for  the  Jardin 
des  Plantes,  according  to  its  present  arrangement,  is  one 
of  the  prettiest  and  most  enjoyable  things  you  ever  saw, 
with  all  the  beasts  and  birds  living  very  much  at  their 
ease  in  that  part  of  it  called  the  menagerie. 
Among  the  young  fine  ladies,  I  find  I  have  the  reputation 
of  being  une  femme  de  beaucoup  d' esprit,  which  I  shall 
certainly  retain  with  them  as  we  have  no  conversation 
together  that  can  possibly  detect  any  want  of  it.  The  elder 
ones,  whether  they  take  it  on  their  own  judgment  or  the 
report  of  their  daughters  and  nieces,  certainly  treat  me 
and  talk  to  me  as  if  they  gave  me  credit  for  it. 

Thursday,  18th. —  ...  In  the  morning  I  had  an  enor- 
mous long  walk.  We  went  first  to  Gerard,  the  painter,  who 


92  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1816 

is  a  much  cleverer  and  more  agreeable  man  than  he  is  a 
good  painter.  In  the  evening  I  went  to  Madame  de  Souza's 
(Monsieur  de  Flahaut's  mother),  whom  I  was  resolved  to 
see,  and  there  I  found  M.  Gallois,  to  whom  Lord  Lans- 
downe  recommended  me  to  listen  if  1  met  him  ;  however, 
wonderful  to  say,  he  said  little.*  .  .  .  Lady  Cahir's 
was  an  excellent  party,  all  the  fine  French  ladies  looking 
their  very  best ;  but,  as  she  said  triumphantly,  the  English 
beat  them  in  a  canter  last  night ;  for  there  were  the  two 
beautiful  Lucan  girls,f  Lady  Conyngham's  daughter  J  and 
herself,  and  the  young  Butler  §  (Lady  Harriet),  who  is  a 
very  pretty  girl  too.  In  short,  they  could  not  face  at 
all.  .  .  .  Tell  my  dearest  Caroline  that  I  wish  she 
could  have  heard  me  on  Thursday  with  Lally,  and 
yesterday  with  the  Princesse  d'Hennin,  on  the  subject  of 
poor  cat's  paw.  Yesterday,  in  an  hour's  conversation,  it 
was  a  fair  set-to  of  French  sentiment,  procedes,  conve- 
nances, and  hard-heartedness  against  English  truth  of 
feeling,  benevolence,  and  humanity — St.  George  against 
St.  Denis — and  believe  me,  though  I  say  it  that  should  not, 
St.  George  had  fairly  the  advantage,  although  fighting 
with  the  disadvantageous  arms  of  a  language  not  his 
own. 

JOUKNAL. 

Monday,  llnd. — I  set  out  at  half-past  eight  o'clock 
with  Lord  Hardwicke  to  the  Court,  where  the  trial  of  our 

*  Jean  Antoine  Gaudin  Gallois,  known  as  a  political  economist  and 
Member  of  I'lnstitut.  In  1791  lie  made  a  report  to  the  Legislative  Assem- 
bly on  the  state  of  La  Vendee.  He  defended  the  liberty  of  the  press,  in 
1814.  The  return  of  Napoleon  put  an  end  to  his  legislative  labours,  and  he 
did  not  again  fill  any  important  office.  He  translated  the  work  of  Filan- 
gieu,  'La  Science  de  la  Legislation.' — Diet,  des  Crnitemporaines. 

t  Lady  Ajine  Bingham  5  married,  1816,  to  Alex.  Murray,  Esq.  Lady 
Louisa  Bingham  ;  married,  1817,  to  Francis  Lord  Elcho. 

%  Lady  Elizabeth  Conyngham  ;  married,  1826,  to  Lord  Aboyne. 

§  Lady  Harriet  Butler,  daughter  of  Lord  Glengall ;  married^  1822,  to  the 
Earl  of  Belfast. 


1816]  TRIAL   OF   SIR   ROBERT   WILSON.  93 

three  Englishmen,  Wilson,  Hutchinson,  and  Bruce,  was  to 
take  place.  I  did  not  return  till  nearly  six  o'clock  in  the 
evening.  The  court  smaller  than  I  expected,  and  less 
ornamented.  The  manner  of  questioning  the  prisoners 
by  the  presiding  judge,  strange  to  our  Enghsh  ears  ;  the 
evidence  of  the  paiivre  diable  Guichelin  was  enough  to 
kill  one  with  laughing,  by  the  manner  in  which  he 
swamped  all  he  had  to  say,  or  rather  concealed  it  in  a 
shower  of  words  which  had  httle  to  do  with  his  subject. 

Extract  of  Letter. 

Monday,  22nd  April,  5  o'clock. 

Just  this  moment  returned  from  Wilson's  trial,  I  find 
your  packet  of  the  19th.  ...  I  would  not  have 
missed  the  trial  on  any  account.  It  is  not  over.  T  am 
going  there  again  to-morrow,  which  is  sufficiently  fatiguing, 
for  one  is  obliged  to  be  there  soon  after  eight  to  get  a 
tolerable  place.  But  you  know  all  trials  interest  me,  and 
this  is  certainly  of  peculiar  interest.  The  conduct  of  a 
French  trial  (when  not  for  Ufe  and  death)  is  so  contrary 
to  all  our  ideas  of  justice  as  to  astonish  one  that  so  clever 
a  people,  after  all  their  codes  and  all  their  constitutions, 
should  not  yet  have  got  nearer  the  mark.  I  have  no 
possible  time  for  details  just  now,  but  I  confess  that  I 
think  our  people  made  a  very  bad  appearance.  They  were 
all  examined  to-day ;  all  spoke  much  too  bad  French 
(according  to  my  ideas)  to  have  attempted  to  speak  in 
pubhc.  B peroreed  with  much  contemptuous  affec- 
tation. In  the  midst  of  my  peroration  my  letters  are 
called  for,  so  fareweU.     La  suite  the  next  courier. 

Extract  of  Letter. 

Paris,  Thursday,  25th  April,  1816. 

.  .  .  Well,  thank  Heaven  !  the  trial  ended  yesterday, 
without  convicting  me  of  a  headache  ;  but  it  took  up 


94  MISS   BERRY'S   JOURNAL.  [1816 

entirely  the  whole  of  the  three  days ;  for,  after  being  up 
soon  after  seven  o'clock,  and  in  the  hot  and  crowded 
court  for  between  eight  and  ten  hours  each  day,  I  was 
perfectly  incapable  of  anything  but  eating  and  drinking, 
and  going  to  bed  after  my  return,  and  it  has  thrown  me 
back  in  all  my  engagements.  .  .  .  But  I  have  been 
extremely  interested.  Yesterday,  after  the  defence  of  the 
English  prisoners  by  their  advocate,  M.  Dupin,  who  exe- 
cuted his  office  admirably — speaking  with  great  freedom 
and  eloquence,  and  at  the  same  time  avoiding  everything 
that  could  properly  give  offence  (he  was  one  of  the  counsel 
for  Marechal  Ney) — both  Sir  Eobert  Wilson  and  Bruce 
made  a  speech  ;  Wilson  first — and  very  well,  except  his 
extra  had  pronunciation  ;  however,  everybody  seemed  to 
excuse  that,  and  the  speech  had  considerable  effect,  and  I 
think  deserved  it ;  for  it  was  manly,  soldier-like,  to  the 
point,  and  temperate.  Luckily  for  him,  nobody  touched 
on  the  really  bad  part  of  his  story — the  having  obtained 
passports  under  a  positively  false  pretence,  and  for  two 
non-existing  persons — so  that  he  was  not  obliged  to  defend 
himself  on  the  only  indefensible  point  in  English  eyes. 
In  those  of  French  truth  and  probity,  it  was  nothing  ;  not 
thought  worth  adverting  to,  even  by  their  magistrates.* 
Hutchinson  wisely  thought  proper  to  say  nothing.  Last 
came  Bruce,  who,  in  fine  flowery  speech,  brought 
together  Montesquieu,  La  Fontaine,  Henry  IV^.,  le  Chev. 
Bayard,  la  revolution  d'Angleterre  de  1688,  les  Bedouins 
du  Desert,  les  Druses  du  Mont  Libane,  I'Alceste  fran9oise 
(as  he  called  Madame  de  la  Valette,  and  the  romanesque) 

*  This  was  not  the  view  taken  of  this  part  of  Sir  R.  Wilson's  conduct  by 
the  Horse  Guards  in  England.  On  the  10th  of  May,  under  the  head  of 
General  Orders,  a  very  decided  censure  of  the  conduct  of  Sir  Robert  "Wilson 
and  of  Captain  Hutchinson  appeared,  in  which  the  following  passage  oc- 
curs : — '  Nor  does  H.R.H.  consider  the  means  by  which  this  measure  was 
accomplished  as  less  reprehensible  than  the  act  itself;  for  H.R.H.  cannot 
admit  that  any  circumstance  could  j  uslify  a  British  officer  in  having  obtained, 
imder  false  pretences,  passports  in  feigned  names  from  the  representative  of 
his  own  sovereign.' — Ann.  Reg. 


1816]  TRIAL   OF   WILSON   AND    BEUCE.  95 

of  the  adventure  in  which  he  was  proud  of  having  acted 
a  part.  The  young  avocats  thought  it  very  fine  (what 
they  understood  of  it).  It  was  just  such  as  they  would 
have  talked  themselves.  The  older  people,  while  they 
admired  Wilson,  said  Bruce  had  the  ton  of  a  mauvais 
comedien.  However,  he  sat  down  with  great  applause, 
and  neither  did  good  nor  harm,  I  beheve,  to  his  cause  ; 
for  the  fact,  as  they  both  owned  and  gloried  in  it,  was 
undeniable,  and  therefore  some  punishment  was  absolutely 
necessary.  The  jury  did  not  remain  out  above  an  hour, 
and  they  had  to  decide  on  three  French  persons  impli- 
cated as  well  as  the  three  English.  The  court  was  kept 
in  good  order,  and  no  applause  or  marks  of  disapprobation 
very  properly  allowed.  It  was  cram-full  of  women,  but 
Lady  Glengall,  Lady  Conyngham,  Mrs.  Crosbie,  the  only 
English  ones  I  knew  who  attended  constantly.  But  I  do 
not  think,  whatever  hes  may  be  told  of  it,  that  it  excited  a 
very  strong  interest  anywhere,  or  with  any  people  except 
the  personal  friends  of  Lavalette. 


Extract  of  Letter. 

Paris,  Sunday,  5tli  May  1816. 

Tuesday. —  ...  I  was  for  a  long  time,  in  the 
morning,  in  the  library  of  our  host,  Comte  Eoederer,  who 
is  a  very  well-informed  and  interesting  man,  from  the 
great  part  he  has  acted  during  the  whole  of  the  Eevolu- 
tion.  He  and  I  are  great  friends,  and  I  go  up  to  his 
hbrary  and  find  him  there  whenever  I  please,  or  rather 
can.,  which  is  not  half  so  often  as  I  wish.  I  went  with 
Lady  H.  and  Elizabeth  to  Bagatelle,  now  restored  to 
Monsieur,  but  not,  I  think,  to  its  ancient  recherche  of 
arrangement. 

Wednesday. —  ...  I  had  a  most  interesting 
morning  at  the  Chateau  de  Vincennes,  which  I  saw 
from  top  to  bottom,  all  the  cachots,  &c.  &c.,  the  rooms 


96  MISS   BEEKY'S   JOURNAL.  []8J6 

where  Palafox  *  was,  those  occupied  by  the  two  Pohg- 
nacs,f  &c.  There  are  no  prisoners  there  now  at  all. 
The  greater  part  of  the  cells  of  the  dungeon  are  now 
filled  with  munitions  of  war,  and  the  whole  chateau  is 
used  as  a  military  depot,  and  not  as  a  prison.  The  ex- 
terior of  the  chapel,  which  is  very  large,  is  in  beautiful 
Gothic  style ;  the  interior  is  filled  with  a  large  frame- 
work of  wood  in  raised  stages,  used  as  a  magazine  for 
stores,  and  in  such  a  manner  that  I  could  only  see,  from  a 
window  above,  that  it  is  very  much  ornamented  and  very 
beautiful.  On  one  part  of  the  plaster  ceiling  still  remains 
the  cypher  of  a  Henry,  I  forget  which.     .     .     . 

Extract  of  Letter. 

Friday. — I  went  to  Malmaison  with  Madame  Moreau 
and  Madame  la  Duchesse  de  Eaguse  (formerly  Mdlle. 
Peregaux,  married  and  separated  from  Marmont).  Here 
we  saw  the  whole  house  and  garden  and  hot-houses,  and 
all  Lee  and  Kennedy's  fine  plants. 

J  0  U  E  N  A  L . 

The  enclosure  of  the  house  of  Malmaison  and  the  gar- 
den very  good,  though  flat ;  the  arrangement  of  the  gal- 
lery, when  all  the  pictures,  vases,  &c.,  v:ere  there,  must 
have  been  superb.  A  great  abundance  of  marble  remains 
there  stilL  But  how  Chiswick,  and  indeed  many  of 
our  inferior  villas,  would  turn  up  their  noses  at  all  the 

*  Don  Joseph  Palafox ;  born  1780,  of  an  ancient  family  in  Arragon  ;  the 
brave  defender  of  Saragossa  in  1808 ;  54,000  persons  perished  during  the 
siege.  Palafox  was  sent  prisoner  into  France,  and  confined  at  Vincennes  till 
December  1813. — Diet,  des  Contetnporaines. 

f  Armand  Jules  de  Polignac,  whose  vmfortunate  public  career  was  ter- 
Diinated  by  the  fall  of  Charles  X.,  was  condemned  to  death  in  the  year 
1804,  for  his  participation  in  the  intended  enterprise  of  George  Cadourdal ; 
the  solicitations  of  his  wife,  seconded  by  those  of  Josephine,  procured  a 
commutation  of  this  sentence  for  imprisonment.  He  was  four  years  in  con- 
finement at  Ham,  and  four  at  Vincennes.  His  brother  Jules  was  imprisoned 
for  the  same  afiair. — Did.  des  Contemporaines. 


1816]  GAIETIES   IN   PARIS.  97 

rest  of  it.  The  room  and  bed  in  which  poor  Josephine 
died*  is  all  gold,  and  gold  embroidery  upon  a  magnificent 
crimson  coverlid,  ridiculously  magnificent  for  such  a  house. 
The  adjoining  bed-room,  lilac  and  white  silk,  is  that  which 
Bonaparte  occupied  the  last  night  he  spent  in  the  envi- 
rons of  Paris.  The  hot-house,  which  is  150  feet  long,  filled 
with  fine  plants  ;  a  very  intelligent  gardener.  All  this 
belongs  to  Eugene  Beauharnois,  who  they  say  is  going  to 
let  it,  but  the  keeping  it  up  will  cost  a  great  deal.  The 
Prussians  were  there  at  the  last  entry  into  Paris,  for  some 
hours  only  ;  they  have  broken  some  small  things,  and 
carried  away  some  covers  of  stools  that  had  fringes,  but 
otherwise  it  is  astonishing  that  the  mischief  was  not  greater. 

In  the  evening,  we  had  a  very  brilhant  soiree  chez  nous, 
more  than  150  English  and  French.  There  was  a  pretty 
general  illumination,  in  the  streets  and  at  the  ministers' 
houses,  for  the  anniversary  of  the  king's  first  return, 

Sunday,  hth. — Li  the  morning  to  the  gallery  of  the 
Louvre,  where  so  many  fine  things  still  remain  that  they 
have  certainly  no  right  to  complain.  One  can  say  the  same 
thing  of  the  statues  ;  they  are  now  working  with  great 
zeal  to  re-arrange  them.  The  emplacement  and  decora- 
tions are  superb.  They  have  added  many  marble  columns 
since  I  saw  it  in  1802. 

In  the  evening  we  went  to  the  opera,  and  saw  '  Ninon  / 
much  more  affecting  in  a  ballet,  and  much  better  acted, 
than  ever  I  saw  it  either  sung  or  recited.  .  .  .  The 
Hfe  I  have  been  leading  I  should  be  very  sorry  to  lead  for 
two  months  longer.  Enough  is  as  good  as  a  feast,  and  of 
this  sort  oi feasting  not  only  is,  but  ever  was  to  me.  .  . 
As  it  is,  I  have  been  much  entertained,  and  shaU  now 
welcome  the  quiet  daily  bread  of  hfe,  and  the  home  and 

*  Josephine  died  May  29,  1814,  and  was  buried  in  the  small  and  ancient 
church  of  Reuil,  where  a  monument  is  erected  to  her  memoiy  ;  it  bears 
the  initials  J.  B.,  and  the  inscription  'A.  Josephine — Eugene  et  Hortense.' 

Galignanis  Paris  Guide. 
VOL.  III.  ♦       H 


98  MISS   berry's   journal.  [181G 

its  little  circle,  that  will  give  me  at  once  time  and  occa- 
sion to  talk  over  and  digest  all  I  have  seen  and  heard  ; 
and  be  assured  that,  like  the  Duchesse  de  la  Ferte,  il 
ny  a  que  moi  qui  ai  raison  sur  le  compte  des  Fi^anqois  ; 
and  when  you  know  all  I  have  heard  and  seen,  you  will 
think  so. 

Extract  of  Letter. 

Paris,  Thursday,  9tli  May  1816. 

.  .  .  .  On  Monday  evening  I  went  to  the  play, 
and  was  well  entertained.  It  was  '  The  Misanthrope,'  and 
'  La  Suite  d'un  Bal  Masque.'  Madlle.  Mars  in  both  pieces, 
and  in  both  so  perfect,  that  she  has  at  last  entirely  made 
my  conquest,  along  with  that  of  all  the  rest  of  the  world. 

.  .  .  .  Tuesday,  we  had  a  most  interesting  day 
at  Versailles,  which  I  had  never  seen  well,  and  had  almost 
forgotten ;  luckily  our  party  consisted  only  of  Lord  and 
Lady  H.,  Elizabeth,  and  myself.  We  saw  everything 
completely,  dined  there,  and  returned  to  tea  here.  We 
entered  the  chateau  by  the  garden,  where  carriages  are 
not  allowed,  and  from  whence  (with  great  civility)  they 
made  us  go  out.  We  then  went  to  see  the  whole  palace. 
There  is  no  furniture,  but  they  have  cleaned  and  repaired 
the  gilding,  which  is  almost  all  of  the  time  of  Louis  XLV., 
and  is  still  very  fresh.  The  king's  and  queen's  apartments, 
and  the  gallery  which  is  between  the  two,  are  truly  magni- 
ficent, without  being  what  is  called  in  good  taste.  The 
ceilings,  all  painted  and  sculptured  in  the  Italian  style,  and 
the  gallery  by  Le  Brun  magnificent.  Several  large  pic- 
tures of  P.  Veronese,  framed,  in  the  waUs  of  different 
rooms  of  the  apartments.  The  dressing-room  and  the 
queen's  private  hbrary  look  out  upon  a  small  court  of 
the  chateau  which  is  not  twenty  feet  square.  The  win- 
dow in  the  middle  of  the  three,  which  forms  the  centre  of 
the  palace,  and  which  has  a  balcony,  is  that  where  the 
royal  family  showed  themselves  at  the  first  coming  of  the 


1816]  VERSAILLES.  99 

populace  to  Versailles  ;  the  cliapel  ill-proportioned  and 
contracted.  We  saw  the  place  where  stood  the  tribune 
of  Madame  de  Maintenon ;  it  was  in  the  king's  gallery,  into 
which  she  entered  by  a  side  door  opening  into  his  apart- 
ment. At  a  subsequent  period  Madame  du  Barri  was 
placed  in  the  first  arch  between  the  columns.  I  went 
with  Lord  Hardwicke  upon  the  roof,  where  one  can 
walk  very  comfortably,  and  saw  where  Louis  XV.  and 
XVI,  made  their  nightly  walks,  and  by  the  means  of  the 
chimney- funnel  sometimes  heard  secrets  of  the  court,  and 
sometimes  heard  very  unpleasant  truths.  The  gardens 
beautiful,,  and  well-suited  to  an  enormous  and  magnificent 
palace  such  as  Versailles.  The  orangery — worthy  of  the 
place,  one  can  say  no  more — contains  229  enormous 
orange-trees  in  tubs,  without  coujiting  hundreds  of  smaller 
ones.  The  oldest  orange-tree  was  planted  by  the  Con- 
stable de  Bourbon  in  1453,  as  they  say.  After  dinner 
we  took  a  long  walk  in  the  gardens.  Groves  and  bath  of 
Apollo,  and  rocks,  well-constructed  ;  the  sculptured  groups 
which  are  very  fine  in  themselves,  are  badly  placed.  I 
had  before  no  idea  of  the  magnificence  of  Versailles,  nor 
the  great  effect  that  it  must  have  had  on  the  arts  of  its 
day.  But  if  anything  were  necessary  to  deter  one  from 
the  wish  of  wearing  a  crown,  it  would  be  the  idea  of 
living,  passing  one's  hfe  from  morning  to  night,  and  from 
night  to  morning  again,  in  the  gilded  rooms  of  Versailles. 
To  a  spectator,  however,  how  interesting  the  remem- 
brances and  scenes  it  recalls ! — from  the  tribune  of  Madame 
de  Maintenon  in  the  chapel,  to  the  door  at  which  the 
wretched  Marie  Antoinette  fled  from  the  murderers,  al- 
ready in  her  gilded  bedchamber,  to  that  of  the  king  for 
protection. 

JOUKNAL. 

Saturday,  lliA.— The  evening  at  Madame  Eecamier's. 
She  upon  a  chaise  longue  with  the  headache,  and  twelve 

H.2 


100  MISS    berry's   journal.  [1816 

or  fifteen  men;  of  ladies,  only  Madame  Moreau,  Mrs. 
Patterson,  the  ex-wife  of  Jerome  Buonaparte — Mrs.  P. 
pretty,  without  grace,  and  not  at  all  shy. 

Extract  of  Letter. 

Sunday^  12th. — In  the  evening  we  went  to  Madame 
d'Escar's,  in  the  garrets  of  the  Tuileries,  where  all  the 
immaculate  royalists,  and  nobody  else,  meet  every  Sunday. 

JOUKNAL. 

Thursday,  IQth. — In  the  morning  to  the  Tuileries,  to 
see  the  king's  apartments.  One  is  admitted  by  an  order 
from  M.  Le  Comte  de  Pradel,  while  the  king  is  out,  be- 
tween three  and  five  o'clock.  They  are  very  magnificent ; 
the  ceiling  of  the  Diana  gallery  superb.  Chapel,  nothing 
particular;  one  single  flag  is  placed  near  the  altar,  be- 
longing to  the  regiment  which  alone  remained  firm  to  the 
Due  d'Angouleme.  I  would  not  have  made  it  so  appa- 
rent that  that  was  but  one.  Very  fine  theatre  made  by 
Bonaparte  in  the  old  Salle  de  Concert.  They  are  now 
working  to  make  a  room  to  serve  as  ball-room,  dining- 
room,  or  theatre  at  pleasure ;  but,  far  and  above  all,  they 
are  occupied  in  taking  away  the  N's  thrust  everywhere 
in  all  the  palaces  and  all  the  public  buildings. 

Friday,  17th. — We  w^ent  to  the  Princess  de  Vaude- 
mont's,  who  expected  us  at  her  chateau.  It  is  a  very  pretty 
French  villa  on  the  banks  of  the  Seine,  about  two  leagues 
from  Paris.  The  house,  garden,  and  court-yard  is  all 
arranged  in  half-English  and  half-French  taste,  and  is 
very  complete.  A  '  basse  cour,'  fiUed  with  the  most 
beautiful  poultry  I  ever  saw.  A  large  kitchen  garden, 
kept  in  the  best  possible  order  by  a  gardener  and  six 
boys.  A  large  balustrade,  or  rather  wooden  balcony,  aU 
round  the  house,  covered  in  the  front,  and  making  what 
we  call  a  verandah,  in  which  the  principal  rooms  look. 


1816]  ST.    CLOUD    AND   ST.    GERMAINS.  101 

Saturday,  ISth. — The  morning  at  St.  Cloud.  The  situa- 
tion dehghtful,  grand  and  cheerful.  The  rooms  less 
superb  than  I  had  pictured  them  to  myself,  considering 
they  had  been  the  favourite  abode  of  Bonaparte.  The 
gallery  is  very  fine.  The  large  apartments  here  look  out 
upon  a  private  garden  of  the  palace,  which  communicates 
by  an  iron  gate  to  the  public  garden,  where  the  fountains 
are.  Madame  d'Angouleme  comes  here  very  often  in  her 
carriage  from  Paris,  and  then  rides  on  horseback  in  the 
park  and  the  forest.  She  was  there  the  same  day  as  our- 
selves, and  we  saw  her  opposite  les  Grands  Eaux.  The 
terrace  in  the  public  gardens,  alongside  of  the  river,  with 
large  trees,  and  the  Seine  with  its  many  boats,  and  a 
much  frequented  public  road  between  the  river  and  the 
garden,  are  charming ;  and  on  the  other  side  are  small 
stalls,  all  occupied  during  the  fair,  or  when  the  court 
resides  here. 

Monday,  20th. — We   set  out  for  St.  Germains.     The 
approach  to  it  very  pretty.     The  interior  of  the  chateau 
totally  and  entirely  spoilt,  so  changed  and  neglected  that 
it  is  hardly  possible  to  find  the  royal  apartment.  Nothing 
is  left  but  a  large  dra\ving;-room,  which  in  former  times 
was  a  theatre,  and  where  still  remains  the  cypher  and 
device  of  Francis  I.,  and  three  little  gilded  rooms  which 
must  date  from  the  time  of  the  minority  of  Louis  XIV. 
All  that  part  of  the  chateau,  including  the  apartments 
occupied  by  our  James  and  his  family,  have  been  divided 
in  two  in  their  height,  and  are  thus  reduced    to    two 
entresols,  occupied,  during  the  time  of  the  Eevolution 
and  of  Bonaparte,  by  a  military  school  of  cavalry  which 
exists  no  longer ;  so  that  the  largest  part  of  the  chateau 
is  deserted,  and  the  remaining  part  serves  as  a  barrack  to 
some  officers  of  the  depot  of  cavalry  always  here.     The 
town  has  a  less  flourishing  appearance  than  any  other  of 
the  environs  of  Paris  that  I  have  seen.     The  terrace  is 
fine,  from  its  length  and  its  view.     The  wood  behind  the 


102  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1816 

terrace — cut,  like  all  the  Frencli  wood,  as  a  star — was 
cliarming  in  its  first  verdure,  and  swarming  with  night- 
ingales. We  returned  by  the  boat.  In  the  evening  I 
went  to  two  guingettes  in  the  Champs  Elysees,  side  by 
side — Le  Pavilion  de  Flore  and  Le  Sallon  de  Mars.  One 
could  not  see  two  ball-rooms  more  prettily  arranged,  or 
better  order  preserved. 

Thursday,  2^rd. — Left  Paris  at  twelve,  and  arrived 
at  Beauvais  at  seven  o'clock ;  so  that  I  had  time 
to  see  the  cathedral  there.  Fine  Gothic  church  ;  the 
arches  of  the  nave^  are  as  fine  and  bolder  than  those  at 
York.  The  windows  surpass  all  I  could  imagine  in 
painted  glass.  They  are  the  same  kind  as  at  Canterbury, 
but  infinitely  more  beautiful.  How  they  escaped  at 
the  Eevolution  I  had  not  the  means  of  ascertaining. 

Sunday,  2Qth. — We  arrived  at  Dover  at  six  o'clock 
in  the  evening.  Unfortunately,  the  custom-liouse  officer 
was  in  a  bad  humour  ;  he  kept  my  sac  de  nuit  and 
dressing-case ;  and  instead  of  finishing  the  examination 
of  the  trunks,  opened  them,  and  threw  the  contents  of 
one  into  the  other,  so  as  to  spoil  all  within.  I  com- 
plained in  vain,  and  was  obliged  to  borrow  night  things 
from  the  landlady  at  the  inn. 

Monday,  27th. — The  cus<tom-house  officer  of  yesterday 
evening  was  still  more  rude  to-day.  I  think  he  had 
been  blamed  for  the  manner  in  which  he  had  treated 
me,  and  that  made  him  worse.  He  kept;  all  my  shoes, 
pieces  of  worn  dresses,  and  things  that  were  marked,  and 
made  me  pay  for  flowers  which  had  been  worn,  itc. 
The  superior  custom-house  officer,  I  well  saw,  wislied  to 
make  liim  behave  better,  and  to  return  what  he  had 
taken,  but  to  no  purpose. 

Miss  Berry  remained  in  London  witli  her  father  and 
sister  till  about  the  middle  of  June,  when  she  went  on  a 
visit  to  Captain  and  Mrs.  Scott,  at  Petersham. 


181G]  THE    NEW   BRIDGES.  103 

Tuesday,  June  l^th. — I  walked  to  the  ferry  at  Twicken- 
ham with  Car  and  her  husband.  On  approaching  the  banks 
of  the  river,  under  Lord  Dysart's  trees,  we  saw  five  or 
six  men  drawing  something  out  of  the  water — it  was  the 
body  of  a  man  who  was  nearly  drowned.  Two  young 
ladies  who  were  out  walking,  seeing  the  body  in  the 
water,  had  first  given  the  alarm.  It  was  not  cold  when 
it  was  drawn  out,  but  all  the  efforts  which  were  made  to 
restore  him  to  hfe  were  ineffectual.  Captain  Scott 
assisted ;  and  the  Due  d'Orleans,  who  was  walking  in  his 
garden  on  the  other  side  of  the  river,  was  there  in  ten 
minutes,  bringing  with  him  two  or  three  servants,  and 
directing  the  means  that  he  wished  to  try,  but  in  vain. 
No  one  knew  if  it  was  accidental  or  on  purpose  that 
the  unfortunate  man  was  drowned.  He  was  pretty  well 
dressed,  and  had  3^,  in  his  pockets.  This  scene  was  not 
cheering.  I  went  afterwards  in  a  boat  alone  to  Cross 
Deep,  where  I  landed,  and  walked  to  Washington's  [the 
gardener  at  Little  Strawberry]  house.  From  thence  I 
made  a  melancholy  pilgrimage  all  round  the  outside  of 
Httle  and  large  Strawberry  Hill,  coming  back  by  Wash- 
ington's garden.  Never  again  wiU  I  take  such  another 
walk  ;  all  that  it  recalled  to  my  remembrance,  all  that  it 
made  me  think  of,  all,  the  regrets  it  suggested,  quite 
overcame  me. 

Tuesday,  July  2nd. — Took  a  boat  at  Whitehall  Stairs, 
to  see  the  Strand  Bridge,*  first  by  w^ater,  and  then  landed 
and  walked  upon  the  bridge  itself.  It  is  already  passable 
for  foot  passengers,  though  neither  covered  nor  paved. 
The  nine  arches  of  120  feet  each  are  beautiful,  but  I  can 
never  reconcile  myself  to  columns  upon  a  bridge,  and 
here  they  are  placed  between  every  arch — two  of  the 
Tuscan  order,  and  well-proportioned  ;  but  what  have  they 
to  do  there  ?  Went  by  boat  as  far  as  Vauxhall,  to  see 
the  iron  bridge  there,  which  is  nearly  finished,  and,  it  is 

*  Afterwards  called  Waterloo  Bridge. . 


104  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1816 

said,  will  be  open  to  the  public  the  25th  of  this  month. 
I  do  not  like  iron  bridges,  they  can  never  have  that  look 
of  solidity  which  constitutes  one  of  the  beauties  of  a  bridge  ; 
but  it  is  fine  of  its  kind. 

Sunday^  lUh. — We  went  to  a  dejeune  dinatoire  at 
Chiswick,  given  for  the  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Cumberland, 
and  about  thirty  other  people,  amongst  whom  were  the 
Prince  and  Princess  Esterhazy,*  &c. ;  but  neither  of  the 
Duke's  sisters  were  there. 

Sunday,  2\st. — ^Went  to  the  Duchess  of  Cumberland's 
large  assembly.  The  regent  had  dined  there.  There  was 
all  of  the  ministerial  world  in  town  there,  and  many  others. 

Monday,  29th. — In  the  evening  at  Mrs.  Wellesley  Pole's ; 
a  large  assembly.  The  regent  had  dined  there.  I  went 
too  early,  though  more  than  half-past  ten. 

Monday,  August  2Qth. — Left  North  Audley  Street. 

Tuesday,  27th. — We  reached  Dover  at  three  o'clock. 

Wednesday,  2Sith. — Sailed  in  the  Post  Office  packet, 
Captain  King,  with  sixty-five  passengers  and  four  car- 
riages. Fortunately,  and  very  fortunately,  it  was  fine 
weather ;  the  crossing  only  lasted  four  hours.  Everyone 
remained  on  deck,  and  few  were  ill. 

Thursday,  29th. — Eeached  Montreuil. 

Friday,  ^Oth. — Slept  at  Grandvilliers. 

Saturday,  olst. — From  Grandvilliers  reached  Paris 
about  five  o'clock. 

Tuesday,  September  10th. — Upon  returning  from  the 
opera,  we  heard  the  news  of  the  bombardment  of  Algiers 
by  Lord  Exmouth.f     This  news  had  reached  the  Duke 

*  Her  Serene  Highness  Princess  Therese  Esterhazy ;  married,  June  18th, 
1812,  to  Prince  Paul  Esterhazy,  many  years  Ambassador  to  the  British  Court. 

t  Edward  Pellew,  first  Viscount  Exmouth ;  born  1757.  On  the  return 
of  Napoleon  from  Elba,  Lord  Exmouth  proceeded  to  his  command  in  the 
Mediterranean,  and,  among  other  achievements,  concluded  treaties  with 
Algiers,  Tunis,  and  Tripoli  for  the  abolition  of  Christian  slavery.  After  the 
restoration  of  peace  to  Europe,  these  treaties  were  shamefully  infringed. 
Lord  Exmouth  was  sent  to  chastise  the  Dey  of  Algiers  ;  the  result  was  the 
battle  of  Algiers,  August  26,  1816.     Lord  Exmouth  was  thanked  by  both 


1816]  JOURNEY    TO    LYONS.  105 

of  Eiclielieu  in  ten  days  from  Algiers.     Our  ambassador 
sent  a  courier  the  same  evening  on  to  London. 

Wednesday,  llth. — We  went  in  the  evening  to  the 
Odeon,  to  see  '  Le  Chevaher  de  CanoUes,'  and  '  Le  Chemin 
de  Fontainebleau.'  The  second  piece,  on  the  occasion  of  the 
Due  de  Berri's  marriage,  less  bad  than  such  pieces  usually 
are. 

Sunday,  16th. — Went  to  St.  Cloud,  where  the  fountains 
played,  and  there  was  a  fete,  and  really  one  of  the  finest 
I  ever  saw — 50,000  people  at  least,  amusing  themselves 
in  all  ways,  eating,  drinking,  and  dancing,  all  sorts  of  games 
Avithout  quarrelling,  without  drunkenness,  without  doing 
any  harm  to  the  beautiful  gardens  of  the  palace,  without 
even  touching  a  flower.  To  see  the  French  nation  m  its 
best  is  to  see  it  in  its  amusements. 

Wednesday,  ISth. — Left  Paris  for  Fontainebleau. 

Thursday,  19th. — From  Fontainebleau  to  Briare. 

Friday,  20th. — From  Briare  to  Nevers.  There  is  a 
very  fine  old  palace  of  the  dukes  [de  Nevers],  forming  one 
side  to  a  public  place,  with  a  garden. 

Saturday,  21st. — Slept  at  St.  Gerau  du  Puy. 

Sunday,  22nd. — Slept  at  Eoanne. 

Monday,  2Srd. — From  Eoanne  to  Lyons,  eleven  hours. 

Tuesday,  2ith. — From  yesterday,  Monday,  till  Sunday 
the  29th,  we  stayed  at  Lyons  without  doing  anything  but 
walk  in  the  streets,  so  unbearable  to  the  feet,  and  visiting 
some  of  its  dear  and  badly  furnished  shops.  All  is  made 
and  manufactured  at  Lyons,  and  nothing  is  to  be  found  so 
good,  nor  so  cheap,  nor  with  so  large  a  choice  as  at  Paris. 
The  only  person  we  saw  was  Fels,  a  merchant  whom  we 
had  always  known  and  seen  at  Lyons  every  time  we  have 
been  here.  M.  Camille  Jourdan  came  to  see  us  on  Friday 
evening,  and  we  saw  General  Abercrombie,  who  arrived 
before  our  departure. 

Houses  of  Parliament,  and  created  a  viscount,  and  subsequently  appointed 
to  the  chief  command  at  Plymouth ;  died  1833. 


106  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1816 

Sunday^  2^th. — From  Lyons  to  Echelles.  At  tlie  Pont 
de  Beauvoisin,  the  frontier  town,  where  the  bridge  sepa- 
rates the  two  countries,  our  passport  was  looked  at,  re- 
gistered, and  signed,  twice  on  one  side  (France)  and 
three  times  on  the  other ;  and  they  made  us  go  through 
the  ceremony  of  taking  us  in  our  carriage  into  the  court 
of  a  dilapidated  custom-house,  where  after  anotlier  exa- 
mination of  the  passports,  and  a  declaration  that  we  were 
not  merchants,  they  let  us  depart,  as  we  had  entered, 
without  touching  anything,  only  giving  them  five  francs 
for  civility. 

Monday^  oOth. — Left  Echelles  early.  A  quarter  of  a 
mile  from  the  inn  one  enters  the  superb  mountain  pass 
called  the  Echelles  de  Savoy,  made  by  Charles  Emmanuel 
in  1667  ;  it  appears  to  me  that  people  never  say  half 
enough  about  it.  After  quitting  this  defile  the  scene  be- 
comes at  each  step  more  interesting.  We  got  no  further 
than  Aiguebelle,  a  pretty  Savoyard  village  surrounded  by 
most  picturesque  mountains. 

Tuesday,  October  1st. — Beached  Lanslebourg,  at  the 
foot  of  Mont  Cenis.  Immediately  after  leaving  Chambery 
begin  the  changes  made  here  and  there  in  the  route  by 
Bonaparte ;  but  about  half-a-mile  on  this  side  of  St.  Jean 
Maurienne  the  road  is  entirely  remade  upon  another  line, 
and  in  quite  a  different  manner.  It  is  impossible  to  see 
one  more  beautifully  constructed :  hills  levelled,  a  magnifi- 
cent causeway  across  the  plains  and  at  the  side  of  the 
torrents,  and  scarcely  any  ascent  or  descent  too  steep  to 
admit  of  the  horses  trotting  ;  in  short,  one  of  the  most 
mountainous  passes  in  Europe  is  now  rendered  capable  of 
being  crossed  as  quickly  as  the  same  space  of  plain. 
Napoleon  built  infantry  barracks  attached  to  the  little 
bourg,  and  another  for  cavalry  attached  to  the  convent, 
which  has  also  a  new  church.  In  short,  there  is  now  a 
mass  of  respectable  buildings  at  the  top  of  Mont  Cenis. 
Wednesday,  2nd. — The   passing   of  Mont   Cenis   has 


1816]  ARRIVAL   AT   TURIN.  107 

always  been  to  me  an  agreeable  day,  even  when  the 
manner  of  transport  was  so  little  convenient ;  now  it  is  a 
delicious  drive  in  a  carriage,  upon  the  best  of  roads.  It 
takes  two  hours  and  a  half  to  ascend  from  Lanslebourg  to 
the  post  upon  the  plain  of  Mont  Cenis,  and  a  little  more 
than  two  hours  and  a  half  to  descend  as  far  as  Suze.  No 
words  can  give  any  idea  of  the  beauty  of  the  scenery  in 
weather  such  as  we  had. 

Thursday^  ord. — Eeached  Turin  at  five  o'clock. 

Saturday^  hth. — Agnes  and  I  walked  upon  the  bridge  ; 
a  fine  stone  bridge  made  by  the  French,  upon  the  model 
of  that  at  Neuilly,  during  their  reign  here.  In  the  even- 
ing we  went  to  the  Carimano  theatre.  There  was  a 
comic  opera  and  a  large  corps  de  ballet,  much  better  put 
on  the  stage  than  formerly,  but  jumping  as  usual. 

Sunday,  Qth, — We  went  in  the  afternoon  to  see  the 
Queen,  accompanied  by  two  of  her  daughters  and  a  lady 
in  waiting,  go  out  driving,  and  the  King  in  a  coupe  with 
an  ofiicer.  They  drive  out  every  day  about  the  same 
time  for  about  an  hour.  They  leave  here  to-morrow  for 
Stupinigi,  so  it  was  the  only  opportunity  of  seeing  them. 
Several  persons  presented  petitions  to  the  King,  who  took 
them  himself  and  put  them  in  his  pocket  There  were  a 
great  many  people  under  the  arcades  of  the  palace  to  see 
them  go  out,  and  many  on  the  open  space.  Every  one 
took  off  his  hat  respectfully,  but  no  one  cheered.  The 
reception  that  I  saw  them  have  in  the  town  seemed  to 
say  :  '  We  are  not  dissatisfied  with  you ;  remain  where 
you  are  :  '  but  nothing  more. 

Monday,  1th. — At  twelve  o'clock  the  court  went  to 
Stupinigi;  four  carriages  and  six  horses,  with  three  out- 
riders behind  each,  but  without  guards  or  other  attendants. 
In  the  evening  w^e  went  with  the  Eoss's,*  in  Madame  de 
Staremberg's  box,  to  the  Italian  play,  where  they  per- 
formed '  Elisabetha   Eegina    dTnghilterra.'      The  piece 

*  General  and  Mrs.  Ross. 


108  MISS    BERRY'S   JOURNAL.  [l8l6 

was  Italian  composition,  taken  in  part  from  an  English 
novel  called  '  The  Eecluse,'  in  which  two  daughters  of 
Mary  Queen  of  Scotland  are  brought  up  in  retirement. 
Here  it  is  not  two  daughters,  but  a  son  and  a  daughter, 
who  has  secretly  married  Leicester — called  in  the  Italian 
theatre  Le-i-chester.  Her  brother  is  Jacobo,  afterwards 
King  of  England.  Notwithstanding  all  this  jumble  of 
facts,  the  story  of  the  piece  was  interesting ;  and  notwith- 
standing a  total  want  of  dignity  and  of  grace  in  the  singer 
who  personated  Ehzabeth,  it  was  not  badly  acted,  for  she 
was  as  old,  as  ugly,  and  as  violent  as  Elizabeth  is  repre- 
sented to  have  been  at  that  time. 

Thursday,  lO^A. — A  drive  in  a  caleche  and  four  horses, 
a  la  Vigna,  to  Mr.  Sordevol's.  I  was  very  glad  to  see  the 
habitation  of  a  small  Piedmontese  squire,  for  such  I 
believe  him  to  be.  The  situation  of  this  little  country- 
jiouse  is  delightful ;  half  way  up  the  side  of  a  most  beau- 
tiful hill,  which  extends  along  the  Po  opposite  Turin.  It 
can  be  reached  in  a  carriage,  which  is  not  often  the  case. 
The  interior  consists  df  small  rooms,  and  not  uncomfort- 
able, in  the  Italian  style.  The  family  were  all  seated 
under  the  trees  in  the  garden,  after  dinner,  a  Vltalienne. 
It  consisted  of  a  father-in-law,  a  brother-in-law,  his  wife, 
&c.,  all  united  and  living  together,  which  never  gives  any 
idea  of  individual  comfort  to  Englishmen.  They  had 
made  with  much  taste  several  little  paths,  en  zigzag,  upon 
the  rapid  inclination  of  the  well-wooded  hill,  and  an 
avenue  of  plane  trees  upon  the  httle  plateau,  from  whence 
they  enjoy  the  grandest  view  of  the  Alps,  with  Turin 
below,  and  the  Po  meandering  along  fine  meadows. 

Sunday,  l^th. — At  twelve  o'clock  to  the  Superga.  It 
takes  more  than  two  hours  to  ascend.  The  view  of  the 
Superga  is  really  something  to  see  ;  to  the  north  the  view 
is  bounded  by  a  magnificent  amphitheatre  of  Alps,  and  to 
the  south  by  hills  of  which  the  form  and  culture  are 
equally  varied.     The  church,  with  the  habitation  of  a 


181G]  FROM   TURIN   TO    GENOA.  109 

chapter  of  Chanoins  attached  to  it,  is  truly  magnificent. 
The  chapter  no  longer  exists.  The  vaults  where  all  the 
bodies  of  the  kings  and  queens  of  Sardinia  are  deposited 
are  very  fine.  There  are  twenty  of  their  princes,  great 
and  small,  already  buried  there ;  two  handsome  and  well- 
sculptured  monuments.  All  along  the  road  the  scenery, 
in  descending  from  the  Superga,  is  enchanting.  We  dined 
with  the  Starembergs ;  nothing  could  exceed  their  kind- 
ness and  their  friendship.  I  leave  Madame  de  Starem- 
berg  with  real  regret.  I  find  she  has  very  much  gained 
in  powers  of  conversation.  The  curious  and  important 
scenes  in  which  she  has  found  herself  since  I  saw  her  in 
England  appear  to  have  made  a  great  impression,  and  she 
relates  them  in  a  very  interesting  manner.  Her  heart 
appears  more  warmly  attached  than  ever  to  those  she 
loves.     I  am  proud  and  happy  to  be  of  the  number. 

Monday^  \\.th. — Left  Turin  at  five  o'clock  in  the  morn- 
ing ;  reached  Novi  in  thirteen  hours,  crossing  the  fine 
plain  of  Lombardy,  passing  by  Asti  and  Alessandro. 
About  a  mile  on  this  side  of  Alessandro  was  fought  the 
famous  battle  of  Marengo.*  The  great  road  passes 
through  the  plain,  which  is  now  covered  for  an  immense 
extent  with  vines  and  corn. 

Tuesday^  Ibth. — Having  passed  through  Novi  Voltag- 
gio  and  ascended  the  Bocchetto,  reached  Campomare ;  a 
most  fatiguing  journey.  The  first  view  of  Genoa,  after 
passing  the  point  of  the  Fanale,  is  truly  grand. 

Wednesday,  IQtL — Much  as  I  am  struck  with  the 
beauty  of  Genoa  and  of  its  environs,  so  much  the  more 
am  I  astonished  and  disgusted  with  its  little  crooked 
streets — La  Strada  Nuova  excepted,  which  may  be  called 
a  street  of  palaces. 

Tuesday,  22nd. — Went  to  the  great  coral  manufactory, 
and  afterwards  to  the  Palazzo  Durazzo.  These  large 
Itahan  palaces  have  not  the  imposing  air  that  they  had 
formerly.     They  look  neglected,  and  all  their  ornaments 

*  June  13th,  1800. 


110  MISS    berry's   journal.  [1816 

are  in  a  style  which  has  been  thrown  out  of  date  by  the 
beautiful  palaces  at  Paris,  with  their  Grecian  furniture 
and  ornaments. 

Friday,  November  \st. — We  dined  at  Lord  and  Lady 
Ponsonby's,*  with  Lord  Caernarvon  and  Captain  Wright, 
a  young  officer  in  the  English  navy,  who  is  to  command  a 
frigate  of  sixty  pieces  of  cannon  now  building  here  in  the 
service  of  this  government.  In  the  evening  Lady  Pon- 
sonby  accompanied  us  to  the  Governor's,  where  Madame 
de  Eevel  had  a  soiree.  There  had  been  a  dinner  of  all 
the  civil  and  military  officers,  being,  I  believe,  the  Queen's 
birthday.  All  these  gentlemen  were  in  uniform.  I  made 
a  party  of  whist  with  the  Governor  ;  the  ladies  of  the 
country  played  at  a  round  game  m  another  room,  and  it 
was  tolerably  flat.  There  had  been  in  the  morning  a 
parade  of  all  the  troops,  whom  we  saw  pass  by  the  Strada 
Balbi.     The  troops  are  fine,  and  well  kept. 

To  Lady  Elizabeth  Stuart  from  Miss  Berry. 

Genoa,  Vtli  November,  1816. 
Madame  de  Staremberg  remains  firm  to  coming  the  eud  of  this 
month,  with  or  without  the  court,  and  without  I  fancy  it  will 
be,  for  the  ridiculous  jealousy  of  the  Piedmontese  ministers 
throws  every  possible  impediment  in  the  way  of  the  king's 
coming  here,  and  it  is  postponed  from  month  to  month,  till  it 
is  supposed  it  will  not  take  place  at  all.  Nothing  can  be  so 
bad,  in  every  respect,  as  the  policy  with  respect  to  this  newly- 
acquired  and  magnificent  province,  nor  nothing  worse  than  the 
state  it  is  in. 

From  Professor  Playfair. 

Florence,  llth,  November,  1816. 
Mt  deak  Miss  Beret, — Though  I  have  not  been  so  happy  as 
to  hear  from  yourself,  I  have  had  the  satisfaction  to  learn  where 

*  Lord  Ponsonby  succeeded  bis  fatber  1806 ;  created  viscount  1839 ; 
died  1855.  He  married,  1803,  Lady  Frances  Villiers,  daughter  of  fourth 
Earl  of  Jersey.  Lord  Ponsonby  was  employed  for  many  yeai's  in  tlie  diplo- 
matic service 


1816]  LETTEKS.  Ill 

you  are  to  be  found.  Miss  Whyte  tells  me  that  you  are  at 
Genoa,  that  you  have  all  arrived  there  safe,  and  that  Mr.  Berry 
stood  out  the  journey  perfectly  well.  This  intelligence  has 
given  me  great  pleasure ;  I  am  glad  to  think  that  you  are  in 
Italy,  and  that  I  may  be  almost  sure  of  meeting  you  before  I 
leave  that  country.  Indeed  if  it  were  not  for  the  advanced 
season,  the  setting  in  of  the  rains,  which  are  now  falling  here 
in  great  abundance,  and  the  necessity  of  getting  to  Eome  as 
soon  as  possible,  I  would  not  delay  my  visit  to  the  spring. 

This  place  is  full  of  English,  and  by  some  strange  fatality  all 
the  loungers  of  Bond  Street  are  now  to  be  seen  on  the  banks 
of  the  Arno.  They  say  that  there  are  not  less  than  four  thou- 
sand foreigners  in  Florence  at  this  moment,  and  the  greatest 
part  by  far  are  English.  It  is  no  wonder,  indeed,  that  this 
place  should  be  the  delight  of  strangers ;  it  is  beautiful  and 
singular,  and  its  associations,  though  not  equal  to  those  of 
Eome,  are  highly  interesting ;  it  is  one  of  the  most  ancient 
seats  of  learning  in  the  Western  Hemisphere.  It  is  the  country 
of  Galileo ;  the  spot  where  he  invented  the  telescope,  and  first 
directed  it  to  the  heavens.  But  I  need  not  speak  to  you  of 
beauties  with  which  you  are  so  well  acquainted.  I  will  only 
add  that  the  landscape  round  Florence,  though  very  beautiful, 
is  not  so  fine,  to  my  taste,  as  many  that  are  to  be  seen  in  our 
own  island.  It  wants  variety ;  and  the  uniform  aspect  of  dusky 
green  to  which  the  prevalence  of  the  olive  gives  so  sombre  a 
hue,  and  which  covers  the  whole  valley,  is  far  inferior  to  the 
fine  woods  and  rich  verdure  of  an  English  landscape.  The 
part  of  Italy  that  has  struck  me  most  is  when,  descending  from 
tlie  grand  and  terrible  scenery  of  the  Simplon,  you  enter  the 
gay  and  rich  valley  of  Toccia,  and  pass  on  to  the  banks  of  the 
Lago  Maggiore.  The  whole  world,  perhaps,  does  not  afford  a 
finer  contrast  in  so  small  a  compass,  and  to  pass  in  the  course 
of  one  afternoon  from  the  region  of  eternal  snow  to  that  of 
eternal  spring  is  more  like  the  fiction  of  an  Eastern  tale  than 
a  simple  fact  in  the  history  of  the  globe. 

Tomorrow  I  leave  this  for  Eome,  full  of  expectation,  and 
hoping  that,  as  has  generally  happened  to  me  in  this  tour, 
those  expectations  will  be  exceeded.  (Though  there  is  a  bull 
in  this  sentence,  it  is  not  without  meaning.) 

Are  your  terrible  headaches  the  better  for  the  climate  ?  I 
hope  sincerely  that  they  are. 


112  MISS    berry's   journal.  [1816 

I  am,  my  dear  Miss  Berry,  yours,  with  the  most  sincere  and 
affectionate  regards, 

J.  Platfaie. 

Wednesday^  20^A. — Mr.  Horner,  who  arrived  two  days 
ago  very  ill,  left  to-day  by  a  merchant  vessel  for  Leghorn. 
I  saw  him  yesterday  morning ;  he  lodged  above  in  our 
hotel.  I  went  to  talk  to  him  about  Pisa.  He  is  going  away 
very  ill,  but  I  think  Pisa  will  restore  him.* 

J  0  U  E  N  A  L. 

Thursday,  2\st — We  went  to  2,  fonction  in  the  Church 
of  the  Madonna  della  Vigna.  It  was  the  presentation  day 
of  the  Virgin.  The  church,  decorated  and  lighted  up  pre- 
cisely the  same  as  for  a  ball-room,  all  in  drapery  of  red 
taffetas,  and  blue  mixed  with  white,  strewed  with  roses 
and  embroidered  with  gold  ;  the  great  doors  of  the  church 
open  ;  mass  performed  at  all  the  altars  ;  soldiers  at  the 
doors  and  at  the  altars ;  a  prodigious  number  of  people, 
and  a  very  eloquent  discourse  by  the  professor  of  logic  in 
the  University.  I  observed  that  he  preached  morality  as 
well  as  doctrine.  The  music  very  fine,  in  full  orchestra, 
but  not  the  least  like  what  we  are  accustomed  to  call 
church  music.  All  the  priests  richly  dressed.  In  fact,  a 
real/^te,  which  the  people  enjoy  here  with  the  satisfaction 
of  thinking  that  they  are  benefiting  their  souls  at  the 
same  time  that  they  gratify  their  senses. 

Eeturning  from  the  church  we  met  Madame  Durazzo, 
and  went  to  see  the  Palace  d' Andrea  Doria.  The  apart- 
ments, faded  as  they  are,  still  worth  seeing.  The  original 
ceilings  and  chimney-pieces  have  not  been  touched.  One 
sees  by  them  that  the  palace  well  deserved  all  that  has 
been  said  of  it  by  the  Genoese  annahsts,  when  the  Emperor 
Charles  Y.,  and  afterwards  his  son  Philip  II.,  were  there 

*  Mr.  Horner  died  at  Pisa  in  February,  1817. 


1816]  LETTER   FROM    CANOVA.  113 

received.  The  gardens  are  also  preserved,  with  fountains 
of  white  marble,  and  terraces. 

Friday^  22nd. — We  were  engaged  to  go  and  see  the 
frigate  launched  which  has  been  built  under  the  inspec- 
tion of  Captain  Wright,  who  has  had  permission  to  enter 
the  King  of  Sardinia's  service.  We  entered  a  house 
where  we  found  several  ladies  and  a  number  of  officers 
— the  governor  commandant,  &c.  &c.  They  gave  us  re- 
freshments on  a  large  table,  and  whilst  all  the  ladies 
were  seated,  the  vessel  set  off  without  asking  permission. 
The  stays  were  not  strong  enough  to  hold  it  as  long  as 
they  wished. 

Wednesday^  27th.- — A  dehcious  drive  to  the  Nervi 
Yilla  Fravega.  The  garden  kept  in  perfect  order ;  roses 
and  jasmine  all  in  bloom.  A  sensible  difference  in  the 
climate  the  moment  we  entered  in  the  little  bay  where 
Nervi  is  enclosed. 

Roma  :  22  Novembre  1816. 

Quanta  consolazione  m'  abbia  recato  la  sua  gentil  lettera,  colla 
sicurezza  di  presto  qui  rivederla,  non  potrei  dirlo  abbastanza  con 
parole.  lo  mi  lusingava  che  la  sua  promessa  avria  ottenuto  il 
suo  effetto,  ma  era  ben  lungi  il  mio  cuore  d'  averne  una  prova 
si  sollecita,  e  sicura.  Ora  mi  par  mille  anni  che  la  primavera 
ritorni  a  rallegrar  la  natura  gia  morta  e  a  condur  Lei  colla 
sorella,  e  col  venerabile  genitor  fra  noi.  Giorni  di  piacere  e  di 
gioja  saranno  per  me  quelli  che  passero  nella  loro  amabile 
compagnia. 

II  Sgr.  Dundas  mi  ha  favorita  la  lettera,  alia  quale  ora 
rispondo ;  giovane  assai  colto  e  gentile,  e  degno,  al  mio  avviso, 
della  di  Lei  benevolenza.  Vorrei  potergli  usare  qualche  bene- 
fizio  o  servigio,  onde  mostrare  a  Lei  quanto  mi  sono  preziose  e 
care  le  raccomandazioni  che  mi  vengono  da  persona  che  io 
stimo  ed  amo  assai. 

Non  mi  ricordo  bene  nel  mom  en  to  a  chi  fossero  affidate 
le  stampe  per  Lei ;  ma  non  voglio  temere  che  siensi  smarrite ; 
in  questo  caso  avro  maniera  di  riparare  all'  errore  innocente. 
Gradisca  i  respetti  del   fratello,    e  faccia  gradire  i  miei  alia 

VOL.  in.  I 


114  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1816 

sorella  ed  all'  ottimo  loro  padre,  e  credami  coi  sensi  della  piu 
verace  stima  e  affettuosa  considerazione, 

Su  affett"  e  obb°  Serv''% 

Antonio  Canova.* 

Tuesday^  December  17th. — We  took  a  charming  drive 
in  a  caleche  with  the  young  Lady  Minto,  her  husband,  and 
Viviani — first  to  La  Villa  delle  di  I'Albero  Doro,  belong- 
ing formerly  to  the  Maison  Lnperiale ;  it  is  almost  in  ruins. 
From  I'Albero  Doro  we  went  to  '  Paradise,'  another  villa 
upon  the  Albero  liill ;  and  to  a  Villa  Cambiaso,  which 
Lord  Minto  wished  to  take.  It  is  the  finest  I  have  seen 
in  the  environs ;  the  architecture  is  said  to  be  by  M. 
Angelo.  If  that  is  certain,  the  execution  must  have  been 
entrusted  to  some  Genoese  architect  who  wished  to  im- 
prove upon  M.  Angelo's  design,  and  has  added  ornaments 
to  the  windows  that  he  would  never  have  thought  of. 

Tuesday,  2ith. — It  was  a  fine  spring  day  ;  all  the  world 
was  out  of  doors,  because  here  they  keep  the  eve  as  well 

Eome :  November  22nd,  1816. 

I  cannot  adequately  express  in  -vrords  the  delight  which  your  amiable 
letter  has  caused  me,  bringing  me  the  assurance  of  soon  seeing  you  again. 
I  flattered  myself  that  your  promise  would  some  day  t  ilce  effect,  but  my 
heart  was  far  from  expecting  so  speedy  and  true  a  proof  of  it.  Now  it  will 
seem  to  me  a  thousand  years  before  spring  comes  to  cheer  up  sleeping 
nature,  and  to  bring  you  amongst  us  with  your  sister  and  your  venerable 
father.  They  will  indeed  be  days  of  pleasure  and  of  joy  which  I  shall 
pass  in  your  dehghtful  company. 

Mr.  Dundas  has  favoured  me  with  the  letter  to  which  I  am  now  reply- 
ing —  a  cultivated  and  agreeable  young  man,  and  worthy,  according  to  me, 
of  your  good  opinion.  I  wish  I  could  be  of  any  service  to  him,  that  I 
might  show  you  how  precious  and  dear  to  me  are  the  requests  that  come 
from  a  person  whom  I  very  much  esteem  and  love. 

I  cannot  recollect  for  the  moment  to  whom  I  entrusted  the  engravings 
which  I  sent  you,  but  I  will  hope  that  they  have  not  gone  astray.  In 
that  case  I  can  easily  repair  the  innocent  mistake. 

Pray  accept  the  respects  of  my  brother,  and  make  mine  acceptable  to 
your  sister  and  your  most  excellent  fixther ;  and  believe  me,  with  the  feel- 
ings of  the  most  true  esteem  and  affectionate  regard. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

Antonio  Canova. 


1816]  VISIT   TO    THE    CHURCHES.  115 

as  the  fetes.  In  the  evening,  the  party  made  to  go  and 
hear  mass  at  midnight  assembled  at  our  house.  After  tea, 
the  gentlemen  amused  us  by  playing  charades  till  near 
midnight,  when  we  all  set  out  to  make  the  round  of  the 
churches.  Mass  at  midnight  is  usually  accompanied  by 
music;  in  several  churches  this  year  (they  know  not  why) 
there  was  none.  We  went  first  to  the  Church  della  Vigne. 
We  could  not  make  our  way  through  the  crowd  near 
enough  to  hear  a  word  the  priest  said  who  preached  at 
the  altar.  From  there  they  proposed  to  go  as  far  as  the 
Church  of  Carignano ;  the  long  walk  to  it  appeared  no- 
thing on  this  most  beautiful  night,  with  a  soft  mild  air  and 
a  sky  strewn  with  stars.  Arrived  at  Carignano,  we  found 
the  church  shut.  Visited  the  Duomo,  where  we  again 
found  the  end  of  mass,  with  bad  music,  and  a  church  full 
of  people.  The  service  finished,  we  returned  home 
through  streets  crowded  with  people  going  in  and  out  of 
churches,  and  walking  about  in  large  parties. 

Thursday^  26^A. — The  theatre  is  open.  The  decora- 
tions and  dresses  fine  ;  the  music  of  the  opera  middling  ; 
the  first  singer,  La  Eonzi^  tolerable  voice,  but  no  draniatic 
talent,  anzi  e  garhata.  The  tenor,  Menelli,  pleased  me 
best.  The  ballet, '  La  Vestale,'  detestable  ;  an  entree^  '  Dei 
grotesche,''  three  men  and  two  women,  by  far  the  most 
perfectly  hnproper  I  have  ever  seen. 


t  2 


116  •  MISS    BERRY'S    JOURNAL.  [1817 


JOUKNAL. 

1817. 

Genoa,  Sunday,  Feb.  9th. — Our  friends  assembled  at 
our  windows  to  see  the  masks,  of  which  the  '  Place,'  as 
also  the  '  Strada  Balbi,'  was  filled.  One  could  have 
walked  upon  their  heads  from  three  o'clock  till  past  five. 
At  eleven  o'clock  we  walked  out,  accompanying  the 
Elliots  to  the  Festone.  It  is  a  large  house  of  several 
rooms,  ill  lighted.  An  immense  crowd.  All  persons  of 
consequence  masked  ;  the  bourgeoisie  and  many  others 
without  masks.  There  was  an  enclosure  for  dancing,  but 
few  danced.  Each  dance  is  paid  for,  and  the  people 
(for  it  is  really  the  people  who  dance  here)  think  of  their 
pence.  The  people  here  have  not  the  same  decent  orderly 
manner  of  conducting  themselves  as  at  Paris. 

From  Sir  William  Gell. 

Naples,  March  6,  1817. 

•  My  dear  ,   The   abominable   postmaster  at  Eome  has 

been  displaced  for  having  destroyed  all  the  letters  paid  for  at  the 
post-office  for  the  last  four  months,  but  what  that  has  to  do  with 
the  detention  of  your  letter  I  know  not.  Nevertheless,  only  three 
weeks  ago  arrived  your  letter  from  Grenoa,  dated  some  time  last 
year,  and  informing  me  that  your  Excellencies  had  had  the  wisdom 
to  come  to  Genoa.  Since  that  time,  and  indeed  before,  I  have 
been  reduced  generally  to  lying  in  bed  all  day,  and  having  the 
gout  in  five  places  at  once.  I  shall  only  add  that  a  Dr.  Eichard- 
son  has  undertaken  me,  and  has  already,  during  the  last  three 
days,  done  what  he  considers  as  a  great  change  for  the  better. 
Gredat  Judwus.  This  puts  me  in  mind  of  the  Duchess  of 
Devonshire,  who  is  at  the  Gran  Bretagna,  on  the  Chiaja,  and 
oives  tea,  ice,  and  cakes  on   Thursdays,    besides  allowing  an 


1817]  LETTER    FEOM    SIR   WILLIAM   GELL.  117 

admiring  public  to  tumble  over,  tear,  spoil,  elbow,  and  deface  all 
her  very  nice  portfolios  of  prints  and  drawings,  to  say  nothing 
of  some  very  pretty  drawings  of  all  sorts  with  which  her  Grace 
proposes  to  illustrate  a  new  edition  of  Horace's  '  Tour  to  Brun- 
dusium,'  out  of  a  sixpenny  French  translation  in  prose,  where  one 
is  compelled  to  submit  to  Teracine,  Capoue,  Fourches,  Caudines, 
&c.  &c.      The  artists  employed  will  be  very  much  benefited,  as 

the  Duchess  of  D will  be  handed  down  to  posterity  with 

the  immortal  names  of  Horace,  Virgil,  Cardinal  Gronsalvi,  and 
Pomardi,  and  II  Marchese  Caponi,  a  long-faced  man,  who  is  .a 
good  Latin  scholar,  and  dines  with  her  Grace  very  often.  She 
is  very  civil  and  obliging,  and  I  should  give  her  a  view  of  the 
Cathedral  of  Canosa  (Cannoe)  for  her  book,  but  that  she  thinks 
Horace  was  not  likely  to  have  seen  it.  Of  course,  the  convent 
of  Lariccge  and  the  modern  walls  of  Rome  were  seen  by  the 
poet,  or  might  have  been.  Virgil  is  also  to  be  illustrated  in  the 
same  manner.  What  a  pity  Miss  Seward  is  no  more  to  make 
a  Litchfield  translation  of  him.  The  people  who  can  go  out 
seem  always  out  dancing  and  eating,  and  I  have  so  many  invi- 
tations that  one  might  be  tempted  to  think  I  was  asked  because 
it  wa.s  a  civility  which  cost  little ;  but  really  everybody  seems 
kind  to  one  even  when  well,  though  there  are  300  English 
here.  I  cannot  write  better,  as  I  cannot  sit  up.  The  Sothebys 
are  come  to  live  next  door.  They  remain  here  about  three  weeks 
longer,  resolved  for  the  moment  to  plunge  into  all  sorts  of  dis- 
sipation, such  as  going  to  Pffistum  and  Pompeii,  &c.  &c.  I 
had  a  letter  from  Mills  and  Mercer  about  a  week  after  I  received 
yours.  They  said  you  had  been  very  kind  to  them,  which  is 
difficult  for  me  to  believe,  as  you  are  always  so  unkind  and 
inhospitable  to  me.  General  Eustace  is  here.  He  gives  balls, 
and  may  possibly  be  member  for  Chiatamone  ;  but  Sir  George 
Talbot  is  decidedly  the  person  elect  for  Chiaja,  for  he  gives  a 
ball  every  Friday,  which  is  very  good  and  well  attended.  Lord 
Craven's  family  are  here  with  his  fine  ship.  They  like  the 
place  much,  and  have  decided  on  returning.  They  think  they 
are  going  up  the  Adriatic,  of  all  places,  in  the  summer.  Lord 
Belmore  and  Co.  also  here  with  a  fine  brig ;  so  that  we  indi- 
viduals do  not  make  a  bad  figure  in  Naples.  Craven  is  gone  to 
dine  with  the  Archbishop,  and  the  Margaret  Queen  has  just 
left  me.    She  has  a  violent  fit  of  the  cock-a-hoops  at  having 


118  MISS    BERKY'S   journal.  [1817 

discovered,  in  a  corner  near  the  sea,  a  place  where  she  has 
found  an  old  ruined  house,  which  for  501.  might  be  put  in 
order,  and  where  she  can  have  hot  baths  and  cold  baths,  all  of 
natural  sea-water  &c.  &c. — so  she  thinks  she  will  buy  it,  good 
woman.  Why  does  not  Mr.  Berry  come  and  walk  in  the  Villa 
Reale,  which  is  grown  so  long  and  so  fine?  You  would  not 
know  it  again.  If  you  pass  ever  through  Florence^  don't  forget 
to  get  a  letter  from  the  Old  Albany  to  the  Princess  Castel- 
Franco,  our  friend  here,  who  already  knows  you  in  some  degree. 
So  while  I  was  acting  Chamberlain  at  Eome  your  Excellencies 
were  at  Genoa.  I  can  no  more.  I  will  have  Mrs.  Harrott 
invited  to  tea  and  you  to  dinner  the  moment  you  come,  if 
that  ever  should  happen  in  my  time.    Adieu  ! 

Most  affectionately, 

Anacharsis. 

From  Miss  Berry  to  Lady  Elizabeth  Stuart. 

Genoa,  Saturday,  15tli  March  1817. 
I  really  begin  to  hope  we  shall  keep  the  things  you 
have  sent  us  for  some  better  occasion  than  making  our  curtsey 
just  now  at  the  Court  of  Sardinia.  After  a  hundred  delays,  and 
a  hundred  different  days  fixed  and  put  ofif,  at  last  it  is  officially 
announced  here  that  the  Court  arrives  on  the  21st;  but  still  the 
21st  is  not  come,  and  many  still  doubt  if  it  will  bring  them. 
At  all  events,  as  they  arrive  only  for  a  short  time,  and  as  we 
shall  not  remain  here  much  longer,  and  that  it  leads  to  nothing 
but  to  making  a  curtsey  in  a  circle,  I  think  we  may  very  well 
dispense  with  showing  our  faded  faces  in  a  court  which  could 
see  or  know  nothingf  but  the  worst  of  us.     .     .     . 


o 


Saturday,  March  22nd. — The  King  was  to  pass  by  our 
windows  between  twelve  and  one  o'clock.  The  military 
lined  the  streets  from  La  Lanterne  as  far  as  the  Palais 
Carrega.  All  the  Court  arrived  in  three  somewhat 
shabby-looking  coaches.  A  great  many  people  in  the 
streets,  but  not  a  crowd  for  Genoa.  No  applause,  no 
'  vivas,'  except  from  a  dozen  little  boys  in  the  Strada  Balbi. 
Half  an  hour  after  they  had  passed,  the  town  was  as  quiet 
as  usual.     Everyone  seemed  agreed  to  be  indifferent. 


1817]  THE    DUG   DE    DALBERG.  119 

Sunday,  2Drd. — In  the  morning  went  to  the  Church  of 
Annunciata,  where  the  King  and  Royal  Family  attended 
Mass.  There  was  nothing  extraordinary  prepared  for 
them.  There  were  chairs  and  cushions  before  the  altar. 
The  Guards'  band  played,  but  it  was  operatic  music 
instead  of  sacred  music.  There  was  not  a  single  lady 
of  distinction  present,  though  usually  there  are  many  at 
this  church. 

Tuesday,  April  1st. — M,  de  Staremberg  and  the  Due 
de  Dalberg*  amused  themselves  with  making  April  fools  of 
everybody.  They  sent  me  a  note  from  Prince  Kasloffsky, 
inviting  me  to  breakfast  at  his  house  at  eleven  to-morrow ; 
and  they  sent  him  a  letter  in  my  name,  claiming  his 
protection  for  an  individual  oppressed  here  for  his  poli- 
tical sentiments. 

Friday,  4ith. — About  seven  o'clock  there  was  a  beau- 
tiful procession  from  the  Church  of  the  Cannes  to  ano- 
ther church,  '  La  Santa  Fede,'  where  they  deposit  a  figure 
of  Jesus  Christ ;  they  carry  it  upon  a  catafalque  under  a 
cover,  and  surrounded  by  candles.  This  ceremony  is 
said  to  take  place  only  once  in  a  hundred  years.  It  was 
a  most  picturesque  coup-d'ceil. 

Miss  Berry  to  Lady  E.  Stuart. 

April  5,  1817, 

How  I  lament  over  the  accounts  you  give  me  of  poor  Stael, 

which  I  had  heard  before  from  the  Due  de  Dalberg.      Amidst 

all  the  numerous  host  of  her  admirers,  lovers,  and  friends,  I 

believe  few  will  more  sincerely  regret  her  than  myself.     If  she 

*  Emeric  Joseph  de  Dalberg ;  born  at  Mayence  1775 ;  married  to  Mdlle.  de 
Brignolles  1808,  on  which  occasion  she  was  appointed  by  Napoleon  '  Dame 
du  Palais '  to  the  Empress.  In  1810  he  was  raised  from  the  title  of  baron  to 
that  of  duke  by  Napoleon.  He  afterwards  signed  the  two  declarations  of 
March  7  and  10,  emanating  from  the  Congress,  against  Napoleon.  On  Na- 
poleon's return  the  Due  de  Dalberg  was  amongst  the  twelve  persons  he 
banished,  and  whose  estates  he  confiscated.  After  the  second  restoration  of 
the  Bourbons  he  accepted  a  diplomatic  mission  to  the  King  of  Sardinia, 
&c.     His  only  daughter  was  the  late  Countess  Granville. 


120  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1817 

were  not  too  ill  I  should  much  like  to  write  to  her,  but  I  fear 
my  letter  arriving  mal-apropos,  or  with  a  word  too  much  or  too 
little  in  it.  They  say  she  is  leaving  this  world  with  much 
regret.  I  should  like  to  tell  her  how  willing  I  should  be  to  die 
for  her. 


Monday,  7th.  —  Dined  at  the  French  Ambassador's, 
After  the  second  course  a  great  noise  was  heard  in  the 
streets,  which  the  Ambassador  did  not  wish  us  to  notice. 
But  Madame  de  Gabriac  knew  that  it  was  the  pro- 
cession they  call  here  'La  Casacchia,'  and  that  it  was 
well  worth  the  seeing.  It  was  passing  at  the  time,  and 
we  and  more  than  half  the  company  went  out  upon 
the  terrace  to  see  it.  It  is  a  confraternity  of  St.  James, 
which  every  year  makes  this  procession  to  some  convent 
about  a  mile  from  Genoa ;  then  half  a  dozen  other  fra- 
ternities of  penitents,  all  distinguished  by  their  dress ; 
and  Capuchins,  more  brilliant  the  one  than  the  other, 
carrying  enormous  metal  crosses,  highly  ornamented,  and 
so  heavy  that  one  could  scarcely  conceive  it  possible  one 
man  could  carry  them  ;  then  came  what  they  call  '  La 
Caisse,' — a  representation  in  coloured  figures  as  large  as 
life  of  the  good  deeds  of  their  saint.  This  enormous 
'  caisse '  is  carried  also  upon  the  backs  of  men  ;  and 
aU  this  is  accompanied  by  bands  of  not  very  good  music, 
and  by  an  immense  crowd  of  men  and  women. 

Tuesday,  2Wi. — The  French  Ambassador  came  at  nine 
o'clock  to  read  to  us  the  '  Memoirs  of  Bonaparte,'  written 
by  himself,  and  sent  to  be  published  in  England.  In 
France  they  are  up  to  the  present  time  prohibited  ;  and 
the  Ambassador's  copy  was  transcribed  from  one  of  the 
five  that  they  say  are  now  in  Paris.  They  are  interesting 
beyond  expression — all  in  resumes,  with  a  masterly 
sketch  of  different  epochs  ;  modest  as  to  his  actions  in 
war  ;  insolent  and  sometimes  fanfaron  as  to  his  conduct 
and  relations  in  peace. 


1817]  LETTER   TO    MADAME    DE    STAEL.  121 

Friday^  Map  2nd. — We  dined  early,  to  see  the  military- 
manoeuvre  which  was  to  take  place  in  the  Plain  de  Bo- 
zanio,  on  the  slope  of  the  ramparts.  Like  everything  at 
Genoa,  it  gave  rather  the  idea  of  a  picture  or  of  a  some- 
thing arranged  at  pleasure  than  of  a  simple  combination 
of  every-day  objects.  The  magnificent  amphitheatre  of 
mountains,  the  pureness  of  the  sky,  the  setting  sun  shining 
upon  the  ornamented  villas  of  Albaro  and  upon  the  walls 
of  the  town,  with  the  plain  below  covered  with  multitudes 
of  people  ;  the  troops  and  the  King  with  his  staff  making 
evolutions  in  the  plain,  and  then  the  attack  on  the  bridge, 
which  seemed  like  nothing  short  of  a  bouquet  of  fire- 
works ;  altogether  formed  one  of  the  most  charming 
scenes  I  have  enjoyed  for  a  long  time. 

Extract  of  Letter  froim  Miss  Berry  to  Madame  de  Stael. 

Genoa,  May  1817. 
Where  do  you  mean  to  pass  the  summer  ?  Have  you  really, 
as  they  say,  the  intention  of  returning  to  Italy  next  winter  ? 
Pray  answer  these  questions,  or  make  some  one  else  answer  for 
you.  You  would  forgive  me  if  you  did  but  know  what  it  is  to 
have  passed  eight  months  at  Genoa.  You  would  understand 
the  thirst  one  must  feel  for  some  more  interesting  society — for 
some  ejoanchemens  de  coeur  et  de  Vesprit  with  those  who  are 
capable  of  feeling  with  and  for  one.  No  such  thing  exists  here  ; 
it  is  the  only  fault  of  an  enchanting  place,  which,  if  differently 
peopled,  would  be  an  earthly  paradise.  To  remain  always  in 
the  noviciate  of  society,  with  that  only  one  sad  consolation  that 
it  would  gain  nothing  by  being  better  known  ;  to  pass  one's 
life  without  books — for  there  are  none  to  be  found  here — and 
without  conversation —  for  it  is  unknown  here — is  an  intellectual 
fast  which  exhausts  and  weakens  me  morally,  and  influences 
much  and  painfully  my  physical  well-being.  We  have  nearly 
settled  to  remain  here  during  the  summer  instead  of  going  to 
Florence,  on  account  of  the  illnesses  there  prevailing.  Give  me 
the  hope,  however  distant,  of  seeing  you  somewhere ;  of  having 
the  happiness  of  finding  myself  with  you  in  Italy,  or  in  Switzer- 
land, or  at  Paris.     Tell  me  where  you  pass  next  autumn  or 


122  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1817 

winter,  and  I  shall  try  to  be  with  you.  After  complaining  so 
much  of  the  society  of  Grenoa,  I  must  say  that  at  this  moment 
we  have  some  agreeable  people  in  the  corps  diplomatique : 
the  Due  d'Alberg,  who  keeps  me  a  little  au  courant  of  all 
that  is  going  on  in  France — who  has  often  procured  me  news  of 
you,  and  with  whom  I  can  talk  over  many  of  our  mutual  ac- 
quaintances ;  Prince  Kasloffsky,  whose  mind  is  not  smothered  in 
the  enormous  mass  of  flesh  in  which  it  dwells — you  saw  him  at 
Paris  this  autumn ;  and  Prince  Staremberg,  who  has  to  me  the 
attraction  of  a  very  long  and  intimate  acquaintance.  Adieu  ! 
I  write  to  make  you  write ;  do  not  let  me  miss  my  aim.  Adieu ! 
Keep  well ;  and  live  to  enlighten,  to  raise,  and  to  interest  all 
who  can  appreciate  you ;  to  be  the  glory  of  your  own  sex,  and 
the  worthy  rival  of  the  other.* 


J  0  U  K  N  A  L. 

Tuesday,  loth, — My  father  had  a  slight  swelluig  on 
his  hand  ;  we  sent  for  the  surgeon. 

Wednesday,  l^th. — My  father's  arm  much  more  swollen, 
aud  he  so  unwell  that  I  sent  immediately  for  Ferrari ;  he 
found  him  with  very  little  fever,  but  much  inflammation 
in  the  hand.  He  continued  all  day  very  ill,  and,  though 
not  suffering  much  positive  pain,  very  weak,  and  to  our 
eyes  much  changed. 

Thursday,  15th. — The  surgeon  and  the  physician  came 
at  ten  o'clock,  and  found  a  decided  gangrene  in  my  father's 
hand.  The  sudden  and  violent  manner  in  which  it 
showed  itself  was  indeed  frightful.  Ferrari  did  not  con- 
ceal from  us  that  he  feared  the  worst  if  its  progress  con- 
tinued. 

*  It  would  seem  tliat  tlie  Miss  Berrys  had  exerted  themselves,  as  usual, 
to  enliven  the  society  in  which  they  found  themselves  placed. 

Extract  of  letter  from  Professor  Playfair: — 'Naples,  April  1817. — Lord 
Minto  added  that  but  for  your  house,  or  the  society  you  collected,  Genoa 
would  have  been  insupportable.  I  have  often  admired,  as  indeed  all  the 
world  does,  that  power  which,  by  the  above  account,  has  this  winter  been 
exerted  in  making  something-  out  of  nothing — society  out  of  solitude.' 


1817]  DEATH    OF   HER   FATHER.  123 

Friday^  16th. — To  all  appearance  father's  arm  was 
much  better  this  morning ;  and  as  his  pulse  kept  up,  and 
they  still  feared  inflammation,  they  did  not  begin  quinine. 
His  head  was  clear,  and  he  remained  in  bed  very 
patiently. 

Saturday,  17th. — My  father's  arm  continued  to  look 
better ;  they  thought  the  gangrene  was  not  deeper  than 
the  epidermis,  and  the  inflammation  was  sufficiently 
abated  to  commence  bark. 

Sunday,  18th. — My  father  was  thought  to  be  much 
better  this  morning.  I  confess  I  had  not  much  confidence 
in  this  '  better ; '  I  thought  that  even  if  the  arm  went 
on  well,  that  some  fresh  attack  would  follow ;  they  gave 
him  quinine  and  port  wine.  At  dinner-time  we  remarked 
a  change  in  my  father ;  his  pulse  was  weaker ;  we  gave  him 
more  wine,  as  they  had  ordered,  and  sent  for  the  phy- 
sician. The  surgeon  arrived  about  six  o'clock ;  he  found 
a  considerable  change  in  his  patient.  I  asked  for  more 
wine  to  be  given,  though  with  the  full  conviction  that  all 
was  too  late.  The  physician  came,  and  confirmed  my 
fears — all  was  changed,  and  everything  as  bad  as  it  could 
be.  We  never  left  the  room  or  my  father's  bed  for  an 
instant.  I  kept  the  surgeon  with  us,  and  wrote  a  line  to 
Andreas  to  tell  him  that  my  father  was  dying,  and  that  I 
feared  would  not  survive  the  night.  That  good  friend 
came  immediately,  and  did  not  leave  us  till  all  was  over, 
at  a  quarter  to  six  in  the  morning.  The  physician  told 
us  at  once,  what  was  impossible  not  to  see,  that  there  was 
absolutely  nothing  to  do  but  to  try  and  make  his  passage 
from  life  to  death  as  peaceable  as  possible ;  and,  certainly, 
there  never  was  a  more  tranquil  death  than  his.  He  re- 
tained his  senses  (with  only  a  few  moments  of  wandering) 
till  he  lost  his  speech,  about  an  hour  before  his  last  breath, 
which  he  drew  as  quietly  as  if  he  were  sleeping.  He  did 
not  suffer;  there  was  not  the  slightest  convulsion  nor 
alteration  of  the  features.     He  had  not  the  least  idea  of 


124  MISS    BERKY's   journal.  [1817 

dying,  and  only  spoke  of  the  annoyance  of  his  arm,  which 
might  prevent  him  for  several  days  from  using  it  or  get- 
ting lip.  When  Andreas  saw  there  was  really  no  hope, 
he  insisted  that  it  was  my  duty  to  inform  him  of  his  state. 
I  yielded,  though  I  dreaded  the  effect  it  might  have  on. 
him.  I  told  him  that  we  thought  him  very  ill ;  that  he 
was  in  great  danger;  that  we  prayed  to  God  for  him,  and 
that  he  must  do  the  same ;  but  his  feelings  were  so 
deadened  it  did  not  produce  on  him  the  effect  I  expected. 
He  said  he  had  nothing  to  arrange,  which  was  true ;  but 
he  thought  he  should  be  better  if  he  could  only  sleep. 
He  had  given  us  all  his  blessing  several  times,  and  was 
always  wishing  us  to  go  to  bed.  He  died  in  peace  with 
heaven  and  earth,  without  knowing  that  he  was  going  to 
leave  the  one  or  rise  asrain  in  the  other.  I  had  been 
attacked  with  spasm  in  the  head  in  the  evening,  and  it  is 
not  easy  to  describe  what  that  night  was ;  hardly  could  I 
drag  myself  to  bed  at  half  past  six  o'clock,  after  having 
closed  all  the  blinds  in  the  house. 

Monday,  l^th. — I  slept  till  nine  o'clock,  but  woke  with 
spasm  in  tlie  head  stronger  than  ever,  and  obliged  to  lie 
down  again,  but  not  before  I  had  seen  Mr.  Dick,  an 
English  clergyman  who  is  here.  I  spoke  to  him  of  the 
funeral,  and  settled  he  was  to  consult  with  Andreas  on 
the  subject,  who,  from  pure  tenderness  of  heart,  attended 
to  us  like  a  brother,  and  undertook  the  charge  of  all  these 
melancholy  duties,  which  here  are  so  hurried  one  upon 
another  that  we  should  not  have  been  able  to  fulfil  them. 

Tuesday,  20th. — I  am  suffering  from  extreme  weakness. 
Agnes  bore  it  better  than  I  did ;  I  fear  she  will  suffer 
more  afterwards.  The  funeral  takes  place  to-morrow 
morning.  We  went  into  my  father's  room  with  them  (Mr. 
Dick  and  Andreas)  for  the  last  time.  Never  was  death 
less  painful  to  look  at ;  there  was  no  other  change  than 
the  paleness  of  death  upon  the  face,  but  it  was  the  most 
perfect  calm.     We  prayed  at  the  side  of  his  coffin  ;  Agnes 


1817]  HIS    FUNERAL.  125 

and  I  kissed  his  cold  face,  and  we  left  him  for  the  last 
time.  And  this  is  human  life  !  How  strange  a  thing, 
when  one  can  neither  enjoy  it,  nor  wish  to  quit  it ! 

Wednesday^  2\st. — Fine  morning;  at  eight  o'clock, 
Staremberg,  Mr.  Dick,  and  Martignoni  were  at  our  house. 
We  got  into  one  of  the  carriages  with  Prince  Staremberg, 
and  Mr.  Dick  and  Martignoni  in  the  other.  They  went 
straight  to  the  cemetery ;  we  stopped  half-an-hour  at  the 
Hotel  de  la  Villa  for  Lord  Jersey.  The  cemetery  is  on 
the  bastion  of  Carignano ;  it  is  an  enclosure  made  by  high 
walls.  On  entering  there  is  a  sort  of  rotunda  with  two 
recesses.  In  one  was  the  coffin ;  and  in  the  rotunda  we 
found  the  Consul,  the  Vice-Consul,  and  about  twenty  gen- 
tlemen of  tlie  colony,  whom  I  could  not  then  look  at,  and 
whom  I  probably  should  not  have  known  had  I  done  so. 
The  service  could  not  have  been  better  read  than  by  Mr. 
Dick,  and  when  the  coffin  was  carried  into  the  cemetery 
we  found  ourselves  in  a  place  planted  with  Cyprus  and 
roses,  and  covered  with  grass,  where  we  knelt  down,  with 
a  feeling  of  grief  perhaps  less  overwhelming,  less  distress- 
ing, than  we  should  have  experienced  at  the  side  of  a 
vault  in  a  church.  Each  coffin  here  has  a  small  vault  to 
itself  I  intend  to  return  and  visit  this  place  at  leisure 
when  I  am  in  a  fitter  state  to  see  it.  The  service  finished, 
we  returned  home,  where  our  two  friends  left  us. 

Miss  Berry's  letter  to  Madame  de  Stael,  probably  her 
last,  and  Madame  de  Stael's  to  her,  docketed  '  Madame 
de  Stael's  last  letter,'  belong  to  this  period  : — 

Extract  of  a  Letter  from  Miss  Berry  to  Madame  de  Stael. 

Genoa,  May  1817. 

...     In  the  state  of  dejection  and  exhaustion  of  body  and 

mind   in  which  I  find   myself,   I  looked  much  more  to  your 

powers  than  to   my  own  for  assistance.     If  you  have  seen  my 

compatriots,  Lord  and  Lady  Jersey,  who  have  just  left  us,  you  will 


126  MISS   BEERY'S    COREESPONDENCE.  [1817 

already  know  that  we  have  lost  that  good  father  to  whom  you 
sent  your  kind  remembrance  !  His  pure  and  guileless  soul  has 
quitted  a  world  in  which  he  had  met  with  nothing  but  difficul- 
ties and  injustice.  His  death  leaves  us  without  a  duty  to  fulfil 
towards  the  living  generation ;  nor  have  we  any  tie  with  that 
which  is  to  come.  This  melancholy  state  of  independence 
affords  us  at  least  the  liberty  to  go  where  we  wish.  I  should 
wish  to  go  and  seek  you  directly  ;  it  would  be  the  thing  in  the 
world  to  do  me  most  good ;  but,  where  shall  you  be  ? 

From  Madame  de  Stael  to  Miss  Berry. 

II  m'est  arrive,  my  dear  friend,  un  accident  vraiment  epou- 

vantable  a  la  suite  de  ma  maladie ;  c'est  de  ne  pouvoir  faire 

presqu'aucun  usage  ni  de  mes  pieds,  ni  de  mes  mains,  a  cause 

des  crampes  cruelles  que  j'eprouve.    Je  suis   done  couchee  sur 

le  dos  depuis  quatre-vingt-dix  jours  comme  une  tortue,  mais 

avec  beaucoup  plus  d'agitation   d'esprit  et  de  souffrance  d'ima- 

o'ination  que  cet  animal.     Je  comptois  partir  le  premier  de  Mai 

pour  la  Suisse,  les  medecins  m'ont  promis  le  premier  de  Juin  : 

je  voudrois  me  flatter  du  premier  de  Juillet,  et  je  passe  ma  vie 

a  me  tromper,  ou   a  me  desesperer  ;  il  y  a  veritablement  une 

punition  du  Ciel,  quand  la  personne  du  monde  la  plus  active  se 

trouve  pour  ainsi  dire  comme  petrifiee.     Je  ne  le  suis  pourtant 

pas,  ni   d'esprit,    ni  de  coeur,  voila  pourquoi  je  regrette  votre 

entretien  et  votre  amitie.    Comment  pourrois-je  jouir  de  I'un  et 

de  I'autre  ?   En  verite  je  n'en  sais  rien.  Si  j'ai  la  possibilite  d'etre 

transportee,  fut-ce  comme  un  paquet  dans  ma  voiture,  je  serai  a 

Coppet  le  15  Juillet,  etaEome  les  premiers  jours  deNovembre; 

mais  si,  comme  un  triste  presage  me  le  dit  au  fond  du  coeur, 

je  suis  forcee  de  ne  pas  bouger  de  Paris,  vous  m'y  trouverez  si 

vous  retournez  en  Angleterre,  mais  vous  m'y  retrouveriez  si  des- 

esperee  que  je  ne  serois  bonne  a  rien  qu'a  vous  affliger.    Voila 

mon  etat  bizarrement  cruel,  et  qui  a  renverse  tous  mes  projets 

dans  ce  monde.     Puisse   le   bon  Dieu  me  faire  sortir   de  cet 

abyme  oii  sa  main  seule  pent  metre  secourable.     Mandez-moi 

vos  projets,  et  croyez  que  personne  ne  pent  apprecier  plus  vive- 

ment  que  moi  tout  ce  que  vous  valez  a  tant  d'egards.    Rappellez 

moi  au  souvenir  de  votre  pere  et  de  votre  soeur,  et  repondez 

moi  directement  ici.    Ma  fille,  qui,  Dieu  merci,  est  tres-heureuse- 

ment  accouchee  d'une  grosse  fille  aussi  ronde  que  je  I'etois  jadis. 


1817]  LETTER    FROM    PROFESSOR   PLAYFAIR.  127 

se  rappelle  a  votre  souvenir,  et  toute  ma  famille  souhaite  de  ne 
pas  etre  oubliee  d'une  personne  aussi  superieure  que  vous.  Fe- 
merciez  en  mon  nom  mes  amis  de  Genes  qui  ne  m'ont  pas  oubliee. 

Mad.  la  Baronne  de  Stael  Holstein, 
Rue  Neuve  des  Mathurins,  No.  9,  a  Paris, 
ce  26  Mai  1817. 

On  the  25th  of  May  the  Miss  Berrys  had  the  comfort 
of  seeing  their  constant  and  intimate  friend,  Professor 
Playfair;  he  remained  at  Genoa  till  the  7th  of  June 
following,  when  he  continued  his  tour  in  Italy. 

From  Professor  Playfair. 

Turin,  lOth  June  1817. 

My  dear  Madam, — You  are  not  to  expect  in  this  letter  any- 
thing but  mere  gossip.  My  letters  moral  and  entertaining  (as 
Mrs.  Eowe  has  it)  shall  begin  with  my  next,  from  Milan.  .  .  . 
The  situation  of  this  place  is  very  beautiful,  on  the  side  of  the 
Po,  and  in  a  rich  valley,  with  the  fine  hill  of  Superga  on  one 
side,  and  the  chain  of  the  high  Alps,  with  their  snowy  summits, 
on  the  other.  The  town  itself,  too,  is  remarkable — well  built, 
clean,  and  regular,  far  beyond  the  ordinary  measure  of  an  Italian 
city.  I  have  been  much  indebted  to  M.  Viviani  for  the  intro- 
duction he  gave  me  to  the  astronomer  Plana,  whom  I  have 
found  a  very  agreeable  as  well  as  a  very  intelligent  man,  full  of 
ardour  for  the  pursuits  of  science. 

Now  that  I  am  approaching  to  my  exit  from  Italy,  I  cannot 
but  congratulate  myself  in  having  seen  the  finest  show  that 
Europe,  perhaps  the  world,  has  to  boast  of.  I  am  aware,  however, 
that  there  are  some  who  will  dispute  the  character  I  give  of 
Italy.  Last  winter,  while  we  were  engaged  at  Rome  in  admiring 
the  antiquities  and  remains  of  that  ancient  metropolis,  a  party 
arrived  from  Grreece.  They  told  us  that  we  were  in  a  great  error  ; 
that  all  the  beauties  we  saw  were  nothing  to  those  which  Athens 
alone  could  furnish  ;  that  if  we  had  seen  the  Acropolis,  the 
Piraeus,  the  Temple  of  Minerva,  we  would  have  no  admiration 
to  bestow  on  what  we  now  saw — mere  imitations  of  models  to 
the  excellence  of  which  it  was  impossible  to  reach.  While  we 
were  listening  to  this  discourse,  another  set  of  travellers  arrived 
from  Egypt.    Alas  !  say  they,  how  you  are  all  deceived !  What 


128  MISS    BEKRY's    COERESPONDENCE.  [1817 

is  there  in  GTreece  or  Italy  that  for  antiquity  or  magnificence 
can  be  compared  to  the  Pyramids,  to  the  Euins  of  Thebes  or 
Heliopolis.  On  comparing  these  opposite  opinions  we  saw  some 
reason  for  holding  by  our  first  supposition.  It  is  plain  that  in 
the  estimate  travellers  form  of  the  comparative  beauty  of  the 
scenes  they  have  visited,  a  little  egoisms  often  finds  means  to 
intrude  itself;  and  that  a  man  sets  the  highest  value,  not  simply 
on  what  is  best,  but  what  has  cost  him  most  pains,  or  what  brings 
with  it  most  illustration.  This,  at  least,  is  the  way  in  which 
one  may  console  himself  for  not  having  seen  Grreece  or  Egypt. 

I  must  entreat  you  to  say  to  M.  Viviani,  that  when  on  the 
summit  of  the  Bochatta,  I  saw  at  the  distance  of  several  miles, 
and  bearing  exactly  SW.,  what  seemed  a  flat  face  of  a  stone  of 
an  oval  form,  of  immense  size,  the  longest  diameter  of  the  oval 
vertical.  The  whole  was  seen  against  a  hill  which  was  beyond 
it,  except  only  the  upper  part  of  the  oval,  which  was  so  high  as 
to  be  seen  against  the  sky.  I  could  not  get  at  my  telescope, 
which  probably  would  have  explained  the  matter,  and  have  only 
to  look  for  information  from  our  friend,  who  is  so  well  acquainted 
with  all  the  phenomena'  of  that  part,  and  can  tell  at  once 
whether  this  is  a  rock,  a  side  of  a  hill,  or  a  mere  deception. 

After  visiting  Susa  and  the  Pass  which  the  Doria  has  cut 
through  the  great  bulwark  of  the  Alps,  I  shall  go  on  to  Milan, 
from  which  I  will  not  fail  to  write. 

.  .  .  I  must  beg  to  be  remembered  to  M.  Viviani.  I  had 
the  pleasure  to  see  him  the  morning  I  left  Genoa ;  he  told  me 
you  were  highly  pleased  with  the  improvisation  you  had  heard 
the  evening  before. 

Yours,  with  esteem  and  affection, 

J.  P. 
From  Professor  Play  fair. 

Milan,  18th  June  1817. 
The  more  I  think,  my  dear  Madam,  of  what  I  have  under- 
taken to  do,  the  more  I  wonder  at  my  own  boldness,  and  the  less 
do  I  find  myself  qualified  for  the  task.  To  tell  you  anything  on 
the  subjects  of  life,  conduct,  or  manners,  of  which  you  are  not 
already  much  more  aware  than  I  am  myself — anything  that 
must  not  appear  to  you  as  a  truism,  or  a  self-evident  proposition 
which  nobody  needs  to  be  put  in  mind  of,  is  what  I  cannot 
reasonably  expect.     If  I  were  to  talk  to  you  of  astronomy  or 


1817]  LETTER    FEOxM    PROFESSOR    PLAYFAIR.  129 

geology — if  I  had  undertaken  to  teach  you  something  about 
planets  or  about  stars,  I  might  hope  to  say  something  that 
would  either  be  new  or  seem  to  be  so;  but  on  the  subject  of 
which  I  am  to  write,  nothing  of  the  sort  can  be  expected.  You 
are,  of  all  the  people  I  know,  the  person  on  whose  tact  and 
knowledge  of  the  world  I  have  ever  had  the  most  entire  re- 
liance ;  and  that  I  should  now  come  forward  to  admonish  or 
instruct,  is  a  pretension  that  appears,  even  to  myself,  as  incon- 
sistent as  it  is  conceited  and  arrogant.  Yet,  having  committed 
a  great  error  in  undertaking,  1  will  not  commit  one  still  greater 
by  not  endeavouring  to  do  the  best  I  can. 

Indeed,  tho'  I  am  alarmed  at  the  boldness  of  my  undertaking, 
there  is  matter  in  the  success  of  which,  I  feel  more  deeply  inte- 
rested. In  the  first  place,  then,  I  must  begin  with  taking  notice 
of  a  sentiment  to  which,  in  the  course  of  some  of  our  conver- 
sations, you  frequently  reverted,  and  which,  at  the  same  time,  I 
cannot  but  consider  as  extremely  fallacious.  Such,  you  said,  is 
my  character ;  such  is  the  manner  in  which  nature  has  deter- 
mined that  I  should  be  affected  in  certain  circumstances.  It  is 
a  thing  which  I  cannot  help;  it  is  a  force  which  I  cannot 
but  obey.  Now,  my  dear  Madam,  it  seems  to  me  that  this 
is  a  dangerous  plea,  and  one  that  can  fairly  be  made  use  of, 
on  very  few  occasions.  If  our  emotions  are  not  always  under 
the  control  of  the  will,  the  degree  of  them,  and  still  more  the 
expression,  certainly  are;  and  were  it  otherwise,  all  instruc- 
tion and  all  moral  precept  would  be  vain.  There  is  certainly 
a  power  in  the  mind  to  moderate  its  feelings,  and  to  regulate 
the  degree  and  the  direction  in  which  they  are  to  be  exer- 
cised, without  which  we  could  not  be  accountable  creatures ; 
we  could  not  be  guided  by  motives,  nor  admit  of  government 
by  rewards  or  punishments.  This  point,  therefore,  must  be 
given  up,  otherwise  there  is  no  error  that  it  might  not  be 
brought  to  j  ustify — no  temper  of  mind  and  no  course  of  action 
which  it  might  not  be  employed  to  defend.  Supposing,  there- 
fore, that  this  argument  is  given  up,  the  next  thing  I  have  to 
urge  is  the  necessity  of  subduing  the  strength  of  certain  emotions, 
which,  tho'  in  themselves  founded  in  reason  and  good  feeling, 
cannot  be  indulged  beyond  certain  limits  without  the  greatest 
danger  both  to  one's  own  happiness  and  that  of  others.  The 
quick  and  lively  perception  of  the  difference  between  right  and 

VOL.  III.  £ 


130  MISS   BERRY'S   CORRESPONDENCE.  [1817 

wrong  in  all  its  shades  and  dependencies,  and  the  emotions 
excited  by  such  perceptions,  are  things  of  this  kind.  They  are 
in  themselves  excellent  and  valuable  parts  of  the  constitution  of 
the  mind,  and  if  not  given  by  nature,  are  what  education  and 
experience  will  very  imperfectly  bestow.  But  this  species  of 
intellectual  excellence  must  be  watched  over  with  the  greatest 
care.  The  feelings  in  question,  tho'  founded  in  generosity  and 
in  justice,  are  apt  to  form  an  alliance  with  others  of  an  opposite 
character,  such  as  are  founded  on  selfishness  and  prejudice. 
Thus,  when  the  errors  and  failures  of  others  in  their  duty,  come 
to  trench  on  our  interests,  our  opinions,  or  our  prejudices,  their 
amount  comes  to  be  greatly  overrated;  it  acts  on  the  temper 
and  on  the  angry  and  irascible  emotions.  Indeed,  we  never 
give  loose  to  those  emotions  so  much  as  whenever  anger  seems 
justified  by  feelings  that  are  ultimately  founded  on  justice  and 
humanity.  It  is  in  such  cases  that  right  and  well-constituted 
miinds  are  in  the  greatest  danger.  They  think  that  they  have 
justice  on  their  side  ;  to  forgive  seems  to  be  wanting  in  a  proper 
discrimination  between  good  and  evil,  and  to  be  angry  seems 
only  to  be  just.  Hence  it  is  that  the  nicer  discriminations  of 
moral  sentiment,  combining  with  feelings  of  a  selfish  natm-e, 
give  a  hardness  and  severity  to  the  character  quite  foreign  from 
its  natural  constitution. 

Thus,  my  dear  Madam,  if  you  will  allow  me  to  bring  this 
reasoning  closer  to  the  point,  I  am  willing  to  allow  that  the  im- 
proper conduct  you  complained  of  in  some  of  your  friends  was 
very  real,  but  not  of  so  deep  a  character  but  that  it  ought  in 
a  great  measure  to  have  been  overlooked,  and  certainly  not 
treated  with  that  indignation  that  ought  to  be  reserved  for 
great  offences.  Time,  I  am  sure,  and  distance  from  the  present 
scene,  will  bring  you  to  be  of  this  opinion  if  you  are  not  already 
so ;  the  only  thing  wanted  is  to  try  to  anticipate  on  all  such 
occasions  a  judgment  which  time  and  distance  are  always  sure 
to  bring  about.  The  mind  will  thus  take  a  softer  tone,  and  see 
things,  not  in  the  erroneous  perspective  that  arises  from  viewing 
them  too  near,  but  according  to  the  true  dimensions  which 
actually  belong  to  them. 

Let  me  entreat  you  to  consider  that  the  angry  emotions, 
even  when  perfectly  well  founded,  may  easily  run  into  excess, 
and  by  indulgence  may  injure  the  temper  in  a  most  pernicious 


1817]  SIR   WILLIAM    GELL.  131 

degree — in  a  degree  fatal  to  one's  own  happiness,  and  that  of  all 
one's  friends.  This  is  a  danger  to  which  the  minds  best  consti- 
tuted and  most  nicely  formed  are  the  most  exposed,  and  it  is 
for  that  reason  that  you  ought  particularly  to  be  on  your  guard 
against  it.  .  .  .  Nothing  but  the  most  perfect  conviction 
of  the  truth  of  what  I  now  state  could  have  induced  me  to  take 
a  liberty  that  still  terrifies  me  when  I  think  of  it.  To  have 
written  )'-ou  so  freely  is  the  greatest  proof  of  friendship  I  could 
give  you,  and  for  you  to  receive  it  in  good  part  is  the  greatest 
you  can  give  to  me.     .     . 

Remember  me  to  Miss  Agnes,  and  believe,  my  dear  Miss 
Berry,  that  I  am,  with  every  sentiment  of  esteem  and  affection, 
yours,  &c. 

John  Pla-yfair. 

From  Sir  William  Gell  to  the  Miss  Berrys. 

Naples:  June  5,  1817. 
My  deak  Friends, — The  Marchese  Mari,  your  landlord,  as  he 
informs  us,  has  offered  to  carry  letters  to  you  at  Genoa,  and 
there  is  no  resisting  such  an  opportunity,  when  it  seems  that 
letters  sent  to  you  by  the  post  are  all  detained  on  the  way.  I 
shall  say  nothing  on  any  subject  which  can  be  disagreeable  to 
you ;  but  beg  and  entreat  that  from  the  day  of  receiving  this, 
you  will  not  forget  that  there  are  persons  in  this  part  of  the 
world  who  really  love  and  esteem  you,  and  who  are  most  anxious 
to  know  what  you  are  doing,  and  how  you  are  doing.  My  royal 
mistress  has  ordered  me  to  Eome,  so  I  am  to  set  off  to-morrow. 
H.E.H.  is,  however,  at  the  Eaffinella  at  Frascati,  Lucien's 
villa,  which  she  has  hired, — that  is,  if  she  has  not  been  induced 
by  clerico-military  fetes  at  Eome  to  stay  there  instead,  for  our 
resolutions  on  the  subject  of  strict  incognita  are  easily  shaken. 
All  I  can  hope  to  do  during  the  month  I  am  to  stay  is  to  per- 
suade her  not  to  commit  herself  too  much  with  the  ex-family, 
who  will,  of  course,  try  to  save  themselves,  now  they  are 
deservedly  reduced  to  the  last  extremity  by  their  detected  in- 
trigues and  restlessness,  by  pulling  her  down  with  them.  '  Eome 
is  our  last  resource ;  for  in  one  way  or  other  we  have  wasted 
almost  all  the  other  kingdoms  of  Europe,  and  shall  soon,  if  we 
don't  take  care,  have  no  place  to  go  to  but  America.  I  hope  to 
be  left  at  Eome  while  the  rest  of  the  family  are  at  Frascati,  and 

K   2 


132  MISS   berry's   correspondence.  [1817 

only  to  be  sent  for  on  holidays,  as  it  is  quite  impossible  for  jne 
to  be  of  any  use  in  handing  about,  as  I  cannot  walk  straight, 
and  still  less  descend  a  staircase.  I  have  no  chance  but  learnins: 
to  stand  on  my  head,  which  would  suit  the  family  pretty  well. 
I  wish  I  could  send  you  a  number  of  Pompeiana, 
which  Mr.  Gandy  is  publishing  in  London  from  my  sketches, 
and  which  he  says  is  much  in  vogue ;  but  I  have  not  got  one. 
Pray  write  to  me  at  Eome,  being  yours  most  atfectionately, 

Anacharsis. 

From  the  Honourable  R.  K.  Craven  to  Miss  Berry. 

I  cannot  send  this  without  a  few  words  from  my  own  indivi- 
dual hand,  though  I  trust  you  have  already  read  as  mine  every 
sentiment  expressed  at  the  beginning  of  G ell's  letter,  relative  to 
the  misfortune  you  have  experienced,  and  the  share  we  bear  in 
it,  as  well  as  in  every  other  event  that  may  touch  you.  I 
shall  therefore  not  dwell  upon  it,  but  proceed  to  say  that  this 
is  the  rumour  -of  yesterday.  Anacharsis  is  gone,  and  now 
on  his  way  to  Capua,  where  he  this  night  is  to  sleep.  His 
departure  vexes  me  on  several  accounts,  but  principally  on  his 
own.  I  don't  think  his  legs  are  in  a  fit  state  to  travel,  still  less 
to  support  his  weight  and  the  additional  one  of  our  august 
princess  up  and  down  the  stairs  of  Eomau  palaces-  These  are 
the  physical  objections,  and  moral  ones  I  leave  to  your  judg- 
ment to  point  out  to  yourself.  Mills  is  there,  and  will  be  some 
consolation  to  him,  and  I  hope  he  will  be  back  early  next  month. 
The  summer  has  been  a  long  time  declaring  itself,  but  has  at 
last  made  its  appearance  in  full  splendour.  I  wish  you  were  to 
be  here  to  drink  tea  with  us  to-morrow,  and  wander  about  the 
chesnut  groves  of  Pausilippo,  which  I  dare  say  you  have  never 
seen.  I  shall  make  several  short  excursions,  having  a  gig,  which 
you  know  is  the  only  real  happiness  on  earth.  My  mother 
remains  here  and  stays  the  whole  summer;  we  have  still  many 
English,  but  I  know  none  except  the  Crawfords.  The  Austrian 
troops  are  going  away,  and  then  nobody  will  be  able  to  arrive 
here  except  by  sea.  I  expect  Lord  Craven  in  September.  Lydia 
White  has  given  a  ball.  Pray  let  us  know  how  you  do,  and 
what  your  plans  are,  and  believe  me  yours  most  affectionately 

K.  K.  Craven. 


1817]  MISS   JOANNA   BAILLIE.  133 

From  Miss  Joanna  Baillie  to  Miss  Berry. 

Hampstead,  June  8,  1817. 
My  deak  Friend, — I  received  a  letter  from  Mrs.  Damer  a 
few  days  ago,  informing  me   of  the  melancholy  event  that  has 
taken  place  with  you  ;  and  I  have   seen   her  since  and  learnt 
the  particulars  concerning  it.     I  sympathise  with  you  and  your 
sister  most  truly :  for  I  know  well  that  the  advanced  age  of  a 
parent,  which  makes  such   a  loss   expected,  and  for  which  we 
ought  to  be  prepared,  does  not  therefore  make  it  less  afHicting. 
That  he  has  lived  to  a  great  age,  in  health  and  comfort  far  be- 
yond what  most  old  people  enjoy,  and  that  your   society  and 
affection  have  so  greatly  contributed  to  it,  is  pleasing  to  remem- 
ber ;  but  long  habits  broken  up,  and  the  removal  of  the  object 
of  those  habits,  who  bore  to  you  affection  of  a  nature  which  no 
other  can  bear,  makes  for  a  time  a  sad  blank  in  the  heart,  which 
will  not  be  comforted  by  reason.     May  you  both  have  a  better 
and  a  higher  source  of  comfort !  this  is  my  earnest  wish.     I  am 
glad  for  your  sakes  that  your  father  had  recovered  from  all  the 
fatigue  of  travelling  before  he  was  taken  ill,  and  that  he  has 
died  from  a  circumstance  which  might  have  happened  to  him 
here  or  anywhere  ;    and  I  am  glad  both  for  your  sake  and  his 
own  that  his  illness  was  so  short  and  hi&  end  without  suffering. 
Indeed,  I  should  be  very  ungrateful  if  I  were  not  glad  of  every 
circumstance  that  spared  him  pain  :  for  he  was  always  kind  to 
me,   and  received  me  with    a    friendly    welcome  whenever   I 
entered  his  door,   from   the  first  moment  that  your  kindness 
opened  that  door  to  me.     When  I  took  leave  of  him  in  Paris, 
he  wished  me  happiness  till  we  should  meet  again — '  If,'  said 
he,  with  a  graver  tone  of  voice,  '  we  ever  meet  again  in  this 
world.'     The  event  which  has  happened  came  across   my  mind 
at  the  time ;   but  he  looked  so  healthy  and  so  well  that  I  would 
not  allow  myself  to  think  seriously  of  it.     He  had  a  kind  and 
cheerful  and  guileless  heart,  and  I  shall  always  recollect  him 
with  gratitude.     .     .     .     WTien  you  return  to  your  own  coun- 
try, a  new  epoch  will  begin  in  your  life.     You  will  then  be  at 
liberty  to  adopt  any  plan  of  life  that  you  please.    I  have  often 
heard  you  regret,  and  I  thought  with  good  reason,  that  you 
lived  too  much  in  the  world.     .     .     .     Whatever  you  do,  your 
sister  and  you  have  my  earnest  wishes  for  your  happiness  ;  and 
God,  who   orders  everything  for  the  welfare  of  His  creatures. 


134  MISS   beret's    JOUENAL.  [1817 

sends  you  this  change  for  good.     Farewell !     Do  not  think  from 
what  I  have  said  that  I  wish  you  to  write  to  me  till  you  are  per- 
fectly so  disposed ;  for  I  shall  hear  of  you  by  Mrs.  Damer,  and 
shall  not  think  your  silence  arises  from  any  want  of  regard. 
Farewell  again  !     Yours  affectionately, 

J.  Baillie. 


JOUENAL, 

Saturday,  June  7th. — We  went  in  the  morning  with 
Andreas  and  Galliaffy  to  the  cemetery,  to  make  arrange- 
ments for  the  stone  that  we  wished  to  place  there.  It 
was  decided  that,  in  order  to  close  for  ever  the  small 
vault  in  which  the  bier  was  placed,  the  marble  must  be 
framed  in  the  stone  which  forms  the  covering. 

Extract  of  a  Letter  from  Miss  Berry  to  Lady  Elizabeth  Stuart. 

Genoa,  Saturday,  14th  June  1817. 
My  dear  Friend, — Ever  since  the  death  of  my  poor  father  I 
have  been  trying  to  write  to  you.  Spirits  have  been  wanting 
yet  more  than  time.  I  was  far  from  well  before  this  event  hap- 
pened, and  you  may  guess  what  effect  it  must  have  had  on 
nerves  so  cruelly  irritable  as  mine  !  Certain  it  is  that  at  his 
great  age  such  an  event  could  not  be  a  surprise ;  that  few  ill- 
nesses could  have  been  accompanied  with  less  suffering,  and  no 
death  with  less  horror ;  but  the  loss  of  our  last  duty  here  on 
earth  (in  our  peculiar  situation)  seems  to  leave  us  alone  in  the 
world,  with  little  interest  in  this  generation,  and  no  connexion 
with  the  next.  It  leaves  us  indeed  the  triste  liberty  of  dispos- 
ing of  ourselves  as  we  will,  and  my  will  would  probably  be  to 
go  directly  to  Paris,  and  in  your  society  and  that  of  some  few 
other  people  to  feel  myself  once  more  with  those  who  interest 
me,  and  who  {for  auld  lang  syne)  I  may  hope  still  a  little  to 
interest ;  but  the  health  of  both  of  us  so  much  calls  for  another 
winter  in  the  south.  .  .  .  You  will  see  the  Jerseys  in  a 
very  few  days ;  they  were  at  Grenoa  exactly  during  the  time*  of 
all  our  melancholy  confinement.  .  .  .  Nothing  could  be 
more  kind,  more  friendly,  than  their  attentions  to  us — much 
more  than  I  should  have  claimed  from  our  previous  intimacy. 


1817]  THE   TOWN   OF   SAVONNA.  135 

Tuesday^  July  8th. — ^We  went  this  morning  at  nine 
o'clock,  with  Viviani  and  Fregeville,  to  the  cemetery,  to 
see  the  marble  that  we  had  placed  upon  the  tomb  of  my 
father.  The  proportions  pleased  the  eye,  and  the  in- 
scription satisfies  me  better  when  engraved  than  it  did  in 
manuscript.  The  cemetery  itself  struck  me  more  than 
ever ;  it  has  an  air  of  repose,  without  gloom,  which  tran- 
quillises  the  mind,  and  takes  away  the  idea  of  horror  from 
death,  by  suggesting  that  of  a  refuge  from  all  the  troubles 
and  sorrows  of  hfe.  If  I  die  in  Italy,  it  is  here  that  I 
will  be  buried. 

Tuesday,  loth. — We*  were  in  the  carriage  at  half-past 
four,  on  the  road  to  Savonna.     All  the  road  from  Genoa 
to  Savonna  is  a  succession  of  the  most  picturesque  land- 
scapes.   One  passes  through  four  little  villages  or  bourgs, 
each  one  prettier  than  the  other.    In  most  of  these  places 
small  merchant  vessels  are  built.     We  counted  in  one  of 
these  bourgs  nine  upon  the  stocks.     After  dinner,  a  walk 
in  the  town  of  Savonna  to  the  Dicomo,  and  to  the  pre- 
fecture,  an   ancient   convent,   which    still   preserves   its 
melancholy  aspect.     Li  Bonaparte's  time    Savonna  was 
the  chief  town  of  the   department,  and  had  some  bril- 
liant prefets,  as  M.  Brignole,  M.  de  Chabrol,  &c.     The 
ancient  port  of  Savonna  was   ruined  by  Andrea  Doria. 
The  environs  are  charming — less  incumbered  by  build- 
ings  than    Genoa,   and   more    intermixed  with   foliage. 
We    went    en    caVeche    to  see  a  gallery  which  is  made 
through  a  rock  upon  the  road  which  the  French  have 
constructed  from  Genoa  to  Nice,  and  which  passes  by 
Savonna,  but  up  to  the  present  time  is  not  all  finished. 
We  made  the  tour  of  the  Bay  of  Vado,  keeping  close  to 
the  shore  ;    the  scenery  most  beautiful.     Vado  is  upon 
the  site  of  a  Eoman  city ;  it  was  there  where  the  galleys 
of  Mark  Antony  retired  after  the  battle  of  Actium.     The 

*  Tlie  party  consisted  of   the  two  Miss  Berrys,  the  Due  de   Dalberg, 
M.  Da  Viviani;  and  General  Fregeville. 


136  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1817 

Only  remains  of  the  ancient  buildings  are  some  foundation 
Avails,  to  be  seen  here  and  there  among  the  vines.  This 
bay,  with  the  town  of  Savonna  and  its  castle  advancing 
into  the  sea,  and  its  cultivated  hills  extending  along  one 
side,  with  its  batteries  rising  on  a  precipitous  rock  on  the 
other,  was  Nelson's  favourite  anchorage  in  the  Mediter- 
ranean. All  the  finest  peaches  in  Genoa  come  from 
Savonna. 

Wednesday^  \^th. — Before  seven  o'clock  in  the  morning 
we  were  in  our  caleches  for  Pian  di  Merlo.  Fabio  Palla- 
vicini  came  to  Savonna  yesterday,  to  arrange  that  a  cart 
with  oxen  should  be  at  the  rendezvous,  where  the  car- 
riages could  no  longer  be  of  use.  Upon  leaving  Savonna, 
the  ascent  of  the  Apennines  begins,  on  a  very  fine  road 
which  leads  to  Alexandria.  These  mountains  are  covered 
with  green  trees  and  cultivation.  The  higher  tlie  ascent 
(and  we  mounted  for  two  hours  and  a  half),  the  more  scarce 
become  villages  or  even  habitations,  and  the  landscape 
assumes  quite  a  pastoral  character  of  its  own.  It  is 
neither  Swiss  nor  Scotch,  nor  Savoyard  nor  ItaHan.  It  is 
the  Apennines,  and  nothing  but  the  Apennines.  We 
found  ourselves  surrounded  on  all  sides  by  these  green 
mountains,  crossing  and  recrossing  in  all  possible  ways. 
Near  ten  o'clock  we  arrived  at  the  point  where  we  had 
to  leave  the  high  road  to  take  that  of  Pian  di  Merlo.  It 
is  a  very  stony  path  upon  the  side  of  this  mountain — 
scarcely  broad  enough  to  admit  even  one  of  the  very 
narrow  carts  of  the  country.  Two  of  these  equipages, 
each  drawn  by  two  oxen,  awaited  us :  one  contained  a 
mattress  to  sit  or  rather  to  lie  upon,  and  covered  over,  en 
berceau,  with  branches  of  chesnut  trees,  making  a  real 
theatrical  car  in  a  pastoral  ballet ;  the  other  was  for  our 
luggage.  We  two,  with  our  maid  Harrot,  placed  our- 
selves in  the  theatrical  carriage.  Our  three  gentlemen 
followed  on  foot,  though  there  was  an  ass  at  their  service. 
In  this  manner  we  passed  without  the  slightest  inconve- 


1817]  INTERIOR    OF   AN   ITALIAN   HOUSE.  137 

nience  a  road  which  in  any  other  way  would  have  been 
impassable  to  us.  Fabio  and  his  little  wife  came  to  meet 
us  half  a  mile  from  their  house ;  his  mother,  who  is  still 
full  of  grace  and  esprit,  also  met  us  nearer  home.  It  is 
quite  a  farmer's  house  of  this  country,  preserving  the 
external  appearance  of  such.  The  inside  is  arranged  with 
perfect  simplicity,  but  having  all  that  is  necessary  to 
comfort,  where  nature  and  chmate  make  so  little  wanted 
for  enjoyment.  There  is  (as  in  all  the  houses,  large  and 
small)  at  the  top  of  the  staircase  a  sala  which  communi- 
cates with  all  the  other  rooms.  This  sala  is  the  drawing- 
room,  where  everyone  meets.  Seen  from  the  outside,  one 
should  not  have  thought  so  many  people  could  be  lodged. 
They  gave  us  an  excellent  dejeuner  a  la  fourchette.  The 
environs  of  the  house  are  adorned  by  the  hand  of  nature 
only.  Agnes  and  the  Duke  began  to  sketch.  We  went 
down  a  stony  steep  descent  to  a  grotto,  where  a  small 
spring  of  water  flows  beneath  the  foliage.  We  dined  at 
past  five  o'clock  in  morning  dresses — that  of  our  host 
and  hostess — really  peasant-like  gingham  dresses,  with 
large  aprons  of  the  same  stuff;  Fabio  in  a  waistcoat  and 
trousers  of  the  same,  with  garters  and  shoes  of  Eussian 
leather.  His  little  wife  looks  very  well  in  this  country 
costume,  with  a  large  coarse  straw  hat,  and  for  livehness 
and  intelligence  is  quite  another  person  to  what  she 
appeared  at  Genoa  in  her  splendour.  One  is  here  in  the 
midst  of  the  scene  of  Bonaparte's  first  triumphs  in  Italy, 
when  for  the  first  time  he  took  the  command  of  the 
army,  fought  the  Austrians  at  Monte  Notte,  turned  their 
position,  and  marched  upon  Turin.  The  Due  de  Dalberg 
says  that  he  has  never  well  understood  these  movements 
till  now  that  he  is  upon  the  spot.  Instead  of  being  too 
hot  upon  these  mountains,  even  at  this  time  of  the 
year,  I  felt  cold.  Upon  returning  to  the  house,  the 
sketchers  retouched  their  morning's  work,  and  I  played  a 
game  at  picquet  with  Madame  Therese  Pallavicini.    They 


138  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1817 

brought  us  sorbets  instead  of  tea,  wliicli  is  much  better 
in  this  country,  and  we  all  went  to  bed  at  half-past  ten 
o'clock. 

Thursday,  1 7 ^/i.— Beautiful  summer's  day ;  the  sky  so 
clear  and  pure  as  to  assure  one  that  it  is  still  Italy,  which 
one  might  otherwise  doubt  in  these  mountains.  I  passed 
a  part  of  the  morning  reading  under  a  large  chesnut 
tree  near  the  house,  enjoying  the  most  beautiful  tempera- 
ture. Our  breakfast  (always  a  la  fourchette)  was  later. 
The  dinner  was  necessarily  the  same.  After  dinner  it  was 
settled  we  should  take  a  long  walk ;  we  were  to .  go  to 
the  valley  of  the  Bormida,  where  commences  the  Plains 
of  Piedmont,  but  we  started  too  late  and  had  to  return. 

The  evening  passed  the  same  as  yesterday.  There  was 
no  want  of  conversation ;  Italian  vivacity  would  always 
supply  that,  in  spite  of  ignorance  ;  but  these  friends  are 
well-instructed  people — have  seen  much  of  the  world,  and 
occupy  themselves  with  literature.  The  Due  de  Dalberg 
is  charming  company ;  he  is  so  gay  and  gentle,  and  his 
manners  are  both  simple  and  fascinating. 

Friday,  ISth. — Our  amiable  hosts  would  not  take  leave 
of  us  last  night.  Everyone  got  up  at  six  o'clock.  They 
gave  us  coffee  before  seven  ;  and  then  having  expressed 
our  thanks,  and  the  pleasure  our  visit  had  given  us,  we 
left  in  the  same  way  as  we  came — accompanied  by  Fabio, 
'  his  wife,  and  Viviani,  who  remains  with  them.  We  then 
arrived  at  Savonna  by  ten  o'clock.  We  walked  more 
than  half  a  league  from  Savonna  to  the  small  country- 
house  of  a  certain  M.  Boschetti.  It  was  at  this  house 
that  Jules  II.,  of  the  family  of  Eovere,  was  born.  M. 
Boschetti  is  a  gentleman  of  this  country  whom  the  Due 
de  Dalberg  had  known  at  Paris  as  having  spent  money 
unwisely  in  building  upon  the  Champs  Elysees.  He  had 
invited  the  Duke  to  see  his  pictures,  and  this  was  really 
the  object  of  our  visit.  They  are  nothing  very  remark- 
able ;  however,  the  Duke  has  expressed  a  wish  to  have 


1817]  DEATH   OF   MADAME    DE    STAEL.  139 

three  of  tliem.  Before  one  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  we 
left  Savonna.  We  reached  Voltei  about  five  o'clock  in  the 
evening,  and  walked  upon  the  terrace  of  the  Villa  Brignole 
here,  which  I  never  see  without  fresh  pleasure.  This 
villa  always  gains  by  comparison  with  all  others,  even  in 
this  beautiful  country.  At  last  we  tore  ourselves  away 
from  this  enchanting  place. 

It  was  in  the  course  of  this  month  that  Miss  Berry 
must  have  received  the  expected  announcement  of  the 
death  of  Madame  de  Stael,  who  died  on  July  14th,  at 
Paris.  In  a  letter  to  Lady  Hardwicke,  during  this  month, 
Miss  Berry  writes  of  the  hopelessness  of  Madame  de 
Stael's  state,  adding — '  I  shall  think  the  world  less  in- 
terestins^  without  her.'  Madame  de  Stael's  last  letter  to 
Miss  Berry  was  in  the  handwriting  of  her  friend  Miss 
Eandall.  The  following  account  of  the  closing  scene 
was  written  by  a  lady  who  had  not  long  left  Genoa  : — 

Extract  of  a  Letter  addressed  to  Miss  Berry. 

When  I  arrived  at  Paris  the  17th  of  June,  she  (Madame  de 
Stael)  was  supposed  to  be  at  the  point  of  death;  she  rallied 
from  that  attack,  and  her  family  indulged  great  hopes,  but 
which  no  physician  encouraged.  ...  I  saw  her  a  week 
before  her  death  ;  she  was  as  eager  as  ever  on  politics.  M.  de 
Montmorency  was  by  her  bedside,  and  she  disputed  with  him 
the  great  question  of  liberty  as  formerly.  I  dined  there  on  the 
Sunday ;  she  saw  the  Duke  of  Orleans,  and  on  that  night  she 
died.  .  .  .  No  words  can  do  justice  to  the  feeling  Albertine* 
has  shown  her,  and  indeed  the  affliction  of  all  those  around  her 
speaks  much  more  for  her  character  than  all  the  eloges  that 
could  be  written.  Her  marriage  with  Eocca,  and  her  son  by 
him,  was  acknowledged  in  the  will.  The  exact  date  of  the  mar- 
riage is  unknown.     She  left  them  both  a  provision 

She  is  an  irreparable  loss  :  no  woman  and  no  man  possesses  the 
talents  she  had.     ... 

*  Duclaesse  de  Broglie. 


140  MISS   BEREY'S   journal.  [1817 

Wednesday^    30^A.  —  General   Babua,  Commander-in- 
Chief  of  the  Austrian  forces  at  Milan,  was  here  last  week, 
on  a  tour  of  military  inspection,  to  visit  the  fortresses,  and 
to  inspect  what  progress  the  Sardinian  Government  was 
making  in  the  disbursement  of  its  share  of  French  money 
awarded  by  the  Congress  to  the  King  of  Sardinia.     He 
insisted  much  on  the  speedy  construction,  not  only  of  the 
roads  from  hence  to  Savonna,  and  from  hence  to  Sazanno, 
but  also  on  some  others,  such  as  one  begun  by  the  French 
from  hence  to  Parma,  which  the  Piedmontese  and  Genoese 
pretend  would  essentially  injure,  instead  of  aiding,  their 
commerce.     The  Austrian  Government  is  not  of  a  gentle 
or  yielding  nature,  at  least  in  Italy ;  and  the  Piedmontese 
Government,  aware  of  this,  and  likewise  of  their  own 
weakness  and  their  own  strength,  or  at  least  the  strength 
given  by  their  situation,   rephed  to  the  injunctions   of 
Babua — 'Vous  pouvez  nous  jeter  dans  I'eau,  mais  vous 
ne  pouvez  pas  nous  submerger.'    General  Babua  is  a  very 
tall  stout  man,  with  a  pretty  good  countenance,  and  his 
carriage  less  stiff  than  most  of  the  Austrian  officers. 

Friday,  August  \st — Went  to  hear  Paganini  play,  a 
celebrated  violinist ;  it  was  a  concert,  but  much  less  tedious 
than  these  concerts  usually  are.  A  military  band  was  in  the 
orchestra,  which  played  some  martial  music  between  the 
acts.  Paganini  played  three  pieces,  surprising  for  execu- 
tion, and  sometimes  he  produces  most  enchanting  sounds 
from  the  instrument.  He  is  a  Genoese  by  birth,  a  very  bad 
character,  earning  a  great  deal  of  money,  and  never  having 
a  penny.  He  has  not  yet  displayed  his  talent  out  of  Italy, 
where  everyone  is  mad  about  him.* 

Thursday^  1th. — In  the  morning  walked  to  the  Grand 

*  Nicolo  Paganini  was  a  native  of  Genoa ;  born  1784.  His  musical 
talent  was  very  early  developed.  At  nine  years  old  he  made  his  first 
appearance  as  a  violin  player ;  the  marvellous  power  he  displayed  in  exe- 
cuting the  most  brilliant  and  difficult  passages  on  one  string  is  well  known. 
He  never  left  Italy  till  past  forty  years  old ;  but  his  fame  was  great,  and  as  he 
travelled  through  Europe  it  was  a  succession  of  triumphs.     He  died  1840. 


1817]  LEAVE   GENOA.  i  141 

Palais  Durazzo,  where  the  Due  de  Dalberg  had  appointed 
us  to  see  the  collection  of  engravings  valued  at  30,000/. 
sterling.  It  is  not  worth  that  certainly  ;  though  large,  and 
containing  all  the  great  works  of  engravings  published 
together,  many  of  the  most  rare  are  wanting  in  all  the 
collections  of  the  different  masters  ;  such,  for  example,  as 
Marc  Antoine,  Eembrandt,  &c.  &c.  The  arrangement  is 
perfect ;  one  finds  what  one  seeks  in  a  moment. 

Friday,  8th. — We  went  again  to  the  Durazzo  Library 
to  see  the  collection  of  drawings.  Amongst  a  great 
number  of  very  little  value,  there  are  some  charming 
ones,  but  nothing  to  compare  with  our  fine  collections  of 
the  old  masters'  drawings. 

Saturday,  oOth. — Mr.  Wishaw  leaves  to-morrow  for 
Florence.  I  showed  him  a  sketch  of  the  beginning  for 
'  The  Life  of  Lady  Eussell,'  which  he  much  approved  of, 
and  we  talked  a  great  deal  upon  this  subject ;  then  during 
the  evening  he  read  to  us  the  Hst  of  the  MSS.  of  poor 
Horner,  and  some  pieces  of  a  journal  of  Lord  Byron's  in 
Switzerland,  put  down  au  coin  de  son  Strange  esprit. 

Thursday,  September  Ath. — M.  Spinola  and  Viviani 
came  in  the  morning  to  go  with  us  to  the  Palais  du 
Ministre.  There  are  statues  larger  than  life  of  the 
most  celebrated  men  of  Genoa  and  of  the  Spinola  family, 
painted  to  imitate  bronze,  between  columns  also  painted 
in  grisaille  ;  but  the  bronze  is  too  much  gilded,  and  the 
grisaille  does  not  produce  sufficient  illusion. 

Tuesday,  9th. — The  weather  being  fine,  it  was  settled 
we  should  leave  Genoa  this  evening.  Several  persons 
came  to  see  us  embark.  About  seven  o'clock  we 
two,  Viviani,  Mrs.  Botto  and  her  daughter — to  whom 
we  had  offered  a  passage  in  our  felucque — Harrot,  Ade- 
hne,  and  Pepino,  went  on  board.  The  carriages  were 
well  placed  in  the  middle  of  the  ship,  so  that  we  could 
easily  enter  the  English  carriage ;  and  under  the  awning 
there  were  spread  two  mattresses,  upon  which  four  or 


142  MISS   BERRY'S   JOURNAL.  [1817 

five  people  could  lie  down,  which  we  ladies  all  did.  The 
daylight  only  served  us  till  we  got  out  of  port ;  there  was 
no  moon,  yet  there  were  not  more  than  four  hours  in 
which  we  could  not  see  the  time  by  our  watches.  The 
air  was  perfectly  dehcious ;  very  httle  wind,  only  little 
puffs  in  passing  the  gorges  of  the  mountains,  down  which 
flowed  small  rivers. 

Wednesday^  10th. —  I  left  my  mattress  before  four 
o'clock,  to  watch  the  dawn  of  day,  and  see  the  sun  rise. 
All  was  as  fine,  as  clear,  and  as  pure  as  yesterday.  At 
ten  o'clock  we  breakfasted  upon  the  cold  provisions  we 
had  with  us ;  but  I  began  to  feel  headache,  which  was 
augmented  by  the  motion  of  the  sea.  At  noon  we  had  a 
breeze,  but  I  was  in  no  condition  to  see  anything  or  to 
enjoy  anything.  The  Gulf  of  Spezia  is  one  of  the  most 
beautiful  coups-d'oeil  imaginable.  One  enters  at  Porto 
Venese,  a  chateau  and  a  small  town,  both  equally  in 
ruins.  The  felucque  passed  this  point,  and  a  small 
island,  Palmiera ;  and  then  the  Gulf  opens  out  in  ail  its 
beauty.  We  arrived  at  Lerici  at  half-past  two  in  the 
afternoon,  having  been  eighteen  hours  upon  the  sea  in 
perfect  weather  ;  and  if  I  had  not  been  so  ill,  it  would 
have  been  very  enjoyable.  Madame  Botto  sang  to  us  for 
some  time  last  night,  and  so  did  the  rowers  —  in  quite  a 
different  style,  but  far  from  unpleasant  to  hsten  to  on  the 
water. 

Thursday,  Wth. — Arrived  at  Lucca. 

Friday,  12th. — Eeached  Florence. 

Friday,  2Qth. — The  morning  to  the  Pitti.  The  col- 
lection there  more  numerous  than  ever  ;  and  never  was 
there  one  so  large  with  so  few  bad  pictures.  In  the 
evening  went  with  C.  [Lady  Charlotte  Campbell]  and  her 
daughter  to  Madame  d' Albany's.  She  received  us  as  old 
acquaintances,  and  with  much  cordiality.  Besides  our- 
selves, there  were  only  two  ladies  and  two  Italian  gen- 
tlemen.    Madame  d' Albany  is  grown  much  fatter  than 


1817]  PRESENTED    TO   THE   GRAND    DUKE.  143 

she  was,  and  her  figure,  which  was  always  square,  is  now 
much  worse.  In  spealdng  to  her,  I  recognised  the  same 
countenance,  but  it  has  lost  much  of  its  good-nature, 
without  having  gained  much  in  expression  of  intelli- 
gence. 

Saturday^  27th. — In  the  evening  at  Madame  d' Albany's. 
It  is  the  day  on  which  all  the  Florentine  society  agree  to 
go  to  her  house.  The  room  in  which  she  receives  is 
small,  as  they  all  are  in  Granfigliazzi's  house,  which  she 
inhabits.  She  never  moves  from  her  chair  at  the  side  of 
the  fireplace  ;  the  ladies  arrange  themselves  in  a  circle, 
the  gentlemen  standing  behind.  There  is  no  means  of 
conversation,  nor  of  changing  one's  place ;  and  the  only 
consolation  is,  that  it  is  all  over  by  ten  o'clock,  having 
begun  at  eight. 

Sunday,  2St/i. — We  were  presented  to-day,  at  twelve 
o'clock,  to  the  Grand  Duke  in  the  Palais  Pitti.  We  were 
assembled  to  the  number  of  ten  or  twelve  ladies,  and  five 
or  six  gentlemen,  in  a  drawing-room  at  the  side  of  that 
occupied  by  the  Duke.  Mr.  Dawkins  made  us  all  go  in 
together  ;  formerly  each  person  entered  separately,  or 
each  family  or  party.  We  were  next  to  Char,  and  her 
daughter.  The  Grand  Duke  spoke  only  to  her  and  to 
us  :  said  to  her  that  he  was  glad  she  was  here  to  be 
present  at  the  fetes  given  in  honour  of  his  daughter's 
marriage  ;  to  us  of  our  former  residence  here,  of  which 
some  one  had  told  him — of  the  fetes  that  had  been 
given  them  at  the  Casciena,  and  of  the  fire  which  took 
place ;  adding  how  many  things  had  happened  since 
then,  and  that  he  had  been  present  at  a  much  more 
awful  fire  at  Paris.  The  audience  did  not  last  altogether 
more  than  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  and  he  dismissed  every- 
body by  saying  he  would  not  detain  them. 

Tuesday,  30th. — The  marriage  of  the  second  daughter 
of  the  Grand  Duke  with  the  Prince  Carignan  took  place 
at  the  Duomo  to-day.     All  the  English  who  had  been 


144  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1817 

presented  were  invited  to  tlie  Duomo  at  ten  o'clock. 
Not  thinking  it  right  or  feehng  inchned  to  put  off  our 
mourning,  we  did  not  use  the  ticket  we  had  received 
from  Mr.  Dawkins.  We  went  with  Mr,  Sotheby  to  his 
apartment  at  the  Hotel  de  York,  to  see  all  the  procession 
pass.  It  was  really  very  magnificent  as  regards  carriages 
and  liveries,  for  the  military  added  but  little  to  the 
spectacle.  In  the  evening  there  was  a  Court  held,  to 
which  we  did  not  go.  There  were  fireworks  on  the 
Palazzo  Vecchio,  which  we  saw  from  an  open  gallery  at 
the  top  of  our  house. 

From  Sir  William  Gell  to  Miss  Berry. 

Naples  :  September  29,  1817. 

Wicked  People, — There  you  are  all  thiee  at  Florence,  and 
not  one  word  can  you  afford  to  say,  any  of  you,  to  your  poor 
cousin  in  the  south,  whither  I  think  you  ought  to  be  beaten  for 
not  coming  while  I  remain  in  a  tolerable  state  of  f]ertification, 
that  is,  before  my  next  fit  comes  on.  You  scarcely  deserve  to 
have  the  history  of  *  *  *  and  her  sister,  who  have  more 
merit  than  any  ladies  who  have  ever  undertaken  the  tour  of 
Italy.  '  Ach,  now  !'  says  *  *,  '  and  I  don't  see  why  we  should 
not  go  from  St.  Mary  the  Major  (Santa  Maria  Maggiore)  to  St. 
John's  Latter  end  (San  Giovanni  Laterano)  without  passing 
through  the  whole  city.'  There  is  here  a  certain  Austrian, 
called  Count  Jenisco,  and  they  both  go  about  talking  of  St. 
Jenisco's  blood  liquidating,  instead  of  the  liquefaction  of  St. 
Januarius.  I  shall  give  you  one  more,  and  that  shall  be  the  last 
one  a  piece  for  you  and  Lady  Char.  'Ach,  now,  and  talk  of 
police,  and  I  saw  with  my  own  eyes  three  people  in  a  tarantella 
(caretella,  a  sort  of  gig),  and  if  four  great  lazzarettos  (lazzaroni) 
did  not  come  and  pull  'em  out,  and  take  their  places  by  force.' 
There's  for  you  in  that  line.  Now  I  will  tell  you  what  saith  my 
royal  mistress  by  the  mouth  of  her  prophet — '  Where  are  the 
Berrys  ? — mein  Gott,  they  are  very  cruel  not  to  write  to  me  when 
I  have  such  regard  and  affection  for  them.'  She  assured  us  one 
day  a  little  girl  was  ill  because  she  had  mangiato  il  letto.'  So 
of  course  we  stared,  and  I  asked  whether  it  was  made  of  hair. 


1817]  LETTER   FEOM   SIR   W.    GELL.  145 

wool,  or  feathers  ?  She  die  from  laughing,  and  meant  latte,  milk. 
Another  time  she  looked  me  full  in  the  face,  and  said  to  a  man 
who  was  going  to  play  the  piano,  '  Temo  che  troverete  il  ciam- 
bellano  (cimbal)  un  poco  cattivo.'  This,  however,  she  swears  I 
have  invented  myself.  If  fate  ever  puts  you  in  the  way,  make 
her  tell  you  how  the  Empress  Marie  Louisa  invited  her  to  Parma; 
how  the  attendants  dined  in  the  outer  room  ;  and  how,  in  full- 
dress  feathers,  and  velvet  chairs  with  heavy  gold  legs  and  backs, 
the  two  ladies  sat  at  a  very  long  tete-a-tete  before  dinner  at  a  fire. 
'  You  imagine  it  not  very  entertaining ;  I  assure  you,  very  doll 
(dull),  I  yarn  (yawn),  and  she  de  same ;  mein  Gott,  I  balance 
on  my  chaire  mit  my  feet  pon  die  fire.  What  you  tink  ?  I  tomble 
all  back  mit  di  chair,  and  mit  meine  legs  in  die  air ;  man  see 
nothing  more  als  my  feet.  I  die  from  laugh,  and  what  you  tink 
she  do  ?  She  stir  not,  she  laugh  not ;  but  mit  the  utmost  gra- 
vity she  say,  "Mon  Dieu,  Madame,  comme  vous  m'avez  effraye." 
I  go  in  fits  of  laugh,  and  she  repeat  di  same  word  witout  varia- 
tion or  change  of  feature.  I  not  able  to  resist  bursting  out 
every  moment  at  dinner,  and  die  to  get  away  to  my  gens  to  tell 
die  story.    We  all  scream  mit  di  ridiculousness  for  my  situation.' 

I  don't  know  whether  I  have  told  you  this  so  that  you  can  un- 
derstand it,  but  hope  your  genius  will  help  you  out  to  imagine 
what  must  have  been  a  duet  between  this  bottle  of  frisky  cham- 
pagne and  that  jug  of  stale  small  beer.  I  shall  give  you  another 
instance  of  a  happy  change  of  letters.  Slap  Lady  Charlotte  on 
the  arm,  and  say,  '  I  tell  you  what,  dey  only  want  to  make  a 
pat's  cau  (cat's  paw)  of  me.'  So  much  for  the  world.  I  have 
just  been  to  Capri,  '  Affreux  Tiberi,' and  the  people  call  the 
ruins  '  0  Palazzo  do  Timperio.'  Moreover,  I  went  up  569  steps 
in  the  rock,  and  came  down  the  same  only  a  week  after  a  fit  of 
tbe  gout,  which  has  been  effected  by  putting  my  legs  into  a 
box,  and  burning  brimstone  without  mercy  underneath.  So 
when  you  have  the  rheumatism,  come,  and  you  shall  have  a 
certain  cure.  If  I  had  money  enough  I  would  come  and  see 
you  ;  if  you  ever  get  to  Eome,  and  I  can  stand  upon  one  leg, 
please  the  Pope,  I  will  come  on  purpose,  as  I  did  to  Eng- 
land, to  see  you.  I  beg  you  will  not  be  so  idle  as  not  to  write. 
Tell  me  where  is  my  own  pocket.  Lady  Char.  I  salute  you  all 
caldamente,  and  lofe  you  very  mouch  strong  well,  my  little 
dear.     Adieu,  my  dears.     You  had  better  come  here,  if  it  was 

VOL.  III.  L 


146  MISS   BEERY'S   journal.  [1817 

only  to  have  good  cavalieri  serventi  and  a  lame  lover  among 
three.  I  kiss  you  all,  hands  and  feet.  Mind  you  go  to  the 
Countess  of  Albany's,  and  tell  her  her  sister,  the  Princess  of 
Castelfranco,  is  very  well,  and  I  dine  with  her  to-morrow. 

Thursday,  October  2nd. —  In  the  morning  we  went  to 
Bartolini's,  the  sculptor.  He  makes  very  good  likenesses 
in  his  busts ;  but  he  works  to  sell,  and  not  to  immor- 
talise his  name.  One  group,  however,  of  a  Venus  and 
a  Cupid,  and  a  gesse  of  a  Nymph,  are  really  fine.  He 
would  part  with  them  for  almost  nothing,  to  show  what 
he  can  do  in  marble  of  his  own  composition. 

Sunday,  l^th. — In  the  evening  to  Madame  d' Albany, 
where  we  saw  some  children  dancing,  which  they  do 
here  every  Sunday. 

Tuesday,  November  Ath. — The  evening  at  Lady  C.  C's. 
The  Duchess  Lanti  sang  admirably  well,  accompanied  by 
Manielli. 

Friday,  7th. — Fine  weather  still.  I  walked  to  several 
booksellers,  printsellers,  &c.,  to  search  for  old  books, 
and  landscapes  of  Tuscany,  to  begin  my  project  of  illus- 
trating the  'Life  of  Lorenzo  de  Medici.'  I  found  very 
few.  Lord  John  Eussell  arrived  from  Bologna.  I  had 
a  great  deal  to  say  to  him  about  his  work,  as  well  as  of 
mine,  if  ever  I  am  in  a  state  to  occupy  myself  seriously 
with  it ;  and  I  was  obliged  to  think  of  it  all  in  a  minute, 
as  he  leaves  to-morrow  at  six  o'clock  for  Leghorn,  to 
embark  for  Malta ;  from  thence  to  seek  an  opportunity 
of  going  to  Greece. 

Roma :  19  Novembre  1817. 

Ella  mi  ha  favorito  d'una  lettera  da  G-enoa,  annunciandomi  il 
suo  ritorno  in  Italia,  e  la  disposizione  di  passar  poi  a  Eoma.  lo 
non  mancai  di  rispondere  subito  al  grato  avviso,  e  il  non  vedere 
pill  lettere  e  nuove  di  Loro  famiglia  mi  fa  temere  con  ragione 
che  quella  mia  risposta  andasse  perduta !  Ora  intendo  che  da 
parecchi  mesi  Ella  ritrovassi  in  Firenze  colla  sorella,  e  che  non 
pensa  di  riveder  Roma.     Questa  notizia  seconda  mi  addolora 


1817]  LETTER   FROM   CANOVA.  147 

moltissimo ;  e  infinitamente  ancora  mi  spiace  che  Ella  non 
m'abbia  fatto  degno  d'una  sua  riga  per  mia  consolazione,  e  per 
rendermi  certo  della  bonta  onde  le  place  adornarmi.  La  prego 
a  voler  gradire  quest!  miei  sentiment!,  e  assecondare  11  desiderio 
di  mio  fratello  e  di  me  per  conoscere  le  Loro  nuove,  e  sapere 
se  abbiano  volonta  di  donarci  11  bene  di  rivederle  anche 
una  volta  fra  noi.  Di  cio,  di  cui  liberamente  I'assicuro  si 
e,  che  io  non  cambiero  mai  quel  senzo  di  stima,  di  rispetto,  e 
d'affezione  che  Le  ho  professato,  e  per  il  quale  sono  e  saro 
sempre 

Obb.  affet.  servitor  Loro, 

Antonio  Canova.* 


Sunday,  l^th. — In  the  evening  accompanied  C.  C.  and 
lier  daughter  to  the  Pitti,  where  there  was  a  reception 
en  grand  gala  in  honour  of  the  hereditary  Prince's 
wedding,  which  took  place  this  morning,  with  the  Prin- 
cesse  (de  Saxe),  who  arrived  at  Caffagiola  the  evening 
before.  The  nuptial  benediction  was  given  without  any- 
great  ceremony  in  the  Church  of  the  Annunciade. 
There  was  a  dinner  afterwards  at  Court  for  the  Ministers, 
and  in  the  evening  this  reception.     We  arrived  after  the 

*  Eome,  19th  November  1817. 

You  favoured  me  with  a  letter  from  Genoa,  announcing  your  return  to 
Italy,  and  your  wish  to  proceed  later  to  Eome.  I  did  not  fail  to  quickly 
reply  to  your  kind  notice,  but  having  received  no  further  letters  or  news  of 
your  family  makes  me  naturally  fear  that  my  answer  has  been  lost.  Now  I 
hear  that  for  several  months  you  have  been  in  Florence  with  your  sister, 
and  that  you  do  not  think  of  coming  back  to  Rome.  This  news,  while  it 
grieves  me  exceedingly,  displeases  me  still  "more,  in  that  you  have  not 
thought  me  worthy  of  a  single  line  to  console  me,  and  to  assure  me  of  the 
kindness  with  which  you  have  always  treated  me. 

I  entreat  you  to  accept  my  feelings  of  regard,  and  to  gratify  the  great 
wish  of  my  brother  and  myself  to  be  made  acquainted  with  your  move- 
ments, and  to  know  if  you  have  any  intention  of  visiting  us. 

I  can  most  truly  assure  you  that  I  shall  never  change  in  the  feelings  of 
esteem,  of  respect,  and  of  affection  that  I  have  ever  felt  for  you,  and  that  I 
am,  and  ever  shall  be, 

Your  obedient  and  affectionate  servant, 

Antonio  Canova. 

I.  2 


148  MISS   BEEEY'S   JOUENAL.  [1817 

presentations  to  the  bride  had  taken  place.  We  found 
her  in  a  sort  of  circle,  talking  to  several  gentlemen  who 
had  been  presented  to  her.  She  is  graceful ;  she  would 
be  really  pretty  for  anybody,  but  beautiful  for  a  Princess. 
She  was  dressed  in  pink,  which  is  the  fashion  here  for 
brides  in  the  evening  ;  in  the  morning  in  white.  The 
brilhancy  of  the  Court-dresses  far  greater  than  I  ex- 
pected. The  ladies  all  wore  gold  and  silver ;  some  with 
a  quantity  of  diamonds.  It  is  said  that  all  this  display  is 
since  the  time  of  the  Court  of  the  Bacciochi  here,  who, 
like  the  rest  of  that  sacred  family,  insisted  that  everybody 
should  ruin  themselves  in  order  to  depend  more  imme- 
diately upon  their  favour.  There  were  many  English  at 
the  Court.  Eighty- one  ladies  and  gentlemen  had  been 
presented  this  day,  in  order  to  attend  the  reception  and 
join  in  the  fetes  which  were  to  follow.  The  bride  had 
her  party  at  cards,  the  bridegroom  his,  and  the  Grand 
Duke  a  third ;  and  before  ten  o'clock  they  left.  The 
Grand  Duke  then  began  to  play  again ;  but  he  and 
everyone  else  departed  before  ten  o'clock.  The  apart- 
ment where  the  Court  was  held  is  very  fine,  consisting  of 
several  rooms  very  well  lighted  by  wax  candles,  ending 
in  a  round  room,  where,  placed  upon  a  pedestal  in  the 
middle,  stands  the  beautiful  Venus  by  Canova. 

Friday^  2\st. — About  two  o'clock  Agnes  brought  us 
the  overwhelming  news  of  the  death  of  our  poor  young 
Princess  and  her  child !  The  account  arrived  to-day  by 
the  post  in  a  letter  from  our  Ambassador  at  Paris  to 
me,  and  in  a  letter  from  Mrs.  D.  to  Char.  I  was  too 
ill  to  read  mine,  or  to  hear  the  other,  or  even  to  ask 
questions;  but  felt  that  the  news  remained  like  a  horrible 
dead  weight  on  my  head  and  on  my  heart. 

Sunday^  2r>rd.  —  There  was  a  very  grand  feast,  or 
rather  function,  at  the  Church  of  Ste.  M.  Novella,  for  the 
repose  of  the  soul  of  a  certain  Sigr.  Ventini,  who  died 
some  weeks  ago.      Tlie  whole  church   was  hung  with 


1817]  LETTEE   TO    COUNTESS    OF    HAEDWICKE.  149 

crimson  velvet  and  gold  fringe,  quite  new — very  brilliant 
and  magnificent.  The  high  altar  was  gUttering  with 
gold  and  silver  stuff ;  and  all  was  lighted  up  between 
four  and  five  o'clock  by  about  5,500  wax-hghts  distri- 
buted in  all  parts,  and  in  large  lustres  hanging  from  the 
ceiling  of  the  church.  Numbers  of  people  began  to  go 
there  from  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning,  and  from  three 
o'clock  till  past  five,  when  all  the  lights  were  lighted, 
and  the  Archbishop  gave  the  benediction.  The  crowd 
became  too  dense  for  us  to  penetrate. 

Saturday,  Dec.  6th. — In  the  evening  at  Madame  d'Alba- 
ny's  with  Lord  John  Eussell  and  others.  Afterwards  to 
Madame  Hitsoff — a  very  small  party,  the  first  I  have  seen 
in  Italy  deserving  that  name.  It  was  in  the  two  small 
rooms  she  always  occupies,  and  which  were  in  that  state 
of  agreeable  untidiness  which  marks  constant  occupation. 

From  Miss  Berry  to  the  Countess  of  Hardwiche. 

Florence,  14tli  December  1817,  Sunday. 

.  The  Itahans  are  here,  as  everywhere  else,  very  un- 
social in  their  own  houses.  Nothing  so  true  as  what  the  poor 
Stael  said,  that  in  Italy  the  theatre  spoilt  society,  and  society 
the  theatre.  No  soiree  holds  here  for  a  moment  after  nine 
o'clock  if  there  is  a  theatre  open  in  the  town ;  and  where  one 
goes  every  evening  to  see  the  same  thing,  of  course  one  looks 
(without  always  finding  it)  for  some  amusement  independent 
of  the  stage.  Our  old  friend  Madame  d' Albany,  whose  hopes  of 
three  kingdoms  (if  ever  she  entertained  them)  have  settled  into 
a  sort  of  curtesey  queenship  here,  receives  every  evening,  and 
publicly  on  Saturday,  when  her  Com-t  is  as  dull  as  any  real  one 
in  Europe.  But  on  other  evenings,  when  one  finds  her  some- 
times alone,  sometimes  with  only  three  or  four  people,  and 
when  she  comes  and  sees  one  of  a  morning,  she  is  not  unen- 
tertaining — well  informed,  sensible,  sharp,  and  heartless — very 
different  from  what  we  knew  her  many  years  ago,  at  Paris,  in 
Alfieri's  time.  But  she  seems  to  think,  and  other  people  seem 
to  allow  her  to  think,  that  she  has  inherited  his  genius  and  his 


150  MISS    BERRY'S   JOURNAL.  [1817 

sentiments,  which  on  many  subjects  agree  oddly  enough  with 
her  own  visible  partiality,  to  the  powers  and  dominations  of 
this  world.     .     .     . 

Tuesday^  \^th. — In  the  morning  for  a  long  time  in  the 
hbrary  of  the  Grand  Duke,  at  the  Pitti  Palace.  It  is 
necessary  to  have  an  order  to  go  ;  38,000  volumes  in 
twenty-two  small  rooms. 

Wednesday^  17th. — In  the  evening  went  to  Madame 
Hitsoff — very  small  pary  ;  tolerably  agreeable.  Madame 
Appony  sang  a  great  deal,  and  enchantingly. 

Wednesday,  ^Ist — In  the  evening  Madame  Appony 
came  to  our  house,  Tonelli,  Bartolini  (the  sculptor),  &c. 
&c.  Madame  Appony  sang  beautifully,  with  ToneUi  at 
the  piano.     Thus  finished  the  year  1817. 


1818]  A   VISIT   TO   THE   ACADEMY   OF   ARTS.  151 


J  0  U  E  N  A  L. 
1818. 

Florence,  Friday,  January  9th. — In  the  morning  to 
the  Academy  of  Arts,  where  the  schools  of  painting  and 
sculpture  are  united  to  the  manufactories  of  Pietra  Dura 
and  of  Scagliola ;  having  seen  these  formerly,  we  went 
to  the  rooms  which  are  filled  by  a  most  complete  col- 
lection of  gesse  (plaster  casts)  from  the  antique  and 
from  the  works  of  Canova.  Young  children  of  all  ages 
were  employed  in  copying  them,  though,  it  seemed  to  me, 
fewer  in  number  than  I  saw  in  the  same  place  twenty 
years  ago.  In  a  long  gallery  are  arranged  all  the  pictures 
of  the  Florentine  school,  taken  from  the  monasteries 
suppressed  in  the  time  of  the  French.  It  forms  a  very 
complete  and  curious  history  of  art  since  the  time  of 
Cimabue*  and  of  Giotto  :f  one  sees  the  immense  step  made 
even  by  those  two  in  looking  at  a  picture  of  the  Virgin 
by  a  painter  of  the  date  at  which  this  collection  begins. 

Monday,  2Qth. — In  the  evening  at  the  Cocomero ;  a 
most  absurd  piece  performed ;  the  scene  laid  in  Eng- 
land. A  Lord  Mayor  under  the  title  of  Lord  Hudson, 
and  aldermen  displayed  as  military  officers  nominated  by 
the  Lord  Mayor.  The  spropositi  were  without  end,  and 
so  ridiculous  that  we  and  Lord  John  Eussell  (who  was 
with  us)  were  dying  of  laughter. 

Tuesday,  February  2>rd. — A  beautiful  day  for  the  last 

*  Giovanni  Cimabue ;  born  at  Florence  1240 ;  died  1300. 
f  Giotto,  or  Ajigiolotto ;  born  near  Florence  in  1276,  pupil  of  Cimabue ; 
died  1336. 


152  MISS   BEREY'S   JOURNAL.  [I8I8 

of  the  Carnival.    Everyone  was  out  of  doors,  and  masked 
from  nine  o'clock  in  the  morning.     I  masked  Pepino  as 
Harlequin,  and  sent  him  to  run  amongst  the  masks  on  the 
Lung  Arno.     Tonelli  called  and  proposed  our  taking  a 
walk.     The  scene  was  very  gay — an  immense  crowd  of 
people.    The  bourgeoisie  masked,  the  beau  monde  without 
masks.     Florentines  of  this  class,  very  few.     At  half-past 
four  in  the  afternoon  we  started  in  our  open  carriage  for 
the  Corso,    and  the  carriages  made  two  lines  from  the 
Palace  Anunziata  to  the  Santa  Maria,  where  they  turned 
at   the  end  of  the  street  to   rejoin  the  file,  guarded  by 
foot  soldiers  at  regular  distances.     The  great  and  only 
expense  of  the  Florentines  is  in  hveries,  horses,  and  car- 
riages, so  it  is  very  hard  upon  them  if  bad  weather  in- 
terferes with  the  four  or  five  times  in  the  year  when  they 
can  display  and  enjoy  them.     The  Prince  Borghese  had 
five  carriages,  one    drawn  by  eight  horses  ;    he  himself 
in  a  coupee  with  the  Duchesse  Lanti,  a  black  servant 
behind   magnificently  and   fantastically   dressed    in    his 
colours,  fawn  and  snuff  colour.     The  Prince  Corsini  had 
three  carriages  ;  he  alone  in  a  phaeton  with  two  grooms, 
all   lace   liveries.     The   Marquis   Torregiani,  three   car- 
riages ;    the  livery  dark-blue  and   gold.     These  people, 
and  many  others,  indeed,  who  have  any  pretensions  what- 
ever,  have    two    chasseurs   behind  ^their   carriages,   all 
dressed  one  more  magnificently  than  the  other  ;  and  here, 
instead  of  going  as  elsewhere  with  the  gentleman's  car- 
riage, stand  behind  that  of  the  lady.     In  the  evening  we 
went   to   Madame   d' Albany,   who    on   Shrove  Tuesday 
always  receives  the  children  masked,  who  dance  at  her 
house  on  Sundays.     There  were  about  thirty  of  them, 
with  their  mothers  or  aunts,  and  several  other  persons  of 
Madame  d' Albany's  usual  society. 

Miss  Berry  was  still  collecting  materials  for  her  work 
on   Lady  Eussell,  and   appears   to  have   applied  for  in- 


1818]  LETTEE   FROM   EAEL   OF    GUILDFOED,  153 

formation  respecting  historical  MSS.  to  Lord  Guildford,* 
from  whom  she  received  the  following  reply : — 

Eome,  Jan.  27,  1818. 

My  dear  Miss  Beery, — It  is  neither  from  forgetfulness  nor 
from  idleness  that  I  did  not  write  to  you,  but  from  positive 
inability  to  recollect  any  printed  book  or  collection  of  private 
papers  which  might  be  of  use  to  you.  Lord  Dartmouth  will 
tell  you  how  faithfully  I  delivered  your  message  to  him  about 
his  invaluable  copy  of  Burnet.  I  have  also  a  vast  number  of 
tracts  of  that  time  at  Wroxton,  of  which  you  shall  have  the 
use  as  soon  as  I  can  call  them  mine,  for  they  are  at  present  the 
property  of  my  Dowager  Maria.  Lord  Bridgewater  has  a  great 
collection,  I  believe,  at  Ashridge,  but  they  are  probably  of  too 
early  a  date,  and  anterior  to  the  Civil  War.  The  '  Somers 
Papers,'  which  were  bought  of  Lord  Lansdowne  for  the  British 
Museum,  I  think  would  have  a  great  many  anecdotes  of  the 
reigns  of  James  the  2°*^  and  William  the  3'''*,  mixed  with  the 
'  hvaddle '  which  you  are  looking  after.  For  at  this  time 
the  private  interests  of  politicians,  and  the  passions  of  Court 
ladies,  had  a  much  more  ostensible  and  declared  influence  on 
pijfblic  events  than  they  have  now,  and  the  line  of  distinction 
between  personal  and  political  was  not  so  well  known  by  states- 
men, as  it  is  now  by  the  mob.  What  is  become  of  the  Hard- 
wicke  collection  ?  The  last  lord  was  a  man  of  such  research 
that  a  great  deal  of  secret  history  must  be  in  the  possession 
of  his  heirs.  I  believe,  however,  that  his  papers  were  also 
bought  for  the  Museum.  Lord  Chichester  has  all  the  papers 
written  by  or  to  the  Minister,  Duke  of  Newcastle,  neatly 
copied,  and  arranged  in  about  a  hundred  volumes  ;  many  of 
them  might  be  of  use  to  you,  as  they  begin  with  Queen  Anne. 
The  collection  of  '  Stuart  Papers,'  lately  gone  to  England, 
ought  also  to  be  a  rich  mine  for  your  '  Comparative  History  of 
the  Manners,'  but  cannot  have  much  concerning  Lady  Eussell, 
as  I  believe  it  chiefly  consists  of  the  correspondence  of  the  son  of 
James  the  2°*^,  which  must  have  begun  about  the  time  of  her 

*  Frederick,  fifth  Earl  of  Guildford;  bom  1766;  succeeded  his  brother 
1817 ;  was  Chancellor  of  the  University  of  the  Ionian  Islands ;  died,  un- 
married, 1827. 


154  MISS   BEEEY'S   journal.  [1818 

death.  Who  has  the  papers  of  old  Sarah  Marlborough  ?  Her 
grandson,  Jack  Spencer,  was  her  favourite  and  her  heir.  Perhaps 
Lord  Spencer  may  have  something  curious.  The  Duke  of 
Leeds  is  the  eldest  descendant  of  the  family,  but  he  probably 
has  nothing  from  them.  He  ought,  however,  to  have  a  great  deal 
of  his  own.  Adieu !  my  dear  Miss  Berry.  I  am  sorry  that  I 
am  able  to  give  you  so  little  information  on  the  subject  upon 
which  you  have  written  to  me.  We  are  here  eight  hundred 
and  fifty  English  individuals.  I  only  have  my  venerable  con- 
temporaries, the  Duchess  of  Devonshire,  Miss  Knight,  &c. ; 
and  of  the  Komans,  Madame  Divinigo  and  similar  matrons.  I 
smothered  Canova  with  kisses  in  your  name,  and  have  promised 
him  and  your  other  friends  that  you  will  pass  next  winter  here. 
Pray  give  my  love  and  respects  to  your  sister,  and  believe  me, 
with  the  greatest  truth. 

Your  devoted,  humble  servant, 

GrUILDFORD. 

Tuesday^  10^/i. — In  the  morning  to  the  Eecluso  dei 
Poveri,  where  1,663  poor  men,  women,  and  children 
are  taken  from  out  of  the  streets,  clothed,  fed,  and 
given  some  occupation,  of  which  they  are  aUowed  their 
choice.  Of  this  number  there  are  now  470  women 
and  1,193  men  and  boys.  The  building  is  composed  of 
two  convents  united,  of  which  the  churches  serve  as 
workshops.  It  was  begun  in  the  time  of  the  French, 
and  after  their  departure  was  neglected ;  but  the  town 
so  swarmed  with  mendicants,  that  the  Grand  Duke  re- 
established it  within  the  last  two  years.  The  inmates  are 
all  dressed  in  thick  brown  cloth.  Their  dormitories  are 
pretty  clean  ;  three  times  a  week  they  have  meat,  and 
vegetables  on  the  other  days.  A  sixth  part  of  what  they 
earn  a  day  is  given  to  them  for  their  daily  wants. 
Another  sixth  is  put  by  to  be  given  to  them  when  they 
leave  the  establishment,  and  the  rest  goes  for  its  support. 
There  are  some  who  earn  six  or  seven  paulo  a  day  by 
making  carpets.  Fortunately  the  people  have  a  horror 
of  this  recluse,  otherwise  their  idleness  would  send  two- 


1818]  RECEPTION   AT   THE    PITTI   PALACE.  155 

thirds  of  the  population  of  Florence  to  the  Eecluso  dei 
Poveri. 

Saturday,  2\st. — In  the  evening  went  to  the  reception 
at  the  Pitti ;  we  were  there  at  eight  o'clock.  The  Grand 
Duke,  his  son,  his  daughter-in-law,  and  his  daughter  had 
already  entered  the  circle,  which  was  too  thinly  attended. 
Lady  Charlotte  Campbell  and  we  were  presented  to 
the  daughter-in-law,  a  ceremony  we  had  missed  on  her 
marriage.  She  asked  us  the  usual  questions  as  to  our 
stay  at  Florence,  &c.  As  for  the  Grand  Duke  himself 
and  the  little  Bossue  (his  daughter),  they  never  speak  to 
anyone  after  the  first  presentation — at  least  I  never  saw 
them  address  a  word  to  any  English  gentleman  or  lady. 
After  about  half  an  hour,  the  Grand  Duke  and  his  chil- 
dren each  made  their  party  at  cards  ;  and  then  those  who 
were  in  the  same  room,  consisting  principally  of  the 
ministers  and  their  wives,  did  the  same.  Mesdames  Brig- 
noUe  and  Appony  invited  me  to  sit  down  at  their  table, 
which  I  did  not  know  until  afterwards  was  a  sort  of 
favour.  All  the  rest  of  the  company  remained  in  an 
ante-room.  At  ten  o'clock  the  Prince's  party  broke  up 
and  they  went  away.  This  might  have  been  a  tolerably 
good  assembly  if  there  had  been  more  company,  and  if 
the  Princes  had  been  more  talkative  and  more  gracious. 
Foreigners  are  allowed  to  come  as  often  as  they  like,  if 
they  are  content  to  be  no  more  noticed  than  the  chairs ; 
but  the  Florentines  are  invited  in  small  numbers  to  each 
of  their  receptions,  which  take  place  twice  a  week — and 
if  those  who  are  invited  do  not  appear,  the  company  is 
too  small,  as  it  was  last  evening,  for  any  Court  whatever. 

Extract  of  a  Letter  from  Miss  Berry  to  Lady  Hardwicke. 

....  Now  for  a  word  or  two  on  the  Devonshire  business.* 

*  A  strange  romantic  story  had  been  put  in  circulation  at  this  time  as  to 
the  birth  of  the  late  Duke  of  Devonshire,  who  was  said  to  be  a  supposititious 


156  MISS   BEERY'S   journal.  [1818 

To  be  sure,  Shakspeare  is,  as  usual,  quite  right  when  he  makes 
his  Grravedigger  say  that  '  all  the  world  is  mad  in  England,'  for 
such  a  strange  mad  story,  with  such  accessoires  as  this,  I  never 
heard  I    Luckily,  it  begins  by  being  founded  on  three  falsities — 
first,  that  the  Duchess  at  Eome  is  sick  ;  next,  that  she  is  devote ; 
and  third,  that  she  is  turned  Catholic,  not  one  of  which  is  true, 
as  Madame  d' Albany  assures  me,  who  is  in  regular  correspon- 
dence with  her,  and  indeed  we  should  all  have  heard  it  in  this 
near  neighbourhood  of  Eome  had  it  been  true.  .  .  .  When  the 
late  Duchess  was  to  be  confined  at  Paris,  that  is  to  say,  at  Passy, 
after  spending  the  summer  at  Spa,  there  was  (as  I  remember  she 
told  me  herself)  present  at  the  labour,  as  a  sort  of  witness, 
the  Duchess  Dowager  d'Aremberg,  our  Princess  Staremberg's 
mother,  a  very  great  lady  of  the  most  unimpeachable  character, 
still  living,  with    all  her  senses  about  her ;   and  I  remember 
the  poor  Duchess  adding,  that  the  Duchess  d'Aremberg,  then 
an  old  woman,  said  she  hoped  she  might  still  live  long  enough 
for  the  son  she  had  seen  born,  to  come  and  make  her  his  bow 
at  Brussels.     In  short,  I  cannot  attach  (knowing,  as  I  think  I 
do,  the    character   and    conduct    of  the  principal    actors)  the 
smallest  degree  of  faith  to  any  part  of  this  confused  bothered 
story. 

Monday^  March  IQth. — Went  to  M.  de  Boutourlin's 
to  look  in  the  library  which  he  has  bought  here  from 
the  heirs  of  a  certain  Dr.  Lessi.  He  has  paid  for  6,000 
bound  volumes,  and  about  400  or  500  unbound,  1,250 
scudi — that  is  300/,  sterhng  ;  it  is  about,  one  with  an- 
other, 2  paulo  a  volume.  The  books  would  have  sold  for 
certainly  more  than  double  that  sum  in  England.  There 
are  some  very  superb,  many  very  curious,  and  several  very 
rare  in  the  collection. 

Friday,  20th. — Went  to  the  Church  of  Ste.  Maria 
Madelena  dei  Pazzi,  to  hear  the  Passion  sung ;  it  lasted 
from   noon   till   three    o'clock,  alternately  singing    and 


child,  a  changeling,  &c.  This  story  has  long  since  died  away.  Miss  Berry's 
account  of  the  presence  of  the  Duchesse  d'Aremberg  on  the  occasion  would 
alone  have  been  a  sufficient  contradiction  to  any  such  fabrication. 


1818]  MAERIAGE   OF  MR.    BURY.  157 

preaching.  The  music  was  tolerably  fine,  but  the  preach- 
ing detestable.  Lenesino,  an  old  singer,  sang  here,  and 
at  the  Grand  Duke's  Chapel,  to  which  he  belongs,  havino- 
left  the  stage  twenty  years  ago  from  religious  scruples. 

Monday^  2^rd. — Nine  o'clock  this  morning  was  the 
hour  fixed  for  the  celebration  of  Lady  Charlotte  Camp- 
bell's marriage  (to  Mr.  Bury).  We  had  been  friends  for 
thirty  years,  and  we  offered  to  be  present,  as  did  Sir 
Thos.  Fremantle.  Lord  John  Eussell  was  invited,  and 
Mr.  Dawkins  was  necessarily  there.  They  were  married 
at  Lord  Borghersh's  house,  being  that  of  the  English 
Minister,  though  not  there  himself. 

Thursday^  2Qth. — Went  to  Fiesole  ;  leaving  our  carriage 
at  the  church  below  ViUa  Mozzi,  we  proceeded,  sometimes 
on  foot,  sometimes  in  a  machine  called  a  tregia — that  is  to 
say,  a  sort  of  sledge,  upon  which  is  placed  a  basket  large 
enough  to  hold  four  persons  sitting,  two  vis-a-vis.  This 
machine  is  drawn  by  two  oxen,  and  they  ascend  and 
descend  the  steepest  paths  without  difficulty.  We  saw 
the  cathedral,  one  of  the  most  ancient  churches  of  Tus- 
cany. This  and  San  Miniato  are  both  constructed  on  the 
same  plan,  with  a  sort  of  choir,  to  which  one  mounts  by 
a  staircase  on  each  side  of  the  great  altar.  The  sarco- 
phagus and  the  bust  beneath,  placed  in  this  choir  by  Salu- 
tati.  Bishop  of  Fiesole,  is  the  work  of  Mi?io  da  Fiesole,  in 
1467,  and  is  admirable — the  bust  most  striking.  The 
Capucin  Convent  at  the  top  of  the  mountain  is,  I  think, 
that  which  was  so  much  frequented  by  Cosmo  and 
his  grandson  Lorenzo.  The  adjoining  church  (of  St. 
Alexander)  is  built  on  the  site  of  an  ancient  temple 
dedicated  (as  they  say)  to  Bacchus,  of  which  there  are 
no  other  remains  but  the  columns.  Upon  the  other  side 
of  the  mountain  are  the  remains  of  what  is  an  amphi- 
theatre. All  one  can  see  are  four  or  five  gradations  of 
cut  stone  and  some  small  caves.  From  this  place  are  to 
be  seen  the  walls  of  the  ancient  town  of  Fiesole,  which 


158  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1818 

appears  to  have  occupied  a  valley  between  two  small 
hills. 

Friday^  27th I  went  with  the  Comte  Bardi  to  the 

Laurentian  Library.  Saw  the  travels  (MSS.)  of  Cosmo  III. 
in  England  in  the  year  16  7-,  accompanied  by  Magalotti, 
who  gives  the  description  of  the  travels,  and  by  an  artist 
who  made  drawings  of  all  the  small  towns  where  they 
stopped,  and  of  all  the  country-houses  they  saw.  I 
remarked  Wilton,  Billingbear,  Audley  Inn,  &c. 

Sunday,  29th. — In  the  morning  Leoni  came  to  read 
me  his  translation  of  Lord  Byron's  'Lament  of  Tasso,' 
and  to  ask  me  the  meaning  of  some  of  the  more  difficult 
passages.  He  has  succeeded  wonderfully  well  in  render- 
ing the  sense  and  spirit  of  the  English  verse  into  Italian 
prose,  which  he  did  before  putting  it  into  verse.  The 
Italian  verses,  I  confess,  pleased  me  less,  probably  because 
in  paying  that  close  attention  to  the  English  lines  that 
I  have  done  to-day,  I  am  the  more  sensible  of  their  great 
beauty. 

Thursday,  April  2nd. — Went  vvdth  M.  BrignoUe  to  a 
collection  of  portraits  and  other  things  in  the  Piazza  Sta. 
Croce  il  Consigliere  Eavani — a  large  room  entirely  filled 
with  portraits,  but  without  names.  It  is  a  pity,  as  there 
are  some  good  ones,  and  several  which,  by  their  date, 
might  be  curious.  There  are  many  others  in  his  library 
to  which  they  have  given  names,  sometimes,  perhaps, 
gratuitously. 

Monday,  Qth. — We  went  this  morning  to  the  Pratolina, 
five  and  a  half  miles  from  here,  on  the  road  to  Bologna. 
It  is  a  continual  ascent,  and  takes  two  hours  to  reach  the 
top.  The  house  at  Pratolina  is  in  ruins — a  pity,  for  the 
terrace  which  surrounds  it  on  all  sides  is  superb,  and  the 
distribution  of  the  rooms  inside  excellent.  This  dates 
from  the  first  Grand  Duke  Cosmo.  The  garden  was 
formerly  (and  as  I  saw  it  twenty  years  ago)  a  beautiful 
Itahan  garden,  with  a  number  of  fountains,  walks,  and 


1818]  A   BALL   AT   THE    PITTI    PALACE.  159 

terraces.  During  the  reign  of  the  French,  their  mihtary 
detachments,  assisted  by  the  peasants  of  the  neighbour- 
hood, spoilt  it  all,  cut  the  leaden  pipes  which  conducted 
the  water,  displaced  and  carried  away  the  sculptured 
stone  from  the  terraces  and  balustrades,  and  made  much 
havoc  in  the  woods,  but,  it  appears,  without  touching  the 
large  trees,  which  are  here  of  a  size  and  beauty  rare  in 
Italy.  Since  the  return  of  the  Grand  Duke  he  has  placed 
here  two  German  gardeners,  who  have  laid  it  all  out 
a  VAnglaise.  There  are  no  fountains  nor  walks ;  all  is 
in  winding  paths,  green  sward,  and  groves  of  trees.  To 
me,  who  delight  in  an  Italian  garden,  the  change  is  not 
agreeable,  but  the  admirers  of  an  English  garden  must 
allow  that  this  is  not  ill  done. 

Wednesday^  Sth. — In  the  morning  with  Tonelli  to 
the  Eiccardiana  Library ;  *  fine  collection,  arranged  in 
highly  ornamented  rooms.  When  the  Grand  Duke 
bought  the  Eiccardi  Palace  (formerly  the  house  of 
Cosmo  P.  Pal.),  the  pubhc  bought  the  library  [in 
1812],  which  is  now  open  every  day.  However,  I  saw  no 
one  studying  there,  whilst  we  saw  at  least  twenty  at  the 
Magliabecchiana.f 

Saturday,  18th. — In  the  evening,  before  nine  o'clock, 
I  went  with  Madame  d'Appony  to  the  ball  at  the  Pitti, 
given  in  honour  of  the  Duke  of  Modena  and  his  brother 
the  Archduke  Ferdinand,  who  are  here  for  three  days. 
The  ball-room  is  large.  It  was  brilliantly  lighted  with 
wax  candles  ;  no  lamps,  even  in  the  great  drawing-room. 
Soon  after  the  entry  of  the  Princess  and  the  two  Arch- 
dukes, everyone  passed  into  the  ball-room,  and  they 
commenced  by  an  English  dance,  the  Duke  of  Modena 

*  The  Palazzo  Eiccardi  was  begirn  in  1430,  by  Cosmo  de  Medici ;  sold 
in  1659  to  the  Marquis  Gabrielle  Eiccardi,  and  bought  by  the  Grand  Duke 
towards  the  end  of  the  last  century. 

t  Bibliotica  Magliabecchiana,  so  named  from  its  founder,  Antonio  Mag- 
liabecchi,  the  most  singular  of  bibliomaniacs,  for  he  is  said  to  have  read  al , 
the  books  that  he  bought.     He  died  1714. 


160  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1818 

dancing  with  the  Archduchess  here,  and  the  Duke 
Ferdinand,  his  brother,  with  the  Httle  Gobba,  and  the 
hereditary  Archduke  with  Madame  dAppony.  Then  a 
French  dance — the  four  ladies,  two  Princesses,  Mesdames 
Brignolle  and  Durazzo  ;  the  gentlemen,  the  three  Princes, 
and  M.  Eeccillai ;  afterwards  a  valse,  &c.  &c. 

Tuesday^  2 1^^. — Went  this  morningto  Madame  dAppony 
at  one  o'clock,  when  she  always  has  Manelli  with  her ;  she 
sings  Handel  like  an  angel — '  Farewell,  ye  limpid  streams,' 
at  sight ! 

Wednesday^  22nd. — This  morning  with  Comte  Bardi 
to  the  Marucelliana  Library.  There  are  several  engravings, 
old  portraits,  &c.,  and  the  most  perfect  collection  of  Marc 
Antonio's  I  have  ever  seen,  or  which  I  believe  exists. 
These  engravings  deserve  even  more  than  their  repu- 
tation. 

Saturday,  2bth. — Left  Florence  for  Lucca  ;  the  weather 
dehcious,  and  the  country  through  which  we  passed  a 
continual  garden.  Arrived  at  Lucca.  On  the  Corso  we 
saw  La  Duchesse  the  ci-devant  Queen  of  Etruria  *  and  her 
son  in  a  carriage,  a  well-appointed  equipage,  mounting  the 
red  Spanish  cockade.  Lucca  has  an  air  of  decline  and 
sadness  that  its  situation  and  the  smihng  beauty  of  its 
environs  do  not  justify. 

Sunday,  2Qth. — ^Left  Lucca  for  Massa  ;  weather  perfect. 
AU  the  peasants  in  their  Sunday  dress.  The  women's 
costume  is  charming,  and  the  country  which  they  inhabit 
in  an  Italian  spring  realises  to  the  traveller's  eye  the  idea 
of  a  fancied  Arcadia. 

Monday,  27th. — Left  Massa  at  nine  o'clock  ;  took  the 
route  to  Carrara,  its  beauty  having  been  so  much  vaunted 
to  us,  and  having  been  so  strongly  advised  to  see  the 
workshops  of  Marblea ;  but  neither  the  one  nor  the  other 
is  worth  the  trouble.  Its  situation  is  rather  fine,  surrounded 

*  Marie  Anne  Eliza,  wife  of  Felix  Baccioclii;  eldest  sister  of  Napoleon  j 
bom  1777  ;  died  1820. 


1818]  A    COUNTRY   PRIEST.  161 

by  marble  mountains,  but  the  road  going  out  of  Massa  is 
difficult,  and  passes  by  a  bridge  not  wide  enough  for  some 
carriages.  In  the  artists'  ateliers  there  were  nothing  but 
busts,  which  are  sold  at  Florence  as  the  works  of  the 
sculptors  there.  There  is  absolutely  nothing  one  can  buy 
to  carry  away — not  even  specimens  of  the  marbles  found 
in  its  environs. 

Tuesday,  28th. — At  nine  o'clock  we  were  in  our  por- 
tantines,  having  them  covered  only  at  the  top.  Harrot 
and  Salvador  rode  on  horseback,  and  a  mule  with 
our  luggage  completed  the  cavalcade.  In  five  hours' 
march,  without  giving  a  moment  of  repose  to  our  inde- 
fatigable porters,  we  reached  Borghetta,  a  most  miserable 
bourg.  Our  porters  only  rested  a  quarter  of  an  hour. 
In  two  hours  from  Borghetta  we  reached  Corodono, 
where  there  lives  a  good  priest,  to  whom  I  had  a  letter 
from  his  friend  Viviani.  He  gives  hospitality  to  all  who 
are  introduced  to  him — so  far  at  least  as  he  has  to  give, 
which  is  not  much.  We  arrived,  having  eaten  nothing 
since  eight  o'clock  but  a  hard  egg  at  Borghetta.  He  was 
alone,  and  without  a  fire  in  his  house.  After  havina: 
called  his  servant  and  another  woman  working  in  the 
vines,  he  managed  to  give  us  a  menestra  with  vermicelli 
and  some  bad  cheese,  a  bad  omelette,  and  two  pigeons, 
killed  after  our  arrival,  which  they  could  not  succeed  in 
sufficiently  cooking  to  serve  up.  The  dessert  was  superb  ; 
all  the  fruits  of  the  country— grapes,  peaches  and  dried 
figs,  nuts  and  filberts,  and  excellent  apples.  This  was 
served  out  by  the  good  priest  himself,  assisted  by  his 
brother  the  doctor,  who  arrived  to  help  him  ;  and  they 
gave  us  new  milk  for  tea,  and  a  very  good  bed  for  me, 
with  a  sort  of  sofa  for  Harrot  in  the  same  little  rooiji. 
Agnes  occupied  the  priest's  room,  which  was  filled  with 
old  shoes  and  old  culottes'. 

Wednesday,  29th — We  had  new  milk  from  the  priest's 
cow  for  our  breakfast  in  the  morninp-  and  left  our  lodofinsr 

VOL.  III.  M 


162  MISS   BEKRY'S   JOUKNAL.  [1818 

at  Corodono  at  eight  o'clock,  having  in  our  best  manner 
thanked  the  priest  and  doctor,  and  given  the  former 
twenty-five  francs  for  him  to  give  his  servants  for  the 
trouble  we  had  occasioned.  In  three  hours  we  arrived 
at  Braco.  As  far  as  Braco  was  through  mountains  quite 
uncultivated,  and  very  httle  inhabited.  During  three 
hours'  progress  we  did  not  see  a  single  cabin.  After  the 
post  station  at  Braco  (an  isolated  house),  comes  a  long 
rapid  descent,  by  very  stony  paths,  too  much  broken  to 
deserve  the  name  of  a  road,  leading  to  a  plain  where 
Sestie  is  situated,  on  the  small  bay  which  bears  its  name, 
and  which,  backed  by  tlie  most  picturesque  form  of 
mountains,  is  of  striking  beauty.  From  Sestie  to  Chiavere 
the  road  upon  the  seashore  is  excellent ;  those  who  wish 
to  rest  from  riding  on  horseback  or  from  the  motion  of 
being  carried  in  the  chair  always  perform  this  part  of 
the  journey  in  a  carriage  to  be  got  at  Sestie.  Nothing 
can  be  more  beautiful,  better  peopled  or  more  dressed 
than  all  the  coast  from  Sestie  to  Chiavere.  Chiavere 
itself  is  one  of  the  prettiest  little  towns  possible. 

Thursday^  30^/i. — The  same  perfect  weather ;  we  left  Chia- 
vere early.  There  is  nothing  more  charming  than  the  road 
from  here  to  Genoa — sometimes  on  the  seashore,  some- 
times crossing,  and  sometimes  coasting  along  mountains 
covered  with  olives  (which  are  here  of  great  age  and  of 
extraordinary  beauty),  corn,  vines,  and  habitations,  with 
church  towers  peeping  out  in  the  distance  over  woods 
covering  the  precipitous  sides  of  the  mountains ;  at  the 
mouth  of  every  little  valley  are  to  be  seen  small  towns  or 
villages  close  to  the  sea.  At  two  miles  on  this  side  Nervi 
the  new  road  is  already  passable  for  carriages.  At  Nervi 
we  had  intended  having  a  carriage  and  leaving  our  chairs, 
but  it  was  a  grand  fete  day  (the  Ascension),  so  that  all 
the  carriages  and  all  the  horses  from  Nervi  were  at  Genoa. 
We  proceeded  in  our  chairs,  and  Harrot  on  horseback. 
The  road  was  full  of  people,  as  it  always  is  on  fete  days 


1818]  A   ROW    IN   THE    THEATRE.  163 

at  Genoa,  and  we  made  our  triumphal  entry,  all  covered 
with  dust,  in  our  travelhng  dresses  and  in  our  open  chairs 
through  this  crowd,  dressed  in  their  Sunday  best,  to 
the  very  foot  of  the  staircase  at  the  Hotel  de  Londres, 
where  we  were  met  with  a  most  cordial  and  affectionate 
reception  from  the  Prince  and  Princess  Staremberg,  who 
expected  us  to  dinner. 

Monday,,  May  ith. — ^Went  to  the  Opera  :  the  Court  was 
not  there,  and  the  public  were  displeased  with  the  ballet, 
would  not  see  it,  and  such  a  noise  was  made  in  the  pit 
that  the  curtain  was  dropped,  and  the  second  act  of  the 
opera  was  beginning.  This  displeased  them  still  more  ;  the 
pit  became  noisier  than  ever.  The  police  then  addressed 
a  word  to  the  orchestra,  and  the  play  ended ;  but  it  was 
not  yet  nine  o'clock,  and  the  displeasure  of  the  public 
was  demonstrated  by  all  sorts  of  noise,  shouting,  roaring, 
and,  finally,  by  throwing  the  benches  in  the  pit  one  upon 
another.  At  least  a  quarter  of  the  rioters  were  officers. 
I  know  not  whether  it  was  out  of  respect  to  them  that 
the  guard  did  not  arrest  some  and  turn  others  out.  But 
once  the  guard  did  enter,  and  retired  again  without 
touching  anybody.  The  pit  at  a  London  theatre  could 
not  have  been  uproarious  with  more  perfect  impunity. 
With  difficulty  we  got  our  chairs  to  go  home-.. 

Tuesday,  hth. — Went  to  the  Government  Palace,  where 
the  Court  gives  a  ball  in  the  evening.  Saw  the  room, 
which  was  formerly  called  the  Great  Council-room  ;  it  is 
undoubtedly  one  of  the  finest  in  the  world ;  it  was  orna- 
mented with  garlands  for  this  evening's  ball.  The  statues 
which  occupy  the  space  between  the  columns  had  been 
all  defaced  in  the  days  of  democracy,  but  on  the  occasion 
of  a  grand  ball  given  to  Napoleon,  upon  the  reunion  of 
the  Ligurienne  Pepublic  with  France,  they  were  repaired 
with  plaster,  and  draped  with  common  cambric  muslin, 
which  stiU  remains,  and  accords  wonderfully  well  with 

M  2 


164  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1818 

the  marble,  particularly  now  that  dust  and  time  have 
subdued  somewhat  of  its  orio-inal  whiteness. 

Wednesday,  13^/i. — This  morning  I  went  with  G.  C. 
de  Negro  to  all  the  libraries  and  brocanteurs  at  Genoa, 
where  I  could  hope  to  find  books  or  prints  which  would 
be  useful  for  my  '  Lorenzo  de  Medicis.'  I  found  but 
few.  KaslofFsky  met  us  in  the  street,  and  accompanied 
us  to  a  librarian ;  got  into  a  discussion  with  me  upon 
Eoscoe's  ideas,  and  to  the  end  to  which  these  ideas  led, 
in  his  life  of  Lorenzo,  and  from  that  to  general  prin- 
ciples of  government.  To-day  he  is  for  an  odious  oli- 
garchy ;  to-morrow,  perhaps,  he  will  be  for  an  absurd 
democracy.     What  a  head,  and  yet  so  much  cleverness  ! 

Thursday,  2\st. — This  morning  I  went  again  to  the 
libraries,  and  to  see  the  tomb  of  Andrea  Doria,  in  the 
Church  of  St.  Matteo  ;  it  is  only  a  sarcophagus,  in  rather 
bad  taste,  placed  in  a  subterranean  chapel  Avhich  still 
belongs  to  his  family.  The  chapel  is  in  stucco,  gilded  and 
painted,  and  was  much  spoilt  in  the  time  of  the  Genoa 
Eevolution,  when  the  people,  more  barbarous  or  more 
malignant  than  in  any  other  town  in  Italy,  obliterated 
not  only  the  arms  of  Andrea  Doria,  over  his  scarco- 
phagus,  but  even  the  inscription  below.  One  cannot 
comprehend  that  sort  of  liberty  ! 

Thursday,  June  4:th. — We  went  with  Harrot  to  the 
cemetery  upon  the  bastions,  where  we  gathered  flowers 
and  shed  tears  upon  my  father's  tomb  ;  but  never  did  a 
cemetery  show  death  under  a  less  gloomy  aspect,  nor 
give  birtli  to  ideas  more  calculated  to  soften  and  to  calm 
the  grief  for  inevitable  losses. 

Tuesday,  dth. — Left  Genoa. 

Wednesday,  10th. — Arrived  at  Milan. 

Friday,  12th. — Left  Milan :  the  posts  in  the  Milanese 
partake  a  little  of  German  slowness :  reached  Sesto 
Calende  late.  One  side  of  the  little  inn  is  entirely 
covered  with  the  branches  of  a  large  vine,  and  the  house 


1818]  ITALIAN   SCENERY.  165 

itself  is  situated  on  the  banks  of  the  beautiful  river 
Ticino.  A  clear  moon  lighted  up  the  scene,  and  has 
left  on  my  mind  a  very  agreeable  remembrance  of  Sesto 
Calende. 

Saturday,  IZth. — Eeached  Duomo  d'Ossola. 
•  Sunday,  14^/i. — Left  Duomo  d'Ossola  at  six  o'clock  for 
the  Pass  of  the  Simplon,  The  first  mile  is  along  the 
valley,  the  ascent  never  very  steep,*  and  apparently  as 
much  descending  as  ascending  during  the  first  stage. 
Two  galleries  through  which  the  road  passes,  both  very 
picturesque.  One  magnificent  fall  of  the  torrent  by  the 
side  of  the  road,  separated  by  a  rock  of  enormous  size. 
In  the  later  part  of  this  stage,  the  finest  possible  mountain 
scenery,  but  completely  Swiss,  not  at  all  Italian.  Italy 
one  leaves  at  Milan,  Arrived  at  nine  o'clock  at  Iselle  ; 
no  horses,  although  only  one  carriage  requiring  four 
horses  had  gone  before  us  ;  waited  an  hour  for  ours  to  be 
refreshed,  in  order  to  make  three  posts  more.  Arrived 
at  the  inn  at  Simplon  after  one  o'clock.  Here,  again,  no 
horses,  and  obliged  to  wait  nearly  two  hours  till  ours 
were  again  refreshed  ;  from  the  inn  at  Simplon  one  is 
continually  mounting  for  two  hours  and  a  half.  The  road 
winds  through  certainly  the  highest  and  most  perpen- 
dicular masses  of  rock  I  ever  beheld,  till  at  last,  where  two 
torrents  meet  and  occupy  the  whole  space  of  the  narrow 
cut  in  the  rocks  over  which  they  pass,  a  stone  bridge  of 
a  single  handsome  arch  is  thrown  over  one  of  them,  and 
the  road  conducted  along  the  side  of  the  other,  through 
the  long  gallery  of  rock  ;  and  the  scenery  on  this  part  of 
the  road  is^^sublime,  without  conveying  any  other  ideas 
than  those  of  awe  and  melancholy.  Blasted  pines  and 
enormous  inaccessible  masses  of  bare  rock  seem  to  record 
the  passage  of  the  Great  Destroyer  rather  than  the 
creation  of  a  Beneficent  Being.     I  am  glad  to  have  seen 

*  The  average  slope  nowliere  exceeds  6  inches  in  6|-  feet  — Murrai/s 
Handbook. 


166  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1818 

this  gigantic  work  of  man  in  overcoming  nature.  As  a 
military  road  and  a  military  measure  it  was  perhaps 
necessary,  otherwise  I  must  ever  think  it  a  misapplica- 
tion of  the  immense  powers  of  labour  and  money  con- 
signed for  a  time  to  the  hands  of  a  man  who,  in  makmg 
the  Simplon,  thought  more  of  doing  what  nobody  else 
would  do,  than  what  in  the  ordinary  course  of  human 
affairs  was  best  to  be  done.  It  is  useless  to  count  on 
posting  on  this  road  as  on  the  Mount  Cenis  ;  it  is  neither 
a  commercial  nor  a  post  road ;  you  meet  nothing  on  it 
whatsoever  but  a  travelling  carriage  like  your  own,  of 
which  you  dread  the  sight,  because  it  is  sure  to  delay 
your  progress.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed,  therefore,  that 
this  mountain  passage  will  long  be  passable,*  as  nature 
prevents  its  being  open  above  four  or  five  months  in  the 
twelve,  and  that  nothing  can  make  it  worth  while,  or 
indeed  possible,  to  be  always  on  the  watch  (which  is 
necessary)  to  keep  it  in  repair  for  the  passage  of  armies. 
We  did  not  arrive  -at  the  inn  at  Brigge  till  near  nine, 
having  left  Duomo  d'Ossola  at  six.f 

Monday,  Ihth. — We  left  a  neat  Swiss  inn  at  Brigge 
about  six,  and  arrived  at  Martigny  after  eight.  The  post 
is  a  production  that  will  not  flourish  in  Switzerland.  It  was 
forced  by  Bonaparte  through  the  Vallais,  exists  only  on 
this  route,  and  is  served  in  an  awkward  manner.  Mar- 
tigny is  the  only  place  that  seems  not  to  have  improved 
in  the  many  years  that  have  passed  since  we  were  here 
returning  from  the  glaciers  ;  it  is  the  same  dirty,  comfort- 
less-looking little  bourg  it  ever  was,  and  the  inn  but  httle 
better,  although  it  was  crammed  and  always  is  crammed 

*  The  tempests  of  1834  and  1839  fell  with  tremendous  violence  on  the 
part  of  the  road  near  Iselle,  and  destroyed  it  for  a  space  of  nearly  eight  miles — 
that  is  to  say,  for  this  distance  the  portion  carried  off  was  greater  than  that 
which  was  left.  Every  bridge  of  stone  wtis  swept  away ;  in  some  instances 
even  the  materials  of  tlie  bridge  disappeared,  and  the  place  where  it  stood 
was  not  to  be  recognised. — Murrains  Handbook. 

t  The  journey  usually  occupies  ten  hours. — Murray  s  Handbook. 


1818]  ARRIVAL    IN   PARIS.  167 

the  wliole  summer  long  with  travellers  in  all  directions  ; 
for  it  is  at  this  place  that  the  road  separates  for  taking 
the  Swiss  or  Savoy  side  of  the  lake,  besides  being  the 
place  to  which  persons  descend  from  the  Montanvert  and 
Col  de  Balme. 

Tuesday^  IQth. — Arrived  at  Geneva. 

Wednesday^  1 7  th. — Geneva. 

Thursday,  ISth. — Moret. 

Friday,  19th. — Dole. 

Saturday,  20th. — Monthard. 

Sunday,  21st. — WiUinerau-sur- Yonne. 

Monday,  22nd. — Paris. 

Monday,  July  Qth. — M.  de  Duras  gave  us  tickets  for 
this  week  in  the  box  of  the  gentlemen  in  waiting.     I 
arrived   in   time   to   see   the   last    scene   of  Talma,    in 
'  Manlius.'     It  was  the  night  of  his  return  to  the  theatre 
after  rather  a  long  absence.     On  the  curtain  falling,  they 
called  loudly  for  him,  with  a  noise  and  a  disturbance 
much  more  like  London  than  Paris.    Three  times  they  in 
vain  began  the  second  piece ;  it  was  impossible  to  hear  a 
word.     Three  times  the  two  actresses  who  had  to  com- 
mence the  piece  took  refuge  in  the  side  scenes.     At  last, 
whilst   Baptiste   Cadet    came    forward    to   address   the 
audience,  some  officer  of  the  police,  in  his  scarf  of  office, 
announced  that,  by  an  order  of  the  police,  the  actors 
were  forbidden  to  appear  upon  the  stage  out  of  their 
parts.     One  might  well  ask  why  this  rule  ?  which  pre- 
vents the  audience  from  showing,  and  the  actor  from 
receiving,  these  marks  of  approbation.     They  have  much 
to  learn  in  this  country  upon  the  ne  quid  nimis  in  the 
way  of  governraent.      At  last  the  audience  was  asked 
if  they  would  have  the  second  piece,  '  L'Aveugle  Clair- 
voyant.'    Upon  the  reiterated  '  Ouis '  from  the  pit,  they 
replied,  '  Vous  I'aurez  quand  ces  miserables  criards  ont 
cesses.'      On    this    the   noise   was    renewed   for    some 


168  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1818 

minutes,  after  which  we  had  the  piece  very  well  acted 
and  very  amusing. 

Tuesday,  1th. — Dined  at  Lady  D.  Hamilton's ;  saw 
the  comic  opera,  '  Chaperon  Eouge,' — a  pretty  opera, 
founded  upon  a  story  of  Mother  Goose.  The  music  by 
Auber. 

Wednesday,  8th. — Went  in  the  evening  to  Madame 
Crawford,*  where  we  met  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  the 
Due  de  Guiche  with  his  intended  bride,  the  daughter  of 
Madame  d'Orsay,  and  granddaughter  of  our  hostess. 

Friday,  IQth. — In  the  morning  went  to  Girard's,  the 
painter,  with  my  sister.  I  only  saw  his  pictures ;  the 
large  one  of  Henry  IV. 's  entry  into  Paris  is  not  equal  to 
what  the  sketch  promised.  It  has  all  the  faults  of  the 
French  modern  school.  I  do  not  think  that  Girard's 
last  works  are  as  good  as  those  of  some  years  ago. 

Saturday,  11th. — In  the  evening  to  Girard's,  where  I 
found  Grassini  and  her  sister  singing,  accompanied  by 
Paer.f  Grassini  is  aged,  but  still  looks  wonderfully  well 
preserved.  Her  sister  is  not  even  pretty,  but  has  a  fine 
contralto  voice,  which  will  make  her  fortune  at  the 
Italian  theatres. 

Sunday,  12th. — In  the  morning  to  prayers,  afterwards 


*  Madame  Crawford  was  an  Italian  by  birth,  and  in  early  life  accom- 
panied an  English  gentleman  to  India,  and  narrowly  escaped  being  drowned 
on  her  return.  She  afterwards  lived  with  the  Duke  of  Wurtemberg,  by 
whom  she  had  two  children — the  General  Francmont  and  a  daughter  who 
married  General  d'Orsay  (father  of  Comte  Alfred  d'Orsay  and  the  Duchesse 
de  Guiche,  afterwards  Grammont).  She  eventually  married  an  old  English- 
man, Mr.  Crawford,  and  was  received  by  the  corps  diplomatique  and  all 
the  best  French  society. 

t  Ferdinando  Paer,  an  eminent  musical  composer ;  born  at  Parma  1774. 
In  1795  he  brought  out  two  or  three  operas  at  Vienna;  in  1801  became 
chapel-master  at  Dresden.  After  the  battle  of  Jena  he  was  taken  into  the 
service  of  Napoleon,  attended  him  to  Posen  and  Warsaw,  and  was  after- 
wards appointed  conductor  of  the  chamber  music  to  the  Empress  Marie 
Louise.  After  the  restoration  of  the  Bourbons,  he  became  director  of  the 
Italian  Opera  at  Paris  till  1825.  Amongst  his  best  operas  are  '  Agnesi,' 
'  Griselda;  '  Sargino.'     Died  1839. 


1818]  A   ROUND   OP   VISITS.  169 

to  see  the  Spanish  Eaffaelles,  which  are  now  in  the  hands 
of  Mons.  Bonnemaison,  the  picture-dealer.  '  La  Madonna 
del  Pesce  '  finer  even  than  I  had  imagined  it ;  'La  Ma- 
donna della  Perla'  much  less  good  to  my  mind ;  a  '  Mater- 
dolorosa'  by  Gruido,  one  of  the  finest  productions  I  ever 
saw  from  his  brush  ;  and  a  Murillo,  a  sort  of  Holy  Family, 
treated  hourgeoisement. 

Monday^  \Mi. — In  the  morning  the  Duchesse  de  Duras 
took  us  to  M.  de  Lestrie,  to  see  the  process  of  taking 
lithographic  impressions,  which  is  nothing  more  than  the 
usual  process  for  engravings  on  copper.  From  the  litho- 
grapher's we  went  to  the  statues  at  the  Louvre.  It  was 
not  a  pubhc  day,  so  that  we  were  alone  in  the  rooms. 
It  is  impossible  for  anything  to  be  better  arranged,  or  in 
more  perfect  taste — and  what  treasures  they  have  still ! 
Those  who  had  not  seen  the  '  Apollo '  and  the  '  Lao- 
coon'  would  never  believe  that  anythmg  could  be  missing 
in  so  fine  a  collection. 

Thursday^  IQth. — In  the  morning  with  Agnes  to  Mrs. 
Crawford's,  to  see  the  pictures.  The  portraits  are  really 
interesting  to  those  who  occupy  themselves  with  the 
history  of  France.*  She  took  my  sister  into  her  room, 
which  is  filled  with  all  sorts  of  beautiful  things.  The 
personalty  of  these  people  ought  to  be  worth  milhons. 

Wednesday^  '2'2nd. — Went  to  Girard's  house ;  a  very 
small  party.  Amongst  others  was  Madame  Brouard,  the 
author  of  the  '  Suites  d'un  Bal  Masque,'  and  the  sister  of 
Talma. 

Thursday^  2^rd. — Went  in  the  evening  with  Lady 
Elizabeth,  and  Lord  and  Lady  Hardwicke,  to  Madame 
Crawford.  It  was  the  wedding  day  of  her  grand- 
daughter, Mdlle.  d'Orsay  (Ina),  to  the  Duke  de  Guiche. 
In  the  second  room  were  the  bride  and  bridegroom  ;  she, 
dressed  in  white  trimmed  with  orange  flowers,  and  a 

*  A  large  portion  of  this  collection  is  now  in  tlie  possession  of  tlie  Earl  of 
Beauchamp,  at  Madresfield;  in  Worcestershire. 


170  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1818 

bunch  of  orange  flowers  in  her  head.  A  very  handsome 
blonde  of  sixteen  years  old.  She  seemed  quite  happy, 
self-possessed,  and  calm  ;  she  followed  us  into  the  two 
rooms  where  her  trousseau  and  corbeille  were  displayed ; 
both  superb.  There  were  gowns  without  number,  and 
of  aU  kinds,  from  the  Court  train  to  the  most  simple 
demi-toilette. 

In  the  '  corbeille,'  a  purse  with  100  Napoleons  was 
placed  in  the  midst  of  ribbons,  gloves,  hat  feathers,  and 
a  Brussels  point  lace  gown.  They  had  been  married  the 
preceding  day  by  the  municipality,  and  this  morning  at 
L'Eglise  de  I'Ascension,  the  parish  church  of  the  young 
lady,  where  there  had  been  an  immense  assemblage  of 
the  friends  on  both  sides. 

Monday,  21th. — Went  with  Lord  Hardwicke  to  see  the 
MSS.  which  have  been  offered  for  sale  to  Sir  Charles 
Stuart ;  they  are  all  the  papers  and  correspondence  of 
Ministers  relative  to  the  Peace  of  Utrecht.  We  re- 
mained some  time  turning  over  and  reading  them.  There 
ought  to  be  amongst  them  some  curious  facts,  and  I 
found  some  that  were  amusing,  but  much  less  than  one 
should  have  expected. 

Saturday,  August  1st. — Dined  at  Mr.  Locke's  with 
Mr.  Ward,  Macdonald,  and  Young  the  comedian.  The 
last  very  amusing,  and  related  in  detail  the  account 
Talma  had  given  him  of  the  Eeign  of  Terror. 

Monday,  Src?.  —  Li  the  evening  to  see  '  La  Famille 
Glinet,'  —  a  very  pretty  piece,  beautifully  acted.  The 
story  is  placed  at  the  beginning  of  the  League,  but  it  is, 
in  fact,  the  history  of  the  effect  of  political  opinions  upon 
the  interior  of  families  in  France  now  and  at  all  times. 
The  King  has  just  given  a  pension  of  800  francs  to  the 
author,  a  M.  de  MerviUe. 

Tuesday,  ith. — We  accompanied  the  Duchesse  de  Duras 
to  the  School  of  Mutual  Instruction  which  she  has  esta- 
blished  in   a  quarter   not   far   from   the  Faubourg  St. 


1818]  THE   STATUE    OF   HENEY   IV.  171 

Germains.  It  is  not  superior  in  point  of  situation  or 
building  to  that  at  Lancaster,  and  the  pupils  much  less 
numerous  ;  but  this  is  one  of  many.  We  saw  there 
about  126  boys ;  their  progress  and  their  habits  of  order 
and  regularity  bear  testimony  to  the  incalculable  advan- 
tages of  this  system,  and  is  perhaps  still  better  adapted 
to  the  French  than  to  the  English  youth. 

Sunday,  9th. — Dined  with  the  Duchesse  de  Duras,  and 
afterwards  accompanied  her  to  Montmorency  and  then 
to  the  forest,  where,  under  the  large  chesnut  trees,  is  held 
every  Sunday  a  sort  of  fete  champetre  for  the  peasants 
of  the  environs  and  a  number  of  idle  lookers-on,  who 
always  appear  at  all  the  fetes  at  Paris.  There  were  as 
many  carriages  at  the  door  of  the  inn  in  the  small  town 
of  Montmorency  as  I  ever  saw  in  the  yard  of  one  of  the 
inns  at  Eichmond  on  a  Sunday.  The  dancing  under  the 
trees  was  charming. 

Friday,  \ith. — I  went  to  see  pass  the  bronze  statue  of 
Henry  IV.,  enveloped  in  blue  cloth  covered  with  Jieur  de 
lis,  and  drawn  upon  a  sort  of  sledge  by  forty  oxen  in  two 
hues. 

Tuesday,  ISth. — We  walked  to  the  new  bridge  to  see 
what  they  were  doing  with  Henry  IV.  The  statue  had 
arrived  at  the  foot  of  its  pedestal,  and  above  and  below 
and  on  both  sides  the  apparatus  was  arranged  to  draw  it 
up.  The  space  around  was  kept  free ;  for  the  cords,  the 
puUeys,  and  the  levers  and  ropes  were  so  placed  as  to 
keep  off  a  very  considerable  crowd.  From  the  new 
bridge  we  walked  to  the  Place  Dauphine,  to  see  the 
monument  of  Desaix,*  killed  in  the  battle  of  Marengo  ;  it 
is  placed  upon  a  public  fountain — a  bust  upon  a  half 
column  crowned  by  a  Victory,  and  upon  the  base  of  the 
column  is  engraved  all  the  names  of  those  in  the  regiment 
who  contributed  to  the  expenses  of  the  monument, 

*  Lieutenant-Colonel  Ant.  Desaix,  bom  at  Ayat,  Dep.  du  Puy  de  Dome, 
1758  5  kiUed  at  Marengo  1800. 


172  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1818 

Wednesday,  19?A. — Left  Paris. 
Tuesday^  26th. — Arrived  in  London. 
Petershafn,  Saturday,  Oct.  17th. — Went  to  Little  Straw- 
berry Hill  to  visit  Admiral  Bowen,  who  now  occupies  it. 
I  was  received  with  great  civility  by  him.  They  took  me 
all  over,  both  inside  and  outside,  to  see  the  ruinous  con- 
dition in  which  the  alderman  had  made  it  over  to  them. 
In  spite  of  all,  the  trees  which  we  had  planted  with  our 
own  hands  are  grown,  and  the  beauty  of  the  long  green 
walk  and  the  lawn  in  front  of  the  house  struck  me  much, 
and  I  was  glad  to  feel  that  all  this  gave  me  more  pleasure 
than  pain.  I  felt  myself  occupied  with  the  present  with- 
out dwelling  on  the  past. 

Friday,  November  loth. — Went  to  Wimpole. 
Wednesday,  2bth.. — At  last  a  fine  day  ;  went  with  Lord 
Hardwicke,  Lady  Charlotte  Lindsay,  and  my  sister  to 
Cambridge.     Visited  Trinity  College ;  saw  the  hall,  the 
statue  of  Sir  Isaac  Newton  in  the  chapel,  and  the  kitchen, 
from  which  they  dine  285  persons  in  commons.     From 
there  we  went  to  see  Lord  Fitzwilliam's  pictures,  being  a 
portion  of  the  valuable  legacy  he  has  left  to  the  univer- 
sity of  books,  pictures,  printed   music,   and   MSS.      I 
hardly  remember  any  collection  containing  so  great  a 
number  of  pleasing  pictures,  and  with  so  few  that  are  un- 
interesting.   The  books  are  also  an  excellent  collection  of 
all  sorts,  but  especially  of  French  works  and  works  upon 
art.     His  old  servant  and  his  son  have  the  care  of  them, 
and  are  paid  by  the  university.     They  both  recognised 
us  ;  the  father  I  had  not  seen  since  we  were  in  Italy  a 
hundred  years  ago  ;  the  son  lived  for  a  long  time  with  Mr.. 
Cambridge.     I  was  touched  with  the  manner  in  which  the 
old  valet  said  that  his  master  had  so  frequently  spoken 
of  me.     What  a  difference  in  our  two  fates  had  they 
been  united !  It  seems  to  me  that  he  might  perhaps  have 
gained  as  much  as  I  should  ;,  but  who  knows  ? 

Saturday,  December  bth. — Lord  Hardwicke  went  to 


1818]  THE   'MEMOIR   OF   LADY   EUSSELL.'  173 

Cambridge,  and  brought  back  to  dinner  Mr.  Smythe,  tlie 
Professor  of  Modern  History — tlie  same  who  has  written 
such  pretty  verses  under  the  title  of  'Enghsh  Lyrics.' 
He  has  a  good  countenance,  and  great  simplicity  of 
manners.* 

Saturday^  Vltli. — I  worked  all  the  morning;  before 
dinner  I  read  in  my  own  room  to  Lady  Hardwicke,  Lady 
Charlotte  Lindsay,  and  my  sister,  what  I  had  written  of 
Lady  Eussell's  Memoir,  with  which  they  expressed  them- 
selves much  pleased. 

Saturday^  19/A. — Sir  James  Mackintosh  in  my  room 
this  morning ;  hearing  me  read  over  and  commenting  on 
my  'Memoir  of  Lady  Eussell,'  spoke  frankly,  seemed 
pleased,  and  satisfied  me  very  tolerably  with  his  opinion. 
Afterwards  a  little  general  conversation,  especially  On  his 
own  book ;  his  conversation  always  admirable.  His  views 
of  the  Eevolution,  and  what  he  wished  to  prove  it  was, 
clear  and  admirable.  In  the  evening  he  read  some  of 
Milton's  '  Paradise  Eegained  '  to  us.  Afterwards  much 
interesting  conversation  about  Sir  Samuel  Eomilly,f  and 
details  of  his  last  moments. 


*  William  Smythe,  professor  of  modern  history  at  Cambridge ;  born  at 
Liverpool  1766 ;  Eighth  Wrangler  at  Cambridge  in  1797 ;  became  tutor 
of  Peterhouse  College,  In  1806  he  published  a  little  volume  of  '  English 
Lyrics,'  which  was  praised  by  the  '  Edinburgh  Eeview,'  and  cited  by 
Dugald  Stewart  in  his  lectures,  He  was  .appointed  by  Lord  Henry  Petty, 
in  1809,  professor  of  modern  history  at  Cambridge.  In  1845  he  published 
his  '  Evidences  of  Christianity.'  He  died  in  1849,  at  the  age  of  eighty- 
three  years. — Im}).  Diet,  of  Universal  Bio(jr.aphy. 

t  Sir  Samuel  Komilly  died  Nov.  2,  1818,  in  the  sixty-second  year  of  his 
age,  having  survived  his  wife  only  three  days. 


174  MISS   BEREY's   journal.  [1819 


JOURNAL. 
1819. 

Monday^  January  4th. — Eeturned  to  North  Audley 
Street. 

Sunday,  February  lith. — In  the  morning  went  to  John 
Street  Chapel  to  hear  Sydney  Smith,  who  preached  a  very 
good  sermon  upon  Death.  He  took  the  opportunity  of 
making  a  well-deserved  eloge  of  Sir  S.  Eomilly. 

Guy's  Cliff,  Friday,  July  9th. — Having  been  very 
much  occupied  with  arranging  the  notes  of  Lady  Eussell's 
Letters,  and  the  composition  of  the  Memoirs  of  her  Life, 
having  Bab.  and  her  husband*  in  the  house,  and  my  real 
or  imaginary  duties  to  fulfil  vis-a-vis  society,  with  health 
more  than  usually  delicate  during  the  months  of 
April  and  May,  I  have  neither  had  time,  strength,  nor 
will  to  continue  my  Journal.  Now  that  my  book  is 
published  (which  it  was  the  1st  of  this  month),  I  re- 
commence my  Journal  in  the  same  place  where  I  first 
began  twelve  years  ago,  in  the  house  and  by  the  advice 
of  my  friend  Greathead.  We  arrived  here  the  4th  of 
July. 

Monday,  hth. — Looked  at  all  the  improvements  they 
made  since  our  last  visit  in  1810. 

Wednesday,  1th. — Walked  with  Greathead  towards 
Gaveston's  Hill,  which  belongs  to  him  now,  and  where  he 
is  going  to  raise  a  monument  to  mark  the  place  where 
the  person  fell  who  gave  his  name  to  the  spot. 

Thursday,  Sth. — We  drove  this  morning  Avith  Anne 
Turner  to  Leamington ;  saw  the  rooms,  the  batlis,  the 

*  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Bannister. 


1819]  VISIT   TO    COVENTRY.  175 

pump-room,  &c.,  and  a  town  which  I  have  ahnost  seen 
born,  and  which  increases  in  size  every  day.  The  build- 
ings in  general  are  in  very  bad  taste ;  the  houses  in  rows, 
all  in  red  brick,  except  the  rooms  and  the  large  baths, 
which  are  in  stone. 

Tuesday,  lc>th. — Agnes  and  I  went  with  Mr.  Great- 
head  to  Coventry.  The  three  churches  are  of  fine  Gothic 
architecture,  and  have  been  much  ornamented ;  but  the 
stone  has  been  so  sensitive  to  the  effects  of  time  and 
atmosphere,  that  the  ornaments  are  almost  obhterated. 
All  three  have  spires  of  great  height.  The  spire  of  St. 
Michael  is  mounted  upon  an  octagon  tower,  at  the  back 
of  which  are  four  flying  buttresses  resting  upon  a  square 
tower  in  beautiful  proportion.  But  all  the  charm — all  the 
prestige  of  the  exterior  is  forgotten  inside  the  church, where 
nothing  corresponds  with  the  ornaments  and  the  beautiful 
form  of  the  outside.  The  Protestant  religion  is  not  in- 
tended to  please^  the  eye.  There  are  many  very  ancient 
houses  in  Coventry — wooden  buildings,  of  which  the  first 
story  projects  in  small  bay  windows.  There  is  a  small 
hospital  built  in  this  manner  round  an  interior  court,  the 
windows  ornamented  with  wooden  work  marvellously 
well  carved.  I  went  into  a  ribbon-weaver's  to  see  the 
weaving,  the  large  and,  I  believe,  only  commerce  of 
the  place.  The  man  who  was  at  the  loom  said  that  he 
could  make  ten  yards  a  day  such  as  I  saw,  which  was 
white  figured  ribbon,  and  of  the  width  that  we  call  six- 
penny. The  Town-hall  is  a  fine  large  room,  the  same 
architecture  as  the  churches,  with  superb  windows. 

Wednesday,  21st. — Left  Guy's  Chff;  returned  home. 

The  following  letters  are  amongst  those  received  by 
Miss  Berry  on  the  publication  of  Lady  Eussell's  '  Life  and 
Letters : ' — 


176  MISS   berry's   journal,  [181^ 

Fror^i  the  Duke  of  Bedford  to  Miss  Berry. 

Hamilton  Place,  June  4,  1819. 

.  .  .  The  scarcity  of  materials  to  illustrate  the  life  of  such 
a  person  as  Lady  Eussell  must  always  be  a  matter  of  regret,  but 
I  can  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  you  have  used  those 
which  have  been  placed  in  your  hands  to  the  best  advantage  ; 
and  the  philosophical  part  of  the  work,  the  reasoning  and 
reflections,  are  such  as  must  ever  do  the  highest  honour  to  your 
own  head  and  heart.     .     .     . 

Bedfoed. 

From  Miss  Joanna  Baillie  to  Miss  Berry. 

Hampstead,  Saturday,  July  24,  1819. 

My  dear  Friend, — I  hear  you  are  in  town,  and  I  hope  you 
are  returned  to  it  refreshed,  after  your  successful  labours  with 
the  agreeable  society  of  your  friends  at  Guy's  Cliff,  the  pure  air, 
and  beauty  of  the  country.  I  may  well  say  successful  labours, 
for  your  '  Life  of  Lady  Eussell,'  as  far  as  my.  acquaintance 
extends,  gives  general  satisfaction  ;  and  I  must  thank  you  again 
for  your  copy  so  kindly  bestowed  upon  your  unworthy  servant, 
now  that  I  more  perfectly  know  its  intrinsic  value,  besides  the 
value  I  particularly  set  upon  it  as  your  gift,  and  a  token  of  your 
regard.  I  have,  indeed,  read  it  with  great  interest;  and  the 
picture  you  draw  of  that  noble  and  excellent  woman,  with  jonx 
own  just  and  impressive  remarks  on  her  character,  and  the 
nature  of  her  piety,  which  had  so  much  effect  in  forming  that 
character,  will  make  her  life  a  pleasing  and  edifying  example  to 
the  young  women  of  the  day,  who  consider  religion  as  too  exclu- 
sively connected  with  mystery,  and  what  we  call  Methodism.  .  .  . 

From  Mr.  Wishaiv  to  Miss  Berry. 

50  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields,  July  14,  1819. 
My  dear  Madam, — On  returning  from  the  country  I  found 
your  kind  and  acceptable  present,  for  which  I  beg  to  return  you 
my  sincerest  thanks.  I  have  read  over  the  whole  with  great 
interest  and  satisfaction ;  and  it  is  no  flattery  to  say  that  you 
have  rendered  a  valuable  service  to  literature  and  to  the  public 
by  this  genuine  picture  of  unassuming  female  excellence,  bearing 


1819]  THE   CHItEAU   DE    CHANTILLY.  177 

the  true  features  of  the  English  character,  and  connected  with 
one  of  the  most  important  periods  of  our  history.  Such  a  work 
is  not,  perhaps,  calculated  to  be  immediately  popular ;  but  of  its 
ultimate  success  there  can  be  no  doubt.    .    .    . 

Yours  most  faithfully, 

J.    WlSHAW. 

Sunday,  August  2^rd. — Left  London. 

Monday,  2ith. — Embarked  at  Dover  for  Boulogne. 

Tuesday,  2hth. — Abbeville. 

Wednesday,  2Qth. — Stopped  a  short  time  at  Amiens  to 
see  the  Cathedral,  which  is  one  of  the  finest  and  most 
ornamented  Gothic  churches  I  have  ever  seen.  Slept  at 
Clermont. 

Thursday,  27th. — Stopped  at  Chantilly  to  see  the  re- 
mains of  the  chateau.*  The  stables,  and  what  is  called 
the  small  chateau,f  are  still  perfect ;  it  is  re-furnished,  and 
they  are  now  arranging  a  small  room  for  a  theatre  on  the 
ground  floor  of  one  part  of  the  large  chateau,  which  was 
demolished  nearly  down  to  that  height,  and  they  are 
making  a  large  terrace  upon  the  top,  which  ranges  with 
the  first  story  of  the  small  chateau.  There  were  not 
more  than  half  a  dozen  of  the  Prince's  horses  in  the 
stables,J  but  he  is  not  here  now,  and  seldom  resides  here. 
The  woods  did  not  appear  to  be  much  spoiled,  but  of  the 
cottage  on  the  Isle  d' Amour,  &c.,  there  were  only  the 
melancholy  remains  which  mark  their  position.  '  LTsle 
d' Amour '  is  converted  into  an  English  garden,  all  newly 
made,  and  consequently  bare  and  not  pretty. 

Wednesday,  September  ^rd. — I  went  to  see  the  Exhi- 
bition of  French  Industry  in  the  rooms  at  the  Louvre. 
The  interior  of  the  Louvre  is  now  finished — that  is  to  say, 

*  The  grand  chateau  was  destroyed  in  1789. 

t  On  the  Restoration,  1814,  the  petit  chateau  was  restored  to  the  house 
of  Conde,  and  many  improvements  were  made  by  the  last  of  the  name,  who 
frequently  resided  here,  and  made  it  his  principal  hunting-seat. — Galignani's 
Paris  Guide. 

X  The  stables  are  capable  of  holding  180  horses. 

VOL.  III.  N 


178  MISS   BEERY'S    JOURNAL.        '  [I8iy 

in  a  state  ready  to  be  furnished.  It  is  at  present  full  of 
all  the  manufactures,  all  the  machines,  all  the  inventions 
of  every  kind  in  France,  from  agricultural  implements  to 
jewellery,  and  from  the  coarsest  cloth  to  velvet.  Nothing 
can  be  more  amusing,  though  fatiguing — I  will  not  say 
with  seeing  it  properly,  but  with  merely  w^alking  through 
such  an  immense  space  so  filled. 

Tuesday^  7th. — I  went  to  M.  Eederer's,  and  found  him 
as  usual  working  in  his  study.  He  is  busy  about  a  His- 
tory of  Louis  XII.,  of  which  he  gave  me  the  sheets  that 
are  already  printed.  The  conversation  was,  as  usual,  very 
interesting,  and  we  made  reciprocal  engagements  to  meet 
often  when  I  return  here  next  year.  I  explained  to  him 
a  little  the  subject  on  which  I  was  about  to  occupy 
myself;  he  promised  to  assist  me  in  showing  me  where  I 
should  fmd  much  of  the  information  I  needed.  We  went 
before  six  o'clock  to  dine  with  the  Duchesse  de  Duras  and 
her  two  daughters — the  Princesse  de  Talmont  (a  widow), 
and  Clara,  the  newly-married  Duchesse  de  Eauzan ;  she 
married  just  a  w^eek  ago  M.  de  Chatelleux,  who  takes  the 
name  of  Duras,  the  title  of  Due  de  Eauzan,  and  the 
'Duche  paire '  of  Duras  after  the  death  of  his  father-in- 
law.  It  appears  that  this  arrangement  met  with  much 
opposition ;  his  family  did  not  like  his  giving  up  their 
name,  and  the  fcnnilles  Duias  and  Deufort  (which  are  the 
same)  not  liking  that  he  should  take  theirs.  However, 
it  is  arranged,  with  the  King's  permission,  that  he  should 
take  the  title  of  Due  de  Eauzan,  which  is  in  the  family  of 
Duras.  The  rest  of  the  company  were  M.  de  Chatelleux,  the 
brother  of  the  bride ;  M.  and  Madame  Eoger  de  Damas, 
M.  and  Madame  de  la  Vallette,  Madame  de  la  Bedoyere 
(the  wife  of  him  who  was  shot  for  being  the  first  who 
led  his  regiment  to  Bonaparte  on  his  return,  1815). 
These  three  ladies  are  Chatelleux,  sisters  of  the  bride- 
groom—  all  three  very  pretty,  fair,  Avith  good  com- 
plexions and  good   features.      There  were  besides,  M. 


1819]  THE    LOUVRE — ST.  CLOUD.  179 

Humboldt — as  talkative  as  ever,  and  as  little  pleasing  as 
I  have  always  thought  him  in  society — and  a  M.  de  la 
Ferronaye. 

Friday,  lOt/i. — In  the  morning,  with  Eobert,  Lady 
Tancred,  and  her  son,  to  see  the  exhibition  of  pictures  in 
the  Grand  Gallery  of  the  Louvre.  They  are  placed  Upon 
a  large  scaffolding  before  the  old  pictures.  There  were 
several  producing  a  curious  effect  by  their  manner  of 
disposing  of  liglits  and  shadows ;  one  particularly,  of  a 
Chapter  of  Franciscans,  by  Granet^*  really  wonderful! 
There  are  several  others,  which  are  called  Tableaux  de 
Genre,  painted  upon  the  same  principle. 

Sunday,  l^tli. — Went  to  St.  Cloud  with  the  Tancreds 
and  Tonelh.  The  approach  is  a  street  so  narrow,  so 
crooked,  and  so  steep,  that  habit  only  can  reconcile  one 
to  it.  We  entered  by  the  garden  gate  into  the  gayest, 
the  most  animated  scene  that  can  be  imagined  in  a  publit 
fete.  The  waters  played,  and  the  crowd  was  great. 
Dined  at  St.  Cloud  with  the  Mercers.  Drove  to  the  park, 
which  was  then  lighted  up,  and  where  were  at  least  five 
or  six  thousand  people  dancing  to  different  orchestras.  We 
amused  ourselves  going  from  one  ball  to  the  other  till 
past  ten  o'clock,  when  we  returned  to  Paris. 

Friday,  October  Isl- — In  the  evening  at  M.  d'Escars, 
and  afterwards  at  Madame  de  Eumford's.  A  great  many 
people  there — Lord  Lansdowne,  Madame  de  Flahault,  M. 
de  Broglie,  &c.  I  talked  some  time  with  Gallois  without 
drawing  much  out  of  him  ;  either  he  does  not  understand 
what  I  am  wanting,  or  he  can  give  me  but  very  little 
assistance.  Everyone  here  could  only  talk  and  dream  of 
politics. 

Saturday,  2nd. — Started  about  eleven  o'clock  for  St. 

*  Fran  Granet,  born  1776,  tlie  son  of  poor  parents,  began  life  by 
painting  the  prows  of  ships  at  Toulon.  His  dexterity  in  the  management 
of  light  and  shadow  acQ[uired  for  him  the  name  of  'ie  Rembrandt  Fran^ais.' 
— J3ioff.  de  Contemp. 

K  2 


180  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1819 

Germain.  At  Poissy  is  a  church,  built  as  they  say  by 
the  English ;  it  is  Gothic,  has  been  much  ornamented, 
and  is  now  defaced  by  time.  It  contains  an  old  stone 
font,  where  they  pretend  St.  Louis  was  baptized,  having 
been  born  in  the  room  of  a  convent  or  palace  adjoining 
the  church,  but  which  no  longer  exists. 

Thursday^  7th. — ^Went  to  the  Odeon.  The  Odeon  is 
the  old  French  Comedy,  where  I  have  often  seen  Mdlle. 
Contat  and  Mole.  It  has  twice  been  destroyed  by  fire 
within  the  last  thirty  years,  but  it  has  always  been  re- 
stored upon  the  old  plan,  which  is  excellent.  The  present 
costly  decoration  of  the  interior  is  in  bad  taste — a  great 
deal  of  gilding  badly  applied,  no  part  where  the  eye  can 
repose.  A  royal  box  in  the  middle,  supported  by  four 
large  golden  caryatides,  which  cut  and  do  not  accord 
with  the  design  of  open  boxes  in  front,  and  loges  grilles 
behind. 

Sunday,  10th. — After  prayers  at  the  Ambassador's,  we 
went  to  see  the  Princesse  d'Henin  and  Lally.*  She  is 
lodged  in  a  very  fine  country-house  which  belonged  to 
the  Due  de  Praslin  (minister),  and  which  now  belongs  to 
his  grandson. 

*  The  Marquis  Trophirae  Gerard  de  Lally  Tollendal,  bom  1751,  son 
of  the  unfortunate  Lally  Tollendal,  who  was  most  unjustly  executed.  No 
sooner  had  the  young  man  left  college  than  he  used  his  utmost  endeavours 
to  vindicate  the  memory  of  his  father,  by  obtaining  in  different  courts  of 
justice  a  reversal  of  the  sentence  by  which  he  died.  In  1789  he  was  chosen 
Depute  de  la  Noblesse  aux  Etats  G6n^raux,  and  was  an  ardent  admirer  of 
the  plans  and  policy  of  Necker.  In  1792  he  joined  with  others  in  endea- 
vouring to  rescue  the  King  from  his  dangerous  position,  but  was  thrown  into 
prison ;  he  fortunately  escaped  the  massacre  of  September,  and  took  refuge 
in  England.  He  offered  to  return  to  France  and  defend  the  King  on  his 
trial ;  but  the  offer  not  being  accepted,  he  printed  his  defence.  He  returned 
to  France  after  the  18th  Brumaire,  and  lived  in  comparative  retirement  till 
1814,  when  he  was  made  a  member  of  the  Privy  Council  of  Louis  XVIII., 
whom  he  followed  to  Ghent  in  18l5.  He  voted  for  the  act  of  amnesty  in 
1816,  for  the  law  of  elections,  and  for  the  liberty  of  the  press.  He  was 
the  author  of  various  works.  {Biog.  des  Contemp.')  His  tragedy  on  the  fall 
of  Strafford  is  alluded  to  in  a  letter  (1791)  from  Horace  Walpole  to  Miss 
Berry.     Died  1830. 


1819]  THE    PLACE    DE    GREVE.  181 

KB. — Tlie  grandson  of  this  detested  minister  never 
having  emigrated,  has  remained  in  quiet  possession  of  all 
his  property,  of  which  this  house  formed  a  part.  The 
Princess  is  grown  very  old  and  very  infirm,  and  '  les  plus 
(jras  des  hommes  sensihles '  (as  poor  Madame  de  Stael 
called  him)  has  become  fatter  than  ever.  They  received 
us  very  kindly ;  she  accompanied  us  to  a  foohsh  sort  of 
temple  near  the  front  of  the  garden,  raised  upon  the  site 
of  Mohere's  house.  If  they  had  left  the  house  itself 
standing,  pilgrimages  would  have  been  made  to  it.  Lally 
took  us  round  the  garden,  half  kitchen  garden  and  half 
English  garden,  but  all  is  beautiful  in  such  fine  weather 
as  we  have  now. 

Thursday^  2Stk. — Walked  in  the  morning  with  Eobert 
to  the  Place  de  Greve.  We  entered  the  Hotel  de  Ville, 
and  saw  there  the  large  room  Avhere  the  city  entertains 
the  King.  It  is  a  beautiful  room,  but  it  was  not  as  a  room 
for  fetes  that  it  interested  us,  but  as  that  where  the  Com- 
mittee du  Salut  Pubhc  held  its  sittings,  and  sent  hundreds 
of  their  fellow-creatures  to  the  guillotine.  With  what 
horrible  fears  have  these  stairs  been  ascended,  and  with 
what  wretched  despair  have  they  been  descended  !  In  a 
narrow  closet — or  rather  cupboard,  for  it  has  no  exit — is 
a  small  window  of  four  panes,  which  looks  into  one  of 
those  very  little  square  courts  sometimes  introduced  here 
in  the  interior  of  houses  to  give  light.  It  was  from  this 
window  that  Eobespierre  threw  himself  when  they  brought 
him  before  le  Commune  de  Paris,  then  assembled  in  the 
before-mentioned  large  room,  having  previously  wished 
to  blow  out  his  brains.  The  lantern  at  a  grocer's  door 
at  the  corner  of  a  street  opposite  La  Maison  de  Ville,  a 
little  to  the  right,  is  that  where  Foulon*  and  Berthier,  the 

*  Foulon  succeeded  Necker  as  Minister.  He  had  given  great  offence  to 
the  people  by  saying  that  'if  they  had  not  bread  they  might  eat  hay.'  He 
was  brought  to  the  Hotel  de  Ville  and  ordered  to  prison ;  but  the  mob, 
fearing  he  should  escape  their  vengeance,  thus  barbarously  executed  him, 


182  MISS   BEREY'S   journal.  [1819 

two  first  victims  to  tlie  rage  of  the  populace,  were  taken 
and  hung.  The  man  who  sliowed  us  all  this,  and  answered 
my  questions,  said  he  was  not  at  Paris  at  that  time,  and 
he  replied  with  very  little  interest  or  intelligence,  and  as 
if  all  these  things  had  happened  a  century  ago. 

Saturday^  November  Qth. — Our  ambassadress  said  that 
the  picture  of  '  Pygmalion  and  Galatea,'  by  Girodet, 
about  which  all  society  has  been  in  ecstasies  the  last  three 
days,  is  only  fit  to  be  a  sign-post  in  the  Eue  Vivienne,  '  au 
besoin  de  tout.'*  It  is  necessary  to  have  seen  the  naked- 
ness, the  colouring,  and  the  composition  of  this  much- 
boasted  picture  to  feel  the  perfection  of  this  saying. 

Wedfiesday,  10th. — I  stayed  at  home,  Hallam  paid  me 
a  visit ;  also  the  Comte  de  Kergolay.  I  had  much  con- 
versation with  the  latter  upon  Ultra  politics.  The  Ultras 
talk  more  easily,  more  willingly,  and  amuse  me  more  than 
all  the  others.  I  talked  with  Mr.  Hallam  about  my  occu- 
pations here.  He  began  by  saying  he  knew  I  was  work- 
ing at  something,  and  he  much  approved  the  idea.  By 
a  law  of  the  two  Chambers,  passed  since  the  ministry  of 
Marshal  Gouvion  de  St.  Cyr,f  everyone,  without  excep- 

July  3,  1789.  Berthier  de  Sauvigny,  son-in-law  to  Foulon,  was  seized  at 
Compiegne,  and  brought  tack  to  Paris  to  endure  a  similar  fate. 

*  A  picture  by  the  same  artist,  M.  Girodet,  seems  to  have  attracted  the 
attention  of  Sir  Samuel  Romilly  in  1802.  'The  subject/  he  says,  'is 
Victory  introducing  Dessaix,  Danipierre,  Marceau,  Joubert,  and  the  other 
officers  who  have  died  in  the  war,  to  the  heroes  of  Ossian.  The  execution 
is,  if  possible,  more  ridiculous  than  the  subject.' — Dimy  of  a  Journey  to 
Paris  in  1802 :  Mem.  of  Sir  S.  Romilly,  vol.  ii. 

t  Marshal  Gouvion  de  St.  Cyr,  born  1764,  served  with  much  distinction 
in  the  wars  of  the  Revfilution  and  of  the  Empire,  from  1793  till  1812, 
when  he  was  made  prisoner  of  war  at  Dresden,  and  tbere  remained  till  after 
the  restoration.  Having  accepted  honours  from  the  Bourbons,  he  remained 
faithful  to  their  cause  during  the  '  cent  jours,'  and  on  the  second  restoration 
he  was  twice  appointed  Ministre  de  la  Guerre,  and  it  was  during  his  second 
administration  that  was  framed  that  law  of  recruiting  '  qui  promittre  a  la 
France  une  armee  citoyenne  et  constitutionelle  '  (Vide  Biog.  des  Contemp.). 
Marshal  Gouvion  resigned  his  office  in  1819,  because  he  would  not  touch 
the  law  of  elections,  which  he  considered  as  the  safeguard  of  the  peace  and 
liberty  of  France. — Biog.  des  Contemp. 


|819]  VISIT    TO    A    'KOYAL    SEANCE.'  183 

tion,  is  obliged  to  enter  the  army  as  a  common  soldier. 
When  talking  of  this  law  to  M.  de  Kergolay  this  evening, 
I  asked  him  if  his  son  had  entered  the  service.  He, 
answered  that  if  the  King  had  commanded  or  required 
such  a  thing  of  his  ancient  nobility,  he  should  not  have 
made  the  slightest  difficulty  ;  but  that  a  lata  should  deprive 
them  of  the  privilege  of  entering  as  officers — that  a  law 
should  make  common  soldiers  of  his  children — that  was 
more  than  he  could  swallow.  Such  are  the  ideas  of  an 
'  Ultra,'  and  a  very  honest  man,  upon  the  subject  of  the, 
power  and  dignity  of  the  law  and  of  the  King. 

Monday^  29th. — Went  to  the  '  Seance  Eoyale  '  in  the 
Chamber  of  Deputies.  We  arrived  there  without  hin- 
drance, though  there  was  an  enormous  crowd.  We  were 
placed  in  what  is  called  the  'reserved  tribune,'  which 
means  nothing  more  than  one  part  of  the  two  exterior 
rows  of  the  great  circle. 

Thursday^  December  2nd. — At  M.  de  Vaudemont's,, 
where  I  found  Talleyrand  with  only  three  or  four  other 
persons,  and,  for  the  first  time  in  my  life,  I  got  into  con- 
versation with  him.  We  spoke  of  the  Galatee ;  his 
remark  was  that  between  the  three  persons  there  was 
only  one  eye — that  of  Pygmalion  in  profile.  Then  we 
talked  of  public  mournings  ;  of  their  effects  in  large 
reunions,  &c.  &c. 

Monday,  Qth. — Went  with  the  Ambassador,  between 
one  and  two  o'clock,  to  the  Chamber,  to  hear  the  dis- 
cussion on  the  acceptation  of  Gregoire.*    The  crowd  was 


*  Count  Henri  Gregoire,  formerly  Bishop  of  Blois ;  born  1750.  He  was 
tiie  firm  and  open  advocate  tbi-ough  life  of  civil  and  religious  liberty,  and 
was  the  author  of  a  great  variety  of  works  on  literary  and  political  subjects. 
He  passed  the  last  fifteen  years  of  his  life  in  retirement  and  study.  He 
died  in  18-30.  On  his  death-bed  the  Archbishop  of  Paris  refused  to  allow 
the  last  sacraments  to  be  administered  to  him  unless  he  would  retract  the 
civic  oath  taken  formerly  to  the  Constituent  Assembly.  This  he  refused  ; 
the  Abbe  Guillon  administered  the  sacrament  to  him  ;  but  after  death  came 
the  last  act  of  persecution,  when  he  was  refused  the  rites  of  sepulture.        , 


184  MISS   BEREY'S   journal,  [1819 

enormous  ;  in  the  minister's  box  I  had  scarcely  room 
to  sit  down.  The  discussion  (if  it  could  be  called  a 
discussion)  lasted  five  hours,  and  finished  without  touch- 
ing upon  the  real  question — if  Gregoire  was  or  was 
not  eligible.*  It  was  at  last  decided,  by  a  sort  of 
acclamation  on  the  right  side,  that  he  should  not  be 
admitted ;  but  the  legal  question,  the  truth,  in  fact,  was 
not  touched  upon  by  either  one  side  or  the  other.  I 
returned  home  between  five  and  six  o'clock.  In  the 
evening  a  grand  ball  given  by  the  Spanish  Ambassador 
upon  the  marriage  of  his  king.  The  two  courts  of  Orleans 
and  Berri  were  there.  The  ball  was  like  all  these  large 
balls,  except  that  it  was  better  lighted.  All  the  great 
world  of  Paris  was  there,  without  as  much  crowding  as 
one  might  expect  in  a  meeting  of  2,000  persons, 

Wednesday,  Sth. — In  a  salon  in  the  Eue  de  Yarenne, 
where  I  was  yesterday  evening,  the  conversation  turned 
upon  the  stormy  sitting  of  the  6  th  in  the  Chamber  of 
Deputies ;  then  upon  the  appointment  of  the  four  vice- 
presidents,!  MM.  Laine,  De  Villele,  Corbiere,  and  , 

*  Les  empietements  de  I'ultramontanism  conimencaient  alors  a  inspirer  de 

forte  repugnance  au  pays ;  I'esp^rance  d'acquerir  en  Gregoire  un  defenseuT 

eloquent  et  eprouvt?  des  libert^s  eccl^siastiques,  jointe  aux  grands  souvenirs 

qui  se  rattachaient  a  son  nom  et  au  desir  de  repondre  par  une  manifestation 

solemnelle    aux   scenes    de    reaction   qui   venaient   d'ensanglanter   I'Isere, 

fixerent  sur  lui  les  yeux  des  ^lecteurs  de  ce  departement.     Son  election  en 

reveillant  les  haines  contre-r^volutionnaires,  effaroucha  la  timidity  du  parti- 

lib6ral  dans  la  chambre;    car  le  projet   annonce   par  les  ultra-royalistes 

d'exclure  comme  indigne  le  nouveau  depute,  allait  placer  ce  parti  dans  la 

facbeuse  alternative  ou  de  ratifier  une  violation  formelle  de  la  cbarte,  ou  de 

compromettre  son  plan  d'opposition  parlementaire  en  prenant  la  defense 

d'un  r^publicain  avou^.     On  fit  aupres  de  Gregoire  pour  I'engager  a  donner 

spontanement  sa  demission  de  vives  instances,  que  sa  fermet^  repoussa.     La 

difficult^  fut  tournee  au  moyen  d'un  subterfuge  l^gislatif.     L'^lection  de 

risere  fut  annul(5e  sans  un  motif  nettement  foniiule  de  maniere  a  ce  que  les 

uns  pussent  voter  I'annulation  pour  vice  de  forme,  tandis  que  les  autres  la 

pronon^aient   pour  cause   dindiynite,   et   personne  (hormis  M.  Dupont  de 

I'Eure)  n'eut  le  courage  de  repousser  hautement  cette  injure  de  la  tete  du 

respectable  vieillard. — Nourelle  Biogrnphie  Universelle. 

t  Josepb  Plenri  Joacbim  Laine  ;  born  17G7 ;  lawyer  by  profession.     Tn 
tbe  session  of  1816  he  took  an  active  part  in  the  Chamber  as  minister  and  as 


1819]  THE   DUG    DE    BKOGLIE.  185 

which  took  place  yesterday,  and  with  which  everyone 
appeared  quite  pleased.  Then  the  conversation  fell  upon 
the  freedom  of  the  press.  The  lady  of  the  house  sup- 
ported its  necessity  in  a  representative  government.  '  Ah 
pour  le  gouverneraent  representatif  vous  en  serez  bientot 
degoute  ; '  replied  a  young  married  lady,  a  relation  of  the 
family.  '  II  n'y  a  pas  de  gouvernement  qui  puisse  aller 
avec  la  hberte  de  la  Presse; '  said  a  young  officer,  who, 
though  young,  is  a  lieutenant-general.  '  Nous  sommes 
actuellement  en  paix,  tout  est,  pour  ainsi  dire,  tranquille  en 
dedans  et  dehors,  et  voyez  le  mal  que  tout  cela  fait ;  mais 
si  nous  etions  en  guerre,  ou  dans  des  difficultes  exterieures, 
qu'est  ce  que  Louis  XIV.  aurait  pu  faire  avec  la  liberte 
de  la  presse  ?  Dans  la  guerre  de  la  succession,  par  exem- 
ple  ?  Mais  vous  voyez,'  said  the  lady  of  the  house,  '  que 
I'esprit  publique  est  beaucoup  ameliore  depuis  qu'on  a  la 
liberte  de  la  presse.'  'Ah  !  oui  (disait  la  dame  ennemie 
du  gouvernement  representatif),  il  faut  peut-etre  de 
I'emetique  a  un  malade ;  mais  quand  il  se  porte  mieux, 
quand  il  sera  fortifie,  vous  ne  le  ferez  pas  vivre  de  I'eme- 
tique ?  ' 

December  2Sth. — I  dined   yesterday  at   the   Due   de 

deputy.  From  1817  a  change  took  place  in  his  politics,  and  from  that  time 
he  was  regarded  as  belonging  to  the  Cote  Droit.  He  was  greatly  admired  as 
a  speaker,  and  it  was  said,  '  Si  sa  discussion  etoit  aussi  solide  qu'animee  il 
laissera  peu  de  chose  a  desirer.' — Diet,  des  Contcmpoi-ames. 

Le  Comte  Joseph  de  Villele  was  born  in  1775 ;  originally  served  in  the 
navy  with  M.  de  St.  Felix,  and  resided  with  him  in  the  Isle  de  Bourbon. 
He  returned  to  France  in  1807,  and  lived  in  retirement  till  1814 ;  he  then 
took  an  active  part  in  politics,  as  the  determined  enemy  to  constitutional 
government,  and  in  favour  of  absolute  power.  In  1820  his  appointment  as 
Vice-President  of  the  Chamber  was  regarded  as  a  proof  of  the  increasing 
power  of  the  party  opposed  to  constitutional  liberty.  He  afterwards  became 
a  minister  of  the  crown. — Diet,  des  Contemp. 

.Jacques  Guillaume  Pierre  Corbiere,  avocat  at  Rennes ;  became  deputy  in 
1815.  His  opinions  were  so  ultra-royalist  that  he  held  the  doctrine  of 
exceptions  from  the  restraint  of  certain  laws,  that  the  friends  of  the  king 
could  commit  no  crimes ;  and  in  order  to  increase  the  exceptions  to  the 
amnesty  of  June  1816,  he  proposed  to  establish  a  new  category  of  political 
olTences. 


186  MISS   BERRY'S    JOURNAL.  [1819 

Broglie's  with  M.  de  Lafayette.  It  was  the  first  tune  I 
had  been  in  his  company.  He  has  the  appearance  of  a 
frank  and  honest  man  ;  his  manners  are  simple,  cheerful, 
and  agreeable,  such  as  might  belong  to  a  person  even 
perhaps  superior  in  abilities  to  himself.  M.  and  Madame 
de  Broglie,  Lally,  two  young  Englishmen,  Auguste  de  Stael, 
and  myself,  were  the  whole  of  the  company.  M.  de  La- 
fayette spoke  out  his  opinions  very  plainly,  although  one 
saw  they  did  not  agree  with  those  of  the  Due  de  Broglie, 
and  still  less  with  those  of  Lally ;  but  all  these  shades  of 
liberality  may  come  together  in  a  salon  without  coming 
to  blows  in  dispute,  and  can  do  justice  to  each  other's 
intentions,  however  much  everyone  of  them  thinks  his 
neiglibour  mistaken.  Their  want  of  any  steady  inviolable 
principles  on  which  to  fix  their  judgment  of  actions,  and 
their  ignorance  of  what  can  or  cannot  be  done  in  any 
other  country  than  their  own,  is  remarkable — I  should  say 
astonisliing,  if  I  did  not  know  them  too  well  to  be 
astonished.  As  an  instance  of  the  first,  the  company 
yesterday  were  all  talking  of  Marshal  Ney's  death  as  a 
most  melancholy  and  iniquitous  transaction.     I  ventured 

to  say  in  a  corner  to  Madame  de ,  that  (putting  aside 

all  political  considerations  of  the  fact),  if  there  was  or  if 
there  could  be  such  a  thing  as  treason  to  an  existing 
Government  (whatever  that  Government  might  be).  Mar- 
shal Ney  was  guilty  of  that  treason  in  the  most  offensive, 
and,  as  it  appeared,  inexcusable  manner.  '  C'est  tres 
vrai,'  was  the  reply ;  '  mais  son  nom  se  rattache  k  de  si 
grands  souvenirs  c'etait  un  caractere  si  Francois,  25  ans 
de  gloire  I'avait  si  ennobli,  qu'on  trouvait  qu'il  etait  traite 
durement,  d'autant  plus  que  son  proces  n'etait  pas  con- 
duit de  la  maniere,  ni  dans  les  formes  juridiques,  qu'on  a 
du  observe.'*  This  last  observation  was  confirmed  by  the 
Luc  de ,  who  interests  himself  in  the  study  of  juris- 

*  The  arguments  of  Madame  de  miglit  have  been  fairly  used  in 

favour  of  a  pardon,  but  not  of  an  acquittal. — Ed. 


1819]  MAESIIAL    KEY— LOUIS   XVI.  187 

prudence.  Here  we  see  these  people,  even  the  most 
liberal  of  them,  confounding  the  crime  of  the  person  with 
the  manner  of  his  trial.  Their  faulty  jurisprudence  did 
not  m.ake  Marshal  Ney  less  guilty,  if  it  had  saved  instead 
of  condemning  him.  Thus  it  is  that  in  every  transaction, 
great  as  well  as  small,  sometimes  from  good,  sometimes 
from  bad  motives,  they  always  contrive  to  avoid  the 
truth.  The  fairest  trial  on  earth  could  not  have  saved 
Marshal  Ney  being  found  guilty.  But  if  he  had  been 
saved  they  never  would  have  considered  the  manner  of 
his  trial.  An  instance  of  my  second  remark,  i.e.  on  their 
ignorance  of  what  can  or  cannot  be  done  in  other  coun- 
tries, was  Lafayette's  observation,  when  they  were  talking 
of  the  interference  of  one  country  in  the  affairs  of  another, 
such  as  that  of  Sir  Eobert  Wilson,  &c.  in  the  escape  of 
La  Valette,  that  such  interference,  when  capable  of  doing 
good,  was  sometimes  unluckily  refused,  as  in  the  case  of 
Mr.  Pitt,  to  whom  (he  said)  it  was  offered  to  save  the  life 
of  Louis  XVI.  by  distributing  two  millions  of  money  here 
in  France.  '  And  by  whom  was  this  proposal  made,'  I 
asked, '  in  particular  ?  '  '  Par  un  M.  Crawford,  un  Anglais.' 
'  Celui  qui  mourut  dernierement  ici  F  '  '  Non ;  M.  Crawford 
qui  s'appelle  Fish.'  Imagine  Fish  Crawford  proposing 
the  disbursement  of  two  millions  in  France  to  save  the  life 
of  Louis  XVI. !  Imagine  Mr.  Pitt  receiving  such  a  pro- 
posal from  such  a  negotiator  as  Fish  Crawford!  And 
this  sale,  this  lie,  has  been  actually  believed  and  repeated, 
and  made  a  slur  on  the  character  of  Mr.  Pitt,  in  en- 
lightened France  at  this  day  ! 

Wednesday,  December  29th. — I  called  on  Eederer  for 
the  first  time  since  his  return  from  the  country.  Talking 
of  the  projected  changes  in  the  mode  of  election  and 
representation,  I  said  if  there  was  sufficient  confidence  in 
the  intentions  of  the  Ministers,  to  suppose  that  they  would 
not  attempt  other  changes,  those  proposed  were  certainly 
advantageous  to  hberty,  and  in  the  spirit  of  a  constitutional 


188  MISS    BEREY'S   JOURNAL.  [l8l9 

monarchy.  He  replied  that  he  saw  I  was  not  in  the 
secret;  that  the  intended  changes  in  the  rights  of 
elections,  and  of  the  eligibles,  threw  the  elections  entirely 
into  the  hands  of  the  ancienne  noblesse  ;  that  in  his  com- 
mune— that  of in  Normandy — of  two  hundred 

eligibles,  a  hundred  and  forty-seven  would  be  ancient 
nobles  ;  that  all  the  elections  thus  secured,  the  Assembly 
would  vote  the  restitution,  in  some  form  or  other,  of  the 
national  domains,  and  thus,  to  please  ten  thousand  nobles, 
dispossess  three  millions  of  persons  of  the  land  they  had 
not  only  paid  for,  but  made  their  own  by  improvement. 
From  these  premises  he  foresaw  an  interminable  civil  war, 
worse  than  all  the  preceding  ones  in  French  history. 
Without  at  all  beheving  his  augury,  I  mention  it  only  to 
show  the  state  of  thousands  of  minds  less  informed  than 
his  at  this  moment ;  only  I  hope  and  believe  that  much 
of  this  is  affected,  and  that  they  all  cry  out,  as  little 
believing  what  they  say  as  the  ultra-royalists  cry  out  what 
I  have  no  doubt  they  wish  and  desire. 

Friday^  31st — In  the  morning  to  an  exhibition  of  in- 
dustry, by  ladies  and  the  Princesses,  for  the  poor.  If  these 
poor  people  have  no  other  resource  they  are  to  be  pitied. 


1820]  CORRESPONDENCE.  189 


1820. 

LETTEKS. 

From  the  Hon.  James  Abercrombie*  to  Miss  Berry. 

Bowood,  Jan.  5,  1820. 
Dear  Miss  Berry, — I  have  not  forgotten  my  promise  to 
write  to  you  ;  and  although  the  dilatoriness  with  which  I  have 
performed  it  does  not  entitle  my  assertions  to  much  credit, 
yet  I  do  assure  you  that  I  should  not  have  allowed  the  pres- 
sure of  business,  not  to  say  the  anxiety  of  mind  inseparable 
from  the  discussions  in  Parliament,  to  have  interfered  with  my 
purpose  if  I  had  not  known  that  your  resolution  to  remain  at 
Paris,  and  the  means  which  you  there  possessed  of  knowing 
what  was  passing  here,  rendered  what  I  could  say  of  no  value. 
Had  you  gone  to  Italy,  I  should  have  acted  differently :  for 
there  you  would  not  probably  have  had  the  means  of  connecting 
and  of  fairly  appreciating  the  rumours  which  were  circulated  ou 
the  Continent  respecting  the  state  of  this  embarrassed  but  not 
ruined  country.  As  I  told  you  at  Chiswick,  all  I  can  contri- 
bute towards  your  amusement  is  to  give  you  my  thoughts  about 
England,  and  the  state  and  conduct  of  the  parties  who  divide 
it.  I  hardly  ever  recollect  to  have  witnessed  a  greater  sensation 
from  a  domestic  event  than  that  which  was  caused  by  the  im- 
prudent and  unwise  proceedings  of  the  magistrates  at  Manches- 
ter. There  certainly  was  great  room  for  condemning  their 
measures ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  those  who  were  clamorous 
against  them  erred  greatly,  both  in  fairness  and  in  their  public 
duty,  in  not  making  allowance  for  the  difficulties  of  the  position 

*  The  Hon.  James  Abercrombie,  bom  1776,  tbird  son  of  Sir  Ralph 
Abercrombie,  was  Judge  Advocate  1827,  Chief  Baron  of  Scotland  in  1830, 
Master  of  the  Mint  and  Member  of  the  Cabinet  in  1834,  and  Speaker  of 
the  House  of  Commons  in  1835.  In  1839  created  Baron  Dunfermline. 
Married  1802,  Mary  Anne,  daughter  of  Egerton  Leigh,  Esq.     Died  1858. 


190  MISS    berry's   journal.  [1820 

in  which  the  magistrates  stood.  The  meeting,  from  its  numbers 
and  the  evidence  of  intended  intimidation,  could  not  be  consi- 
dered as  legal.  The  danger  to  the  peace  of  the  town,  and  the 
injury  to  the  real  right  of  petitioning  from  so  gross  an  abuse 
of  it,  are  circumstances  which  I  always  thought  should  have 
deterred  the  Whigs  from  taking  any  part  in  the  affair  except  in 
Parliament,  where  the  errors  both  of  the  magistrates  and  of  the 
people  could  alone  be  fairly  and  fully  stated,  with  all  the  quali- 
fications with  which  prudent  men  would  wish  to  express  their 
opinions.*  There  certainly  was  some  provocation  for  the  removal 
of  Lord  Fitzwilliam,f  but  it  was  not  wise,  and  indeed  I  may 
say  it  was  culpable,  to  seize  it.  However,  the  division  of  men  of 
character  and  property  was  impolitic  when  we  were  threatened 
with  a  contest  for  property,  and  when  the  signs  of  the  times 
indicated  a  CTOwino:  breach  between  the  higher  and  lower  orders 
of  society.  No  rational  person  ever  thought  that  the  deluded 
Radicals  could  overturn  the  State ;  but  anyone  who  viewed  the 

*  In  January  1819,  Henry  Hunt,  the  leader  of  a  set  of  men  called 
'  Radical  Reformers,'  presided  at  a  numerous  meeting  at  Manchester,  with 
flags  and  mottoes  of  '  Hunt  and  Liberty,'  '  Rights  of  Man,'  '  Universal 
Suffrage,'  'No  Corn  Laws.'  Mr.  Hunt  treated  with  contempt  the  idea  of 
petitions  to  the  House  of  Commons,  and  asked  his  audience  to  come  forward 
'  as  men  and  Englishmen,  and  claim  their  rights.'  A  remonstrance  to  the 
Prince  Regent  was  then  adopted  in  lieu  of  a  petition  to  Parliament.  In 
the  month  of  June  numerous  meetings  in  the  manufacturing  districts  were 
held,  hut,  like  that  at  Manchester,  no  breach  of  the  peace  occurred,  though 
the  harangues  of  the  leaders  were  highly  inflammatory.  The  manufacturing 
districts  were  in  so  distressed  and  disturbed  a  state  as  to  become  a  subject 
of  serious  alarm  to  the  Government.  On  the  16th  of  August  an  assemblage 
of  80,000  people  took  place  in  Peter's  Field,  at  Manchester,  to  be  addressed 
by  Mr.  Hunt.  He  had  just  begun  his  speech,  when  the  appearance  of  the 
Yeomanry  Cavalry,  advancing  at  a  brisk  trot,  excited  a  panic  in  the  out- 
skirts of  the  meeting.  They  brandished  their  swords  in  the  air,  and  making 
for  the  cart  on  which  the  speakers  were  placed,  captured  Hunt  and  another. 
A  cry  arose  among  the  military  to  attack  their  flags,  and  immediately  they 
proceeded  to  cut  right  and  left  to  get  at  them.  In  ten  minutes  the  whole 
ground  was  cleared,  numbers  were  trampled  down,  and  not  less  than  300  or 
400  injured.  For  this  act  Colonel  L'Estrange  and  his  officers,  &c.,  received 
the  approbation  and  thanks  of  the  Prince  Regent. — A7m.  Hcg. 

t  Lord  Fitzwilliam  presided  at  a  numerous  meeting  at  York ;  the  bands 
of  Reformers,  with  their  usual  insignia,  were  on  the  ground.  In  conse- 
quence of  the  part  taken  by  Lord  Fitzwilliam  on  this  occasion,  he  received 
a  dismissal  from  the  Prince  Regent  from  his  office  of  Lord  Lieutenant  of  the 
West  Riding  of  Yorkshire.— ^4rt«.  Reg. 


1820]  CORRESPONDENCE.  191 

difficulties  of  the  country  felt  that  it  was  the  duty  of  the 
G-overnment  to  take  immediate  and  effectual  measures  to  pre- 
serve the  public  peace  from  the  disturbance  of  an  unemployed 
and  angry  population.  It  was  also  necessary  to  reassure  the 
well-disposed  inhabitants  of  the  manufacturing  districts,  in  which 
the  panic  was  excessive.  This  was  a  delicate  task,  because  to  pro- 
pose new  and  restrictive  laws  under  the  influence  of  alarm  is  a 
proceeding  at  all  times  calculated  to  excite  the  proper  jealousy 
of  all  real  lovers  of  liberty ;  and  on  the  present  occasion  it  was 
of  the  greatest  consequence  to  do  nothing  that  should  indispose 
or  alienate  the  middling  classes,  who,  being  pressed  by  taxation 
and  poor  rates,  are  inclined  to  view  with  more  than  ordinary 
suspicion  the  conduct  of  Ministers  and  of  Parliament.  On  the 
whole,  I  must  in  fairness  say  that  I  think  the  Ministers  have 
executed  their  task  in  a  manner  which,  in  the  result,  ouo-ht  to 
satisfy  the  public.  To  many  of  their  measures,  altered  as  they 
have  been,  I  have  no  objection  to  make.  I  confess  that  I  wish 
a  further  experiment  had  been  made  of  the  efficiency  of  the 
existing  laws  against  libel,  before  any  measures  are  taken  to  re- 
strain the  liberty  of  the  press.  I  look  with  apprehension  to  a 
contest  with  the  press.  It  never  can  be  put  down  in  this 
country  without  a  violent  struggle,  and  to  irritate  it  without 
greatly  augmenting  the  power  that  is  opposed  to  it  renders  the 
new  measures  a  source  rather  of  weakness  than  of  strensfth.  On 
the  whole,  the  opposition  acted  with  more  prudence  than  I  ex- 
pected. I  could  not  go  all  lengths  with  them,  and  of  course  by 
the  intolerant  I  am  considered  as  a  false  friend.  On  reflection,  I 
feel  confirmed  in  my  own  opinions,  and  I  have  the  satisfaction 
of  knowing  that  I  agree  with  my  host  here,  and  others  whom 
you  would  regard  as  the  most  prudent  and  dispassionate  of  the 
opposition.  I  am  very  glad  also  that  our  friend  at  Chiswick 
was  perfectly  disposed  to  lend  the  aid  of  his  name  and  property 
to  the  moderate  faction,  as  it  is  called.  The  success  of  Lord  J. 
Russell's  motion  is  a  benefit.  I  wish  it  could  have  been  carried 
when  there  was  no  room  for  suspecting  that  it  owed  any  portion 
of  its  success  to  fear.  If  it  stops  here,  it  is  well ;  if  it  is  only  the 
first  point  of  a  wedge  that  is  to  go  further,  I  shall  not  be  with- 
out my  fears.  Things  are  never  stationary ;  there  is  a  general 
desire  for  some  change — something  from  the  uneasiness  of  the 
condition  of  most  people.     What  the  Grovernment  must  do  is  to 


192  MISS    berry's   journal.  [1820 

play  for  the  support  of  the  middling  classes ;  if  they  join  the 
lower  orders,  the  force  and  the  power  are  with  them.  We  have 
too  much  debt  and  too  many  people  here ;  to  diminish  the  one 
and  employ  the  other  is  the  problem  to  be  solved.  Enough  of 
this,  and  what  I  have  said  is  my  true  and  unreserved  opinion. 
There  is  in  the  last '  Edinburgh  Eeview '  an  article  on  Chaptal's 
book  on  French  Manufactures,  that  is  written  with  so  much 
ability,  and  displays  such  an  extent  of  variety  of  knowledge,  as 
to  have  excited  a  great  desire  to  discover  the  author.  Who  he  is 
I  neither  know  nor  can  guess.  He  is  perhaps  a  little  insolent, 
but  he  is  a  good  Englishman.  We  have  here  a  most  severe 
winter,  which  adds  to  the  great  sufferings  of  the  poor.  I  am 
reading  Coxe's  *  Life  of  Marlborough ; '  the  s.ubject,  in  spite  of 
the  dulness  and  want  of  capacity  in  the  writer,  renders  it  most 
truly  interesting.  I  cannot  help  wishing  that  in  the  beginning 
of  the  next  century  our  successors  may  have  another  hero,  and 
that  the  state  of  England  may  have  been  as  free,  happy,  and 
glorious,  as  in  the  interval  between  the  battle  of  Blenheim  and 
Waterloo.  After  such  a  dull  tiresome  letter  you  will  not  wish 
for  a  second,  but  pray  let  me  know  that  this  comes  to  your 
hands.  Mrs.  A.  joins  in  kindest  remembrances  to  you  and  your 
sister ;  and  believe  me. 

Yours  most  sincerely, 

J.  A. 

I  am  sure  you  will  be  glad  to  hear  that  Ealph*  is  quite  well, 
and  placed  much  to  my  satisfaction. 

From  Miss  Berry  to  Mr.  Ahercromhie  (afterwards  Lord 

Dunfermline). 

Paris,  17tli  Jan.  1820. 

Your  Scotch  reviewer's  facts  respecting  French  industry  and 
manufactures  are,  I  dare  say,  all  true ;  but  yet  he  does  not 
appear  to  me  to  give  always  a  just,  an  exact,  or  a  like  picture 
of  either.  In  some  particulars  he  deceives  himself ;  in  others  he 
is  deceived  by  not  being  sufficiently  and  intimately  acquainted 
with  French  character,  French  cleverness,  and  French  wants. 

All  M.  Chaptal's  mistakes  and  misstatements,  and  all  those 
of  others,  the  reviewer  might  have  summed  up  in  the  one  great 

•  The  present  Lord  Dunfermline. 


1820]  CORRESPOm)ENCE.  '  193 

deaideratum  in  French  character — the  one  fundamental  and  in- 
superable defect  which  pervades  all  their  combinations  and 
paralyses  all  their  enormous  advantages — an  ignorance  of  the 
value,  an  indifference  to  the  existence,  and  a  neglect  of  the 
practice  of  truth,  collectively  and  individually.  This  is  so  per- 
fectly known  to  themselves,  that  a  tacit  agreement  seems  always 
to  have  taken  place,  mutually  to  receive  and  to  make  assertions 
without  enquiry  into  proof,  but  at  the  same  time  without  con- 
fidence, in  fact,  on  either  part.  And  your  reviewer,  instead  of 
wondering  at  their  tardiness  in  adopting  some  applications  of 
machinery,  might  with  more  reason  have  wondered  at  their 
little  advancement  in  the  doctrine  of  sound  and  useful  ethics, 
not  to  have  yet  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  truth  is,  in  every- 
thing, not  only  the  shortest,  but  the  only  way  to  excellence — the 
only  foundation  on  which  anything  permanent  can  ever  be 
raised ;  and  that  all  ways  of  evading,  slighting,  or  opposing  it, 
are,  in  fact,  only  loss  of  time  and  hindrance  of  business  in  all 
the  affairs  of  men.  Had  we  here  exulted  over  the  superiority  of 
our  country,  at  least  at  its  nearer  approach,  its  more  assiduous 
cultivation,  its  more  constant  habits  of  this  first  great  moral 
good,  both  in  principle  and  in  application,  both  in  great  and 
little  matters,  I  should  have  heartily  and  exultingly  agreed  with 
him.  But  he  detects  French  inaccuracy  in  the  insufficiency  of 
these  details,  or  the  non-agreement  of  those  details  with  general 
promises,  programmes,  and  proposals,  without  seeming  aware  of 
this  great  failure,  from  which  all  others  must  spring.  It  is  this 
failure  which  prevents  M.  Chaptal  from  enquiring  accurately 
into  facts,  the  result  of  which  might  be  less  agreeable  to  his 
readers,  and  which  none  of  them  would  be  at  all  the  more 
likely  to  believe.  This  same  spirit  of  inaccuracy  (to  give  it  no 
harder  name)  pervades  many  of  their  manufactures,  much  of 
their  machinery,  and,  in  general,  everything  which  does  not  dis- 
gust the  eye  on  a  first  and  superficial  view.  On  what  does  not 
contribute  to  beauty,  and  what  is  not  in  its  application  sus- 
ceptible of  much  ornament,  they  bestow  no  pains,  are  satisfied 
with  its  being  merely  serviceable,  and  will  not  pay  a  sous  for  its 
being  better  put  together  or  more  likely  to  last.  And  it  must 
be  added,  that  much  of  their  coarse  tackle,  and  many  utensils 
and  articles  of  every-day  use,  for  the  common  purposes  of 
common  life,  are  better  adapted  to  their  end,  simpler,  and  made 
VOL.  III.  0 


194  MISS   BEKRY'S   journal.  [1820 

and  repaired  at  half  the  expense  of  ours,  altho'  incomparably 
less  neat,  less  complicated,  and  less  satisfactory  to  the  eye.     To 
this  the  reviewer  does  not  seem  to  have  attended,  and  thinks 
the  great  mass  of  the  people  in  this  country  must  be  without  con- 
veniences and  comforts,  because  those  conveniences  and  comforts 
are  presented  in  another  and  less  finished  form  than  in  England. 
Nor  does  he  take  notice   of  several  material  circumstances 
in   manufactures,  where   they   must   ever  be    our    superiors; 
and  in  others,  where  they  have  made  such  rapid  strides  as  to 
have  acquired  a  certain  degree  of  excellence  which  is  capable  of 
being  adapted  to  every  purpose  of  use  and  ornament  at  an 
expense  much  inferior  to  ours.     Thus,  as  an  instance  of  the 
first,  in  dyeing  all  brilliant  colours,  the  water,  or  the  climate,  or 
their  mode  of  applying  the  one  and  of  profiting  by  the  other, 
have  even  made  them  infinitely  our  superiors,  and  are  likely 
ever  to  continue  them  so.     The  excellence  of  their  silk  manu- 
facture he  avoids  touching  on,  while  it  would  certainly  have 
been  an  excellent  occasion  for  a  philosophical  enquirer  into  the 
comparative  industry  and  interests  of  the  two  nations,  to  have 
shown  his  own  countrymen,  while  doing  justice  to  their  com- 
petitors, how  much  it  would,  in  fact,  contribute  to  the  riches  of 
both,  if — instead  of  forcing  a  silk  manufactory,  never  thoroughly 
naturalised  in  England,  and  carried  on  under  such  disadvantages 
as  to  have  been  only  just  able  to  support  itself — we  were,  by 
opening  our  ports  to  French  silks,  to  prevail  on  them  to  allow 
the  entry  of  our  cotton  and  other  stuffs,  in  which  we  are, 
perhaps,  still  their  superiors.    In  speaking  of  the  improvement 
in  their  manufacture  of  glass  and  crystal,  he  seems  little  aware 
how  far  they  are  advanced  in  its  beauty,  and  in  the  art  of 
cutting  and  preparing  it  for  all  sorts  of  ornamental  purposes,  as 
well  as  all  those  of  common  use ;  and  that,  however  one  of  the 
trade  would  still  allow  a  difference  in  favour  of  the  purity  and 
whiteness  of  our  crystals,  it  is  imperceptible  to  common  eyes  in 
their  application  either  to  ornament  or  use.     In  plating  silver 
on  copper  their  advancement  is  still  greater  and  more  rapid, 
which  is  the  rather  to  be  admired,  because  the  use  of  silver- 
plate  is  more  universal  in  France  than  in  England,  and  conse- 
quently the  demand  for  plated  articles  less.     Their  forms  are 
more  beautiful,  their  silver  whiter,  their  prices  not  greater,  and 
in  some  articles  which  they  have  been  long  in  the  habit  of 


1820]  COKEESPONDENCE.  195 

making,  less  than  ours.     There  are  a  number  of  depots  for  it  at 
Paris,  and  its  use  is  becoming  every  day  more  general. 

On  their  paper  and  books  the  reviewer  has  looked  with  ultra- 
English  eyes.  The  paper  on  which  their  ordinary  works  are 
printed  (not  editions  de  luxe)  is  more  lasting,  tougher,  and  of 
a  more  agreeable  colour  to  the  sight  than  ours;  and  they  now 
make  writing  paper  which  it  requires  an  experienced  eye  to 
discover  from  ours — without  talking  of  that  (no  longer  in 
fashion)  which  the  reviewer  supposes  made  for  'Parisian  belles 
and  boudoii'S.'  Their  foreign  commerce  in  books  must  always 
greatly  exceed  ours,  because  they  write  and  print  for  all  Europe, 
from  the  universality  of  their  language  in  that  quarter  of  the 
globe ;  consequently,  like  all  articles  of  a  great  and  general 
demand,  books  are  better,  cheaper,  and  more  plentiful  than 
with  us. 

To  their  common  cutlery,  too,  I  fear  the  reviewer  don't  do 
justice.  In  everything  where  the  luxury  of  perfection  enters 
in  cutlery,  we  beat  them  hollow.  But  they  now  make  useful 
knives  for  every  common  purpose — not,  indeed,  at  *  ninepence  a 
dozen,'  but  at  as  low  a  price  if  not  lower  than  you  could  have 
an  article  of  equal  use,  altho'  not  equal  appearance,  with  us. 

It  appears  to  me,  likewise,  that  in  the  dressing  of  leather,  and 
everything  to  which  leather  so  dressed  is  applicable — in  harness, 
coachmaking,  &c.  &c. — their  leather  is  as  good,  as  serviceable, 
and  certainly  looks  quite  as  well,  as  ours.     In  the  reviewer's 
admiration  of  our  English  horses  he  has  entirely  overlooked,  or 
perhaps  he  is  too  young  to  have  known,  the  incalculable  ameli- 
oration which  has  taken  place  in  the  appearance  of  horses  of 
every  description  in  France  since  the  Revolution,  and  since  the 
remounting  of  their  numerous  cavalry  made  their  studs  of  such 
enormous  importance  to  all  their  successive  evil  governors.  The 
common  coach-horses  of  Paris  at  the  present  day  seem  to  me 
stronger,  more  hardy,  better  suited  to  the  purpose,  and  in  better 
condition,  than  the  common  run  of  coach -horses  in  London.    In 
the  thousand  cabriolets  which  are  whirling  before  my  windows 
on  the  Boulevard,  I  see  some  of  the  most  active  and  handsomest 
horses  I  can  imagine  for  the  purpose;   and  the  reviewer  has 
entirely  passed  over  a  very  remarkable  breed  of  draft  horses 
now  in  France,  or  at  least  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Paris  since 
the  Revolution — I  mean  the  short,  thick,  beautifully-moulde<l 

o  2 


196  MISS  berry's  journal.  [1820 

cart-horses,  resembling  (alttio'  aiot  in  colour),  and  exceeding  in 
beauty  of  form,  those  known  in  England  by  the  name  of  Suffolk 
Punches.  These  animals,  in  perfect  condition  and  spirits,  are 
to  be  seen  every  day  in  the  streets  of  Paris,  drawing  the  large 
covered  carts  from  the  villages  in  the  environs,  which  convey 
everything  which  a  great  town  thus  receives  from  twenty  miles 
around. 

After  most  justly  marking  the  want  and  the  neglect  of  all 
cross  roads,  and  the  consequent  inefficient  and  often  impeded 
communications  between  neighbouring  parishes  and  provinces, 
the  reviewer  denounces  the  nation  as  ignorant  in  the  art  of 
road-making  and  paving,  and  that  '  it  is  practised  upon  erro- 
neous principles.'  Nobody  who  has  seen  and  travelled  much  on 
the  many  roads  made  by  the  French  within  these  last  twenty 
years  in  the  south  of  Europe  can  possibly  be  of  his  opinion. 
On  the  contrary,  their  methods  of  constructing  roads,  in  all  the 
various  difficult  circumstances  common  to  mountainous  coun- 
tries, appear  models  of  excellence,  yet  unrivalled  elsewhere, 
obviating  every  difficulty,  preparing  against  every  accident,  and 
constructed  to  resist  in  no  common  degree  even  the  effects  of 
time  and  neglect. 

In  speaking  with  no  great  respect  of  their  agriculture  in  com- 
parison with  ours,  he  has  totally  neglected  adverting  to  their 
gardening,  in  whieh  art  their  produce  both  of  fruit  and  flowers 
and  all  culinary  plants  far  exceeds  ours.  I  speak  of  the  climate 
of  Paris  :  certainly  in  point  of  severity  of  cold,  very  little,  if  at 
all,  milder  than  that  of  London.  It  would  have  been  worth 
enquiring  how  much  this  superiority  is  to  be  attributed  to 
the  qualities  of  their  soil  and  air,  and  how  much  to  their  greater 
skill.  But  the  reviewer  satisfies  himself  with  declaring  them  to 
have  received  a  '  charter  from  nature  contained  in  their  sybari- 
tical  aphorism — "  Be  thoughtless,  and  enjoy."  ' 

Whether  it  is,  indeed,  from  the  rights  inherent  in  those  born 
to  this  charter,  or  from  any  more  complicated  and  recondite 
.causes,  I  know  not ;  but  certain  it  is,  that  the  French,  as  a 
nation,  contrive  to  extract  more  enjoyment  from  oxistence  than 
we  do.  To  adopt  a  vulgar  phrase,  they  somehow  or  other  make 
a  better  thing  of  human  life.  The  Englishman,  with  all  his 
claims  to  depth  and  solidity,  and  all  his  advantages  of  govern- 
ment and  education  (perhaps  a  little  too  pompously  insisted  on 


1820]  LETTER   TO   COUNTESS   OF   HARDWICKE.  197 

by  the  reviewer),  has  never  attained  the  art  (and,  after  all,  it  is 
the  first  I  know)  of  proeuring  for  himself  as  much  innocent 
enjoyment  as,  under  all  his  supposed  disadvantages,  has  ever 
been  done  by  his  French  neighbour. 

This  art  is  so  desirable  that  it  seems  well  worth  while  to  en- 
quire to  what  secondary  causes  it  may  be  attributed,  and  how 
it  may  be  acquired 

From  Miss  Berry  to  the  Countess  of  Rardwich 

Paris,  Thursday,  6tli  Jan.  1820, 
.  .  .  .  There  are  always  a  number  of  little  things  which 
I  can  tell  you  of  her  '  Excellency,''  which  she  cannot,  or  will  not, 
tell  you  as  well  herself.  I  think  her  looking  infinitely  better 
than  when  you  and  we  were  here  together  the  summer  before 
last.  She  has  acquired  too,  a  delibere,  a  confidence  in  her  own 
manner,  which  becomes  her  perfect  civility  particularly  well, 
and  her  toilette  and  her  '  grace '  are  celebrated  here  even  by 
those  who  have  the  greatest  pretensions  to  both.  "Were  I  now 
to  turn  from  the  lace  and  fringe  of  life,  and  talk  to  you  of  the 
excellent  stuff  both  of  head  and  heart  on  which  they  are  applied, 
I  should  tell  you  nothing  new ;  but  I  must  express  my  admi- 
ration of  the  manner  in  which,  while  fulfilling,  every  duty  of  her 
troublesome  situation,  she  never  neglects  a  single  attention  of 
friendship,  and  finds  even  time  to  bestow  on  old  and  useless 
friends. 

.  The  difference  of  the  footing  on  which  even  the  most  favoured 
of  the  English  are,  since  we  were  here  together  in  1816,  is  quite 
remarkable.  They  have  at  last  shaken  us  off  their  shoulders, 
and  they  now  snap  their  fingers  at  us.  It  is  not,  as  then,  that 
some  people  sought  and  others  avoided  you,  but  that  all  the 
world  treats  you  now  with,  equal  neglect. 

J  0  U  E  N  A  L. 

January  10th. —  I  called  on  Eederer  again.     M.  de 
Chauvelin  *  was  with  him,  but  went  away  at  my  entry. 

*  Francois  Chauvelin  was  sent,  when  very  young,  as  Minister  Plenipo- 
tentiary to  London,  in  1792 ;  afterwards  to  Florence,  when  Lord  Howe 
threatened  to  bombard  Leghorn  imless  the  Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany  sent 
him  away  within  twenty-four  hours ;  he  accordingly  retired.  Thrown  into 
prison  on  his  return  to  France,  and  constantly  threatened  with  death,  from 


198  MISS  beret's   JOUENAL,  [1820 

All  these  people  are  in  the  most  violent  state  of  agitation, 
from  the  extreme  folly  of  the  Ministers  in  having  an- 
nounced, by  the  King's  speech,  measures  which  remain 
still  unbrought  forward  (as  they  say  from  the  illness  of 
M,   de  Lerne,  le  Garde  des  Sceaux),  and  consequently 
enveloped  in  all  the  mischief  which  the  opposite  party 
can  possibly  suppose  from  them,  and  magnified  by  all  the 
uncertainty  in  which  they  have  remained  now  for  nearly 
six  weeks.     Time  has  thus  been  given  to  raise  all  the 
busy  spirits  in  France  against  the  Ministry,  on  account 
of  the  supposed  tendency  of  those  measures,  which  they 
continue  to  assert  is  no  less  than  to  attack  the  national 
domains,   and    restore    feodality   and   the    aiistocratical 
rights  by  means  of  a  Chamber  chosen  by  the  altered 
laws  of  election.     But  no  one  is  sure  what  these  altered 
laws  are  to  be,  and  no  wonder  that  everyone  fancies  the 
alteration  will  be  that  which  he  most  dreads  ;  for  the 
Ministry  seem  to   have  adopted  the    same   means  that 
the  theatres  use  to  raise  the  curiosity  and  expectation  of 
the  people,  by  advertising  '  Eelache  au  Theatre  en  atten- 
dant ! ' — '  La  loi  des  elections ! '  &c.  One  can  hardly  con- 
ceive  such   folly  in    the  execution  of  their  intentions, 
whatever  they  may  be.     They  have  certainly  succeeded 
in  exciting  all  parties  to  a  degree  of  violence  against  one 
another,  of  which,  thank  heaven,  we    have  hardly  an 
idea.     I  must  say,  for  the  good  sense  and  candour  of 
Eederer,  in  the  midst  of  his  bitter  exclamations  against 
the  conduct    and  intentions  of   the    Ministers,  that  he 
declared  such  was  the  situation  of  France,  till  they  had 
wilfully  conjured  up  this  storm  against  themselves  ;  that 
he,  and  those  who  thought  with  him,  had  allowed  that 
although  another  dynasty  and  another  form  of  govern- 
ment   might    suit    their   own  interests    better,    that  as 
Frenchmen,  laying  their  hands  on  their  hearts,  they  must 

■which  he  escaped  on  the  9th  Thenuidor.     Accepted  public  employment 
during  the  Empire.    After  1814  he  took  an  active  part  in  the  Chamber. 


1820]  DEATH   OF   GEOEGE   III.  199 

own  that  this  for  the  Kberties  of  their  country  was 
better  :  '  Que  ceci  valait  mieux,'  was  his  phrase.  Peace 
and  tranquillity  in  every  part  of  France,  agriculture 
flourishing,  commerce  improving,  new  modes  of  industry 
devising,  and  plenty  everywhere.  In  this  state  of  things, 
in  which  certainly  nothing  is  exaggerated,  although  I 
began  with  thinking  that,  as  these  intended  changes  were, 
in  fact,  all  improvements,  and  all  in  the  true  spirit  of 
a  representative  monarchy,  the  sooner  they  were  made 
the  better  ;  yet  I  am  now  almost  convinced  that  it  were 
far  better,  with  a  people  whose  natural  volatility  has 
been  so  often  wrought  even  to  madness  during  the  last 
twenty-five  years,  that  the  first  and  best  habits  to  give 
them  are  those  of  security :  allowing  both  sides  to  feel 
that  a  Government  may  be  abused  without  overturning 
it — convincing  the  Liberaux  that  their  estates  are  safe, 
and  that  hberty  may  exist  in  spite  of  all  the  ridiculous 
doctrines  and  silly  conduct  of  ultra-royalists,  and  con- 
vincing the  ultra-royaHsts  that  neither  anarchy  nor  pro- 
scriptions ensue  from  a  hmited  monarchy  and  the  freedom 
of  the  press. 

Monday,  2>lst. — The  news  of  our  King's  death  spread 
about  this  evening.     I  did  not  believe  it  at  the  time. 

Tuesday ,  February  1st. — After  breakfast  Lady  Charlotte 
and  I  walked  to  the  Ambassador's,  where  we  found  the 
servants  already  in  mourning  for  the  King.  The  intelh- 
gence  arrived  by  telegraph  to  the  French  Government 
yesterday  evening;  and  old  d'Osmond  came  into  the 
Ambassadress's  box  at  the  Opera,  to  whisper  it  to 
her.  We  were  all  the  morning  at  shops,  buying  our 
mourning. 

Thursday,  ^rd, — At  Madame  Moreau's.  The  Queen 
of  Sweden* — that  is  to  say,  the  Countess  de  Gothland,  the 

*  Eugenie  Bernadotte,  afterwards  Queen  of  Sweden,  was  tlie  daughter 
of  Clary  a  negotiant  at  Marseilles,  and  the  sister  of  the  wife  of  Joseph 
Bonaparte,  king  of  Spain. — £wg.  des  Contemp, 


200  MISS  berry's   journal.  [1820 

wife  of  Bernadotte,  and  the  mother  of  Prince  Oscar — 
entered  suddenly,  without  being  announced.  It  so  hap- 
pened that  the  conversation  had  just  turned  upon  her,  upon 
her  family  name,  and  upon  her  extraordinary  life  at  Paris. 
Her  entrance  so  amused  the  company,  that  for  some 
moments  I  took  her  for  a  hoax,  and  the  more  so  that 
everyone  being  inclined  to  laugh  offered  no  explanation. 

Sunday^  6th. — -I  was  at  half-past  twelve  o'clock  at  I'Ab- 
baye-aux-Bois,  to  go  with  Madame  Eecamier  to  St.  Sulpice, 
to  hear  what  they  call  a  discourse  of  the  Abbe  Frassinous  ; 
it  was  upon  the  existence  of  God— a  very  eloquent  dis- 
course, and  very  well  reasoned,  without  having  any  great 
depth  of  thought.  His  proofs  were  drawn  from  the 
perfect  order  established  throughout  the  universe,  and 
the  conviction  that  nothing  of  which  we  have  any  know- 
ledge can  be  made  without  order  and  without  a  calcu- 
lating mind.  The  crowd  was  immense  ;  it  was  with  the 
greatest  difficulty  that  I  obtained  a  place.  A  crowd  of 
gentlemen  in  the  nave  of  the  church. 

Saturday,  12th. — Fancy  masked  ball  at  the  Griffiths. 

I  wore  a  black  domino  ;  Agnes  and  Lady  Charlotte  in 

coloured  dominos.     I  should  have  been  amused  had  I 

been  well.   The  ball  was  very  good — a  splendid  quadrille 

of  Tartars ;  the  gentlemen  well  dressed  in  character  ;  the 

ladies  quite  the  reverse,  because  here  it  does  not  signify 

what  costume  is  proposed,  the  ladies  will  always  dress 

according  to  their  taste    (sometimes  very  bad),    or  in 

whatever  they  think  becomes  them.     They  bid  adieu  to 

all  appearance  of  truth  in  their  costume ;  it  is  always 

merely  fancy  dress.      The  quadrille  was    composed  of 

Mesdames  de  Noailles  Juste  and  Alfred,  the  Duchesse  de 

Dinon,  and  the  Duchesse  de  Mailly ;  the  Prince  Arthur 

Potoski,  the  Due  de  Dinon,  M.  de  Mossion,  and  M.  de 

Custine —  all  very  good-looking  figures.     Several  other 

costumes,  some  eccentric,  but  most  of  them  handsome ; 

some  ladies  of  the  time  of  Louis  XIY.,  and  a  Ninon  de 


1820]  A  BAL   MASQUE.  201 

I'Enclos,  admirably  well  got  up ;  most  of  tlie  gentlemen 
in  dominos,  which  they  soon  threw  off ;  a  few  only  kept 
on  their  masks.  We  left  immediately  after  the  departure 
of  the  Due  and  Duchesse  de  Berri,  having  stood  near 
them  a  quarter  of  an  hour  in  the  first  room,  whilst  they 
were  talking  and  saying  '  goodbye  '  to  their  hosts.  All 
this  is  become  fixed  on  one's  memory  when  we  afterwards 
knew  that  it  was  the  last  ball  he  was  at,  and  that  in  less 
than  twenty-four  hours  he  ceased  to  exist. 

Sunday,  IMi. — After  having  dined  at  our  Ambassa- 
dor's, at  ten  o'clock  we  went  to  the  Duchesse  d'Escar's, 
who  receives  every  Sunday  fortnight  at  her  apartment, 
up  three  pair  of  stairs  at  the  Tuileries.  Here  I  remained 
with  Mrs.  Scott  and  my  sister  till  past  eleven  o'clock, 
when,  hearing  at  Madame  de  la  Briche's  some  of  her 
society  were  to  disguise  themselves  comically,  I  resolved 
to  go  and  persuade  Agnes  to  accompany  me. 

We  found,  instead  of  the  usual  quiet  meetings  at  her 
house,  a  vrai  reunion  de  Carnival ;  all  the  younger  part 
of  the  society  costume  or  travestied,  either  in  the  most 
becoming  or  the  most  comical  manner. 

M.  de  Mure  (a  very  fat  coarse  man)  admirably  cos- 
tume en  demoiselle,  waltzing  with  a  young  man  six  feet 
high,  en  enfant,  and  M.  Mossion  as  his  nurse,  all  admi- 
rably masqued,  and  all  d'une  gaiete  folle,  which  seemed 
to  communicate  itself  to  all  the  company.  There  were 
no  princes,  no  predetermined  fine  dresses  and  rivality 
of  expensive  toilets  ;  but  everybody  seemed  there  for 
their  own  amusement,  tind  thoroughly  to  have  attained 
their  end. 

Soon  after  twelve,  in  the  height  of  all  this  gaiety,  I 
saw  a  rush  to  the  door  of  the  outer  room,  and  learnt 
that  a  message  had  been  sent  for  M.  de  Bethisy  (whose 
wife  is  one  of  the  Duchesse  de  Berri's  ladies),  which 
message  was  immediately  communicated  to  M.  Ferdinand 
Chabot,  one  of  the  Due  de  Berri's  ecuyers,  who  both 


202  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1820 

immediately  flew  away — the  Due  de  Berri  having  re- 
ceived a  coup  de  poignard  k  I'Opera.  It  was  said  to  be 
shght — to  be  nothing — for  that  he  had  returned  into  his 
box.  This  was  all  that  was  known  for  the  first  ten 
minutes,  but  its  effect  on  the  meeting  I  shall  never  forget. 
The  fiddles  ceased  ;  silence  ensued  ;  gravity  more  or  less 
intense,  and  in  the  women  amounting  to  horror,  marked 
every  countenance,  and  contrasted  singularly  with  the  odd 
travesties  and  gay  costumes  of  the  men. 

A  second  and  a  third  arrival  of  persons  sent  to  enquire 
brought  accounts  nearer  the  truth.  By  one  it  was  known 
that  nobody  had  yet  returned  to  the  Elysee,  and  by  ano- 
ther that  he  had  fainted  away,  and  already  been  bled 
three  times. 

Knowing  how  unattainable  truth  ever  is,  at  first,  on 
these  occasions,  I  waited  no  longer  ;  but,  calculating  that 
our  Ambassador,  from  the  seclusion  occasioned  by  the 
death  of  our  King,  might  not  have  heard  of  the  event  of 
the  night,  we  stopped  at  the  door  of  the  Ambassade ; 
with  some  difficulty  got  in  ;  found  him,  as  I  had  guessed, 
returned  home  before  the  event  had  happened,  and 
writing  in  his  cabinet  for  the  next  day's  courier. 

Our  intelligence  was  worthy  of  a  place  in  his  de- 
spatches. Still,  I  had  no  idea,  from  anything  I  had  heard 
— considering  the  exaggeration  usual  on  all  such  occa- 
sions— of  the  real  truth,  nor  of  the  horrible  scene  that 
was  passing  in  one  of  the  housekeeper's  rooms  at  the 
Opera-house. 

The  next  morning,  Monday,  February  14th,  was  the 
day  on  which  the  long  and  often-delayed  Law  of  Elec- 
tions was  to  be  laid  by  Ministers  before  the  Chamber  of 
Deputies.  I  had  agreed  the  day  before,  at  Sir  Charles's, 
to  go  down  to  the  Tribune  Diplomatique  with  M.  de 
Fagel.*  He  was  to  call  for  me  at  twelve  o'clock ;  at 
ten  o'clock  1  received  this  note  from  him  : — 

*  Dutch  Minister. 


1820]  DEATH   OF  THE   DUG   DE   BERRI.  203 

Paris,  14th  February  1820. 

The  dreadful  event  of  the  Due  de  Berri's  assassination,  who 
died  this  morning  at  one  o'clock,  at  the  Opera-house,  in  the 
arms  of  his  distressed  family,  induces  me  to  go  to  Pasquier*  at 
half-past  eleven,  to  hear  more  particulars  about  this  horrid 
crime,  in  order  to  inform  my  Grovernment  of  them. 

You  will,  I  hope,  excuse  me  if  I  do  not  wait  on  you  to  go  to 
the  Deputies ;  but  my  friend  Baron  Zuylin  will  call  at  twelve 
at  your  door,  and  take  care  of  you  as  well  as  I  could  have 
done. 

I  take  this  to  be  a  personal  revenge,  nourished  and  inflamed 
by  the  party  who  is  determined  to  prevent  the  reigning  branch 
of  the  Bourbons  from  having  an  heir  to  the  Crown. 

I  am,  respectfully  and  sincerely  yours, 

(Signed)  Fagel. 

About  twelve,  liis  friend  Comte  Zuylin  came  (he  is  the 
Dutch  Minister  at  Madrid,  returning  to  his  mission).  We 
found  few  people  yet  in  the  Chamber ;  the  tribunes  full, 
except  the  Diplomatique,  where  we  went.  Of  ladies,  there 
were  only  Madame  de  la  Briche,  Madame  Mole,  her 
daughter,  and  Madame  de  JumiUac,  the  Due  de  Eichelieu's 
sister.  The  tears  were  in  all  their  eyes,  and  we,  of  course, 
began  talking  of  the  scene  of  the  night  before. 

At  one  o'clock,  when  the  Chambers  met,  the  attendance 
was  full,  except  on  the  bench  of  Ministers,  who  were  all 
absent,  the  examination  of  the  assassin  then  going  on. 
The  sitting  began  with  reading  over,  as  always  takes 
place,  the  proces-verbal  of  the  last  discussion  (on  the 
Domains  Nationaux) ;  nobody  hstened  to  it.  Almost  be- 
fore the  secretary  had  done  reading,  a  M.  Clausel  de 
Coussergues,*!-  from  the  Cote  Droit,  started  forward  to  the 

*  Le  Comte  Denis  Etienne  Pasquier ;  bom  1767.  He  held  employment 
under  the  Empire ;  became  Prefet  de  Police  in  1810.  After  the  second 
return  of  the  Bourbons,  he  was  appointed  Ministre  Secretaire  d'Etat  de  la 
Justice,  and  Garde  des  Sceaux.  From  1819  to  1822  he  was  Minister  for 
Foreign  Affairs,  and  became  a  peer. — Diet,  des  Contemp. 

t  Jean  Clausel  de  Coussergues,  bom  1765,  was  but  little  known  till  after 
the  return  of  the  King,  when  he  became  a  warm  advocate  for  the  revival  of 


204  MISS   BEKKY'S   journal.  [1820 

tribune  and  said,  '  La  Cliambre  n'a  pas  encore  decide  sur 
la  maniere  d'accusation  des  ministres,  mais  moi,  je  viens 
ici  pour  denoncer  M.  le  Comte  Decazes*  comme  accom- 
plice du  meurtre  de  M.  le  Due  de  Berri ! '  If  he  added 
anything  more,  his  voice  was  drowned  in  the  general 
brouhaha  and  universal  marks  of  disgust  and  disapproba- 
tion of  the  whole  audience,  for  I  think  tribunes,  galleries, 
and  all  joined  in  an  involuntary  expression  of  their  feel- 
ings. The  president  very  properly  declared  his  notice 
informal  and  inadmissible ;  that  he  had  only  allowed  him 
la  parole^  supposing  that  he  had  something  to  say  relative 
to  the  proces-verbal ;  and  then  immediately  read  the  letter 
addressed  to  him  as  President  of  the  Chamber,  announcing 
the  assassination  and  death  of  the  Due  de  Berri.  M.  de  la 
Bourdonnayef  moved  the  address  to  the  King,  and,  in- 
stead of  confining  himself  to  the  affecting  circumstances 
of  the  moment,  and  the  deplorable  state  of  the  Eoyal 
Family,  he  connected  the  event  they  all  deplored  with 

all  tlie  ancient  institutions  in  France,  and  vehement  against  all  freedom  of 
thought  or  liberty  of  the  press. — Diet,  des  Cmitemporaines. 

*  Elie  Decazes,  Due  et  Pair  de  France;  born  1780.  In  1810-11  he 
became  Conseiller  a  la  Cour  d'Appel  de  Paris ;  Conseiller  du  Cabinet  de 
Louis  Bonaparte,  King  of  Holland ;  Secretaire  des  Commandemens  de 
Mdme.  Mere.  After  the  return  of  the  Bourbons  in  1814,  he  adhered  to  that 
dynasty.  He  succeeded  Fouch^  (Due  d'Otrante)  as  Minister  of  Police  in 
the  years  1815-16-17.  In  1818  he  married  Mdlle.  de  St.  Aulaire,  grand- 
daughter, on  the  mother's  side,  of  the  last  reigning  Prince  of  Nassau-Sarre- 
bruck,  and  received  from  the  King  of  Denmark  the  title  and  duchy  of 
Glucksbm-g.  :  After  his  resignation  of  the  ministry  in  1820,  he  vras 
appointed  Ambassador  to  England. 

t  Franfois  Regis,  Comte  de  la  Bourdonnaye ;  bom  1767 ;  served  under 
Conde,  took  part  with  the  Vendeans,  but  afterwards  submitted  to  the 
Government  of  Napoleon.  In  1815  he  proposed  the  persecution  of  all  who 
had  taken  part  in  the  Revolution  of  the  20th  of  March.  Nothing  could 
exceed  the  violence  of  his  reactionary  spirit.  He  was  opposed  to  the  system 
of  recruiting  established  by  Gouvion  de  St.  Cyr ;  he  was  furious  against  the 
admission  of  M.  Gregoire  to  the  Chamber  of  Deputies ;  he  asserted  the  right 
of  Ministers  to  speak  on  all  questions,  and  denied  the  right  of  Deputies  to 
reply ;  he  went  so  far  as  to  declare  that  *  La  Charte  avait  et(5  octroy ^e  et 
non  pas  consentie.'  Even  the  unfortunate  ministry  of  M.  de  Polignac,  in 
1830,  would  not  satisfy  him,  and  he  disagreed  with  his  colleagues  and 
resigned  before  the  fall  of  Charles  X.     Died  1839. 


1820]  PKOCEEDINGS   IN   CHAMBERS   OF    DEPUTIES.  205 

the  factious  spirit  of  the  times ;  denounced  the  writings 
and  discourses  they  heard  every  day  as  the  instigators  of 
the  crime.  The  Cote  Gauche  heard  everything  he  said  in 
dignified  silence,  General  Foy*  only  saying  a  few  words 
expressive  of  much  feeling,  and  desirous  that  all  party 
ideas  should  be  excluded  on  such  an  occasion.  Corbiere 
followed  on  the  Cote  Droit,  in  the  same  sense,  but  less 
political  than  La  Bourdonnaye.  They  then  retired  to  their 
bureaux  to  select  a  committee  to  draw  up  an  address, 
which  was  to  be  discussed  in  a  private  sitting ;  so  that  we^ 
the  pubhc,  were  sent  away  in  about  an  hour  after  their 
meeting. 

The  address  was  carried  up  to  the  King  that  evening. 
It  is  decent,  and  ne  jette  pas  lefroc  aux  orties  on  the  score 
of  the  constitution. 

The  Assembly  met  en  seance  ouvert  the  next  day. 

Tuesday,  Ihth. — I  was  at  the  Chamber  at  one  o'clock. 
The  seance  was  still  more  numerous  than  yesterday.  On 
reading  the  proces-verbal,  it  mentioned  that  the  proposition 
of  M.  de  Clausel  had  been  '  ecoute  avec  une  immobilite 
parfaite  de  deux  tiers  de  la  Chambre.'  Certainly  a 
proces-verbal  (I  should  suppose)  has  no  business  to  ex- 
press Jiow  any  proposition  is  received,  but,  instead  of 
letting  it  pass,  as  the  president  advised,  comme  7ion  avenu, 
M.  de  St.  Crige,  the  directeur-general  des  Douanes,  a  sort 
of  minister,  gets  up  and  says  it  ought  to  have  been 
quahfied  with  the  general  disapprobation  of  the  House. 
Courvoisier,f  in  a  very  good  short  speech,  insisted  on  its 

*  Alexandre  Sebastian  Foy;  born  1775;  entered  tbe  army  at  fifteen 
years  old,  and  served  with  distinction  througliout  the  war  till  1815,  wben 
he  received  bis  fifteenth  wound  at  Waterloo.  In  1819  he  entered  the 
Chamber  of  Deputies,  and  declared  himself  the  supporter  of  '  les  droits 
fondes  par  la  Revolution  et  consacres  par  la  charte.' — Diet,  des  Ccmtemps. 

t  Jean  Joseph  Antoine  Courvoisier  began  his  career  in  the  army  of  the 
Prince  de  Conde,  in  which  he  distinguished  himself.  During  the  years 
1815,  '16,  '17  and  '18  he  was  an  active  supporter  of  the  ministry,  of  which 
he  was,  from  his  eloquence,  regarded  as  the  Cicero.  He  was  favoui'able  to 
constitutional  government. — Did,  des  Contemps. 


206  MISS  berry's   journal.  [1820 

having  obtained,  and  moved  for  its  being  qualified  with, 
the  indignation  of  the  Chamber.  M.  Clausel  de  Cous- 
sergues  again  mounted  the  tribune,  and  declared  that, 
however  informal  he  might  have  been,  he  persisted  in  his 
intention,  had  in  his  hands  the  means  of  justifying  his 
charge,  and  desired  the  Chamber  to  settle  a  time  for  his 
being  heard.  Upon  this,  M.  de  St.  Aulaire  (the  father-in- 
law  of  Decazes)  made  a  good  and  sufficiently  impressive 
speech  (in  his  circumstances),  ending  in  declaring  his 
answer  to  M.  Clausel  to  be  summed  up  in  the  words,  il 
est  un  calomniateur. 

Two  or  three  other  short  speeches  were  made  on  the 
words  of  the  proces-verbal,  which  were  afterwards  left  as 
they  found  them,  by  their  passing  to  the  order  of  the 
day.  It  was  then  announced  that  the  Ministers  had  a 
communication  to  make  to  the  Chamber,  which  would  be 
ready  at  half-past  four  o'clock,  and  that  the  House  would 
be  suspended  until  that  hour. 

A  little  before  five,  the  whole  six  ministers  occupied 
their  bench,  and  Decazes  mounted  the  tribune.  His 
appearance  was  lamentable.  He  has  been  ill.  It  was  his 
first  time  of  appearing  in  public  for  long.  He  had  been 
up  for  the  most  part  of  two  nights,  and  his  voice  was 
almost  extinct.  All  this,  however,  failed  to  move  the 
pity  of  his  audience,  for  they  repeatedly  desired  him  to 
speak  louder  with  all  the  durete  they  would  have  used  to 
a  laquais.  He  was  visibly  too  much  overcome  by  his 
situation.  His  speech  introductory  of  the  law  of  election 
might  have  been,  and  was,  weU  worded,  but  wanted  all 
force  or  dignity,  and  failed  in  making  any  impression. 
Then  followed  Pasquier,  with  the  proposal  of  an  immediate 
censure  on  the  newspapers,  and  demanding  the  power  of 
arrestation  of  any  citizen  on  the  mandat  of  any  three 
Ministers.  His  introductory  speech  was  better  given,  but 
seemed  equally  without  any  efiect  that  dared  to  show 
itself.    The  Cote  Gauche  heard  it  aU  in  the  recueillement  of 


1820]  PARTICULARS   OF  THE   ASSASSINATION.  207 

the  most  profound  silence ;  and  if  the  Cote  Droit  had 
flattered  themselves  that  any  of  these  laws  would,  in  the 
present  circumstances,  be  carried  by  acclamation,  they 
must  have  found  themselves  woefully  mistaken.  A  sort 
of  sourd  murmur  of  applause  was  instantly  repressed  by 
a  fear  of  showing  how  small  was  the  minority  who  par- 
took of  it. 

On  setthng  when  the  laws  were  to  be  sent  into  the 
Bureaux  (the  nine  committees  into  which  the  whole  House 
is  divided),  the  ministry,  or  at  least  the  Cote  Droits  wanted 
them  to  be  sent  directly  ;  the  Cote  Gauche^  by  the  voice 
of  M.  de  Lafayette,  wished  for  a  delay  of  three  days,  which 
was  not  allowed,  and  was  of  httle  consequence,  as  they 
may  take  as  long  as  they  please  to  make  their  rapport. 

Monday^  2\st. — I  am  going  to  set  down  all  the  cir- 
cumstances I  have  heard,  directly  and  immediately  from 
those  who  received  it  from  the  mouths  of  the  persons 
themselves  present — spectators  and  actors  in  the  horrible 
scene  at  the  Opera-house  during  the  night  of  the  13th. 

The  Due  de  Berri  had  led  the  Duchesse  away  to  her 
carriage  near  the  close  of  the  first  act  of  the  ballet,  in- 
tending to  return  and  see  the  end  of  it  himself ;  had  with 
him  neither  hat  nor  greatcoat.  Madame  de  Bethizy  was 
in  waiting  on  the  Duchesse,  and  M.  de  Choiseul  (who 
married  Miss  Parkyns*)  on  the  Due.  After  they  had  put 
the  Duchesse  and  Madame  de  Bethizy  into  the  carriage, 
both  sitting  forward  in  the  coach,  the  valet  de  pied  was 
just  shutting  the  door,  with  his  back  turned  to  the  Due, 
when  a  man  slipped  between  the  horses  of  the  carriage 
and  the  sentry  at  the  door,  and  gave  the  fatal  stab.  M. 
de  Choiseul  saw  a  man  push  or  pushed  forward  on  the 
Due  de  Berri,  and  thrust  him  away  with  his  arm  before 
he  was  aware  of  what  he  had  perpetrated.  ]S[or  was  the 
poor  wounded  man  himself,  for  he  exclaimed,  feeling 
only  a  violent  blow,  '  Voila  un  fier  brutal ; '  but  instantly 
*  Afterwards  maxried  to  the  Prince  de  Polignac 


208  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1820 

seeing  the  knife  in  the  wound,  '■  Je  suis  assassine!  Caro- 
line^ un  pretre.''  The  coach-door  was  shut,  but  the  poor 
httle  Duchesse  instantly  threw  herself  on  it.  Madame  de 
Betiiizy,  a  strong  young  woman,  seized  her  with  both 
arms  round  the  body,  to  prevent  her,  not  knowing  at  all 
(as  she  says)  whether  there  were  more  assassins  or 
an  emeute — in  short,  having  no  clear  idea  but  the  one,  of 
preserving  the  Duchesse,  who,  screaming  and  struggling, 
insisted  on  the  door  being  opened,  and  in  springing  out 
of  Madame  de  Bethizy's  arms,  tore  her  glove  to  pieces, 
and  left  the  impression  of  her  hand  on  the  flesh  beneath. 
She  almost  fell  out  of  the  carriage  at  her  husband's  feet, 
who  by  this  time  had  fainted,  and  was  carried  into  a 
room  at  the  Opera,  which  belongs  to  the  secretary  or 
housekeeper  of  the  administration.  On  recovering  his 
senses  in  this  room,  le  Due  de  Berri  is  said  to  have 
exclaimed,  '  Ah !  c'est  un  jugement  du  ciel  que  cette 
€hambre ! '  because  it  was  one  where  it  is  said  he  used  to 
give  rendezvous  to  some  of  the  nymphs  of  the  Opera. 
This  is,  it  seems,  an  entresol^  low  and  meanly  furnished. 
Bed  there  was  none  ;  two  chairs  were  brought,  and  mat- 
tresses from  another  room,  and  the  Prince  laid  on  what  is 
called  un  lit  de  sangle — truckle-bed. 

Here  were  shortly  collected  around  him,  besides  his 
poor  wife,  who  never  quitted  him  for  an  instant.  Monsieur 
and  the  Due  and  Duchesse  d'Angouleme  —  sent  for 
directly  to  the  Tuileries — the  Duke  of  Orleans,  his  wife 
and  his  sister,  who  happened  to  be  at  the  Opera  in  their 
box,  with  their  children. 

The  Duke  of  Orleans,  on  finding  how  serious  the  acci- 
dent was,  sent  round  for  the  Duchess  and  his  sister, 
desiring  the  children  to  be  sent  home.  For  it  is  to  be 
remembered,  in  addition  to  the  horror  of  the  scene,  that, 
as  the  audience  in  the  theatre  knew  nothing  of  the  acci- 
dent, the  last  act  of  the  ballet  was  going  on,  and  that 
every  time  the  door  opened  of  the  room  where  the  Due 


1820]  DUG   DE  BEREl'S   LAST  MOMENTS.  209 

de  Berri  lay  (which  must  have  been  almost  every  instant), 
the  applause  of  the  pit  and  the  steps  of  the  dancers 
struck  the  ears  of  the  spectators  of  the  horrors  within. 
The  effect  was  so  terrible,  that  Mdlle.  d'Orleans,  less 
occupied  than  the  rest  with  any  immediate  services  to 
the  poor  victim,  actuaUy  fainted  dead  away  from  the 
mere  incongruous  horror  of  the  scene,  on  which  she  had 
a  sort  of  leisure  to  look. 

In  the  meantime,  half-a-dozen  surgeons  assembled  were 
making  the  poor  Duke  suffer  martyrdom  by  opening  and 
enlarging  his  wound,  cupping,  and  various  apphcations, 
to  prevent  his  being  immediately  choked  with  blood  on 
his  lungs. 

From  the  first  he  felt  himself  a  dying  man,  and  remon- 
strated against  the  agonies  they  were  making  him  suffer. 
He  desired  to  see  and  bless  his  child,  who,  before  two 
o'clock,  was  brought  by  Madame  de  Gontaut  from  the 
Elysee  Bourbon  to  this  scene  of  horror !  The  impression 
made  on  her,  she  says,  is  indelible.  The  carriage  which 
conveyed  her  and  the  infant  was  stopped  and  delayed  by 
the  crowd  of  carriages  at  a  ball  given  by  Marechal  Sachet 
in  the  Eue  du  Faubourg  St.-Honore,  while  she  felt  that 
every  moment's  delay  might  deprive  the  child  of  its  father's 
dying  benediction. 

The  poor  Duke's  arms  had  been  extended  by  the  sur- 
geons, to  assist  his  respiration.  He  brought  them  together 
again  to  receive,  for  the  last  time,  his  infant  daughter,  and 
bless  her.  He  then  said, '  Mais,  j'ai  d'autres  enfkns,  deux 
filles,  longtemps  avant  que  je  vous  ai  connue,  Caroline  ;  que 
je  les  voie.'  Gustavo  de  Coigny  instantly  went  in  a  car- 
riage from  the  Opera-house  to  the  Eue  Neuve  des  Mathu- 
rins,  where  these  children  are  living  with  their  mother — 
now  a  decent  and  well-behaved  Englishwoman  under  the 
name  of  Mrs.  Brown,  who  is  occupied  with  nothing  but 
their  education. 

On  arriving  at  the  door  at  that  hour  of  the  night,  or 

VOL.  III.  p 


210  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1820 

rather  morning,  he  had  the  greatest  difficulty  to  procure 
admission.  At  last,  having  made  the  servant  understand 
that  she  was  not  to  disturb  her  mistress,  that  he  only- 
wanted  the  two  children  and  their  maid,  who  must  in- 
stantly accompany  him,  she  told  him  that  the  eldest 
child  slept  with  her  mother,  so  that  all  hope  of  conceal- 
ment ceased. 

On  M.  de  Coigny  being  obhged  to  tell  her  that  she 
must  allow  her  children  to  go  without  her^  that  she  could 
not  be  admitted,  she  made  no  reply,  but  gently  pressed  his 
arm  in  silence,  put  on  a  large  bonnet  with  a  deep  veil, 
and  placed  herself  in  the  coach  with  the  children,  their 
maid,  and  M.  de  Coigny.  On  his  again  repeating  that  she 
could  not  be  allowed  to  go  in,  she  again,  without  uttering 
a  word,  squeezed  his  arm  as  if  to  assure  him  of  the  pro- 
priety of  her  conduct,  and  actually  remained  in  the  car- 
riage at  the  door  of  the  Opera,  while  the  children,  accom- 
panied by  their  maid,  were  carried  up  to  their  dying 
father,  by  whose  bed  they  knelt  and  received  his  blessing, 
and  his  recommendation  to  the  poor  little  Duchesse,  who 
declared  they  should  hve  with  her,  and  always  be  consi- 
dered as  her  own. 

The  poor  dying  man  then,  in  a  whisper  to  his  brother, 
the  Due  d'Angouleme,  reminded  him  that  he  had  another 
child,  a  boy,  born  since  his  marriage,  by  Virginie^  a  dancer 
of  the  Opera,  whom  he  recommended  to  his  protection. 

His  not  offending  the  feelings  of  his  wife  with  the  men- 
tion of  this  child  showed  his  power  of  thinking  of  others 
in  the  midst  of  his  cruel  sufferings,  with  the  blood  mount- 
ing higher  and  higher  in  his  heart  every  moment. 

He  had  expressed  a  great  desire  to  see  the  King.  We 
must  hope,  for  the  sake  of  his  character,  that  like  all  kings 
he  had  been  deceived  as  to  the  real  state  of  the  case  at 
his  couche,  when  an  accident  was  mentioned  by  Decazes 
to  have  happened  to  the  Due  de  Berri  at  the  Opera  ;  but 
how  slight  he  had  chosen  to  make  it,  to  spare  the  King's 


1820]  DE   BERKI'S   LAST   MOMENTS.  211 

feelings^  we  know  not,  and  they  certainly  needed  not  such 
precaution.  At  two  o'clock  he  was  sent  for ;  the  danger 
announced  immediate,  and  the  dying  man  most  eager  to 
see  him.  The  King  and  all  his  immediate  attendants  had 
gone  to  bed  as  usual,  and  before  they  could  get  him  and 
themselves  up,  and  his  carriage  ready,  and  the  means  of 
putting  him  in  and  out  of  it  (which  is  an  operation),  it  was 
half-past  five  before  he  arrived  at  the  Opera-house. 

In  the  intermediate  time,  nothing  could  equal  the  im- 
patience of  the  poor  Prince,  or  exceed  the  horrors  of  the 
people  collected  around  him,  in  a  small  low  room,  ill  and 
poorly  furnished,  and  looking  perfectly  unsuited  to  the 
guests  it  contained.  It  was  now  crowded  with  the  Princes 
and  their  immediate  attendants ;  with  all  the  household 
of  the  poor  Duke ;  with  the  Bishop  of  Chartres  and  the 
Cure  of  the  parish,  who  had  been  called  to  administer  the 
succours  of  religion  ;  with  the  Ministers,  and  numbers 
of  medical  people,  to  say  nothing  of  those  bringing  back- 
wards and  forwards  warm  water  and  other  things  that 
they  wanted.  Amongst  these  persons  was  a  figurante  of 
the  Opera,  still  in  her  costume  de  theatre^  who  had  some- 
how or  other  fallen  into  the  service  without  having  had 
time  \o  change  her  dress. 

The  heat  in  a  low  crowded  room  was  excessive,  and  no 
light  was  allowed  but  what  was  necessary  for  the  surgeons, 
which  showed  all  the  horror  of  his  large  and  ghastly 
wound,  left  entirely  a  decouvert  to  encourage  the  flowing 
of  the  blood,  with  which  everything  was  stained,  and  the 
gown  of  Madame  de  Berri  covered  !  Everybody  was  wait- 
ing for  the  sound  of  the  guards,  and  longing  to  announce 
the  arrival  of  the  King  to  relieve  the  impatience  of  the 
poor  dying  man,  who,  at  every  noise  of  wheels,  asked  if 
it  was  not  him,  and  seemed  to  dread  his  arriving  too  late. 
At  last  he  came,  and  the  Due  de  Berri's  first  and  last 
words  to  him,  in  a  now  almost  choked  utterance,  were 
'  Grace  pour  Vhomme.'     By  his  great  eagerness  to  obtain 

p2 


212  MISS  beret's   JOUENAL.  [1820 

mercy  for  tlie  man,  and  his  dread  of  the  King's  not 
arriving  in  time  for  him  to  ask  it,  he  seemed  to  connect 
the  idea  of  thus  expiating  his  own  weaknesses  ;  and  ex- 
pressed a  hope  that  the  great  sufferings  from  his  wound 
might  spare  him  others  hereafter.  * 

He  recommended  his  household  and  servants  to  the 
King,  and  seemed  much  satisfied  with  having  Uved  to  see 
him. 

Withm  half  an  hour  after  his  arrival,  his  embarrassed 
respiration,  which  had  long  been  drawn  with  a  suffocating 
noise  in  his  throat,  ceased  altogether — the  King  closing 
his  eyes  before  he  left  the  Opera-house. 

His  poor  little  wife  never  left  him  a  moment.  At  the 
very  last  the  King  had  desired  her  to  be  taken  away  be- 
fore the  last  breath  was  drawn  ;  but  she,  hearing  her  hus- 
band again  breathe,  burst  away  from  those  that  held  her, 
and  returned  to  his  side.  When  all  was  over — and  not 
till  then— she  was  conveyed  back  to  the  Elysee  in  a  coach, 

with  Madame and  Madame  de  Gontaut  and  the  child. 

On  undressing  her  there  and  taking  down  her  hair,  she 
suddenly  seized  a  pair  of  scissors  and  cut  all  she  could  of  it 

off,  desiring  Madame  de to  keep  it,  and  give  it  to  her 

child  when  she  was  old  enough  to  understand  that  her 
mother  had  cut  it  off  the  day  her  father  was  murdered. 

On  the  evening  of  Monday,  the  14th  of  February,  she 

and   her  child,  accompanied  by  Madame  de  and 

the  Duehesse  de  Eeggio,  in  waiting  on  her,  were  removed 
from  the  Elysee  to  St.  Cloud.     On  leaving  tlie  Elysee  she 

*  The  name  of  the  assassin  was  Louis  Pierre  Louvel ;  born  1783 ;  was 
the  son  of  a  mercer.  He  served  in  the  army,  and  was  afterwards  employed 
as  a  saddler  in  the  stables,  first  of  the  Emperor  and  theu  of  the  King.  He 
distinctly  denied  having  any  cause  of  private  ill-will  towards  the  Due  de 
Berri,  but  declared  that  from  the  year  1814  he  had  resolved  to  murder  the 
Bourbons,  and  began  with  him  (the  Due  de  Berri)  only  because  he  was  the 
youngest.  He  appears  to  have  been  labouring  under  a  complete  monomania 
respecting  the  Royal  Family.  He  underwent  frequent  examinations  in  order 
to  discover  if  he  had  any  accomplices,  but  he  had  none.  He  was  tried, 
condemned,  and  executed  on  the  7th  of  June  1820. 


1820]  ALL   AMUSEMENTS   PROHIBITED.  213 

bid  adieu  for  ever  to  a  place  where  she  said  she  had  been 
so  happy. 

Wednesday^  IMi. — The  theatres  have  all  been  shut 
since  Monday,  the  day  of  the  Due  de  Berri's  death,  and 
all  masking  in  the  streets  and  public  balls  forbidden  by 
the  pohce.  So  strictly  were  these  orders  obeyed,  that 
the  silence  of  the  streets  was  quite  remarkable  on  these 
two  last  days  of  a  Carnival  so  cruelly  terminated.  Even 
on  the  Wednesday  night,  between  the  Due  de  Broglie's,  in 
the  Eue  Bourbon,  Faubourg  St.  Germain,  to  the  Eue  Basse 
du  Eempart,  I  met  or  passed  but  three  carriages  of  any 
description.  In  the  evening  I  went  to  Madame  de  Broglie ; 
her  door  was  shut,  but  she  received  her  habitues  ;  every- 
body depressed,  but  quite  different  from  the  Ultras.  The 
violence  of  the  letters  against  Decazes  makes  it  clear 
that  his  only  possible  chance  of  staying  in  office  is  his 
throwing  himself  into  the  arms  of  constitutionalism,  I 
thought  this  evening  it  was  so  settled ;  there  were  more 
than  usual  of  the  party  whispering  together  at  the  Due 
de  Broglie's  ;  and  from  a  quarter  of  an  hour's  conversation 
I  had  with  him,  I  had  every  reason  to  believe  this  arrange- 
ment as  good  as  settled.  The  Duke  spoke  in  good  spirits 
of  the  crisis  in  which  they  found  themselves  having  passed 
over  better  than  they  could  have  expected ;  that  the 
barriers  of  Paris  had  not  been  shut,  and  that  no  arrests 
had  been  made  ;  that  the  trial  of  the  assassin  was  to  be 
conducted  according  to  the  law,  and  that  in  the  mean- 
time he  was  treated  like  other  criminals  ;  that  they 
hoped  merely  to  put  some  little  necessary  checks  to  the 
present  enormous  licence  of  the  press,  and  that  the  other 
laws  were  to  be  modified.  In  short,  I  had  little  doubt, 
from  what  M.  de  Broglie  said,  that  the  Centre  and  the 
Doctrinaires  had  settled  their  matters  with  Decazes,  and 
promised  him  their  support.  Kor  do  I  now  doubt  it ;  but 
we  heard  this  same  evening  for  certain,  that  Decazes  had 
resigned,  and  the  presidency  of  the  Conseil  des  Ministres 


214  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1820 

was  forced  on  the  Due  de  Eichelieu  ;  tlie  King  having  at 
last  yielded  to  the  prayers  of  all  his  family,  who,  by  some 
strange  deception  of  hatred,  persist,  or  pretend  to  persist, 
in  seeing  in  Decazes  the  accomphce  of  the  Due  de  Bern's 
murderer ! 

When  his  wife  went,  on  the  Thursday  following  the 
murder,  to  St.  Cloud,  to  make  personal  enquiries  after  the 
Duchesse  de  Berri,  as  all  the  Court  had  done,  no  living  soul 
spoke  to  her ;  except  at  last  Madame  Juste  de  JSToailles,  out 
of  compassion,  addressed  some  indifferent  question  to  her. 
The  room  in  which  she  was  received  the  Princes  were 
obliged  to  pass  through,  and  both  Monsieur  and  Madame 
hurried  through  the  room,  turning  their  faces  the  other 
way;  while  all  their  attendants  exclaimed  at  the  '  audace' 
of  her  venturing  to  come  under  the  very  roof  of  their 
victim ! ! ! 

Such  ideas  and  such  language,  and  above  all  such  folly, 
is  really  incredible  anywhere,  except  in  the  mind  and  the 
mouth  of  an  ultra-Royalist 

Thursday,  17th. — Our  Ambassadress  went  to  St.  Cloud 
to  make  enquiries  in  person  after  the  Duchesse  de  Berri, 
although  it  is,  it  seems,  contrary  to  etiquette  in  common 
cases  for  ambassadors  to  go  to  country  palaces  where  or 
when  the  King  is  not  established  there.  She  described 
the  melancholy  of  the  scene  as  quite  remarkable.  In  the 
great  gay  gilded  rooms  of  the  Palace  of  St.  Cloud,  figures 
in  the  deepest  mourning  were  ghding  about,  and  meeting 
(many  of  them  for  the  first  time  since  the  event),  all  with 
tears  in  their  eyes.  Madame  de  Gontaut  estabhshed  for 
the  moment,  as  if  cast  by  some  strange  accident,  in  one  of 
the  gaily  embroidered  salons ;  she  was  quite  overcome 
with  the  past  and  present  scene.  Her  infant  charge  sleep- 
ing in  its  cradle,  in  an  inner  room,  opening  to  that  inha- 
bited by  her  mother,  insensible  to  all  the  melancholy  she 
inspired. 

Saturday,  19th. — In  the  morning  we  went  with  George 

\ 


1820]  LETTER   FEOM   HON.    J.    ABERCROMBIE.  215 

Dawson  to  the  Louvre,  at  twelve  o'clock,  to  see  the 
lighted  chapel  where  the  coffin  of  the  Due  de  Berri  was 
shown  ;  but  though  it  had  been  publicly  announced  in  the 
newspapers,  the  public  were  not  allowed  to  enter,  on  ac- 
count of  the  deputations  from  various  corps,  which  arrived 
one  after  another.  In  the  evening  I  went  to  Madame  de 
Broglie's  ;  many  more  people  there  than  on  Wednesday. 

Tuesday,  22nd. — It  was  the  day  for  carrying  the  body 
of  the  Due  de  Berri  from  the  Louvre  to  St.  Denis.  The 
procession  passed  by  the  Quays  and  by  the  Eue  St.  Denis. 
Two-thirds  of  the  shops  in  Paris  were  shut,  and  all  in  the 
streets  through  which  the  procession  passed. 

Friday,  2bth. — In  the  evening  I  went  alone  to  the 
Duchesse  d'Escars,  where  Seguier,  first  '  President  de  la 
Cour  de  Cassation,'  discoursed  upon  the  subject  of  the 
assassin,  Louvel,  to  a  circle  of  ladies  and  gentlemen  of  the 
Court.  Prom  there  I  went  to  the  other  extreme  at  B. 
Constant — large  meeting  of  co7ispirators.  I  only  remained 
there  a  minute,  to  ascertain  for  certain  that  there  would 
be  no  sitting  at  the  Chamber  to-morrow. 

Saturday,  2Qth. — Agnes  brought  home  from  the  em- 
bassy the  news  of  the  intended  assassination  of  the  Minis- 
ters in  England,  at  Lord  Harrowby's  house.* 

From  the  Hon.  James  Abercrombie  to  Miss  Berry. 

London,  February  25, 1820. 

Events  succeed  each  other  in  such  rapid  succession,  that  to 
follow  them  is  really  the  business  of  life.  The  day  before  yes- 
terday this  Thistlewood  and  a  band  of  ruffians  projected  the 
diabolical  plan  of  murdering  the  Cabinet  Ministers  at  dinner  at 
Lord  Harrowby's.  The  Ministers  had  been  apprised  of  it,  and 
adopted  the  necessary  precautions.  The  murderers  were  found 
assembled  in  a  loft  of  an  untenanted  stable  in  a  small  street  out 
of  the  Edgeware  Eoad.  The  police  officers  behaved  with  admira- 
ble courage  and  spirit ;  but  Birnie,  the  magistrate  to  whom  the 
execution  of  this  duty  was  confided,  does  not  appear  to  have 

*  The  well-known  Cato  Street  conspiracy. 


216  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1820 

laid  his  plan  with  judgment.    He  brought  his  police  officers  into 
action  before  the  soldiers  arrived.     They  could  only  ascend  one 
at  a  time  by  a  ladder,  and  they  were  too  few  to  inspire  that 
dread  and  conviction  of  the  inutility  of  resistance  which  might 
have  been  expected  by  an  instantaneous  display  of  force,  and 
which  might  have  been  effected  by  drums  and  other  indications 
of  the  presence  of  the  military.     One  officer  of  the  police  was 
killed  by  Thistlewood,  nine  were  made  prisoners,  others  escaped 
— the  whole  number  was  from  25  to  30.     Thistlewood  escaped, 
but  was  taken  yesterday  morning  in  bed.     It  is  said  that  when 
he  escaped  from  the  loft  he  went  round  by  Grosvenor  Square  to 
dismiss  the  sentinel  whom  he  had  placed  to  watch  the  proceedings 
at  Lord  Harrowby's.     The  Ministers,  of  course,  were  not  there. 
There  is  no  indication  of  any  extensive  conspiracy — they  must 
have  relied  on  their  persuasion  that  if  confusion  was  created 
the  people  might  have  risen  and  joined  them.     They  had  a 
proclamation  ready  to   be  distributed.     I  cannot  tell  you  what 
form   of  government  they  intended  to  have  blessed  us  with. 
Thistlewood,  as  you  probably  know,  is  a  ruined,  desperate  man. 
But  it  is  shocking  to  think,  that  so  many  men  of  our  country 
could  have  been  brought  to  dwell  calmly,  and  that  probably  for 
some  days,  if  not  weeks,  on  the  contemplation  of  the  commission 
of  so  atrocious  a  crime.     The  actors  appear  to  be  all  of  the 
lowest  order.     The  accounts  given  of  most  of  them  are  con- 
sistent  with    their  belonging   to    that   body  of  pillagers  who 
probably  exist  in  all  large  capitals.     Two  of  them  (shoemakers) 
appear  to  have  been  of  regular  habits  in  private  life,  and  thence 
I  conclude  that  they  may  have  been  the  victims  of  that  dis- 
graceful licence  of  the  press  which  has  caused  so  much  mischief. 
We  are  all  very  tranquil.     I  have  no  means  of  judging  as  yet 
of  the  public  feeling  among  the  middling  and  lower  classes,  but 
the  little  I  have  is   favourable.     Among  the  higher  orders  I 
observe  that  they  have  all  been  so  accustomed  of  late  years  to 
the  consideration  of  strange  and  striking  events,  that  tbe  sensa- 
tion is  less,   and  the  indifference  greater  than  it  ought  to  be. 
They  will,  of  course,  be  tried  as  quickly  as  the  forms  of  law  will 
admit.    All  these  events  hasten  the  crisis,  unless  it  be  supposed 
that  to  strengthen  throughout  Europe  the  hands  of  Governments 
be  the  surest  way  to  preserve  the  public  tranquillity.     The  case 
is  difficult,  and  one  cannot  say  which  is  the  stronger  party. 


1820]  LETTER   FROM   HON.    J.    ABERCROMBIE.  217 

This,  however,  is  a  national  disgrace,  and  I  fear  it  will  be  a 
public  calamity.  I  dread  the  effect  of  it  in  France,  and  any 
commotion  there  will  produce  its  effect  here.  The  action  and 
reaction  promises  little  for  our  repose.  Ward  tells  me  that 
they  had  a  plan  of  Lord  Harrowby's  house.  The  possession  of 
this  plan  may  have  been  the  motive  for  wishing  to  execute  their 
purpose  this  week,  because  if  they  had  waited  till  next  week 
the  confusion  in  the  event  of  their  success  would  have  been 
greatly  increased  by  the  dissolution  of  Parliament. 

The  Due  de  Eichelieu,  I  conclude,  cannot  coalesce  with  the 
Moderes,  or  Liberaux.  Must  he  not  then  connect  himself  with 
the  Ultras  ?  Can  he  control  and  constrain  them  ?  Are  they 
so  obnoxious  to  the  nation  that  even  a  reasonable  adminis- 
tration of  public  affairs  by  them  would  not  be  tolerated  ?  How 
and  when  is  all  this  to  end  ?  The  King  appears  to  be  better ; 
his  Ministers  have  beaten  him  quite  down,  and  he  may  justly  be 
said  to  have  ceased  to  reign.  I  do  not  know  that  anybody 
must  complain  of  this.     I  write  in  haste. 

Yours  ever  most  truly  and  sincerely, 

J.  A. 

Paris,  Mars  1820. 

I  was  at  the  Chambre  des  Deputes  on  Wednesday  the 
1st  of  March,  Thursday  the  2nd,  and  again  on  Tuesday 
the  7th,  and  on  the  Thursday,  Friday,  and  Saturday  fol- 
lowing. The  four  last  days  (it  was,  in  fact,  five  days,  for 
the  debate  continued  on  Wednesday  the  8th,  but  I  was 
not  present)  were  uninterruptedly  employed  on  the  dis- 
cussion of  the  law  of  arrest,  on  the  mandat  of  three  Minis- 
ters, laid  before  the  Chamber  on  the  16th  of  February. 

M.  Kiviere,  the  rapporteur  of  the  committee  charged 
with  the  examination,  made  a  long,  minute,  and  not  very 
interesting  report  of  what  the  amendments  of  the  com- 
mittee were,  which  seemed  all  insignificant  in  their  conse- 
quences, except  the  great  and  essential  amendment  of  en- 
trustmg  such  power  to  the  Minister  only,  till  the  next 
assembly  of  the  deputes,  as  the  restrictions  on  the  journals 
— which  the  Ministers  had  proposed  for  five  years — had 
been  equally  only  voted  for  one  by  the  House  of  Peers. 


218  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1820 

I  am  not  going  to  enter  into,  or  attempt  any  detail  of, 
tlie  speeches  on  either  side,  as  they  are  very  accurately 
given  in  most  of  the  French  papers ;  but  the  colour  of 
the  whole,  and  the  temper  of  the  three  different  divisions 
or  parties  of  the  House,  I  was  glad  to  see  and  curious  to 
remark. 

The  best  speakers  on  the  Cote  Gauche  are  decidedly 
General  Foy,  Manuel,*  and  B.  Constant.  The  first  two 
speak  without  notes  at  all,  and  B.  Constant  contrives  so  to 
read  his  as  to  have  the  whole  effect  of  improvising  what 
he  says. 

General  Foy  speaks  with  much  nobleness  on  general 
principles,  and  with  less  of  disquisition,  and  more  of  the 
appropriate  oratory  of  a  senate,  than  perhaps  any  of  them ; 
quite  free  from  references  to  the  Eomans  and  their  his- 
tory, to  which  almost  all  of  these  orators  are  so  fond  of 
recurring. 

Manuel  is  a  closer  arguer,  and  more  violent  in  his  asser- 
tions and  general  opinions.  These  are,  however,  uttered 
with  an  imperturbable  temper,  which  makes  him  get  on 
through  a  thousand  interruptions  from  the  Cote  Droit. 

B.  Constant  speaks  always  in  a  manner  to  command 
attention — always  with  an  abundance  both  of  matter  and 
of  words ;  often  with  eloquence,  and  still  oftener  with 
that  keen  sarcasm  and  grave  persiflage  which  marks  his 
conversation.  His  taste,  I  think,  sometimes  fails.  I  by 
no  means  admired  his  citing  General  Lafayette  by  name, 
while  present,  in  speaking  for  an  amendment  to  the  law 
which  allowed  State  prisoners  to  see  their  family  after 
the  first  three  days  of  their  confinement,  provided  the 

*  Jacques  Antoine  Manuel ;  bom  1775.  He  practised  as  a  lawyer  in  the 
provinces  till  1815,  wlien  lie  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Chamber  of 
Deputies.  In  1817  he  became  an  object  of  hatred  to  the  ultra-royalists. 
In  1820  he  opposed  the  exclusion  of  M.  Gregoire.  In  1823,  having  spoken 
freely  his  opinion  on  the  war  against  Spain,  accompanied  by  some  comments 
on  the  reign  of  Ferdinand  VII.,  he  was  accused  of  preaching  regicide. 
They  refused  to  listen  to  his  explanation ;  the  next  day  his  expulsion  was 
proposed  and  carried  into  effect  bv  a  bodv  of  Gardes  Nationales. 


1820]  FRENCH   ORATORY.  219 

persons  so  seeing  tliem  were  willing  afterwards  to  share 
that  confinement.  On  this  he  brought  forward  the  case 
of  M.  de  Lafayette  in  the  Austrian  prisons,  and  his  wife 
and  family  devoting  themselves  to  the  same  punishment. 
All  this  he  might  have  brought  forward  as  an  argument 
without  naming  anybody.  The  story  is  so  well  known, 
and  the  hatred  to  Lafayette  is  so  great  among  the 
Ultras,  that  he  even  lost  part  of  the  force  of  his  example 
by  thus  individualising  it. 

Of  the  Centre  a  Gauche,  Courvoisier  speaks  with  an  ex- 
cellent voice  and  manner  ;  with  much  precision,  few  idle 
words,  and  always  to  the  point.  Eeciting,  too,  without 
notes,  he  is  always  listened  to. 

Beugnot,*  from  the  same  side  of  the  House,  made  an 
excellent  speech  too,  both  as  to  matter  and  argument. 
But  it  was  a  discourse  read ;  and  none  so  uttered  in  a 
popular  assembly  can  have  much  efiect.  Thoughts  and 
arguments  take  quite  a  different  expression  on  paper 
from  what  they  would,  thrown  off  in  the  abundance  of 
the  mind  from  the  same  speaker. 

On  the  Cote  Droits  the  best  speakers — the  only  ones, 
indeed,  fit  to  be  heard — are  Laine,  Villele,  and  Corbiere. 
They  all  three  recite  their  speeches,  but  they  have  none 
of  them  either  a  commanding  manner  or  figure,  and 
have  a  virulence  in  their  expressions  towards  the  opposite 
party  which  is  both  frightful  and  disgusting.  Laine  has 
the  most  eloquence  ;  he  sometimes  begins  well,  but,  I 
think,  always  weakens  before  he  finishes.  Villeie  speaks 
like  an  enrage— ]j\^q  a  man  that  would  be  at  once  an 
inquisitor  and  a  bourreau  if  he  could.  Corbiere  is 
something  in  the  same  manner. 

The  virulence  of  the  whole  of  this  side  of  the  House  is 

*  Jacques  Claude  Comte  Beugnot ;  "bom  1761 ;  constantly  employed 
during  the  Empire.  At  the  Restoration  he  was  appointed  first  to  the 
Ministere  de  la  Police,  and  afterwards  to  that  of  the  Marine.  He  joined 
the  King  at  Ghent,  and  filled  a  variety  of  offices  during  the  reign  of  the 
Bourhons. 


220  MISS   BEERY's   JOURXAL.  [1820 

mucli  more  offensive,  and  gives  a  much  more  unpleasant 
idea  of  the  disposition  and  intentions  of  its  members  than 
the  remonstrances,  invocations,  and  complaints  of  the  Cote 
Gauche,  who  are  also  much  more  patient  hearers  of  the 
tedious  harangues  on  all  sides. 

Of  the  Ministers,  Pasquier  speaks  well — like  a  gentle- 
man— and  is  a  quick  and  ready  answerer.  Simeon,  the 
new  Ministre  de  I'lnterieur,*  is  particularly  respectable 
looking ;  spoke  one  day  very  well,  and  with  much  can- 
dour, on  the  law,  so  as  to  produce  visibly  considerable 
effect.  But  a  second  time,  his  discourse,  without  point 
or  eloquence  or  argument,  did  the  cause  more  harm 
than  good.  Eoy,f  the  Ministre  de  Finance,  spoke  one  of 
the  days,  on  this  law,  a  few  words  very  well ;  invo- 
cating  boldly  the  responsibility  of  the  Ministers  on  all 
they  had  done,  and  on  the  manner  in  which  they  intended 
to  apply  the  powers  they  were  demanding.  On  subjects 
of  finance  he  is  very  long  and  very  tiresome,  as  perhaps 
all  subjects  of  finance  must  be. 

Monday,  March  Qth. — In  the  morning  I  went  to  the  Pa- 
lais Eoyal,  to  Madame  de  Montjoye's  apartment ;  and  from 
thence  we  went  to  see  the  rooms  and  the  pictures  of  the 
Due  and  Duchesse  and  Mdlle.  d'Orleans.  The  pictures 
are  almost  all  modern,  some  good  and  some  middling, 
and  in  the  modern  French  taste,  which  is  quite  different 
from  the  French  taste  of  the  last  century.     The  grand 

*  Le  Comte  Joseph  Jerome  Simeon  ;  born  1749 ;  brought  up  to  the  study 
of  law.  He  took  no  prominent  part  in  government  till  after  the  Restora- 
tion. In  1815  he  was  made  Conseiller  d'Etat ;  in  1818  he  refused  the 
seals  resigned  by  Pasquier,  and  which  were  then  given  to  M.  de  Serre.  In 
1819  he  was  made  Inspecteur  General  des  Ecoles  de  Droit.  In  1820 
Secretary  of  State  de  I'Interieur,  which  office  he  held  till  1821,  when 
the  Ministry  was  broken  up,  and  he  was  called  up  to  the  Chamber  of  Peers. 

f  Antoine  Roy;  born  1765 j  began  his  profession,  the  law,  1785.  He 
took  no  part  in  the  revolutionary  movement,  or  under  the  Empire.  After 
the  Restoration  he  became  a  member  of  the  Chamber  of  Deputies,  and 
steadily  upheld  the  rights  of  the  Charter.  He  took  a  most  active  part  on 
questions  of  finance,  and  successfully  combated  the  views  of  M.  de  Villele. 
in  1822  he  became  a  peer. 


1820]  FUNERAL   OF   THE    DUG   DE    BEREI.  221 

apartment  of  the  Palais  Eoyal  is  in  the  best  possible 
taste,  and  magnificent,  yet  at  the  same  time,  apparently,  a 
very  comfortable  house. 

Friday,  l^th. — At  the  Chamber  all  the  morning.  I 
wished  to  hear  the  end  of  this  discussion  of  the  law  upon 
arrests  by  order  of  three  Ministers. 

Monday,  l?>th.  —  From  two  o'clock  till  nearly  six 
o'clock  I  was  at  the  Chamber.  Same  discussion  upon 
•personal  liberty,  more  violent  than  ever.  Whilst  General 
Foy  was  speaking,  a  M.  Corday,  of  the  Centre  Droit,  got 
up  and  advanced  from  his  seat,  crying  out  to  him,  '  Vous 
etes  un  insolent ! ' 

Tuesday,  lith. — The  Due  de  Berri's  funeral  took  place 
to-day  at  St.  Denis ;  everybody  was  there,  and  the 
theatres  closed  in  the  evening.  It  was  the  first  spring 
day.  Car.*  still  so  ill  that  I  could  not  think  of  going  to 
see  a  ceremony  that  other\vise  would  have  been  novel 
and  not  without  interest  to  me. 

Wednesday,  Ihth The  last  discussion  of  the  law  upon 

personal  liberty,  which  passed  by  a  majority  of  nineteen, 
without  the  Cote  Gauche  being  able  to  carry  a  single 
amendment. 

Wednesday,  29th. — At  three  o'clock  I  went  with  my 
sister  to  walk  to  the  Champs  Elysees.  The  weather  was 
delicious,  and  there  was  a  great  crowd  of  carriages, 
horses,  and  people  going  to  Longchamps,  or  looking  on, 
which  was  better.  None  of  the  beau  monde  were  walk- 
ing, and  very  few,  I  think,  in  the  carriages  ;  but  all  the 
ladies  with  new  bonnets  of  every  shape  and  colour. 

Sunday,  April  2nd.  —  At  church,  where  the  sacra- 
ment was  administered  to  a  hundred  persons.  We  were 
kept  from  eleven  till  three  o'clock. 

Friday,  7th. — At  the  usual  soiree  at  B.  Constant's, 
this  night.  Lady  Char.  Lindsay  and  myself  saw,  for  the 
first    time,   the    much-admired    Madame   TalUen,   now 

*  Honourable  Mrs.  Scott. 


222  MISS    berry's   journal.  [1820 

turned  into  the  Princesse  de  Chimay,  by  her  marriage 
with  Joseph  de  Caraman,  and  by  progress  of  time  turned 
into  a  large  woman  of  five  or  six  and  forty,  and  with  not 
much  remains  of  very  fine  or  regular  features. 

Friday^  \itli. — At  the  Ambassador's  at  three  o'clock, 
where  there  was  a  ball,  or  rather  a  meeting  of  children. 
The  eldest,  not  more  than  twelve  or  thirteen  years  old, 
danced  wonderfully  well ;  the  others  jumped  and  ran 
about  in  the  large  ball-room  and  in  the  garden.  At  five 
o'clock  they  all  dined,  and  were  afterwards  to  see  a 
magic  lantern. 

Wednesday,  l^th. — ^We  walked  in  the  Cour  du  Palais, 
and  went  up  into  the  large  drawing-room,  which  leads  to 
several  of  the  courts  now  sitting.  We  met  there  M. 
Merilhon,  en  robe  et  bonnet  carre.  I  told  him  our  v^dsh 
to  see  the  inside  of  the  Conciergerie  if  it  were  possible. 
He  accompanied  us  to  the  door.  At  the  foot  of  the 
large  staircase  of  the  Palace  we  entered,  and  remained 
between  two  gratings  whilst  M.  Merilhon  asked  permis^ 
sion  of  the  concierge  to  enter  ;  but  was  told  that,  since 
Louvel  is  there,  they  let  no  one  inside  of  the  prison. 
The  first  grating  was  enough  to  give  us  a  sad  impression 
of  the  rest.  I  was  not  sorry  to  have  seen  and  to  find 
myself  between  the  two  doors  through  which  the  unfor- 
tunate Marie  Antoinette  passed  when,  after  the  King's 
death,  she  was  transferred  from  the  Temple,  and  through 
which  she  repassed  to  satisfy  the  fury  of  her  persecutors 
upon  the  scafibld. 

Tuesday,  2bth. — In  the  morning  I  went  to  the  Chamber; 
the  Ministers'  tribune  being  already  so  full,  there  was  not 
room  for  a  mouse.  We  waited  in  the  corridors  for  more 
than  half  an  hour,  but  afterwards  found  ourselves  with 
four  men  standing  before  us,  so  as  to  render  it  impossible 
to  see  or  hear  anything  for  more  than  another  half  hour. 
After  aU,  the  debate  did  not  recompense  one  for  the 
trouble.    The  two  sides  were  agreed  to  send  M.  Mandier's 


1820]  AN   INSOLENT   OFFICIAL.  223 

petition  to  the  President  of  the  Council  of  Ministers. 
The  only  thing  striking  in  the  discussion  was  when  they 
spoke  distinctly  of  the  secret  influence  of  Monsieur,  and 
denounced  it  as  the  cause  of  much  evil ;  nor  was  it  posi- 
tively denied  by  the  Ministers. 

Thursday,  May  ith. — Left  Paris. 

Sunday,  7th. — Arrived  at  Besan^on.  The  public  walk 
here  of  Chamars  *  is  very  fine.  Avenues  of  large  trees  at 
the  side  of  a  river,  crossed  by  a  bridge  into  a  wood, 
which  occupies  aU  the  space  between  the  town  and  the 
fortifications. 

Monday,  8th. — At  Pont  Arlin  I  went  to  the  office  of 
the  Custom-house,  to  show  the  order  from  the  Directeur 
General  of  the  Customs  at  Paris,  to  receive  two-thirds  of 
the  money  that  I  had  deposited  at  Calais  for  our  carriage. 
The  director  received  me  very  civilly,  acknowledged  the 
receipt  of  the  order,  which  had  been  with  him  since  the 
month  of  September,  and  gave  me  another  order  (written 
on  that  from  the  Director  General)  to  receive  the  money 
at  Jougne,  where  I  was  to  sign  the  receipt,  and  where  the 
carriage  would  really  leave  Prance.  As  soon  as  I  arrived 
at  Jougne,  I  sent  for  the  director,  who  returned  for 
answer  that  I  must  come  to  him.  I  went  and  found  'him 
with  the  inspector,  sitting  upon  a  bench  at  their  door. 
They  treated  me  with  all '  the  insolence  of  office,'  left  me 
standing  before  them,  and  would  scarcely  look  at  the 
letter  I  presented  from  the  Director  General  to  Sir  C. 
Stuart,  saying  that  the  order  had  been  given  to  reimburse 
me  at  the  frontier.  He  said  he  could  do  nothing;  this 
evening,  but  to-morrow  morning  he  would  look  into  the 
business, 

Tuesday,  9th. — The  director  sent  me  word  before  six 

*  The  extensive  promenade  of  Chamars,  traversed  by  two  branches  of 
the  River  Doubs,  is  said  to  occupy  the  site,  as  well  as  retain  in  part  the 
name,  of  the  Roman  Campus  Martius.  Besan^on  was  the  ancient  Vesutio 
described  by  Csesar. — Murray's  Handbook  foi-  France, 


224  MISS  beeky's  journal.  [1820 

o'clock  in  the  morning  that  he  was  ready  to  receive  me. 
Knowing  he  was  obhged  to  pay  me  my  money,  he 
thought  to  pay  me  also  in  insolence  ;  but  I  made  no  reply, 
signed  a  release,  received  375  francs,  and  left  the  office. 

Eeached  Lausanne.  I  had  sent  to  announce  our 
arrival  to  my  old  friend  Miss  Corgat. 

Wednesday^  lOtJi. — Our  friend  came  to  take  us  in  her 
char-a-banc  to  the  country-house  of  one  of  her  brothers, 
on  the  shores  of  the  lake.  The  garden  is  quite  English ; 
to  my  mind  not  so  pretty  as  it  would  have  been  in  ter- 
races and  groves  of  yoke  elms,  according  to  the  old 
fashion.  We  walked  upon  Mount  Benon,  which,  since 
our  last  visit  in  1803,  is  much  embelhshed.  As  these 
good  people — I  mean  the  Government  of  the  Canton  de 
Vaud — now  administer  their  own  affairs,  they  wilhngly 
spend  money  for  the  public  good,  and  it  is  to  be  hoped 
they  will  soon  think  of  repairing  their  towns  and  villages, 
which  are  mostly  in  such  a  state  as  to  break  the  horses' 
legs  and  the  carriage-wheels.  The  post  is  established 
now  in  the  Pays  de  Vaud  upon  the  three  large  roads. 

It  was  during  this  short  stay  in  Switzerland  that  the 
Miss  Berrys  went  to  see  the  Princess  of  Wales,  then 
staying  at  Geneva ;  it  was  the  last  time  they  ever  saw  her. 

Tuesday^  IQth. — We  crossed  Mont  Cenis,  and  arrived 
at  Turin. 

Letter  from  the  Princess  of  Wales  to  Miss  Berry. 

Geneve,  ce  25  du  mois  de  Mai  1820. 

Ma  cheke  Amie, — Je  m'empresse  de  vous  commimiquer  que 
j'ai  eu  des  nouvelles  tres-satisfaisantes  de  Londres  par  M.Vassalle, 
qui  est  de  retour  comme  hier  au  soir.  Je  pars  ainsi  aujourd'hui, 
et  a  Dijon  Alderman  Wood  et  Lady  Anne  Hamilton  vont  me 
rencontrer,  et  Monsieur  Brougham  se  trouvera  sur  la  route  pres 
de  Calais.  Je  compte  de  m'etablir  a  la  campagne,  et  me  flatte 
que  la  Maison  d'Angerstein  a  Blackheath  pourra  me  contenter 
pour  le  premier  moment.  Je  suis  en  grande  hate ;  le  moment  que 


1820]  VISITS   HER    FATHER'S    TOMB.  225 

je  me  trouve  a  Londres  je  vous  donnerais  de  mes  nouvelles. 
Ayez  la  charite  de  m'adresser  vos  lettres  a  Coutts  sans  enveloppe 
pour  moi.  Je  ne  saurai  dire  assez  combien  je  serai  charmee  de 
vous  retrouver  en  Italie,  ce  que  j'espere  beaucoup,  au  mois 
d'aout.  Ayez  la  bonte  de  vous  souvenir  quelquefois  d'une 
sincere  amie,  qui  ne  fait  que  des  vcbux  pour  votre  bonheur  et 
parfait  retablissement  de  votre  sante ;  c'est  avee  ces  memes 
sentimens  que  je  me  glorifie  d'etre  votre  bien  affectiounee  amie, 

C    XV. 

JOUENAL. 

Tuesday^  June  20th. — Left  Turin. 

Wednesday,  21st. — Eeaclied  Genoa.  From  the  top  of 
the  Bochette,  a  fog  coming  on  from  the  sea  covered  the 
plain ;  but  we  soon  found  ourselves  on  its  shores,  sur- 
rounded with  all  the  beauty  of  its  sides  covered  with 
villas,  terraces,  and  vines.  I  can  hardly  express  what  I 
felt  on  finding  myself  once  again  in  this  pilgrimage  of  hfe 
upon  these  shores  ;  it  seemed  as  if  I  had  never  left  them, 
and  all  the  varied  sensations  that  I  had  experienced  here 
passed  sadly  through  ray  mind. 

Friday,  ^Oth. — In  the  morning  we  went  to  the  ram- 
parts of  Carignan,  to  visit  the  cemetery  where  our  father 
sleeps.  Though  all  the  roses  in  the  enclosure  were  over, 
and  the  grass  wanted  mowing,  still  I  could  not  cease 
admiring  this  place  as  a  cemetery,  and  to  feel  again  the 
calm  that  it  inspires.  After  having  knelt  some  time  side 
by  side  with  my  sister  upon  the  marble  which  covers  his 
mortal  remains,  our  friend  Andreas  joined  us  there,  and 
suggested  our  having  the  inscription  put  in  bronze  letters, 
the  black  being  often  effaced  by  the  rain. 

Thursday,  July  Qth. — Left  Genoa. 

Sunday,  9th. — Arrived  at  Lucca. 

Extract  of  a  Letter  from  Miss  Berry. 

Baths  of  Lucca,  August  1820. 

I  have  been  reading  after  dinner,  when  it  is 

too  hot  to  write,  '  Anastatius.'     It  is,  as  I  had  supposed,  the 
VOL.  IIL  Q 


226  "  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1820 

substance  of  the  MS.  travels  in  the  East  which  he  long  ago  gave 
me  to  read.  But  in  this  its  new  form  so  arranged  !  in  such  a 
pert  style —  such  an  evident  copy  of  Lord  Byron's  prose,  which 
hardly  his  verses  can  make  one  forgive.  Such  a  tissue  of  ignoble 
crimes  and  villanies,  described  without  any  variety  of  motive, 
and  commented  on  without  any  elevation  of  sentiment.  Were 
it  good  as  a  story  (in  which  it  fails),  I  would  not  be  the  author 
of  it  for  millions  ! — for  altho'  nobody  in  a  fiction  is  answerable 
for  the  sentiments  of  their  actors,  there  are  fictions  which 
certain  minds  never  could  feign. 

Friday,  September  1st. — At  ten  o'clock  Agnes  and  I 
went  en  portantine  to  Gramola,  a  village  upon  the  moun- 
tain. As  the  crow  flies  it  would  not  take  more  than  five 
minutes,  but  it  took  a  good  hour  to  reach  it,  mounting 
the  steep  path  by  which  we  had  to  ascend.  It  is  a  fair 
specimen  of  an  Italian  village,  with  very  few  beggars ; 
the  view  is  like  a  map  of  the  country  on  which  one  sees 
all  the  paths  and  all  the  river-courses  marked.  We 
entered  one  of  the  best  houses,  belonging  to  an  arque- 
busier  by  trade,  as  he  told  us,  but  who  was  working  in 
metal — a  sort  of  whitesmith.  He  would  have  been 
thought  in  any  country  a  man  of  decided  intelligence. 
My  sister  stayed  to  make  a  sketch  from  the  terrace,  while 
he  took  me  into  a  small  room,  where  there  were  about  a 
hundred  books,  which  he  called  for  the  most  part  roha  de 
prete — that  he  had  inherited  from  a  priest-uncle.  There 
was,  however,  a  small  edition  of  '  Goldoni,'  and  to  my  great 
surprise  he  put  into  my  hands  a  volume  of  'Faublas,' 
saying  he  did  not  know  how  he  got  it  nor  what  it  was, 
as  he  never  read  anytliing,  but  thought  perhaps  I  could 
tell  him.  I  took  my  leave  much  pleased  with  my  new 
acquaintance,  whose  name  was  called  Semione. 

Miss  Berry  to  the  Countess  of  Hardwicke. 

Baths  of  Lucca,  Saturday,  2nd  September  1820. 
.     .     .     I  have  luckily  secured  for  myself  in  time   Galig- 
nani's  paper,  which  comes  to  me  directly  from  Paris  to  this 


1820]  LETTER   TO    LADY   HARDWICKE.  227 

place.  It  contains  the  whole  of  the  proceedings  against  the 
Queen  ia  details.  That  of  last  night  which  I  received  at  the 
same  time  with  your  letter,  gives  the  whole  account  of  the  first 
day.  I  feel  rather  satisfied  at  its  passing  off  as  it  did.  But  the 
longer  it  lasts,  the  more  anxious  one  shall  feel.  .  .  .  Of 
the  Queen's  letter  there  can  be  but  one  opinion  among  all  that 
part  of  the  population  to  whom  (according  to  Dogberry's  idea) 
it  has  come  by  nature  to  be  able  to  read.  Ministry  could  have 
wished  nothing  better  from  her  had  they  themselves  suggested 
such  a  measure.  All  these  letters  have  been  given  at  full  length 
in  Gralignani's,  therefore  what  appears  in  our  English  newspapers 
it  is  needless  to  send  or  repeat  to  us  in  letters.  .  .  .  The 
foreigners  and  Italians  are  all  gone  to  fetes,  to  be  given  at 
Lucca,  on  the  marriage  of  the  Prince  v\^ith  a  daughter  of  the 
King  of  Sardinia,  whenever  the  winds  and  the  waves  will  allow 
her  to  arrive  from  Genoa  to  these  shores ;  but  if  the  Prince  is 
no  more  in  a  hurry  for  her  arrival  than  the  winds  and  waves  to 
let  her  conie,  I  am  sorry  for  her.  It  is  above  a  week  since  the 
marriage  and  these  fetes  were  to  have  been  over,  and  they  are 
not  yet  begun.  Our  only  concern  in  them  (for  we  from  the 
first  sent  our  excuse)  is  that  they  may  not  occupy  all  the  post 
horses  of  this  great  principality  on  the  day  and  night  when  we 
mean  at  last  to  leave  our  retreat  here.  .  .  .  After  a  few 
dajs^  stay  at  Leghorn,  we  shall  establish  ourselves  at  Florence 
till  towards  the  end  of  October,  v/hen,  if  Naples  is  goable,  we 
shall  remove  ourselves  there  for  the  winter.  I  say  if,  because 
were  we  to  listen  to  the  thousand  reports  abroad,  we  should  sup- 
pose the  whole  college  of  cardinals,  radicals,  and  the  people,  all 
carbonari  (the  Italian  for  a  Jacobin),  and  everything  ready  for 
a  revolution.  But  I  had  a  long  letter  from  Mr.  Crawford  (old 
Fish's  heir),  who  assures  me  everything  is  perfectly  quiet  there 
and  likely  so  to  remain.  Old  women  have  nothing  to  do  with 
running  into  the  mouth  of  a  revolution ;  and  however  much  it 
might  entertain  them,  had  better  not  be  even  present  at  one, 
however  little  dangerous  ;  therefore  I  shall  take  special  care  not 
to  budge  from  Florence  till  I  am  well  assured  all  is  probably 
safe,  and  probably  is  all  one  can  say  anywhere  iu  the  present 
state  of  things. 


Q  2 


228  MISS   BEKRY'S   JOURNAL.  [1820 

Miss  Berry  to  Miss  Joanna  Baillie. 

Baths  of  Lucca,  7tli  September  1820. 

How  often  have  I  said  to  myself  since  at  this  place, — Why 
don't  you  write  to  Joanna  ?  Why  don't  you  thank  her  for  a 
letter  so  long  received  ?  How  can  you  allow  her  to  suppose  you 
indifferent  to  her  ?  How  can  you  do  such  injustice  to  your  own 
sentiments,  and  deprive  yourself  of  what  always  gives  you  so 
much  pleasure  as  hearing  from  her  ?— All  this  you  must  put 
into  my  eager  and  angry  tone,  for  be  it  known  to  you  that  1 
scold  myself  much  more  than  ever  I  did  anybody  else — and, 
generally,  with  as  little  effect. 

.  .  .  .  I  have  extremely  enjoyed  the  perfect  leisure, 
quiet,  and  tranquillity  of  this  beautiful  place,  where  we  have 
spent  nine  weeks.  Numbers  of  our  countrypeople  have  been 
here  ;  but  as  they  happened  to  be  none  of  them  our  intimate 
and  particular  acquaintance,  my  enjoyments  have  been  perfectly 
independent  of  society,  and  I  am,  I  believe,  the  only  person 
who  leaves  this  place  perfectly  satisfied  with  my  stay  here. 
Younger  people  came  expecting  gaiety  and  society,  and  have 
gone  away  quite  discontented.  This  last  week  that  we  have 
spent  quite  alone  has  perhaps  been  one  of  the  most  agreeable, 
for  the  sfreat  heats  beinsf  over  we  have  been  able  to  make  mornino- 
excursions  in  the  beautifully-wooded  and  peopled  mountains 
which  surround  us  ;  and  these  excursions  being  made  in  open 
chairs,  carried  by  legs  much  stouter  and  surer-footed  than  one's 
own,  are  as  little  fatiguing  to  the  body  as  they  are  agreeable  to 
the  mind.  The  peasantry  of  this  country,  their  habitations,  and 
their  habits  of  life,  the  more  one  knows  the  more  one  likes  them  ; 
they  are  the  most  industrious,  hard  labouring,  and  contented 
people  in  the  world ;  and  I  am  convinced  that  the  dominions  of 
the  Duchess  of  Lucca  will  be  the  last  place  in  which  a  revolution 
will  take  place.  I  wish  all  English  people,  who  have  a  dreadful 
idea  of  the  chara<iter  of  Italians  (judging  from  postilions  and 
innkeepers)  would  come  here  and  study  it  amidst  the  Luccese 
and  Tuscan  peasantry.  The  nature  of  their  labour,  their  modes 
of  cultivation,  the  produce  of  their  soil,  and,  above  all,  the  nymph- 
like beauty  of  their  young  women,  give  them  and  their  country 
much  more  an  Arcadian  air  than  anything  one  can  conceive 
existing  upon  earth  since  the  condemnation  of  man  to  live  by 


1820]  LETTER   TO   MISS   JOAN^^A   BAILLIE.  229 

the  sweat  of  his  brow.  .  .  .  The  extraordinary  heat  of  this 
summer  has  confined  us  all  to  the  house  till  sunset,  and  given  me 
leisure  to  attempt  making  comparative  vieivs,  altho'  not  of  this 
country.  ...  I  have  neither  time,  paper,  nor  opportunity 
to  enter  upon  the  inexhaustible  subject  of  public  affairs,  either 
on  the  Continent  or  in  our  own  country.  I  shall  only  say  that 
you  must  not  believe  the  hundredth  part  of  what  you  read  of 
disturbances  here  and  there,  and  revolutions  everywhere  at  hand ; 
and  that  you  must  be  convinced  that  we  shall  not  be  such  fools 
as  to  run  our  noses  into  public  confusion  anywhere.  We  shall 
remain  at  Florence  till  the  end  of  next  month,  when  if  every- 
thing continues  quiet  we  shall  remove  to  Eome.  ...  It 
would  be  provoking  to  have  come  so  far  again  without  getting 
to  Eome  ;  but  I  will  submit  even  to  this  rather  than  run  my 
nose  into  confusion,  where  old  women  have  nothing  to  do  but 
to  be  kicked  down  and  not  picked  up  again.  Your  friend  Mr. 
Denman  is  curiously  engaged  at  present !  The  proceedings  in 
England  are  really  beyond  imagination.  I  only  pity  those  who 
are  innocently  engaged  in  being  obliged  to  give  evidence  called 
for  by  the  culprit  herself.  But  I  have  so  fi;rm,  steady,  and 
perfect  reliance  on  truth,  that  I  still  feel  convinced  all  this  will 
end  as  it  ought,  and  without  any  popular  commotion.  .     .     . 

Thursday,  1th. — A  fine  day,  with  light  clouds.  An 
eclipse  of  the  sun  betv^een  two  and  four  o'clock ;  it  was 
the  greatest  I  have  ever  seen,  and.  the  effect  upon  these 
mountains  w^as  remarkable.  The  shadows  were  as  dark 
as  at  seven  o'clock — this  I  remarked  in  walking  out  the 
same  evening  —  and  the  temperature  became  sensibly 
lowered  at  the  time  of  the  greatest  obscuration,  about 
three  o'clock.  I  am  not  astonished  that  in  the  davs  of 
ignorance  they  regarded  an  eclipse  with-  fear.  The  pea- 
sants were  all  watching  it  and  talking  of  it,  but  did  not 
appear  to  take  it  for  more  than  it  is. 

I  never  thus  take  leave  of  scenes  where  I  have  passed 
some  time,  and  which  have  become  familiar  to  me,  with- 
out extreme  sadness  ;  without  a  feeling  of  eternal  separa- 
tion, which  throws  me  into  the  state  of  mind  perhaps  the 


230  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1820 

most  natural  to  me,  because  it  is  a  sadness  which  leads  me 
to  appreciate  the  value,  rather  than  to  disgust  me  with  hfe. 

Sunday,  l^tli.- — Left  Lucca  for  Leghorn. 

Thursday,  lUh. — Went  to  the  English  cemetery,  a  little 
way  outside  the  town.  It  is  surrounded  by  a  large  grille, 
and  appropriately  planted  with  cypress.  The  space  is 
almost  covered  with  marble,  in  every  form  that  the  good 
or  the  bad  taste  of  relations  or  friends  could  devise,  and 
the  near  neighbourhood  of  quarries  could  produce.  The 
tomb  of  poor  Horner  in  good  taste,  and  the  medallion 
much  resembles  him ;  the  inscription  good  in  Latin,  but 
bad  in  the  original  English. 

Sunday,  17th. — Arrived  at  Florence. 

Saturday,  2^rd. — In  the  morning  I  went  with  Mr. 
William  Locke,  alle  Belle  Arti,  to  see  the  exhibition  of 
modern  pictures.  The  portrait  of  Lord  Burghersh's  child, 
by  Lawrence,  into  which  he  has  thrust  the  mother's  head, 
very  like  as  a  portrait — the  effect  is  bad  as  a  picture. 

Monday,  2bth. — Went  out  walking  with  Mr.  Locke  to 
Bartolini's  studio,  and  I  introduced  them  to  each  otlier. 
I  spoke  to  him  of  the  commissions  with  which  the  Duke 
of  Devonshire  had  charged  me. 

Sunday,  October  1st — In  the  evening,  Madame  d'Ap- 
pony,  the  Lockes,  Prince  Jablannowsky  (formerly  Am- 
bassador at  Naples),  and  some  others,  came  to  us.  Madame 
d'Appony  sang,  and  enchanted  everyone. 

Thursday,  12th. — In  the  evening  the  French  Minister's 
fete  for  the  birth  of  the  Duke  of  Bordeaux.  He  had 
the  Quays  of  the  Arno  illuminated  on  both  sides,  from  the 
Pont  de  la  Caraca  to  the  Pont  de  Trinita,  by  posts  sup- 
porting three  lamps,  all  white,  in  the  form  of  a  lily ; 
and  upon  the  river  four  large  boats,  illuminated  in  the 
same  manner,  rowing  about  two  bands  of  music.  All 
this  produced  a  charming  effect ;  but  the  exterior  of  the 
fete  was  more  brilliant  than  the  interior.  The  company 
were  chiefly  Enghsh.     Lord  Burgliersh  had  given  a  list 


1820]  LETTERS    FROM    HOME.  231 

of  113  to  be  invited;  but  they  did  not  make  a  brilliant 
ball.  From  the  Court  of  Tuscany  there  were  only  the 
Grand  Duke  and  the  little  Gobba ;  the  others  were  ill ; 
and  the  Florentine  beauties  would  not  leave  their  village 
attire  and  have  new  dresses  at  this  season.  The  Flo- 
rentine dancing  gentlemen  were  not  there  either.  Lady 
Burghersh  and  Madame  de  Boutourlin  received  the  Court 
and  ladies. 

Saturday^  lith. — We  went  to  the  Gallery  with  Cico- 
quera,  to  see  the  cameos.  We  saw  them  all,  in  the  most 
ao;reeable  manner,  in  a  small  drawinoj-room  belono-inor  to 
the  Comte  Alessandre,  the  Director-General  of  the  Gal- 
lery—  a  very  gentlemanlike  man,  and  very  learned.  The 
collection  appeared  to  me  finer  in  stones  than  in  gems. 
Mr.  P.  Knight  and  the  Duke  of  Devonshire  have  both 
some  quite  as  good. 

Monday^  l^th. — In  the  morning  we  went  to  Bartolini's, 
to  see  the  copy  of  the  Venus  for  the  Duke  of  Devon- 
shire, and  the  Nymph  of  the  Peri,  of  which  I  had  seen 
the  model  there  three  years  ago. 

Friday^  20th. — In  the  morning  to  the  Gallery,  with 
Mr.  Locke,  Cicoquera,  and  •  Marie  Bartolini,  to  see  the 
drawings  of  the  old  masters  up  to  EafFaelle,  his  included. 
It  is  not  possible  to  pass  three  hours  more  delightfully 
than  in  seeinsj  these  remarkable  drawing-s  with  two  men 
so  deeply  read,  and  with  such  good  taste  in  the  fine 
arts. 

Saturday,  21st — Letters  from  England,  bringing  the 
news  of  the  renewing  of  the  Queen's  trial ;  a  letter  from 
Lady  Hardwicke,  with  the  account  of  Lady  Charlotte's 
[Lindsay]  examination. 

Tuesday,  2ith. — In  the  evening  to  Madame  de  Bou- 
tourhn.  We  talked  a  great  deal  of  their  flight  from 
Moscow,  of  the  burning,  the  incessant  rain,  &c. 


232  MISS   BERRY'S   JOURNAL.  [1820 

From  Miss  Berry  to  the  Duke  of  Devonshire. 

Florence,  22nd  October  1820. 
My  deae  Duke, — ....     Your  vase  at  Bartolini's  is  far 
advanced,    and    he   swears   will    be  ready  for  embarkation  by 
the  end   of  the  year.      I  told  him   of    your   good   intentions 
towards  him  as  soon  as  you  had  received  it,  and  he  has  already 
in  petto   the    idea   of  a   group   which  he    destines    for   your 
order.      I  took  Mr.  Locke  (who  luckily  happens  to  be  here) 
with  me  when  I  went  to  Bartolini's  studio  to  look  at  a  copy  of 
the  Venus  which  he  has  now  ready,  and  which  is,  on  Mr.  Locke's 
authority,  so  much  better  worth  than  mine.     I  venture  to  assure 
you  that  it  is  a  good  copy,  and  the  marble  in  all  the  material 
parts  spotless.     He  asked  for  it  80  louis,  which  we  both  thought 
by  no  means  extravagant.     In  the  same  studio  he  was  at  work 
on  the  figure  of  a  Nymph,  with  which  I  recollect  being  much 
pleased  when  he  showed  it  to  me  three  years  ago  in  the  model ; 
it  is  not  less  beautiful  in  the  marble,  and  we  both  thought  it  a 
very  pleasing  and  original  idea  of  simple  nymph-like  beauty, 
and  regretted  that  it  was  not  yours.     As  it  is  executing  for  my 
friend  Mr.  Morritt,  of  Eokeby,!  could  not  wish  Bartolini  to  fail  in 
his  engagement  with  him,  altho'  he  says  he  must  throw  himself 
on  Mr.  Morritt's  generosity  to  add  50  louis  to  the  original  agree- 
ment for  150L  to  pay  him  for  the  labour  and  expense  it  has  cost. 
From  Rome,  where  we  go  the  end  of  next  week,  I  shall  write 
to  you  again,  when  I  have  visited  all  the  artists  at  work  for  you. 
But,  pray,  in  the  meantime  give  me  a  line  from  England,  where 
your  'public  works  at  present  are  much  more  wonderful  than 
anything  in  Italy.      One  cannot  call  them  works  of  the  fine 
arts,  for  more  coarse  arts  than  are  used  by  the  two  factions 
that  seem  at  present  to  divide  England,  can  hardly  be  imagined. 
Is  it  possible  that  by  such  the  solid  good  sense  of  the  English 
people  can  be  led  into  serious  mischief? — I  cannot  yet  believe 
it.     We  have  still  hopes  of  Lord  Gruildford  and  Lady   Char. 
Lindsay  joining  us  at  Rome,  if  your  ^orc?ships  will  contrive  to 
put  an  end  to  this  disgraceful  trial,  which  you  may  well  believe 
out  of  our  own  country  is  regarded  in  a  manner  not  flattering 
either  to  any  of  the  parties  concerned  or  to  the  country.     But 
on  this  subject  I  have  neither  time,  paper,  nor  inclination  to 
enter.     You  must  have  lately  heard  too  much,  and  I  seen  too 
little,  to  talk  of  it. 


1820]  LETTEE   TO    LADY    IIAEDWICKE.  233 

I  have  heard  of  nothing  from  all  the  last  emigrants  from 
England  but  of  your  magnificences  during  last  spring. 

P.S. — I  must  not  forget  to  tell  you,  as  a  lover  and  protector  of 
the  arts,  that  while  the  quality  of  the  marble  of  Carrara  is  every 
day  becoming  worse,  a  mountain  of  the  purest  statuary  marble 
has  been  discovered,  or  rather  again  sought  out,  in  the  Tuscan 
dominions,  near  Seraviste.  A  road  from  the  mountain  to  this 
little  port  was  begun  by  M.  Angelo,  and  afterwards  neglected  ; 
it  is  now  going  to  be  immediately  completed  and  the  quarries 
re-worked.  I  have  sent  over  by  Sir  C.  Gordon  (Lord  Aberdeen's 
brother)  a  specimen  of  this  marble  to  Westmacott — a  little  bit, 
both  worked  and  polished,  which  will  show  its  extreme  beauty; 
and  Fabroni  (the  person  sent  to  survey  it)  tells  me,  blocks  may 
be  had  of  any  immensity  without  spot  or  vein.     Farewell. 

From  Miss  Berry  to  the  Countess,  of  Hardwicke. 

Florence,  Sunday,  22nd  October  1820. 
Deakest  Feiend, — I  cannot  tell  you  how  much  I  feel  your 
kindness  in  sending  us  the  earliest  possible  account  of  dear 
Charlotte's  cruel  trial  being  over.  I  never  doubted  her  proving 
herself  what  she  is — a  very  superior  person,  both  in  character 
and  abilities.  But  the  circumstances  in  which  she  was  placed 
— the  melancholy  remembrances  they  must  have  excited — the 
fear  of  saying  too  much  or  too  little — and,  above  all,  the  speaking 
impromptu  to  Europe,  is  something  awful !  Thank  Heaven,  it 
is  over.  Your  letter,  which  arrived  yesterday,  brought  us  the 
first  account  of  it ;  Gralignani's  paper  gave  me  at  the  same 
time  the  first  part  of  the  evidence,  and  I  am  just  now  waiting 
in  anxious  expectation  for  a  loan  of  the  last  English  papers 
arrived  here  by  yesterday's  post  to  give  me  her  cross-examination. 
It  appears  to  me  that  the  Crown  lawyers  have  conducted  their 
business  and  examinations  as  ill  during  the  trial  as  the  Ministers 
of  the  Crown  did  before,  in  allowing  it  ever  to  come  to  a  trial — 
a  trial  which  has  done  nothing  but  throw  a  mass  of  odious  and 
disgusting  details  on  the  public,  and,  as  far  as  I  can  guess  at 
present,  seems  likely  to  prove  nothing  but  how  far  a  woman 
can  go  with  impunity  by  law ;  while  its  effect  in  disgracing  and 
lowering  King,  Queen,  Lords,  Commoos,  and  nation,  in  the  eyes 
of  Europe,  is  more  than  you  can  imagine — while,   as  if   to 


234  MISS   BEREY'S    journal.  [1820 

provoke  the  opinions  of  Europe  against  us,  every  public  opportu- 
nity is  taken  of  expressing  the  most  contemptuous  opinions  of 
the  morals  and  manners  of  the  lower  order  of  people  in  other 
countries,  who  are  (I  say  it  with  sorrow)  infinitely  more  moral 
and  regular  than  our  own,  great  crimes  infinitely  less  common, 
and  a  simplicity  of  habits  and  manners  existing  which  have 
ceased  entirely  with  us.  How  this  horrible  business  will  end, 
one's  heart  beats  with  impatience  to  know.  Like  you,  I  am  willing 
to  accept  of  degradation  at  a  cheap  rate.  To  die  nobly  in  this 
case  is  impossible,  and  therefore  it  is  much  better  not  to  die  at 
all.  If  by  throwing  out  the  Bill  and  the  Ministers  together  this 
violent  excitation  can  be  calmed,  I  shall  think  we  get  well  out  of 
one  of  the  worst  scrapes  into  which  John  Bull's  Bull-head  and 
gullibility  was  ever  led.     .     .     . 

I  beg  you  not  to  lend  an  ear  to  all  the  many  and  manifold 
lies  told  in  all  our  papers,  and  many  of  the  French,  of  the 
horrors  and  disturbances  going  on  in  this  country,  where  all 
is  still  (north  of  Naples)  perfectly  quiet,  and  even  there  I 
feel  convinced  that  nothing  but  the  advance  of  the  Austrian 
troops  is  at  all  likely  to  create  any  present  mischief.  In  this 
advance  I  so  little  believe,  from  everything  I  can  learn  here, 
that  we  are  going  to  set  out  for  Kome  on  Saturday  next; 
troops  of  English  having  preceded,  and  as  many  likely  to 
follow  us.  I  had  hoped  that  these  wars  and  rumours  of  wars 
would  have  prevented  Eome  from  overflowing  with  English 
this  winter,  but  I  fear  it  will  be  rather  in  quality  than  quantity 
that  we  shall  fail.  However,  we  shall  always  have  the  houses 
of  the  Duchess  of  Devonshire,  of  Lady  Westmoreland,  and  of 
Madame  d'Appony,  the  Austrian  Ambassador's  wife,  which  will 
make  us  very  independent  of  any  other  society.  ...  I  find 
I  require  less  and  less  every  day,  although  I  own  I  still  like  it 
good ;  but  I  am  sure  I  don't  get  more  fastidious  in  it,  as  I  feel 
I  have  every  day  less  right  to  be  so.  We  shall  leave  nobody 
here  that  we  regret,  except  a  certain  excellent  Madame  de 
Boutourlin,  of  whom  you  have  heard  me  speak,  and  whose 
numerous  train  and  immovable  husband  prevents  her  spending 
the  winter  at  Rome,  as  she  and  we  had  hoped.  Some  agreeable 
foreigners  are  following  us — among  others  a  Comte  Cicoquera, 
who  speaks  much  of  Lord  Hardwicke's  politeness  to  him  at  the 
Duke  of  Gloucester's  visit  to  Cambridge,  and  his  regret  that  he 


1820]  LADY   C,    LINDSAY's   JOURNAL.  235 

could  not  go  to  Wimpole.  He  is  at  the  head  of  the  academy 
at  Venice,  and  is  at  once  a  man  of  the  world,  a  man  of  letters, 
and  a  man  of  taste.  His  wife  was  a  great  beauty,  and  her  dress 
unfortunately  marks  that  her  memory  is  quite  fresh  on  a  subject 
which  may  be  forgotten  by  others.  I  think  you  must  remem- 
ber her  at  Lansdowne  House  one  evening  that  we  were  there 
together.     .     .     . 

Monday,  23rd  October. 

I  have  at  last  succeeded  in  seeing  the  whole  of  Charlotte's 
examination.  I  think  it  does  her  infinite  honour.  The  parts 
in  which  she  was  affected,  no  less  than  those  in  which  she  re- 
mained impassable,  and  answered  with  such  admirable  temper 
and  presence  of  mind  the  cold,  unfeeling  questions  of  some  of 
her  peers,  would  have  provoked  any  temper  but  hers. 

Lady  Charlotte  Lindsay's  own  Journal,  in  letters  ad- 
dressed to  Miss  Berry,  though  begun  previous  to  this 
date  (October  23),  and  continued  as  late  as  the  10th  of 
JSTovember,  require  to  be  read  en  suite,  and  seem  best 
placed  immediately  after  IViiss  Berry  had  heard  of  the 
conclusion  of  Lady  Charlotte's  examination. 

LADY  C.  LINDSAY'S  JOUENAL  OF  THE  QUEEN'S 

TKIAL. 

Some  Account  of  the  Occurrences  in  England  from  the 
Arrival  of  Her  Majesty  Queen  Caroline  on  the  5th  of 
June  1820. 

Wroxton  Abbey,  June  9,  1820. 

My  dearest  Friend, — The  unexpected  though  long-threat- 
ened event  of  Queen  Caroline's  return  to  the  British  dominions 
has  at  leng-th  taken  place.  Her  Majesty  landed  at  Dover  last 
Monday,  June  5th,  accompanied  by  her  attendant.  Lady  Anne 
Hamilton,  and  escorted  by  her  self-created  adviser,  Mr.  Alder- 
man Wood.  She  was  received  at  Dover  with  every  demonstra- 
tion of  loyalty  and  affection.  The  magnanimity  of  her  conduct 
in  rejecting  the  terms  offered  to  her  by  Lord  Hutchinson,  and 
her  undaunted  courage  in  returning  to  England  in  defiance  of 
a  threatened  prosecution,  naturally  impressed  the  minds  of  a 


236  MISS   BEERY 'S   JOUENAL.  [1820 

generous  people  with  a  conviction  that  such  conduct  could  only 
proceed  from  conscious  innocence,  and  a  confiding  reliance  upon 
the  justice  that  such  innocence  was  secure  of  finding  amongst 
them.     But  far  different,  alas  !  are  the  feelings  of  those  who, 
from  a  more  intimate  knowledge  of  Her  Majesty  and  of  her 
present  advisers,  cannot  but  foresee  the  ruin  and  disgrace  that 
she  is  bringing  upon  herself,  and  the  probable  confusion  into 
which  she  is  plunging  this  country.     These  apprehensions  are 
only  more  strongly  confirmed  when  we  reflect  upon  the  spite 
that  urges  her  chief  adversary  to  acts  as  unjust  and  unconstitu- 
tional as  they  are  unwise ;  acts  which,  though  disapproved  of 
by  his  Ministers,  they  have  not  had  sufficient  firmness  to  resist. 
This  injustice  and  weakness  in  the  adverse  party  is  giving  her 
a  boldness  that  can  only  be  well-grounded  when  it  rests  upon 
the  sure  foundation  of  a  clear  conscience  ;  and  those  who  have 
seen  and  heard  much  of  her  conduct  for  some  years  past  can 
hardly  entertain  a  hope  that  she  has  thi^s  foundation  to  rest  upon. 
Striking  the  Queen's  name  out  of  the  Liturgy  before  any 
process  had  taken  place  against  her,  was  the  silliest,  the  most 
unchristian,  as  well  as  the  most  unjust  idea  that  ever  entered 
into  the  mind  of  man  ;  and  this,  besides  giving  great  offence  in 
England,  was,  I  think,  by  its  operation  on  foreign  courts,  the 
chief  cause  of  her  return,  or  rather,  of  her  threatening  to  return  ; 
for  I  do  not  think  that  she  really  meant  to  proceed  to  England 
until  after  she  had  been  joined  by  Alderman  Wood.     When 
Her  Majesty  went  to  Rome  last  winter,  a  few  weeks  after  the 
death  of  the  late  King,  she  hired  for  her  residence  a  palace  be- 
longing to  Lucien  Bonaparte,  and  was  in  treaty  to  take  a  villa 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Rome  for  the   summer  months ;  but 
upon  Cardinal  Gonsalvi's  refusing  her  the  guard  of  honour  that 
had   been  placed  at  her  door  when  she  was  at  Rome  upon  a 
former  occasion  as  Princess  of  Wales,  she  expressed  the  greatest 
indignation,  changed  her  plans,  and  set  out  upon  her  progress 
towards  England,  making  a  considerable  stay  at  Bergami's  Farm 
near  Milan  (the  Villa  Barona),  and  then  afterwards  at  Geneva. 
Gonsalvi,  who  had  been  very  civil  to  her  upon  all  former  occa- 
sions, is  supposed  to  have  been  influenced  in  this  instance  by 
the  Hanoverian  Minister,  Monsieur  de  Red  en ;  and  probably  the 
Queen's   name  being  struck  out  of  the    Liturgy  would  make 
her  be  considered  at   Rome,   as  well  as  in  all  other   foreign 


1820]  .,    LADY   C.    LINDSAY's   JOUENAL.  237 

courts,  as  an  excommunicated,  disgraced  person,  and  that  it 
would  be  an  offence  to  the  British  Grovernment  to  receive  her 
with  the  honours  due  to  their  Queen.  Her  Majesty's  intention 
was,  by  advancing  towards  England,  to  alarm  the  English 
G-overnment,  and  thereby  to  obtain  instructions  for  her  proper 
reception  at  foreign  courts,  and  her  settlement  of  50,000/-.  per 
annum.  Mr.  Brougham  had  had  several  interviews  with  Lord 
Liverpool  during  the  winter  upon  this  subject,  and  Lord  Liver- 
pool had  charged  him  with  a  message  to  the  Queen,  that  he  was 
to  deliver  'personally  to  her  upon  the  first  opportunity ;  but  this 
opportunity,  through  unforeseen  and  unlucky  circumstances, 
never  occurred  till  after  Her  Majesty's  arrival  at  St.  Omer's. 
It  does  not  appear,  however,  that  this  message  by  any  means 

contained  a  full  acquiescence  in  her  demands  ;  for  Mr.  B 

stated  that  it  did  not  very  greatly  differ  from  that  sent  through 

Lord  Hutchinson.     But  if  Mr.  B had  met  her  before  she 

had  been  joined  by  Wood,  and  before  she  had  received  the 
message   through    Lord    Hutchinson    (though    it     might    not 

greatly  differ  in  substance  from  that  sent  through  Mr.  B ) 

yet  the  one  being  delivered  by  a  friend  of  the  King's,  and  the 
other  by  her  own  confidential  adviser,  might  make  all  the  dif- 
ference of  its  being  rejected  with  disdain,  or  of  its  forming  the 
basis  of  a  negotiation,  that  after  many  alterations  and  modifica- 
•  tions  might  possibly  have  ended  in  an  amicable  adjustment  of 
the  points  in  dispute.  Brougham  always  intended  to  have  had  this 
conference  with  the  Queen.  Before  her  arrival  in  England  he 
wrote  this  to  her  himself,  and  charged  me  to  write  to  the  same 
effect,  which  I  did ;  but  the  alderman  was  beforehand  with  him, 
and  left  England  about  the  20th  of  May,  under  the  pretext  of 

business  at  Paris.    B ,  being  then  aware  that  his  real  object 

was  to  join  the  Queen,  and  to  urge  her  immediate  return  to 
England,  wrote  to  me  from  Carlisle  (where  he  was  at  that  time 
engaged  in  an  election  cause),  instructing  me  to  write  instantly 
to  the  Queen,  as  strongly  as  possible  to  warn  her  against  giving 
herself  up  to  Wood's  advice.  I  most  readily  undertook  to  write 
this  letter,  being  thoroughly  convinced  that  Wood's  object 
in  bringing  the  Queen  over  was  entirely  to  give  himself  a 
consequence  with  the  Radicals  which  he  could  not  otherwise 
have  obtained.  My  letter,  of  course,  remained  unanswered,  as 
the  advice  it  contained  was  unheeded.     The  Queen  came  on 


238  MISS    berry's    journal.  [I820 

with  Alderman  Wood  and  Lady  Anne  Hamilton  to  St.  Omer's, 
where  she  was  met  on  the  3rd  of  June  by  Lord  Hutchinson, 
and  by  Mr.  Brougham,  and  James  Brougham  his  brother. 
It  is  to  be  regretted  that  Brougham  crossed  the  sea  in  the  same 

packet,  and  arrived  with  Lord  H at  St.   Omer's.     These 

circumstances  were  really  accidental ;  the  weather  being  ex- 
tremely boisterous,  no  packet  except  the  one  hired  by  Mr. 
Brougham  left  Dover  that  day.  He  therefore  could  hardly 
avoid  giving  Lord  Hutchinson  a  passage  in  it ;  but  their  arriving 
together  gave  an  impression  to  the  world,  and  probably  to  the 

Queen  herself,  that  B approved  of  Lord  H 's  message, 

which  he  most  certainly  did  not."  Indeed,  no  man  of  sense  or 
honesty  could  advise  his  client,  before  any  accusation  was 
brought  against  her,  to  give  up  the  title  and  privileges,  &c.  of 
Queen,  and  to  accept  of  50,000^.  per  annum.  But  the  whole 
message  was  nonsense,  for  Queen  she  must  be  until  she  is  di- 
vorced ;  nor  would  Parliament,  I  imagine,  have  consented  to 
grant  50,000^.  per  annum  to  a  person  who  would  voluntarily 
have  renounced  the  title  and  splendour  of  Queen,  to  sustain 
which,  and  for  no  other  purpose,  such  a  settlement  should  be 
granted.  Honour  and  common  sense  equally  forbade  her  ac- 
cepting such  an  offer ;  but  good  faith  should  have  prevented  her 
from  publishing  a  private  message,  and  prudence,  under  all  the 
circumstances  of  her  case,  should  have  induced  her  to  remain  at 

St.  Omer's  with  Mr.  Brougham  after  dismissing  Lord  H 

and  Wood.  The  extreme  absurdity  of  the  terms  offered  made 
it  the  more  probable  that  they  could  not  be  persisted  in ;  and  if 
they  were,  she  might  have  come  at  last,  attended  by  her 
attorney-general,  who  would  have  been  a  more  creditable  com- 
panion for  her  than  the  one  she  chose.     Her  Majesty,  however, 

thought  otherwise  ;  and  without  apprising  either  B or  Lord 

H ,  while  they  were  writing  to  each  other,  and  disputing 

upon  the  proposal,  she  set  off  suddenly  with  Wood  and  Lady 
A.  Hamilton,  embarked  instantly  on  board  a  packet  at  Calais,  on 
the  4th,  at  night,  and  landed  the  next  day  at  Dover.  The 
Queen  slept  at  Canterbury  on  the  5th,  and  arrived  in  London 
on  the  6th  of  June,  at  seven  o'clock  in  the  evening,  in  an  open 
landau,  the  alderman  sitting  by  her  side.  Lady  A.  Hamilton 
backwards !  She  had  certainly  no  palace  to  go  to,  but  she 
might  have  gone  to  an  hotel ;  instead  of  which,  she  took  up  her 


1820]  LADY    C.    LINDSAY's   JOUKNAL.  239 

residence  at  Alderman  Wood's  house  in  South  Audley  Street. 
Ever  since  her  arrival,  the  house  has  been  surrounded  by  im- 
mense crowds  of  people,  huzzaing,  and  crying  '  Long  live  Queen 
Caroline  ! '  I  have  been  told  that  they  sometimes  add,  'and  her 
son,  King  AustinJ  *  All  who  go  by  are  made  to  take  off  their 
hats  and  to  join  in  the  applause  ;  and  at  night  they  parade  the 
streets,  breaking  the  windows  of  the  houses  that  are  not  lighted 
up,  but  committing  no  further  outrages. 

When  I  heard  that  the  Queen  was  actually  landed  at  Dover, 
I  yielded  to  the  advice  of  my  friends,  and  made  my  retreat  into 
the  country.  The  appearance  of  deserting  an  old  friend  f  is  so 
repugnant  to  my  nature,  that  I  confess  it  was  not  without  some 
difficulty  that  I  resolved  upon  this  measure;  but  I  am  perfectly 
satisfied,  upon  reflection,  that  it  is  not  only  the  safest,  but  the 
most  honourable  conduct  that  I  could  pursue  under  the  present 
circumstances.  After  having  been  so  many  years  in  her  fa- 
mily, during  which  time  I  had  alwa3'S  been  distinguished  by  her 
partiality,  and  supposed  (though  without  foundation)  to  have 
been  much  in  her  confidence ;  having  also,  since  my  resignation, 
been  constantly  in  correspondence  with  her,  I  could  not,  though 
now  out  of  her  service,  have  refused  going  to  her,  and,  if  she 
required  it,  remaining  with  her  as  much  as  she  chose,  or  might 
think  necessary  for  outward  appearances.  This,  as  her  conduct 
for  some  time  past  has  been  notoriously  disgraceful  in  the  eyes 
of  all  Europe,  would  have  been  discreditable  to  my  character ; 
but  even  this  sacrifice  I  would  have  made  had  I  believed  in  the 
sincerity  of  her  friendship,  or  in  the  possibility  of  my  being  of 
any  essential  use  to  her.  I  am  too  well  aware  that  hers  is  not 
a  character  capable  of  real  friendship.  Of  this  I  have  had 
various  proofs  in  her  conduct  to  me,  on  occasions  when  both  my 
comfort  and  my  reputation  might  have  been  materially  injured 
by  her  caprice ;  and  by  experience  I  know  that,  while  appearing 
to  consult  and  trust  me,  she  would  in  fact  be  guided  by  the  coun- 
sels of  mischievous  and  foolish  persons,  as  long  as  their  counsels 
agreed  with  her  own  inclinations.  And  my  remaining  in  London 
without  going  to  her  would  be  giving  a  public  testimony  of  my 

*  William  Austin,  mentioned  before,  the  child  adopted  by  the  Princess 
of  Wales. 

t  Lady  Charlotte  Lindsay  had  retired  from  the  Queen's  service  some 
time  before. 


240  MISS    berry's   journal.  [1820 

opinion  that  would  be  repugnant  to  my  feelings  of  gratitude,  I 
cannot  say  for  the  friendship  she  has  shown  me,  but  for  the 
pleasure  that  she  has  always  appeared  to  take  in  my  society, 
and  for  the  many  pleasant  days  that  I  have  enjoyed  in  hers. 

I  trust  that  my  correspondents  and  the  public  papers  will 
keep  me  au  courant  of  all  that  is  going  on  in  London,  which  I 
will  faithfully  and  regularly  transmit  to  you.  My  dearest  friend. 
Farewell. — Believe  me,  C.  Lindsay. 

Wroxton  Abbey,  June  18,  1820. 
My  dearest  Friend, — The  day  after  the  Queen's  arrival, 
Wednesday,  June  the  7th,  a  message  was  sent  from  the  King 
to  both  Houses  of  Parliament,  stating  that  the  step  that  Her 
Majesty  had  taken  in  returning  to  England  made  it  necessary 
that  papers  containing  an  account  of  Her  Majesty's  conduct 
durino-  her  residence  abroad  should  be  laid  before  them,  and 
that  a  secret  committee  in  each  House  should  be  appointed  to 
examine  into  and  to  report  upon  their  contents.  A  debate  took 
place  in  the  House  of  Commons,  but  they  did  not  come  to  any 
decision  upon  the  Message.  The  Ministers  were  very  powerfully 
attacked  by  Tierney,  Creevy,  Bennet,  and  others  of  the  opposition, 
upon  the  message  sent  to  the  Queen  through  Lord  Hutchinson, 
and  they  made  a  very  awkward  defence.  Canning  spoke  hand- 
somely of  the  Queen,  and  declared  his  intention  of  taking  no 
part  in  the  proceedings  against  her ;  Brougham  made  a  very 
able  speech,  setting  forth  in  the  strongest  manner  the  evils  that 
mio"ht  be  expected  from  pursuing  these  measures  against  the 
Queen  ;  Wilberforce  made  a  speech  to  the  same  purpose ;  and 
these  speeches  produced  a  great  effect.  The  sense  of  the  House 
appeared  evidently  to  be  against  proceeding  in  any  such  enquiry. 
The  House  of  Lords  agreed  to  the  appointment  of  a  secret 
committee,  but  the  next  day  (Thursday,  the  8th  of  June)  Lord 
Kenyon  moved  that  the  committee  should  not  meet  till  the 
following  Tuesday,  in  order  to  give  time  for  some  amicable  ar- 
rangement to  take  place.  Lord  Liverpool  said  that  he  was 
not  warranted  in  saying  that  any  such  arrangement  was  likely 
to  take  place,  but  he  had  no  objection  to  this  adjournment  of 
the  committee,  which  was  carried.  Lord  Lauderdale  and  Lord 
Donoughmore  opposed  the  delay.  The  committee  that  is 
named,  consists  entirely  of  ministerial  men,  except  Lord  Lans- 


1820]  LADY   C.    LINDSAY's   JOUENAL.  241 

downe.  On  Friday,  the  9th,  Lord  Castlereagh  proposed  in  the 
Commons  an  adjournment  upon  the  consideration  of  the  King's 
message,  on  account  of  a  message  received  by  Lord  Liverpool 
from  the  Queen,  stating  that  Her  Majesty  was  willing  to  listen 
to  any  propositions  that  did  not  compromise  her  honour.  Mr. 
Brougham  said  that  Her  Majesty  had  been  induced  to  write 
this,  in  consequence  of  tlie  great  desire  expressed  by  the 
members  of  both  Houses  of  Parliament  to  give  every  possible 
facility  to  an  arrangement.  On  Monday,  the  12th,  Lord  Liver- 
pool moved  for  a  further  adjournment  of  the  committee  to 
Saturday,  as  negotiations  were  actually  carrying  on  with  a  view 
to  render  the  investigation  unnecessary.  He  complained  of  a 
garbled  letter  that  had  appeared  in  the  newspapers,  purportino- 
to  be  a  letter  from  him  to  the  Queen  ;  but  he  added  that  he 
entirely  acquitted  Her  Majesty's  legal  advisers  of  any  suspicion 
of  having  had  any  hand  in  this  fabrication.  Lord  Castlereagh, 
on  the  same  day,  spoke  to  the  same  effect  in  the  Commons.  Mr. 
Brougham  disclaimed  for  himself,  his  colleague  Mr.  Denman, 
and  for  the  Queen,  any  part  in  the  fabrication  of  this  letter. 
The  adjournment  was  agreed  to. 

All    parties    seem  so  thoroughly  aware  of  the    incalculable 
mischief  that  may  arise   from  pursuing   this  enquiry,  that  I 
have    great    hopes    this    matter   may  stop  here,   though    both 
parties  have  gone  too  far  to  retract  with  honour.     The  Kino-'s 
party  will  always  say  that  they  had  proof  against  the  Queen, 
but  were  induced,   for  the   repose  of   the   country,  to   let  it 
drop;  and  the  Queen's  will   say  that,  notwithstanding  all  the 
spite  and  rancour  evinced  against  her,  they  have  never  been 
able  to   bring  forward  any  proof   of  criminality.     They    had 
better  not  have  gone  so  far ;  but  as  I  fear  that  the  further  they 
go,  the  deeper  they  will  sink  into   the  mire,  they  had  better 
escape  with  their  dirty  shoes  while  they  can.     B.  has  written 
to  me,  and  tells  me  that  even  I  can  have  no  idea  of  all  the 
tricks  and  rogueries  he  has  had  to  encounter  ;  but  he  says  that 
he  got  the  sense  of  the  House  so  completely  with  him  in  the  first 
debate,  and  having  kept  it  ever  since,  he  thinks  that  he  shall 
steer  her  safe.     He  also  says  that  he  hopes  she  has   discarded 
Wood  from  her  counsels.     I  wish  this  may  be  true,  but  I  doubt 
it.     Her  Majesty  has,  however,  removed  from  his  house,  and 
is  gone  to  one  belonging  to  Lady  Anne  Hamilton,  in  Portland 
VOL.  in.  R 


242  MISS   BEERY'S   JOUENAL.  [1820 

street.  The  concourse  of  people  that  assemble  round  her  house, 
and  that  follow  her  carriage  when  she  goes  out,  continues  to  be 
as  great  as  ever ;  but  the  visitors  within  doors  are  by  no  means 
so  numerous.  Some  of  her  male  friends — Sir  H.  Englefield,  P. 
Knight,  Mr.  St.  Leger,  and  Dr.  Holland — have  called,  and  some 
few  of  the  opposition — Sir  R.  Wilson,  Sir  F.  Burdett,  Mr.  Bennet, 
&c. ;  but  none  of  the  great  guns — no  Lords  Grey,  Lansdowne, 
nor  Holland,  which  I  rather  wonder  at.  Lord  and  Lady  Tavistock 
have  left  their  names ;  the  Queen  having  always  been  particularly 
kind  to  Lady  Tavistock  from  the  time  she  was  a  child,  made 
her  probably  feel  this  attention  indispensable ;  but  I  have  not 
heard  of  any  other  woman  of  fashion  who  has  called  except  Mrs. 
Damer,  who  I  imagine  thought  this  visit  a  respect  due  to  the 
station  of  a  Queen  against  whom  nothing  has  as  yet  been  proved. 
The  only  inconvenience  that  may  result  to  her  is,  that  no  other 
woman  of  character  (except  Lady  T.)  having  made  this  visit,  it 
acquires  greater  consequence  than  should  naturally  belong  to  so 
simple  an  action,  and  she  will  be  reckoned  a  decided  partizan 
of  the  Queen's,  when  she  probably  only  disapproves  of  the  pro- 
ceedings against  her.  On  the  16th,  Lord  Liverpool  moved  in 
the  Lords  for  a  further  adjournment  of  the  meeting  of  the 
secret  committee,  and  Lord  Holland  moved  for  a  repeal  of  the 
Marriage  Act,  stating  that  as  the  King's  marriage  was  concluded 
under  the  influence  of  this  Act,  it  might  be  considered  as  com- 
pulsory, and  be  dissolved  without  disgrace  to  either  of  the  parties. 
Lord  Liverpool  said  that  he  should  oppose  the  repeal  through 
every  step  of  the  business.  Lord  Castlereagh,  in  the  Commons, 
proposed  further  adjournment  of  the  consideration  of  the  King's 
message  to  the  following  Monday,  but  stated  that  no  further  ad- 
journment should  be  proposed  after  this.  Brougham  agreed  as 
to  the  propriety  of  not  adjourning  beyond  Monday,  unless  some 
unforeseen  accident  should  occur  to  make  a  further  delay  neces- 
sary. The  Government  were  much  alarmed  last  Thursday  (the 
15th),  by  an  appearance  of  mutiny  in  the  1st  battalion  of  the 
3rd  Regiment  of  Guards ;  it  is  quelled,  and  the  mutineers  are 
marched  oft'  to  Portsmouth.  The  reasons  given  for  this  mutiny 
are  the  hard  duty  they  have  had  during  the  riots  last  week, 
and  their  dislike  of  their  new  barracks  at  the  King's  Mews. 
Wednesday,  the  14th,  Mr.  Farrell,  in  the  Common  Court,  moved 
that  an  address  should  be  presented  to  Her  Majesty  of  con- 


1820]  LADY   C.    LINDSAY's   JOURNAL.  243 

gratulation  upon  her  return  to  England.  This  address  was 
carried  by  108  against  26.  The  Lord  Mayor  voted  in  the 
minority. 

Wroxton  Abbey,  June  26,  1820. 
Last  Monday  (19th  of  June)  the  Ministers  in  both  Houses  of 
Parliament  announced  that  the  negotiation  between  the  Queen 
and  the  Grovernment  was  at  a  stand,  and  they  laid  the  docu- 
ments of  the  proceedings  before  the  two  Houses.  It  appears 
by  these  documents,  that  after  some  preliminary  correspondence 
between  Her  Majesty  and  Lord  Liverpool,  it  had  been  agreed 
upon  by  both  parties  that  the  Queen's  legal  advisers,  Messrs. 
Brougham  and  Denman,  should  confer  with  the  Duke  of 
Wellington  and  Lord  Castlereagh  for  the  purpose  of  settling 
the  terms  of  the  desired  arrangement.  It  seems  that  they  have 
had  five  meetings  upon  this  business,  but  have  hitherto  failed  in 
coming  to  anj  agreement.  The  Queen's  advisers  offer  to  give 
up  the  point  of  her  residence  in  England,  but  insist  upon  the 
restoration  of  her  name  to  the  Liturgy,  or  to  her  having  some 
equivalent  for  it,  such  as  instructions  to  our  ministers  at  foreign 
courts  to  receive  her  publicly  as  Queen  of  England,  and  to  pre- 
sent her  as  such  at  the  courts  where  they  reside,  if  she  should 
require  to  be  so  presented.  I  don't  think  in  the  present  stage 
of  the  business  that  she  can  ask  less.  One  can  easily  conceive  that 
the  foolish  step  of  the  Liturgy  cannot  now,  without  awkward- 
ness, be  retracted  ;  but  I  should  have  thought  the  equivalent 
might  have  been  adopted  to  settle  this  matter.  Mr.  Brougham 
declared  that  no  blame  was  imputable  to  the  Queen  with  respect 
to  the  failure  of  this  negotiation,  nor  did  he  impute  any  blame 
to  the  other  party.  Lord  Castlereagh  moved  that  this  subject 
should  be  debated  upon  on  Wednesday,  the  21st  of  June;  but 
Mr.  Wilberforce  giving  notice  of  a  motion  for  the  arrangement 
of  the  unhappy  differences  in  the  Eoyal  Family,  Lord  Giastle- 
reagh  consented  to  postpone  his  proposed  motion.  Mr.  Wilber- 
force requested  leave  to  defer  his  motion  to  Thursday ,^  the  22nd, 
something,  he  said,  having  occurred  that  made  an  alteration 
necessary.  On  Thursday,  the  22nd  of  June,  Mr.  Wilberforce 
brought  forward  his  motion,  which  was  an  address  to  the  Queen, 
praying  Her  Majesty  to  accede  to  the  wishes  of  Parliament,  and 
to  relinquish  the  point  of  having  her  name  restored  to  the 

K  2 


244  MISS    BERRY'S  JOURNAL.  [1820 

Liturgy ;  that  the  arrangement  might  not  be  impeded  in  order 
to  avert  a  measure  which,  whatever  might  be  its  results,  must 
prove  '  derogatory  from  the  dignity  of  the  Croiun,  and  injurious 
to  the  best  interests  of  the  country ; '  that  by  such  condescen- 
sion she  should  in  nowise  be  deemed  to  compromise  her  honour, 
but  to  yield  in  compliance  to  the  wishes  of  Parliament ;  and 
this  address  was  seconded  by  Mr.  Wortley,  and  carried  by  394 
against  124,  the  Ministers  voting  for  it,  and  thereby  confessing 
that  they  had  brought  forward  a  measure  that,  whatever  may 
he  its  res  alt,  must  -prove  derogatory  from  the  dignity  of  the 
Crown,  and  injurious  to  the  best  interests  of  the  country. 
Lord  A.  Hamilton  moved  an  amendment,  '  That  it  is  the  opinion 
of  Parliament  that  Her  Majesty's  name  should  be  restored  to 
the  Liturgy.'  This  was  seconded  by  Sir  F.  Burdett,  but  was 
negatived  without  a  division.  On  Friday,  the  23rd  of  June, 
Lord  Grey  gave  notice  of  a  motion  he  intended  to  bring  for- 
ward on  Monday,  the  26th,  in  case  the  Ministers  jjersisted  in 
bringing  on  an  investigation  that  they  had  themselves  declared 
to  be  '  derogatory  from  the  dignity  of  the  Crown,'  &c.  The 
address  was  presented  to  the  Queen  on  Saturday,  the  24th,  to 
which  she  returned  an  answer,  very  well  expressed  in  words, 
but  in  substance  I  think  most  injudicious — for  she  declined 
complying  with  their  request.  The  gentlemen  that  went  up 
with  the  address  were  hissed  and  hooted  by  the  populace. 
Wilberforce  was  called  Dr.  Cantwell,  and  they  would  possibly 
have  more  seriously  insulted  him  if  Mr.  Brougham  had  not 
accompanied  him  back  to  his  carriage.  It  is  hardly  possible  to 
conceive  anything  more  weak  and  inconsistent  than  the  conduct 
of  Ministers  in  voting  for  an  address  that  cast  such  reflections 
upon  their  own  measure ;  nor  can  one  imagine  anything  more 
rash  and  unaccountable  than  the  Queen  refusing  to  avail  herself 
of  this  loophole  that  would  have  let  her  out  of  the  scrape,  given 
her  50,000/.  per  annum,  a  frigate  to  take  her  where  she  wishes 
to  go,  and  an  acknowledgment  from  the  Government  here  that 
she  should  be  treated  with  the  honours  due  to  the  Queen  of 
England  in  foreign  courts,  which  must  have  been  granted  had 
she  acceded  to  the  address.  But  this  is  what  I  feared.  The 
weakness  of  her  adversaries  makes  her  rash  ;  she  thinks  that 
everytliing  that  embarrasses  them  must  be  for  her  advantage, 
not  recollecting  that  they  may  all  fall   to  the  ground  together. 


1820]  LADY    C.    LINDSAY'S   JOUKNAL.  245 

Wood  (who  still  maintains  his  influence  over  her)  is  supposed 
to  have  persuaded  her  to  reject  the  advice  of  the  address,  either 
from  a  conviction  that  her  innocence  will  be  fully  established 
by  an  investigation,  or  from  a  hope  that  by  throwing  the  country 
into  confusion  he  may  defer  his  own  ruin.     Farewell. 

London,  July  11,  1820. 

On  Monday,  June  the  26th,  a  petition  was  presented  in  the 
House  of  Lords  by  Lord  Dacre,  from  the  Queen,  praying  that 
she  might  be  heard  by  her  counsel,  which  was  agreed  to. 
Messrs.  Brougham  and  Denman,  her  attorney  and  solicitor- 
general,  addressed  the  Lords,  urging  the  necessity  of  a  delay  of 
two  months  to  enable  Her  Majesty  to  bring  her  witnesses  from 
Italy,  and  protesting  against  the  proceeding  by  secret  com- 
mittee. The  meeting  of  the  committee  was  further  postponed 
to  Wednesday,  the  28th,  and  Lord  Grrey  postponed  his  motion 
to  the  27th.  In  the  Commons,  Lord  Castlereagh  moved  an 
adjournment  of  the  debate  upon  the  King's  message  to  the  7th 
of  July,  and  gave  notice  of  a  motion  upon  the  Queen's  commu- 
nication. Mr.  Western  proposed  an  amendment  to  adjourn  the 
debate  upon  the  King's  message  to  that  day  six  months.  Lord 
Castlereagh's  motion  was  carried.  Lord  Grrey's  motion  in  the 
Lords  on  Tuesday,  the  27th,  against  the  proceeding  by  secret 
committee  was  negatived  by  102  against  47  ;  and  the  secret 
committee  began  its  sittings  on  Wednesday,  the  28th  of  June. 
Lord  Lansdowne  having  declined  sitting  upon  it,  Lord  Hard- 
wicke  was  named  in  his  place.  Lord  Hardwicke  said  that, 
although  he  disapproved  of  the  principle,  of  a  secret  committee, 
and  had  voted  against  it  with  Lord  Grrey,  yet  as  the  House  had 
decided  in  its  favour,  he  thought  that  he  ought  not  to  refuse 
sitting  upon  it. 

On  Tuesda}^,  the  4th  of  July,  the  committee  made  report  that 
'  there  is  cause  to  proceed  to  the  examination  of  the  accusations 
against  the  Queen.'     .     .     . 

On  the  following  day  (Wednesday,  the  5th  of  July),  the 
Ministers  brought  forward  a  Bill  of  Pains  and  Penalties  into  the 
House  of  Lords,  entitled  '  An  Act  to  deprive  Her  Majesty 
Queen  Caroline  of  the  Title,  Prerogatives,  Privileges,  and  Ex- 
emptions of  Queen  Consort  of  this  realm,  and  to  Dissolve  the 
Marriage  between  His  Majesty  and  the  said  Queen  Caroline.' 


246  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1820 

So  now  the  die  is  cast,  and  this  measure  is  adopted,  though 
approved  of  by  no  one  ! — disgraceful  it  must  prove  to  both  par- 
ties, whatever  may  be  its  result.  I  only  hope  it  may  not  prove 
very  seriously  dangerous  to  the  country.  The  preamble  to  this 
Bill  will,  I  think,  strike  you  as  being  singularly  worded,  divorce 
being  made  the  consequence  of  degradation,  instead  of  degrada- 
tion being  the  consequence  oi  divorce.  This  I  am  told  is  done 
because  divorce  might  stagger  the  consciences  of  some  of  the 
bishops,  and  of  all  the  saints,  as  a  divorce  in  Doctors'  Commons 
can  only  be  obtained  where  the  party  suing  for  it  can  prove 
their  own  conduct  to  have  been  irreproachable,  and  in  this  case 
an  abandonment  of  twenty-four  years ;  and,  taking  no  notice 
of  the  Queen's  conduct  in  the  appointment  of  Bergami,  now 
brought  forward  for  the  first  time,  would  make  divorce  a  strong 
measure, — yet,  in  my  opinion,  it  M^ould  not  be  comparable  in 
absurdity  to  degradation  without  it :  for,  with  all  due  respect 
for  the  power  of  Parliament,  I  cannot  understand  how  it  can 
deprive  a  Queen  Consort,  who  derives  her  rank  only  from  being 
married  to  the  King,  of  that  rank  while  she  remains  his  wife  ; 
and  it  is  certainly  not  very  respectful  to  our  Sovereign  to  vote 
that  a  person  unworthy  of  the  title  of  Queen  is  yet  worthy 
enough  to  be  his  wife.  But  if,  by  dividing  the  two  clauses,  they 
think  they  can  carry  that  of  degradation  where  divorce  would 
not  go  down,  they  may  be  right  to  attempt  it — and,  conse- 
quently, the  Queen's  friends  should  stand  upon  their  going  to- 
gether. In  one  shape  or  other  I  have  little  doubt  of  this  Bill 
passing  in  the  House  of  Lords ;  but  I  think  it  by  no  means 
likely  to  pass  in  the  Commons — and,  if  so,  the  sentiment  in  the 
country  against  the  decision  of  the  Peers  will  be  violent  indeed. 
Not  only  the  common  people,  but  the  middle  ranks,  and  also 
many  of  the  upper  class,  who  live  retired  in  the  coimtry,  are  all 
warmly  interested  for  the  Queen;  and  the  more  harm  the  Italian 
witnesses  depose  against  her — and  it  is  likely  that  all  the  wit- 
nesses that  can  be  brought  against  her  will  be  persons  of  bad 
character  and  low  stations,  discarded  servants,  &c.,  who  will  pro- 
bably prevaricate  in  their  evidence ;  while  she  will  bring  respect- 
able witnesses  M'ho  know  nothing  against  her,  as  respectable 
people  are  those  before  whom  improprieties  are  not  usually  com- 
mitted, and  who  don't  seek  to  know  more  than  comes  unavoid- 
ably before  their  own  eyes. 


1820]  LADY   C.    LINDSAY'S   JOURNAL.  247 

\STiichever  way  it  may  terminate,  the  Queen  will  not  be  so 
well  off  as  she  would  have  been  had  she  acceded  to  the  address 
of  the  Commons.  If  the  Bill  passes,  she  loses  title,  income,  pre- 
rogatives ;  and  I  am  by  no  means  sure  that  she  would  not  be  still 
more  unhappy  should  she  triumph  and  be  obliged  to  remain  in 
England,  leading  the  same  sort  of  life  as  her  predecessor,  Queen 
Charlotte,  and  surrounded  by  the  same  sort  of  Court.  On  the 
day  that  the  Bill  was  brought  in,  the  Queen's  counsel  desired  to 
be  heard  in  the  House  of  Lords  ;  they  urged  that  as  the  pro- 
ceedings had  gone  so  far,  and  the  Bill  having  been  read  the  first 
time,  that  the  second  reading  might  follow  as  soon  as  possible. 

•  •  •  • 

Friday,  the  6th  of  July,  Lord  Castlereagh  announced  in  the 

House  of  Commons  that  the  coronation  is  put  off. 

The  Queen  may  at  least  have  the  satisfaction  of  having  discom- 
posed his  Majesty's  favourite  pastime.  The  17th  of  August  is 
fixed  by  the  Lords  for  the  second  reading  of  the  Bill.    Farewell. 

Sheffield  Place,  August  13,  1820. 

On  Friday,  the  14th  of  July,  Lord  Erskine  moved,  in  the 
House  of  Lords,  that  the  Queen  should  have  a  list  given  her  of 
the  names  of  the  witnesses  against  her.  The  Lord  Chancellor 
objected,  giving  as  a  reason  that  there  is  no  precedent  for  the 
list  of  witnesses  being  given  in  cases  of  pains  and  penalties.  The 
motion  was  lost,  the  majority  against  it  being  78  to  28.  On 
the  17th  of  July,  Dr.  Lushington  (the  Queen's  civilian)  moved, 
in  the  House  of  Commons,  that  Her  Majesty  should  have  her 
plate  restored  to  her,  complaining  that  it  had  been  refused 
upon  her  appljdng  for  it  at  the  Lord  Chamberlain's  office.  Lord 
Castlereagh  in  answer,  stated  that  this  plate  belonged  to  the 
Crown,  and  was  only  appropriated  to  the  Queen's  use  during 
her  residence  at  Kensington  Palace.  Dr.  Lushington  withdrew 
his  motion.  A  motion  of  Mr.  Favell's,  in  the  Common  Council, 
was  carried,  for  petitioning  both  Houses  of  Parliament  to  stop 
the  proceedings  against  the  Queen.  This  petition  was  presented 
by  Lord  Erskine,  in  the  House  of  Lords,  on  the  19th  of  July, 
and  was,  upon  a  motion  of  Lord  Lauderdale's,  rejected  without 
a  division. 

I  received  last  Tuesday,  the  1st  of  August,  a  letter  from 
Mr.  Vizard,  the  Queen's  solicitor,  informing  me  that  I  shall  be 


248  MISS   berry's   journal.  []820 

called  upon  to  give  evidence  in  favour  of  Her  Majesty,  in  the 
House  of  Lords,  as  soon  as  her  defence  comes  on,  and  requesting 
to  see  me  upon  this  business.     In  answer,  I  appointed  him  to 
come  to  me  here  (Sheffield  Place).    He  came,  and  took  my  depo- 
sition in  writing.    I  represented  to  him  that  my  evidence  could 
be  of  little  consequence,  as  I  had  been  so  short  a  time  with  the 
Queen  upon  the  Continent,  and  had  quitted  her  so  long  ago. 
He  replied  that  they  must  call  me,  if  it  were  only  to  show  that 
I  knew   nothing  against  her.     To  this  I  had  nothing  to  say, 
and  therefore   I  must  submit  to  this  most  disagreeable  exhi- 
bition, which  may  have  the  disagreeable  effect  of  delaying  my 
journey  to  Italy.     Thank  Heaven  !   I  do  not  from  my  own  per- 
sonal knowledge  know  anything  that  can  criminate  the  Queen ; 
and  I  conceive  that  her  accusers  have  no  right  to  draw  from 
me  opinions  formed  chiefly  from  what  I  may  have  heard  from 
others.     .     .     .    My  brother  and  Lord  Glenbervie  are  also  sub- 
poenaed.    The  Queen  has  received  and  still  continues  to  receive 
very  numerous  addresses ;  many  of  them  have  been  presented  by 
members  of  Parliament.    Some  of  her  answers  at  first  were  well 
written,  but  lately  they  have  given  strong  indications  of  the 
absence  of  her  legal  advisers,  who  are  gone  into  the  country  for 
the  recruiting  of  their  health — Mr.  Brougham  being  very  ill, 
and  Denman  with  the  jaundice.     The  answers  now,  'a  variety 
of  wretchedness,'  are,  I  suppose,  intended  to  please  all  palates ; 
there  are  seditious  for  the  Radicals,  pathetic  for  the  sentimental, 
and  canting  for  the  Methodists — the  productions  probably  of 

Alderman  Wood,  Lady  P ,  and  Lady  A.  H — — .     Doctor 

Parr  has  been  living  much  with  the  Queen  lately,  and  is  sup- 
posed to  have  influenced  her  counsels ;  but  these  answers  are,  I 
think,  too  foolish  to  have  been  his  composition.  A  letter  has 
just  appeared  in  the  newspapers,  addressed  to  the  King,  from 
the  Queen ;  part  of  it  is  well  written.  It  is  very  inflammatory 
and  libellous  against  both  Houses  of  Parliament — consequently, 
very  injudicious  in  this  stage  of  the  business.  The  author  is  not 
known ;  some  say  it  is  Cobbett's,  but  I  do  not  think  that  it  is 
quite  in  his  style ;  others  give  it  t^  a  Mr.  Fellows,  a  Unitarian 
preacher.  .  .  .  Her  Majesty  has  lately  taken  Erandenburgh 
House  for  her  villa,  and  Lady  Francis's  house,  until  the 
Grovernment  find  her  some  other,  which  I  suppose  they  will 
speedily  do,  as    Lady  Francis's  house  is  next  door  to   Lord 


1820]  LADY    C.    LINDSAY'S   JOURNAL.  249 

Castlereagh's.  A  party  of  Italian  witnesses  that  arrived  in 
England  some  weeks  since,  were  so  ill-used  by  the  populace  at 
Dover  that  the  Grovernment  had  been  obliged  to  send  them  to 
Holland,  to  be  kept  there  in  safety  until  they  are  wanted  to  give 
their  evidence.  It  is  disgraceful  to  the  country  that  witnesses 
on  either  side  should  meet  with  such  treatment,  and  it  has  pro- 
duced great  inconvenience ;  for  in  order  to  protect  these  wit- 
nesses, when  they  return  here  for  the  trial,  from  the  resentment 
of  the  people,  they  are  to  be  kept  all  together  in  a  Grovernment 
house  in  Cotton  Garden,  close  to  the  House  of  Lords.  So  those 
who  shall  have  been  examined,  and  those  who  are  about  to  be 
examined,  will  have  every  opportunity  of  conversing  together ; 
and  it  is  scarcely  possible  that  they  will  not  talk  upon  the 
subject  that  must  be  uppermost  in  their  thoughts.      Farewell. 

St.  James's  Place,  August  29,  1820. 

The  proceedings  against  the  Queen  in  the  House  of  Lords 
commenced  on  the  17th  of  August;  but  I  shall  say  nothing 
about  them  in  this  letter,  because  I  mean  to  give  you  an  un- 
interrupted precis  of  them  when  the  counsel  for  the  Bill  shall 
have  closed  their  case.  I  shall  now  only  relate  my  own  adven- 
tures, as  far  as  they  have  any  reference  to  Her  Majesty. 

I  came  to  my  brother's,  in  St.  James's  Place,  on  the  20th  of 
this  month.  I  am  not  obliged  to  be  in  London  during  this  stage 
of  the  business,  as  my  turn  does  not  come  till  the  defence;  but 
the  matter  is  too  interesting  for  me  not  to  wish  to  be  upon  the 
spot,  and,  besides  my  anxiety  about  public  affairs,  I  felt  much 
impatience  to  see  our  friends  Gell  and  Craven,  who  arrived  in 
England  a  few  days  ago.  They  are  looking  well,  and  in  good 
spirits,  but  poor  Gell  is  quite  crippled  by  the  gout.  His 
coming  from  Italy  at  this  time,  and  for  this  occasion,  is  as  great 
a  sacrifice  to  gratitude  as  ever  man  made.  His  crippled  state 
would  have  given  him  a  valid  excuse  for  not  coming,  as  he  is, 
in  fact,  entirely  unable  to  perform  the  functions  of  Chamberlain ; 
and  his  interest,  in  a  worldly  point  of  view,  may  in  all  proba- 
bility suffer  from  this  step— for  his  warmth  of  heart,  together 
with  his  imprudence,  will,  I  doubt  not,  get  him  into  scrapes 
before  the  end  of  this  business,  and  passing  the  winter  in  a  cold 
climate,  or  taking  a  long  winter  journey  back  to  Italy,  will  be 
complete  discomfort  to  him.     But  having  continued  to  receive 


250  MISS   BEKRY's   journal.  [1820 

his  appointments  of  2001.  per  annum  since  his  resignation,  in 
1815,  he  thinks  himself  bound  to  do  all  in  his  power  to  show 
his  gratitude  to  his  former   mistress.     Craven   accompanying 
Gell  is  entirely  an  act  of  friendship  to  him,  and  to  serve  him  as 
a  second  pair  of  legs,  for  he  is  not  under  the  same  tie  of  grati- 
tude to  the  Queen.     I  did  not  wish  that   my  being  in  town 
should  be  generally  known,  and  especially  not  to  Her  Majesty, 
for   the    reasons    stated    in    a    former    letter ;    but    Gell    was 
charged  by  her  with  a  message  inviting  me  to  dine  at  Branden- 
burgh  House  on  the  following  Sunday,  August  the  27th.    .    .    . 
I  felt  a  considerable  degree  of  doubt  whether  Her  Majesty  ideally 
wished  to  see  me,  or  whether  she  invited  me  out  of  complaisance 
to  Gell    .     .     ,    and  having  been  told  that  the  Queen  had  sent 
a  message  by  Dr.  Lushington  to  Lady  Elizabeth  Forbes*  (whose 
situation  was  exactly  similar  to  my  own),  saying,  that  as  she  was 
subpoenaed  as  a  witness  for  her,  she  thought  it  most  prudent  for 
them  jiot  to  meet  until  after  her  evidence  had  been  given,  .  .  . 
I  wrote  very  respectfully,  submitting  to  Her  Majesty  whether 
it  might  not  be  more  proper  for  me  to  defer  paying  my  duty 
until  after  I  had  given  my  evidence.     In  answer  to  this  I  got  a 
note,  not  from  the  Queen  herself,  but  one  from  Dr.  Lushington 
to  her,  stating  that,  in  answer  to  Her  Majesty's  question,  he  gave 
it  as  his  opinion  that  the  rank  and  high  character  of  Lady  C. 
Lindsay  would  prevent  any  prejudice  attaching  to  her  evidence, 
from  whatever  intercourse  Her  Majesty  might  choose  to  have 
with  her.    I  had  now  nothing  for  it  but  to  comply  as  civilly  as 
possible.    The  next  day  (Monday,  the  28th)  I  was  appointed  to 
go  to  St.  James's  Square  to  meet  the  Queen  on  her  return  from 
the  House  of  Lords.     The  square  Avas,  as  usual,  crowded  with 
people,  so  completely  that  you  might  have  walked  upon  their 
heads,  and  this  crowd  was  by  no  means  composed  of  the  lowest 
ra,bble,  but    of    very    creditable  decent-looking  people ;    they 
cheered  me  loudly  as  I  went  into  the  house,  which  made  my 
proud  spirit  feel  rather  indignant.     Upon  entering  the  room, 
I    found    the   Queen    at  dinner,    with    Lady  Anne    Hamilton, 
Lieutenant  Hownham,  and  Alderman  Wood.     She  received  me 
with  the  most  cold  civility  and  affected  stateliness.    I  knelt 
down  to  kiss  her  hand,  which  she  did  not  prevent  by  saluting 
me,  as  in  etiquette  she  ought  to  have  done  to  an  earl's  daughter ; 

*  Daughter  of  the  Earl  of  Granard. 


1820]  LADY   C.    LINDSAY'S   JOURNAL.  251 

but  this  was  perhaps  imintentional ;  as  I  had  no  recollection  of 
this  etiquette,  she  might  also  have  forgotten  it,  but  she  might  have 
remembered  (what  at  this  moment  was  strong  in  my  mind)  our 
former  intimacy  !  I  must  confess  my  weakness  ;  the  recollection 
of  past  times,  with  a  sort  of  undefinable  sentiment  that  had 
made  me  both  dread  and  wish  to  see  her,  deprived  me  of  my 
presence  of  mind  for  a  few  moments,  and  nearly  overcame  me  ! 
Her  entire  composure  soon  restored  mine,  and  her  overstrained 
dignity  rather  disposed  me  to  laugh.  After  she  had  presented 
Lieutenant  Hownham  to  me,  she  said,  '  I  need  not  introduce 
Alderman  Wood,  as  he  is  an  old  friend  of  yours.'  During  the 
dinner  the  conversation  was  carried  on  with  great  formality  and 
respect  on  my  side,  and  with  constrained  civility  on  hers.  She 
told  me  of  her  meeting  with  you  at  Geneva,  and  of  the  bad 
account  you  had  given  her  of  my  health.  This  meal  was 
enlivened  only  by  a  little  sort  of  sotto  voce  flirtation  between 
the  Alderman  and  Lady  Anne  upon  speculations  in  a  lead  mine. 
We  were,  however,  soon  relieved  from  this  uneas}''  state  of 
society  by  the  arrival  of  an  address  from  the  Ward  of  Cripple- 
gate  Without.  It  was  brought  up  by  at  least  200  persons.  We 
retired  into  a  back-room  to  take  coffee  while  they  were  arranging 
themselves  in  the  great  front  drawing-room,  which  could  scarcely 
hold  them.  The  Alderman  came  to  inform  us  when  they  were 
ready.  He  held  a  paper  (the  answer  to  the  address)  in  his 
hand.  The  Queen  asked  whether  this  answer  was  a  long  one. 
He  replied  that  it  was  not  very  short.  '  Then  you  please  read 
it  yourself,'  said  she ;  from  which  I  conjecture  that  Her  Majesty 
seldom  sees  her  answers  till  they  appear  in  the  newspapers.  I 
was  called  into  the  room  to  stand  by  the  Queen  while  they  read 
the  address  to  her,  which  the  orator  informed  us  was  from  the 
'  Ousoldurs  and  Hinahitants  of  Cripplegate  Without.'  It  was 
long,  and  so  was  the  Alderman's  answer,  which  he  did  not  read 
the  better  for  having  written  it.  This  was  one  in  the  seditious 
line,  assuring  the  Cripplegatia7is  that  the  King,  Lords,  and 
Commons  have  little  to  do  with  the  Constitution  of  Great 
Britain ! 

After  this  Her  Majesty  ordered  her  carriage  to  take  her  back 
to  Brandenburgh  House,  and  I  went  home  with  my  mind  much 
relieved  upon  the  whole  by  having  made  this  visit,  as  I  think 
that  I  shall  not  be  required  to  make  another ;  and  the  manner 


252  MISS    BEERY'S    JOURNAL.  [1820 

in  which  I  was  received  has  entirely  quieted  the  little  qualms  of 
tenderness  and  gratitude  with  which  I  was  now  and  then  troubled; 
still,  if  my  visit  can  produce  any  favourable  effect  for  her  in  the 
world,  I  am  glad  she  has  had  it.  Some  of  my  friends  blame  me 
for  going  at  all,  but  I  don't  feel  dissatisfied  with  myself,  and  I 
hope  you  will  not  be  dissatisfied  with  me.    Farewell,  &c. 

My  brother  thinks  that  I  have  been  quite  right  in  going  to 
the  Queen.  He  attends  the  House  of  Lords  every  day  to  have 
bif  name  called  over,  but  never  stays  to  hear  the  evidence,  not 
thinking  it  right  to  do  so,  being  himself  a  witness — so  he  will  of 
course  not  vote.  This,  they  say,  is  an  unnecessary  scruple,  for 
as  a  peer  he  is  exempted  from  this  rule ;  but  he  is  glad  to  get 
rid  of  the  attendance  and  to  avoid  his  vote. 

Counsel  for  the  Bill.  Counsel  against  the  Bill. 

The  King's  Attorney-general,      The  Queen's  Attorney-general, 
Gifford  ;  Brougham  : 


o 


The    King's    Solicitor-general,      The  Queen's  Solicitor-general, 

Copley ;  Denman  ; 

Dr.  Adams,  I>r.  Lushington, 

Mr.  Park,  Mr.  Williams, 

Sir  Christopher  Eobinson.  Mr.  Tindal, 

Mr.  Wilde. 

The  House  of  Lords  met  on  Thursday,  the  17th  of  August, 
1820. 

After  calling  over  the  names,  the  Duke  of  Leinster  moved 
that  the  order  of  the  day  for  proceeding  against  the  Queen  by  a 
Bill  of  Pains  and  Penalties  be  rescinded.  The  House  divided : 
for  the  motion,  41  ;  against  it,  260.  Lord  Grey  said  that  a 
Bill  of  Pains  and  Penalties  could  only  be  expedient  where  the 
law  could  not  reach  the  offence  alleged  to  be  committed  any 
other  way.  He  moved  that  the  opinion  of  the  judges  should  be 
taken  as  to  whether  the  offence  of  which  Her  Majesty  is  accused 
be  high  treason.  The  judges  were  consulted,  and  pronounced  it 
not  to  be  high  treason.  The  Queen's  Attorney-general,  Mr. 
Brougham,  then  made  a  most  eloquent  and  powerful  speech 
against  the  principle  of  the  Bill.  The  Queen  herself  was  in  the 
House  of  Lords,  attended  by  her  lady  of  the  bedchamber.  Lady 
Anne  Hamilton,  and  Keppel  Craven,  who  officiated  as  chamber- 
lain in  the  place  of  Gell.     She  was  much  cheered  and  applauded 


1820]  LADY   C.    LINDSAY's   JOURNAL.  253 

by  the  populace  as  she  went  down  and   returned   from   the 
House,  but  there  was  no  riot. 

Friday,  August  I8th. — The  King's  Attorney  and  Solicitor- 
generals,  Giiford  and  Copley,  and  the  Queen's  Attorney  and  Solici- 
tor-generals, Brougham  and  Denman,spoke  in  the  House  of  Lords 
for  and  against  the  principle  of  the  Bill.  Brougham  stated,  and 
proved  by  various  precedents,  that  any  person  may  be  subjected 
to  impeachment  for  acts  that  are  not  offences  by  law,  aa  well  as 
for  those  that  are  offences  by  law.  Lord  Grey  said  that  the 
arguments  of  Her  Majesty's  counsel  had  produced  so  strong  an 
impression  on  his  mind  that  he  wished  for  time  to  give  them  due 
consideration  before  he  could  agree  to  the  necessity  of  proceed- 
ing by  this  Bill. 

Saturday,  August  I9th. — Lord  Grrey  moved  that  they  should 
proceed  by  impeachment.  The  House  divided  :  179  against 
the  motion,  and  64  for  it.  Had  the  motion  for  impeach- 
ment been  carried,  I  think  the  Queen  would  have  been  quite 
saved  harmless.  A  majority  of  the  peers  would,  I  believe,  vote 
for  her  degradation,  provided  the  evidence  against  her  would 
give  any  colour  to  their  doing  so,  and  many  probably  would 
vote  for  divorce ;  but  I  imagine  few  would  be  found  to  vote  for 
beheading  her,  which  must  naturally  be  the  consequence  of  im- 
peachment, in  case  she  is  pronounced  guilty.  Lord  King 
and  Lord  Calthorpe  both  moved  against  proceeding  by  a  Bill  of 
Pains  and  Penalties,  but  lost  their  motions.  The  Attorney- 
general  then  opened  his  charge.  He  made  various  mistakes  in 
dates  and  little  particulars  respecting  Her  Majesty's  attendants, 
but  he  brought  forward  some  very  strong  circumstances. 

Monday,  2\st. — The  Attorney-general  concluded  his  charge 
this  day ;  and  Theodore  Majoochi,  formerly  a  servant  of  the 
Queen's,  and  I  believe  a  cousin  of  Bergami's,  was  brought  for- 
ward as  a  witness.  Upon  his  entrance,  the  Queen  fixed  her  eyes 
upon  him,  started  up,  clenched  her  fists,  and  screamed  out — 
'  What !  Teodore ! '  and  then  rushed  out  of  the  House,  to  the 
astonishment  of  all  present  and  of  her  own  attendants,  who 
followed  after  as  fast  as  they  could,  keeping  their  madness  in  the 
background.  I  cannot  make  out  the  meaning  of  this  exhibition, 
for  it  must  have  been  done  to  produce  stage  effect,  as  she  knew 
before  she  went  down  to  the  House  of  Lords  that  Theodore 
Majoochi  was  to  be  examined  as  a  witness  against  her;  but. 


254  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1820 

whatever  was  the  intention,  the  effect  was  not  favourable,  as  it 
gave  the  impression  of  her  being  much  alarmed  at  his  evidence, 
and  I  fear  that  on  the  wrong  side  of  fifty  a  woman  does  not 
create  much  interest  by  being  in  a  passion. 

Tuesday,  22nd. — Majoochi  was  examined  and  cross-examined 
again  to-day ;  people  see  and  hear  according  to  their  politics  and 
their  wishes.  The  Government  people  declare  that  he  was  per- 
fectly consistent  in  his  evidence,  but  Gell  and  Craven  assure 
me  that  he  was  evidently  perjured.  I  think  that  he  did  not 
choose  to  remember  me,  for  as  I  was  the  only  lady  who  accom- 
panied the  Queen  in  her  carriage  from  Naples  to  Civita  Vecchia, 
it  was  extraordinary  that  he  should  forget  my  being  there.  He 
certainly  made  a  greater  impression  upon  me,  for  I  was  so  much 
struck  by  his  bad  countenance  that  when  talking  about  him 
with  Craven  and  Grell,  we  used  always  to  call  him  the  traitor. 

The  House  of  Commons  met  last  Monday. 

Castlereagh  proposed  an  adjournment  for  a  month,  which  was 
agreed  to. 

Wednesday,  23rc?. — Majoochi's  cross-examination  was  finished. 
His  answers  became  more  and  more  evasive,  till  at  last  he  said 
nothing  but  '  non  rni  ricordo '  about  matters  that  he  must 
necessarily  have  recollected.  He  is  evidently  a  prejudiced  if 
not  a  perjured  witness. 

The  examination  and  cross-examination  for  the  prose- 
cution continued  for  many  days.  On  the  4th  of  Septem- 
ber is  the  following  entry  in  this  Journal : — 

J  0  U  E  N  A  L. 

The  Marylebone  address,  accompanied  by  Lord  W.  Fitz- 
gerald, Sir  G.  Noel,  and  Mr.  Whitbread,  with  fifteen  carriages, 
went  to  Brandenburgh  House  to-day,  and  proposed  at  their 
meeting  to  raise  a  subscription  of  a  shilling  a  piece  to  keep  the 
Queen  in  England,  in  the  event  of  the  passing  of  the  Bill. 

On  the  7th  of  September  the  Solicitor-general  summed  rip 
the  evidence  for  the  Crown.  Lord  Lonsdale  then  asked  whe- 
ther Lord  Liverpool  had  come  to  any  determination  about  sepa- 
rating the  two  clauses  of  the  Bill^ — degradation  and  divorce. 
.     .     .     Lord  Liverpool  replied  that  bethought  no  such  ques- 


1820]  LADY    C.    LINDSAY'S   JOURNAL.  255 

tion  should  be  brought  forward  till  after  the  defence  ;  that  he 
had  disclaimed  the  idea  that  the  object  of  this  Bill  was  the  per- 
sonal relief  of  the  illustrious  individual  ;  that  its  sole  object  was 
public  justice.  Lord  Grrey  said  that  this  Bill  must  be  considered 
not  only  as  a  Bill  of  Pains  and  Penalties,  but  also  of  divorce ; 
that  if  Her  Majesty  were  to  be  degraded,  she  should  also  be 
divorced,  not  on  account  of  the  personal  relief  to  the  King,  but 
because  a  Bill  degrading  a  Queen  who  was  to  remain  the  wife 
of  the  King,  would  be  in  fact  a  Bill  of  Pains  and  Penalties 
against  His  Majesty.  .  .  .  Upon  the  whole,  it  appears  to 
me  that  the  evidence  would  be  scanty  for  divorce,  setting  aside 
the  power  of  recrimination.  Degradation  by  a  Bill  of  Pains  and 
Penalties  is  an  anomaly  of  which  I  cannot  pretend  to  judge ;  but 
after  the  terms  that  were  offered  to  the  Queen,  through  Lord 
Hutchinson,  this  degradation  must  be  inflicted  upon  her,  not 
on  account  of  her  conduct  upon  the  Continent,  but  because  she 
returns  to  England  and  asks  to  be  prayed  for. 

During  the  recess  I  shall  go  down  to  Sheffield  Place,  and  not 
return  to  London  until  the  defence,  in  an  early  part  of  which 
I  suppose  I  shall  be  called  upon  to  play  my  part. 

On  Tuesday,  October  3rd,  Mr.  Brougham  opened  his 
case  in  the  House  of  Lords  by  a  very  clever  speech.  His 
defence  turned  upon  proving  a  conspiracy,  and  his  com- 
ments upon  the  witnesses  were  in  an  admirable  strain  of 
irony.  He  did  not  make  any  attempt  at  recrimination, 
but  said  that  he  reserved  the  right  of  so  doing  at  any 
future  period,  in  case  he  should  be  pushed  to  that  pain- 
ful necessity. 

Wednesday,  Mh. — This  day  was  filled  up  by  Mr.  Brougham's 
peroration — a  most  strikingly  beautiful  piece  of  eloquence,  that 
produced  much  effect ;  and  then  by  the  beginning  of  Mr.  Wil- 
liams's speech,  which  was  reckoned  a  very  able  one,  though,  of 
course,  it  appeared  cold  after  the  impassioned  eloquence  of 
Brougham.  Mr.  Williams  has  distinguished  himself  particu- 
larly in  the  cross-examination  of  witnesses.     .     . 

Thursday,  5th. — .  .  .  .  My  brother  was  called,  and  it 
was  supposed  that  he  knew  more  than  he  would  like  to  tell. 


256  MISS    berry's   journal.  []820 

He  was  much  badgered  and  tormented ;  but  they  did  not  get 
anything  that  made  against  the  Queen  from  him.  Then  Lord 
Glenbervie  followed,  and  his  examination  was  favourable,  as  far 
as  it  went,  to  Her  Majesty.  Then  I  was  called,  Mr.  Brougham 
having  previously  sent  me  a  dose  of  lavender  drops,  and  having 
desired  the  Court  to  permit  me  to  sit  down.  I  was  first  ex- 
amined by  Dr.  Lushington,  who,  being  one  of  the  Queen's 
counsel,  of  course  gave  me  no  difficulty  ;  and  this  examination 
gave  me  time  to  get  accustomed  to  my  situation,  and  to  hearing 
the  sound  of  my  ow^n  voice.  .  .  .  The  Solicitor-general 
Copley  cross-questioned  me,  and  in  as  harsh  a  manner  as  if  he 
had  been  endeavouring  to  bring  out  the  confession  of  a  mur- 
derer at  the  Old  Bailey.  I  was  getting  through  it,  however, 
better  than  I  had  expected,  when  four  o'clock  struck,  which  was 
the  signal  for  an  adjournment.  I  had  to  go  home  again,  with 
the  prospect  of  a  further  cross-examination  the  next  morning. 

Friday,  6th. — The  business  of  this  day  began  with  my  cross- 
examination,  which  was  more  distressing  and  severe  still  than 
that  of  yesterday.  ...  I  did  not,  however,  flinch  or  falter. 
At  last  I  was  asked  some  questions  respecting  family  misfortunes 
that  had  occurred  in  the  year  1817  — the  deaths  of  my  brother 
Francis,  and  of  my  sister,  Lady  Glenbervie,  which  happened 
within  a  fortnight  of  each  other.  These  questions,  asked  me  in 
such  a  place,  and  when  my  spirits  were  so  much  harassed,  quite 
overwhelmed  me  for  a  moment,  and  I  burst  into  tears  ;  but  these 
tears,  together  with  a  glass  of  water  that  was  brought  me, 
relieved  me  immediately ;  and  then,  in  answer  to  a  question 
that  was  asked,  '  Whether  the  state  of  my  spirits,  in  consequence 
of  these  domestic  misfortunes,  was  the  sole  cause  of  my  resign- 
ing my  situation  of  lady  of  the  bedchamber  ?  '  I  replied,  '  No ; 
certainly,  my  resignation  was  also  influenced  by  the  degrading 
reports  that  had  reached  me,  although  I  had  myself  never  seen 
any  improprieties  in  Her  Majesty's  conduct  while  I  was  with  her 
in  Italy.'  This  answer  seemed  to  give  universal  satisfaction.  The 
counsel  for  the  prosecution  could  not  but  own  that  it  was  an 
honest  one,  while  the  Queen's  counsel  were  equally  pleased, 
because  it  tended  to  strengthen  their  argument  of  a  conspiracy 
to  drive  away  from  the  Queen  all  her  most  respectable  servants, 
by  raising  reports  of  her  ill-conduct,  I  heard  Denman  whisper 
to   Mr.   Brougham,    '  that   was   well  answered ; '    and    Mr.  B. 


1820]  LADY   C.    LINDSAY'S   JOURNAL.  257 

replied,  '  Perfect !  perfect ! '  After  all  this  torment  and  fatigue, 
I  was  rewarded  by  a  very  gratifying  compliment  that  was  paid 
me  by  Lord  Erskine,  who,  in  speaking  of  my  evidence,  said, 
*The  fair  and  candid  evidence  of  the  noble  witness  at  the  bar.' 
These  expressions  produced  a  loud  cheering,  in  which  Lord 
Liverpool's  voice  joined ;  indeed,  I  must  say  that  his  conduct  to 
me  was  remarkably  gentlemanlike  and  good-natured  during  the 
whole  of  my  examination.  But  my  troubles  were  not  yet  quite 
come  to  an  end,  for  it  had  appeared  in  my  brother's  examina- 
tion that  he  had  written  me  a  letter  advising  my  resignation, 
and  offering  to  make  good  the  income  that  I  should  lose  by  so 
doing.  This  letter,  besides  this  offer,  happened  to  contain  some 
comical  remarks,  .  .  .  which  would  by  no  means  have  been 
pleasant  to  hear  publicly  read  in  the  House  of  Lords.  When 
asked  about  it,  I  really  could  not  recollect  what  I  had  done  with 
it.  The  carelessness  about  a  letter  in  which  my  interest  was  so 
much  concerned  appeared  very  extraordinary  to  many  of  their 
Lordships,  who  knew  little  of  the  brother  and  sister — the  perfect, 
honour  of  the  one,  and  the  implicit  confidence  of  the  other.  I 
answered,  that  I  believed  I  had  destroyed  it.  .  .  .  That  if  it 
was  in  existence,  it  would  be  at  Lord  Glenbervie's,  in  Argyll 
Street,  where  I  left  some  few  papers.  ...  I  was  directed 
to  make  this  search,  and  produce  this  letter,  if  I  should  find 
it,  the  next  day.  ^Mien  I  left  the  House  of  Lords  I  went  to 
Argyll  Street,  where  I  did  really  search  honestly  among  my 
papers ;  but  I  believe  that  no  heir  was  ever  more  rejoiced  at 
the  discovery  of  the  document  that  was  to  clear  up  all  doubts 
of  his  right  of  inheritance  than  I  was  at  not  finding  the  object 
of  my  search.  I  was  obliged  to  go  again  the  next  morning 
(Saturday,  October  7th)  to  tell  the  Lords  (what,  perhaps, 
half  of  them  did  not  believe)  that  I  could  not  find  this 
letter.     .     .     . 

The  examination  and  cross-examination  of  witnesses 
lasted  till  the  23rd  of  October. 

JOUENAL. 

Wednesday,  25th. — I  was  in  the  House  of  Lords,  concealed 
behind  Sir  J.  Tyrwhitt's  red  curtain ;  and  I  thought  what  I  heard 
of  Mr.  Denman's  speech  was  very   good — strong,    clear,  and 

VOL.  III.  S 


258  MISS   berry's   journal."  [1820 

concise.      His  voice  is  fine,  but  not  so  flexible  and  pathetic  as 
Brougham's. 

Thursday,  26th. — Dr.  Lushington  spoke  in  the  House  of 
Lords,  and  his  speech  gave  me  much  pain,  although  he  compli- 
mented me  very  highly;  but  he  placed  my  conduct  in  contra- 
distinction to  that  of  my  husband's,  who,  he  insinuated,  had  sold 
my  letters  to  the  other  party. 

Oct.  SOth. — A  very  satisfactory  explanation  took  place  this 
morning  in  the  House  of  Lords  with  respect  to  the  unlucky  busi- 
ness between  my  husband  and  myself.  Lord  Balcarras  begged 
leave  to  state  to  Dr.  Lushington  that  he  must  have  entirelv 
misunderstood  the  conduct  of  Col.  Lindsay  by  the  manner  in 
which  he  alluded  to  it  in  his  speech,  and  observed  upon  the  im- 
probability tiiat  the  same  person  who,  from  motives  of  delicacy, 
had  acquiesced  in  refusing  the  advantageous  and  lucrative  offer 
of  the  appointment  of  Chamberlain  to  Her  Majesty  should  have 
been  guilty  of  the  sordid  treachery  of  selling  his  wife's  letters, 
and  that  wife's  letters  who  had  possessed  sufficient  influence 
over  him  to  persuade  him  in  the  rejection  of  that  offer.  Dr. 
Lushington,  in  answer,  replied  that  he  had  entirely  misunder- 
stood the  matter,  and  sincerely  apologised  for  what  he  had  said 
when  under  this  error.* 

On  Nov.  2nd,  and  three  following  days,  the  second  reading 


*  The  state  of  Colonel  Lindsay's  pecuniary  affairs  obliged  him  to  live  apart 
from  his  wife,  and  he  resided  in  a  very  small  island  near  Guernsey.  About 
four  years  before  this  trial,  the  Princess  of  Wales  had  been  anxious  to  ap- 
point him  her  Chamberlain,  with  a  salary  of  400/.  per  annum,  upon  condition 
that  he  and  Lady  Charlotte  should  reside  with  her  in  the  Palace  of  Radstadt, 
where  she  at  that  time  intended  to  live.  Lady  Charlotte  then  explained  to 
her  husband  the  reasons  why  she  did  not  wish  the  proposal  to  be  accepted. 
Colonel  Bayley  was  at  this  time  Governor  of  Guernsey ;  Colonel  Lindsay 
lived  alone,  and  was  frequently  visited  by  Colonel  Bayley.  The  consequence 
of  this  intimacy  was,  that  Colonel  Lindsay  very  imprudently  confided  to  him 
all  that  had  passed  between  him  and  his  wife  on  the  subject  of  this  appoint- 
ment, and  occasionally  read  him  passages  from  her  letters.  Colonel  Bayley 
was  a  confidential  friend  at  Carlton  House,  and  these  communications  were 
passed  on  and  received  there  with  avidity.  Colonel  Lindsay  had  no  idea  he 
was  communicating  with  an  agent  of  the  King's  until  an  ofter  was  made 
him  of  any  number  of  soldiers  that  he  might  require,  to  work  his  stone 
quarries,  and  of  various  other  conveniences  of  which  he  was  in  need,  upon 
condition  that  he  should  give  up  her  letters.  This  he  refused  to  do,  and  it 
opened  his  eyes  at  once  as  to  the  imprudence  he  had  committed. 


1820]  LADY   C.    LINDSAY'S   JOUKXAL.  259 

of  the  Bill  was  debated  ;  the  division  was  123  for,  and  95 
against  the  Bill.  The  only  chance  of  its  not  passing  the  third 
reading  and  going  into  the  House  of  Commons  seems  to  be  the 
union  of  the  divorce  clause  with  that  of  degradation;  and 
therefore  it  appears  to  me  that  all  those  who  wish  the  Bill  thrown 
out  should  insist  upon  not  separating  the  two  clauses,  and  they 
may  be  fairly  borne  out  in  this  for  the  reasons  given  by  Lord 
Grey. 

Tuesday,  Nov.  7th. — A  protest  from  the  Queen  was  presented 
to-day  in  the  House  of  Lords  by  Lord  Dacre. 

Nov.  8th. — The  divorce  clause  was  debated  and  carried — 129 
for,  62  against ;  the  Opposition  Lords  voted  in  the  majority  for 
the  purpose  of  throwing  out  the  Bill,  and  all  the  Ministers  voted 
in  the  minority  for  the  purpose  of  passing  it. 

Nov.  lOth. — This  day  the  debate  took  place  in  the  House  of 
Lords  upon  the  third  reading  of  the  Bill,  and  ended  by  a  divi- 
sion of  108  for  it,  and  99  against  it — the  majority  in  favour  of 
passing  it  being  9,  which  was  the  exact  number  of  the  Ministers. 
Lord  Liverpool  then  declared  that  he  withdrew  the  Bill.  This 
was  objected  to  by  some  voices,  but  the  declaration  was  in  gene- 
ral received  with  much  applause. 

I  was  in  the  House  of  Lords  all  this  day,  and  in  great  anxiety 
as  to  the  result,  not  only  from  wishing  well  to  the  poor  Queen, 
but  also  from  selfish  motives :  for,  had  the  Bill  passed  into  the 
House  of  Commons,  what  fresh  examinations  and  renewed  tor- 
ments awaited  me  there,  to  say  nothing  of  the  grievous  disap- 
pointment of  not  spending  this  winter  with  you  at  Eome. 
The  Queen  was  also  in  one  of  the  private  rooms  adjoining  to  the 
House  of  Lords,  and  when  she  went  away,  after  it  was  known 
that  the  Bill  was  withdra\vn,  an  immense  crowd  of  people  fol- 
lowed her  carriage,  hanging  about  the  wheels,  huzzaing,  and 
congratulating  her  with  every  demonstration  of  delight;  but 
there  was  no  riot  or  attack  of  any  sort  upon  the  carriages  of 
those  Lords  who  had  voted  for  the  Bill.  I  went  to  the  Queen's 
room  to  offer  her  my  very  sincere  congratulations,  but  she  was 
gone.  I  found  there  Mr.  Denman,  who  was  in  as  high  a  state  of 
excitement  as  myself ;  this  sympathy  united  us.  We  embraced, 
and,  according  to  the  good  '  John  Bull '  notions  of  friendship, 
he  invited  me  to  dinner ;  but  I  was  engaged  to  dine  with  Mr. 
Damer,  at  Twickenham 

s  2 


260  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1820 

And  now,  my  dearest  Mary,  my  brother  has  already  settled 
that  we  are  to  set  out  for  Italy  on  the  15th  of  this  month.  I 
cannot  express  with  what  delight  I  look  forward  to  finding  my- 
self with  you  in  the  repose  of  the  Eternal  City,  occupied  with 
nothing  more  immediately  interesting  than  the  recollections  of 
Eoman  patriots  and  Eoman  emperors !  and  to  your  sincerity 
and  affection  I  shall  apply  as  a  safeguard  against  believing  my- 
self to  be  either  an  angel  or  a  devil,  which  during  the  last  five 
weeks  has  been  a  point  rather  difficult  for  me  to  determine. 
The  manner  in  which  I  have  been  cried  up  and  complimented 
by  the  opposition,  for  having  had  sufficient  presence  of  mind  in 
some  manner  to  defeat  the  designs  of  the  counsel  for  the  Bill,  of 
drawing  from  me  opinions  that  I  conceived  they  had  no  right  to 
extract,  might  have  turned  a  head  excitable  as  mine,  and  per- 
suaded me  that  I  am  a  female  Solomon  ;  while,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  scurrilous  and  abominable  attack  upon  my  evidence  in 
the  ministerial  papers,  and  the  horrible  anonymous  letters  with 
which  I  am  daily  persecuted,  might,  to  a  person  of  my  nervous 
constitution,  have  frightened  me  into  imagining  myself  a  creature 
despised  and  contemned  by  all  the  honest  part  of  the  community ! 
You  know  exactly  all  that  1  have  thought  and  felt,  and  I  trust 
that  you  will  acquit  me  of  any  dishonourable  or  mean  motives 
in  all  that  I  have  done  or  said.  I  have  suffered  much  uneasi- 
ness, terror,  and  perplexity  during  all  this  business. 

I  must  not  omit  to  tell  you  that  Lord  Liverpool,  with  much 
gentlemanlike  good  nature,  put  a  stop  to  the  abusive  attacks 
upon  me  in  those  papers  over  which  he  had  any  influence. 
Farewell,  &c.  Charlotte  Lindsay. 

JOUENAL. 

October  SOth. — Left  Florence. 

October  ^Ist. — Eeached  Castiglione. 

Wednesday,  November  1st. — Arrived  at  Perugia. 

Thursday,  2nd. — We  did  not  arrive  at  Spoleto  till 
seven  in  the  evening.  This  way  of  travelling  '  en  voitu- 
rier '  is  most  vexatious  in  a  line  country  and  at  this 
season.  One  arrives  at  some  beautiful  spot  after  it  is 
dark,  and  leaves  the  next  morning  before  it  is  light.     A 


1820]  ARRIVES    IN   ROME.  261 

clean  inn  at  Spoleto,  and  the  people  very  civil,  but,  as 
usual,  having  nothing  for  us  to  eat. 

Friday^  ^rd. — La  Vigna. 

Saturday,  ith, — The  environs  of  Civita  Castellana  de- 
licious. I  defy  a  painter  to  conceive  anything  more 
beautiful  or  more  picturesque  than  the  rocks  and  the 
woody  ravine  through  which  the  river  runs,  and  over 
which  is  thrown  a  bridge  with  two  rows  of  arches,  like 
an  aqueduct ;  but  we  saw  no  appearance  of  inhabitants. 
One  may  indeed  say  pretty  much  the  same  thing  of  the 
manner  in  which  the  country  is  peopled — or  rather  not 
peopled — as  far  asMonterose,also  a  miserable  Kttle  village. 

Sunday,  hth. — We  at  last  entered  the  Eternal  City, 
after  a  tedious  pilgrimage  of  six  days  and  a  half  The 
Hotel  de  Serny,  in  the  Piazza  del  Popolo,  could  not  lodge 
us,  but  the  host  sent  us  to  a  house  on  the  shady  side  of 
the  Piazza  d'Espagna.  There  we  once  more  descended 
in  Eome,  after  an  absence — after  a  whole  life  ! — of  thirty- 
six  years !  I  do  not  allow  myself  to  reflect ;  I  try  not  to 
recall  even  the  thoughts  of  the  past.  It  is  useless  ;  it  is 
sad.  It  is  my  duty  to  the  beneficent  Being  who  created 
me,  and  in  whom  and  in  whose  will  I  have  boundless 
confidence,  to  occupy  myself  with  the  present — to  try  to 
enjoy  it,  and  to  recover  what  I  can  of  an  existence  which 
has  been  to  me  a  failure. 

We  went  to  walk  in  the  Villa  Medici,  now  the  French 
Academy,  and  all  changed  from  our  time.  The  garden 
of  former  times  is  shut ;  they  have  made  a  public  garden 
of  the  remains  of  the  enclosure,  which  is  considerable, 
and  from  which  there  is  a  splendid  view  of  Eome. 

Monday,  6th. — In  the  middle  of  our  drive  I  could  not 
resist  making  a  detour  to  the  Campo  Vacino,  and  to  the 
Orti  Farneseani.  The  day  was  mild,  cloudy,  and  in 
perfect  harmony  with  the  feelings  inspired  by  the  sight 
of  the  ruins  of  Eome — ruins  of  three  different  periods — 
that  are  still  to  be  traced. 


262  MISS   BEKRY'S   JOURNAL.  [l820 

Tuesday,  1th. — Went  to  the  Villa  Borgliese,  the  beauty 
of  which  much  exceeds  even  my  recollections  of  it. 

Wednesday,  Sth. — A  drive  to  the  Cohseum ;  without 
comparison,  the  most  imposing  remains  of  antiquity.  A 
monk  was  preaching  there. 

Saturday,  11th. — We  went  to  the  Villa  Pamfili,  outside 
the  gate.  In  going  there,  one  passes  the  grandest  of 
fountains — the  Aqua  Paulina.  The  Villa  Pamfili,  hke 
that  of  Borgliese,  far  exceeds  what  I  remembered  of  its 
beauty.  It  is  larger,  more  varied,  and  the  coujy-d'oeil 
still  finer  than  the  ViUa  Borgliese.  The  whole  is  perfectly 
well  kept — waters,  fountains,  jets-d'eaux,  grass-cut  ave- 
nues, all  taken  the  greatest  possible  care  of,  though  the 
master  never  stays  there. 

Sunday,  12th. — To  St.  Peter's  for  the  first  time  since  I 
have  been  here.  The  unique  magnificence  of  its  tout 
ensemble  and  of  each  of  its  details  astonishes  me  more 
than  ever.  In  the  evening  we  received  Canova  and  Mr. 
Eastlake,*  an  Enghsh  artist. 

Monday,  IZth. — At  Canova's  with  Mr.  Crawford;  he 
was  at  his  studio  to  receive  us.  His  works  much  finer, 
more  numerous,  more  striking  than  I  even  expected. 
Went  to  the  Palais  Quirinal,  to  the  private  apartment  of 
the  Pope — to  that  one  furnished  two  years  ago  to  receive 
the  Emperor  of  Austria  upon  his  visit  to  Eome.  This 
last  is  very  magnificent,  and  in  good  taste  a  la  franqaise, 
but  with  a  luxe  of  marble  that  cannot  be  found  elsewhere. 
The  Pope's  private  apartment  consists  of  three  small 
rooms,  fui'nished  simply  enough  in  crimson  damask — one 
for  dinner,  one  for  sleeping,  and  another  to  work  in,  if  work 
there  is.  We  saw  him  get  into  his  carriage — a  carriage 
made  to  hold  four  persons — drawn  by  four  black  horses  ; 
a  coachman  and  postilions  in  blue  hvery  with  red  Bran- 
deburgh ;  half  a  dozen  horse-guards,  tolerably  good- 
looking,  with  black  gloves  and  feathers.     In  the  evening 

*  Now  Sir  Charles  Eastlake,  President  of  the  Royal  Academy. 


1820]  VISITS   ST.    PETER'S.  263 

at  Madame  d' Albany's.  The  Cardinal  Gonsalvi  was  there, 
to  whom  I  was  presented  by  the  Duchess  of  Devonshire. 

Thursday^  \^th. — Fine  in  the  morning  ;  went  to  the 
Colonna  Gardens.  The  Palace  no  longer  shown.  The 
gardens  pretty  well  kept  up — delightful  in  detail,  but  the 
view  of  Eome  less  grand  than  elsewhere.  A  famous  pine,* 
the  finest  tree  of  its  sort  ever  seen,  and  one  that  is  seen 
from  all  parts  of  Eome.  From  thence  to  see  Guido's 
Aurora  on  the  ceiling  of  a  casino  in  the  garden  of  the 
Palais  Euspiglioro.  It  is  in  the  most  perfect  preserva- 
tion, and  has  certainly  lost  nothing  of  the  brightness  of 
its  colours  during  the  more  than  thirty  years  since  I 
saw  it. 

Saturday^  l^th. — Went  to  St.  Peter's  to  hear  the  music 
in  the  Capello  del  Choro,  where  eight  cardinals  were 
present.  We  saw  their  entrance  in  procession,  very  pic- 
turesque from  the  church.  The  music  was  fine— a  double 
choir — and  sung  by  the  soprani  of  the  Pope's  chapel. 
Later,  we  walked  in  the  church ;  it  was  full  of  people, 
and  decorated  and  lighted  more  than  usual,  on  account  of 
its  being  the  fete  of  the  consecration  of  the  church.  The 
effect  of  the  light  around  the  canopy ;  the  processions 
which  were  at  the  confessional  of  St.  Peter's,  below ;  the 
music,  which  was  always  going  on,  and  seeming  to  float 
in  the  air  ;  the  groups  of  people  in  all  the  different  parts 
of  this  enormous  edifice,  and  the  rays  of  a  brilliant  setting 
sun  which  entered  the  windows,  made  altogether  such  a 
striking  effect  that  we  could  not  tear  ourselves  away. 

Monday^  20th. — ^Went  with  Crawford  to  see  the  Palais 
Doria — a  spacious  enclosure,  with  magnificent  old  furni- 
ture, and  a  large  collection  of  very  fine  pictures,  but  so 
badly  lighted,  and  many  so  blackened  for  want  of  care  and 
varnish,  that  they  failed  to  produce  much  effect.  We 
dined  at  the  Duchess  of  Devonshire's,  with  the  two  Secre- 

*  This  pine,  so  famous  for  its  size  that  it  was  known  as  the  '  Colonna 
Pine,'  was  broken  by  the  same  tempest  which  destroyed  Tasso'soak  in  1842. 


264  MISS    berry's   journal.  [1820 

taries  of  the  French  Ambassador ;  M.  de  Lamarre,  a 
Frenchman  (military,  I  think)  ;  Camuccini,  the  painter  ;* 
a  Madame  Kenaudin,  who  sings  wonderfully  well,  &c.  In 
the  evening  Madame  d'Appony  came,  M.  and  Madame  de 
Blacas,  Sir  Edward  and  Lady  Berry,  and  several  gentlemen, 
none  Enghsh  except  Lord  W.  Eussell.  Madame  d Appony 
sang  Hke  an  angel  with  Madame  Renaiidin. 

Tuesday,   '21st. — Went  to  the  Church  of  the   Sancti 
Apostoli.     The  tomb  of  Clement  XIV.,  by  Canova,  placed 
upon  the  vestry  door,  admirable ;  perhaps  the  finest  he 
has  done.      The  figure  of  the  Pope  very  grand.     The 
woman  leaning  on  the  sarcophagus  has  all  the  beauty  of 
the  nude,  and,  at  the  same  time,  all  the  grace  of  beautiful 
drapery.    From  there  to  the  Pantheon,  the  most  imposing 
of  all  the  ancient  edifices  (the  Coliseum  excepted).    From 
there  to  the  Capitol,  up  the  grand  staircase,  to  give  a 
glance  at  the  modern  Place  of  Michael  Angelo  and  the 
bronze  equestrian  statue  of  Marc  Aurelius  in  the  centre. 
Without  doubt,  the  horse  is  unrivalled  in  spirited  action. 
They  say  the  body  is  too  large,  and  the  proportions  are 
not  those  of  a  fine  horse  ;  but  go  to  the  Capitol  and  see 
the  effect  of  these  proportions  and  the  body  !    In  the  court 
called  des  Conservateurs  are  enormous  fragments  of  statues 
which  must  have  been  30  or  40  feet  high.      Is  it  known 
if  these  statues  have  ever  been  put  together  ?     Erected  in 
ancient  times — and  where  ? 

Wednesday,  22nd. — To  the  Castel  St.  Angelo.  Nothing 
— absolutely  nothing — to  be  seen  of  Adrian's  mausoleum  ; 
it  is  only  used  for  prisons,  where  one  is  not  allowed  to 
enter.  It  contains  at  this  moment,  besides  the  garrison 
of  the  galley-slaves,  between  six  and  seven  hundred. 
From  there  to  Monte  Aventino,  and  vis-a-vis  La  Pipe 

*  Vicenzo  Camuccini,  one  of  the  most  distinguislied  Roman  painters  of 
modern  times,  was  born  1775.  He  first  earned  his  living  by  copying  the 
old  masters,  and  afterwards  painted  historical  pictures  of  prominent  scenes 
in  Roman  history. 


-1820]  VISIT   TO    CA^^OVA'S    STUDIO.  265 

Grande.  Here  there  are  large  substructioris,  to  which 
they  give  the  name  of  La  Caverne  de  Cacus  of  La  Scala 
Gemonia,  from  whence  they  throw  the  malefactors  into 
the  Tiber.  All  these  are  tales,  but  they  are  stories  that 
no  other  place  upon  earth  could  create  and  invest  with 
similar  interest. 

Thursday^  2?>rd, — In  the  morning,  a  long  drive  with  the 
Craufords  to  the  Villa  Mattel,  belonging  now  to  the  Prince 
de  la  Paix  ;  charming  view  towards  the  mountains  of  Al- 
bano,  S.  Stefano  Eotundo,  and  St.  Giovanni  Laterano.  The 
Corsine  Chapel  a  treasury  of  marbles.  The  porphyr  sarco- 
phagus of  Pope  Clement  XIIL,  found  in  the  portico  of  the 
Pantheon,  one  of  the  finest  in  form  and  finish  that  antiquity 
has  left  us.  On  returning,  we  passed  through  the  Arch 
of  Dolabella  and  that  of  Galieno.  One  is  surrounded  in 
this  quarter  by  those  grand  ruins  of  aqueducts  which 
astonish  by  the  immensity  of  their  size,  and  delight  by 
their  picturesqueness. 

Friday^  2ith. — Walked  to  Canova's.  After  having 
visited  him  in  his  library,  he  accompanied  us  to  his  studio, 
where  he  is  now  at  work  on  a  colossal  horse  for  a  colossal 
King  of  Naples,  ordered  by  the  Government  to  be  erected 
at  Naples.  From  thence  with  Mr.  Crauford  to  the  ruins 
of  Mont  Palatine.  The  day  was  one  of  those  which  so 
well  harmonises  with  the  view  of  Eome — mild  and  quiet 
— nothing  to  recall  you  to  yourself,  nor  to  the  present 
time  ;  nothing  to  distract  you  from  the  long  and  imposing 
remembrances  that  these  places  cannot  fail  to  inspire  in 
every  thoughtful  being.  From  there  to  the  Thermes  of 
Caracalla.  These  large  masses  of  ruins  and  the  space 
which  they  enclose  leave  all  to  the  imagination  as  to  their 
interior  arrangement ;  there  is  not  even  an  arch,  nor  a 
piece  of  marble,  nor  hardly  a  piece  of  plaster,  to  indicate 
either  their  decorations  or  their  uses. 

Saturday,  2ith. — Visited  Camuccini,  the  first  painter  of 
the  Eoman  school  in  the  grand  genre.     I  like  his  last 


266  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1820 

picture  for  a  church  at  Eavenna ;  it  is  much  better  than 
Gerard's  '  Entry  of  Henry  the  Great.'  Camuccini  groups 
a  merveilles,  but  the  colourincr  of  his  other  Dictures  was 

^  Ox 

hke  burnt  earth.  Then,  to  make  a  picture,  he  makes  a 
cartoon  of  lapis,  of  the  same  size  as  the  picture  itself,  on 
which,  it  seems  to  me,  he  must  waste  all  the  fire  of  con- 
ception and  expression  of  his  ideas.  In  the  evening  went 
to  Le  Baron  Eoden,  the  Hanoverian  Minister.  There  was 
music ;  the  performers,  one  of  the  daughters  of  the 
house,  Madame  d'Appony,  and  a  Madame  Marconi,  the 
most  extraordinary  contralto  voice  I  ever  heard.  She 
sang  formerly  at  the  theatre,  is  German  by  birth,  and  is 
now  married  to  a  German  painter  settled  at  Eome,  and 
only  sings  for  her  friends. 

Extract  of  Letter  from  Miss  Berry  to  Mrs.  Darner. 

Rome,  November  1820. 
.  .  .  My  last  letter  was  from  Florence,  written  four  days 
before  we  set  out  for  this  place,  whither  six  mules  brought  us 
in  six  mortal  long  days  and  a  half,  and  deposited  us  safely  once 
again  in  the  Piazza  d'Espagna,  after  an  absence  of  thirty  years ! 
I  had  much  feared  that  on  my  return  to  scenes  and  objects 
which  had  so  interested  and  delighted  my  youthful  mind,  I 
should  have  had  a  melancholy  assurance  of  the  effects  of  ad- 
vanced life  on  my  mind,  as  well  as  body,  in  the  lessened  plea- 
sure I  received  from  all  these  objects.  But,  on  the  contrary, 
everything  I  have  yet  seen  strikes  me  more  forcibly  than  it  did 
formerly.  I  receive  more  undivided,  more  informed  pleasure 
from  all  that  is  grand  and  all  that  is  beautiful.  The  scope  of 
accessary  ideas  produced  by  all  around  me  is  enlarged,  and  I 
dwell  on  them  in  more  repose  of  mind.  In  short,  nothing  is 
wanting  but  legs,  time,  and  strength,  to  find  inexhaustible  amuse- 
ment in  this  most  interesting  place. 

From  Miss  Berry  to  Lady  Elizabeth  Stuart. 

Rome,  Saturday,  25th  November  1820. 
Dearest  Elizabeth, — You  have  never  been  at  Eome,  and 
therefore  can  have  no  idea  of  the  difficulty  of  finding  time  to 


1820]  LETTER   TO   LADY   E.    STUART.  267 

write  there — at  least  in  the  first  ardour  of  one's  passion  for 
all  the  wonders  around  one.  I  had  very  much  feared  that 
I  should  have  found  this  ardour  sadly  abated  from  my  first 
visit  here  in  my  early  youth.  On  the  contrary,  I  have  found 
everything  exceed  both  my  expectations  and  my  remembrance, 
and  I  have  certainly  a  more  entire  and  undivided  enjoyment  of 
all  that  is  great  and  all  that  is  beautiful  than  I  had  formerly. 
.  .  .  .  I  have  almost  as  little  time  for  writing  as  yourself, 
and  have,  alas  !  no  pretension  to  that  promptitude  of  mind, 
ideas,  and  hand,  which,  luckily  for  your  friends,  gives  you  more 
time  than  anybody  else  would  find  in  your  day.  .  .  .  The 
news  of  the  final  end  of  the  Queen's  business  arrived  here  the 
day  before  yesterday  (the  23rd),  by  the  courier  Carlo  Forte. 
.  .  .  .  I  very  much  rejoice  that  it  has  ended  so,  as  I  am 
quite  convinced  it  is  much  better  for  the  King  as  well  as  for  the 
nation  than  its  ffoins:  down  to  the  Commons.  As  for  the  indivi- 
dual  herself,  it  is  now  that  her  punishment  will  begin.  She  will 
find  herself  absolved  and  shunned ;  her  rights  protected  and  her 
society  avoided ;  her  innocence  proclaimed  and  her  condemna- 
tion irrevocable.  But  what  is  to  be  done  with  the  ministry  ? 
The  world  all  here  think  it  is  to  change  directly.  I  don't  feel 
so  sure  of  that:  but  it  is  nonsense  talking  at  this  distance. 
.  .  .  While  I  am  talking  of  our  sejour  here,  very  ugly 
reports  are  afloat  of  the  movements  of  the  Austrians  and  the 
decisions  of  Troppau.  They  say  that  at  all  events  we  shall  be 
more  quiet  here  than  anywhere  else.     We  shall  do  like  the  rest, 

and  hope  that  our  insignificance  will  protect  us 

Naples  seems  likely  to  be  every  day  more  forbidden  ground 
although  several  English  have  very  lately  gone  there,  and  the 
dear  little,  quiet,  exact  Colchester  pair  are  in  the  midst  of  the 
fray,  and  meaning  to  remain  there.  ...  I  count  much  on 
the  hopes  of  finding  myself  again  at  Paris,  and  with  you,  in  the 
month  of  June;  other  places  to  visit,  Paris  to  live  at — the 
more  I  see,  the  more  I  think  so :  for  those  who  have  neither 
'land  nor  beeves,  nor  the  duties  they  entail  at  home.     .     .     .' 

Simclay,  2Qth. — Went  to  the  Stanze  de  EafFaelle.  I  am 
sorry  to  say  these  divine  compositions  have  suflered  much 
since  I  saw  them  thirty  years  ago — I  mean  in  the  colour- 
ing and  distinctness  of  the  outline.     They  are  altogether 


268  MISS    berry's   journal.  [1820 

much  blackened,  and  tlie  effect  of  the  white  ahnost  lost. 
The  '  School  of  Athens'  has  suffered  the  most,  and  the 
'  Dispute  on  the  Sacrament '  and  the  '  Incendio  di  Borgo ' 
the  least.  I  was  never  before  so  much  struck  with  the 
elegance,  the  grandeur,  the  recherche  of  the  whole  decora- 
tion of  these  four  stanze,  ending  in  a  magnificent  hall. 
The  design  of  the  surbases  all  different ;  tlie  beauty,  va- 
riety, and  admirable  execution  of  the  small  pictures,  imi- 
tating bas-relievos,  of  a  deep  goldish  colour,  introduced 
into  them  ;  every  part  of  the  coves  of  the  ceiling,  and  the 
groins  of  the  arches,  so  richly  ornamented  with  the  best- 
chosen  patterns  of  what  are  now  called  the  fresqiies  of 
Raphael.  The  wooden  carving  of  the  doors  and  window- 
shutters  all  admirably  executed,  and  of  elegant  designs. 
One  can  hardly  conceive  even  now  anything  more  elegantly 
magnificent  than  this  apartment,  in  its  first  splendour. 
The  arms  of  Eovere  (an  oak  torn  up  Quercus  Eobin  for 
Eovere),  Julius  11. ,  is  often  displayed  in  the  stanze,  and 
the  name  of  Leo  X.  on  the  doors  and  windows  of  the 
open  colonnade,  where  are  the  now  almost  effaced  pilas- 
ters. The  late  or  present  Pope  closed  the  arches  with  glass 
windows,  but  the  mischief  was  done  ;  the  steed  was 
stolen.  Were  it  not  for  the  engravings,  one  could  hardly 
make  out  the  designs,  and  never  guess  at  their  beauty. 
The  ceiling  of  the  corridor,  called  the  Bible  of  Eaffaelle, 
appears  quite  fresh,  but  has  certainly  been  retouched,  re- 
coloured,  and  cruelly  hardened  and  altered.  The  archi- 
tecture of  these  corridors,  making  three  stories  round  the 
three  sides  of  a  court,  is  of  Eaphael,  and  very  gracefully 
simple.  What  a  mind  was  Eaphael's  !  What  a  combina- 
tion of  intellect,  learning,  arrangement,  and  powers  of 
imagination  in  the  whole  history  of  sacred  and  profane 
knowledge,  told  in  the  stanze,  to  say  nothing  of  the  ex- 
quisite beauty  and  grace  of  his  forms  and  his  powers  of 
combining  them !  Then  in  tlie  corridors — what  a  playful 
imagination !     How  he  has  combined  and  varied  all  the 


1820]  VISIT   TO   THE   VILLA   ALBANI.  269 

beautiful  vagaries  of  the  ancients,  the  models  of  which  he 
had  seen  in  the  then  newly-opened  baths,  and  rooms  be- 
longing to  them,  since  crumbled  to  the  dust  or  reburied. 
The  grand  Sala,  where  is  the  battle  of  Maxentius,  at  the 
Ponte  Molle,  is  not  Eaphael,  nor  is  the  plan  of  the  decora- 
tion of  the  chamber,  which,  although  very  magnificent,  is 
loaded  and  confused,  in  comparison  to  the  four  preceding 
rooms,  which  appear  to  me  models  of  grace  and  beautiful 
decoration,  as  much  as  of  unrivalled  painting. 

Monday,  27th. — Went  to  the  Villa  Albani.  This  is  the 
last  of  these  magnificent  country-houses  built  and  furnished 
by  the  Princes  of  the  Church,  just  without  the  gates  of 
Pome  ;  it  is  more  modern,  and  in  better  preservation  than 
any  of  the  others.  The  present  possessor,  a  Cardinal 
Albani,  the  nephew  or  grand-nephew  of  he  who  built  and 
finished  it  about  sixty  or  seventy  years  ago,  is  at  the  head 
of  the  police  of  Pome,  and  never  comes  here  but  for  a 
promenade,  and  even  that  rarely.  The  collection  of  an- 
cient statues,  termes,  busts,  basso-relievos,  and  ancient 
columns,  is  quite  astonishing ;  and  not  only  all  over  the 
house,  but  dispersed  in  every  part  of  the  gardens.  The 
gardens  are  large  and  very  beautiful — a  parterre  between 
the  house  and  a  circular  building,  with  a  corridor  orna- 
mented in  the  same  manner,  and  called  a  coffee-house ; 
terraces  from  which  are  views  of  the  Alban  Mountains 
and  the  Campagna ;  with  a  foreground  of  cypresses,  ever- 
green oaks,  &c.,  within  the  precincts  of  the  villa.  I  could 
have  stayed  basking  in  a  winter  sun  illuminating  this  ex- 
quisite view  till  that  sun  had  left  both  me  and  it. 

Tuesday,  28th. — To  the  Thermos  of  Titus.  The  more 
I  see  of  these  enormous  remains  of  Thermos,  the  less  I 
understand.  These  baths,  which  formerly  could  only  be 
entered  on  hands  and  knees  near  the  top  of  the  range  of 
arches,  have  been  so  cleared  by  the  French  as  to  pass 
through  various  large  and  small  apartments  and  long  pas- 
sages, most  of  them  with  considerable  remains  of  painting 


270  MISS   BEERY'S   journal.  [1820 

in  what  are  now  called  arabesques ;  the  passages  coarsely, 
with  httle  ornament ;  some  of  the  rooms  with  a  great  deal, 
and  with  some  gilding  introduced  into  the  ceiHngs  still 
visible.  The  Laocoon  was  found  in  a  large  niche  of  one 
of  these  rooms  which  had  visibly  been  hned  with  marble, 
as  were  the  surbases  of  many  other  rooms,  bits  of  which 
remain.  Although  everything  has  been  carried  away  from 
these  inexplicable  ruins  in  modern  as  well  as  ancient  times, 
heaps  of  fragments  of  statues,  columns,  friezes,  &c.,  bits  of. 
terra-cotta  admirably  worked,  and  pieces  of  painted  wall, 
are  collected  together  under  the  arches  on  first  entering. 

Friday^  December  1st. — Went  to  the  Villa  Madama, 
thus  called  from  Madame  d' Autriche,  daughter  of  Charles  V., 
to  whom  it  belonged ;  it  is  said  to  be  built  upon  the  de- 
signs of  Eaffaelle,  and  finished  upon  those  of  Jules  Eomano, 
who  painted  an  arcade  in  arabesque,  in  the  middle  of 
which  still  remains  the  Medicis  arms. 

Monday^  iih. — Went  with  the  Craufords,  Itir.  Eastlake, 
and  Sotheby,  to  the  Palais  Borghese.  Its  magnificence  is 
wonderful.  Lord  and  Lady  Colchester  arrived  from  Na- 
ples, bringing  the  news  that  all  the  English  had  left  there. 

Saturday.,  9th. — At  the  Villa  Pamfih  for  the  second 
time.  I  had  made  the  custode  promise  that  she  would 
show  me  the  contents  of  sundry  little  boxes  and  coffers 
having  belonged  to  a  certain  famous  Donna  Olympia,*  the 
wife  of  the  Pope's  brother,  and  generally  supposed  still 
more  nearly  connected  with  Innocent  X.,  the  Pamfili  Pope, 
who  reigned  from  1644  to  1655,  and  to  have  disposed  of 
all  offices  and  places  of  profit  during  those  ten  years. 

The  boxes  are  deposited  in  a  round  room  near  the  top 
of  the  villa,  fitted  up  by  the  said  Donna  Olympia  for  a 
music-room,  or  cabinet  of  rarities.  There  are  old  glass 
cases  all  round  it ;  one  contained  works  in  ivory,  another 

*  It  was  presented  by  Innocent  X.  to  tlie  profligate  Olympia  Maidalchini, 
the  wife  of  his  brother,  Prince  Pamfili,  in  1650,  and  was  arranged  from  the 
designs  of  Antinori  and  Algardi. — Murray's  Handbook. 


1820]  DONNA   OLYMPIA'S   BOXES.  271 

in  coral  and  amber,  a  third  in  bucchero,  &c.  &c.  In  the 
lower  shelves  of  these  cases  are  deposited  little  coffers  of 
various  sizes,  having  belonged  to  the  same  lady,  stuffed  in 
there  at  her  death,  in  16 — ,  and  left  there  with  their  con- 
tents ever  since.  Two,  the  size  of  common  bandboxes, 
are  full  of  bundles  of  empty  purses  (not  so  received),  of 
tens  and  twenties  tied  together,  and  made  of  all  sorts  of 
material  except  netting  ;  little  bags  drawn  together  with 
two  strings,  such  as  one  often  sees  used  for  chessmen,  but 
much  smaller ;  dozens  of  women's  single  pockets,  all  of 
quilted  silk  of  various  colours  and  sizes ;  and  some  gloves. 
Of  this  last  article  there  is  a  large  coffer  completely  filled, 
of  all  sorts  and  colours  except  white,  or  long  gloves  ;  the 
tops  of  many  of  the  short  ones  trimmed  with  narrow 
ribbon  in  knots,  &c.  &c.  In  another  Japan  box  is  a  sort 
of  Turkish  or  eastern  dress,  with  large  sleeves  of  crimson 
satin  trimmed  with  gold,  which  has  the  appearance  of 
having  been  much  worn  ;  and  some  coarse  and  coarsely- 
embroidered  sort  of  shirts  with  great  sleeves  to  wear 
under  it,  probably  a  Carnival  dress.  Another  coffer  con- 
tains a  number  of  artificial  flowers,  faded,  tumbled,  and 
all  squeezed  together,  but  not  having  been  badly  made  in 
their  day — chiefly  of  feathers.  In  the  same  coffer  are  a 
number  of  little  pasteboard  boxes,  containing  each  six 
small  wash  balls,  in  cotton,  still  much  perfumed.  Another 
box  is  quite  fuU  of  very  thin  brown  and  some  whitish 
leather,  stamped  in  aU  sorts  of  patterns  and  for  all  sorts  of 
purposes  ;  some  appeared  for  handkerchiefs  or  for  head- 
dresses ;  some  for  covers  of  tables  or  for  aprons ;  some 
were  made  into  purses,  lined,  and  several  glasses  hocales 
were  covered  with  a  sort  of  network  of  the  same  material. 
The  civil  custode  allowed  me  to  take  a  Httle  bit  of  the 
pierced  leather,  hke  a  border  of  lace,  three  of  the  wash 
balls,  and  two  bits  of  the  artificial  flowers.  After  this 
examination  1  rejoined  my  companions  on  the  terrace  ; 
remained  in  admiration  of  the  exquisite  beauty   of  a 


272  MISS    berry's   journal.  [1820 

clear  sun  setting  on  one  of  the  most  beautiful  panoramic 
views. 

Sunday^  17th. — Before  ten  o'clock  in  the  morning  to 
the  Quirinal  Chapel,  where  the  Pope  and  fifteen  cardinals 
were  to  assemble.  The  Cardinal  Tech  officiated.  These 
ceremonies  have  outlived  their  age,  and  consequently  lost 
much  of  their  effect. 

Friday,  22nd. — Went  to  see  the  scava  of  Sir  G.  Talbot. 
But  httle  to  see  as  yet ;  he  has  found  a  marble  stah-case 
which  led  to  the  hippodrome ;  there  are  three  or  four 
steps  beginning  to  appear.  In  the  evening  I  went,  at 
eight  o'clock,  to  Pauline's  (Princess  Borghese)  ;  she  occu- 
pies a  fine  apartment  in  the  Palais  Borghese,  well  heated. 
A  pretty  person,  no  longer  young ;  but  still  preserves  her 
looks,  giving  herself  as  much  the  airs  of  a  princess  as  she 
can  venture  to  do — rising  a  very  little  when  anyone  enters, 
&c.  Several  Eoman  ladies  there,  and  about  twentv  eren- 
tlemen.  We  had  music ;  I  was  at  her  side  on  the  sofa ; 
we  talked  a  great  deal  of  all  those  of  her  admirers  who 
were  my  friends. 

Saturday,  2^rd. — I  heard  in  the  morning  of  the  arrival 
at  the  Hotel  de  Paris  of  Lord  Guildford  and  Lady  Charlotte 
Lindsay. 

Monday,  2hth. — Went  to  the  Capella  Quirinale,  where 
the  Pope  was  to  hear  mass,  instead  of  at  St.  Peter's.  It 
was  an  ordinary  mass,  except  that  everyone,  cardinals. 
Pope,  &c.,  were  all  en  gala — that  is  to  say,  the  Pope  in 
white  and  the  cardinals  in  scarlet,  and  very  magnificent ; 
few  foreigners  at  the  chapel.  In  returning  home,  between 
twelve  and  one  o'clock,  Harrot  met  us  on  the  stairs  to  tell 
us  that  the  house  had  been  on  fire.  We  found  the  mis- 
tress of  the  house  and  several  persons  in  our  room,  where 
everything  was  in  confusion.  The  fire  was  in  one  of  the 
chimneys  upstairs,  and  had  burnt  our  ceihng  ;  they  said 
it  was  out,  but  the  smell  was  still  so  strong  that  I  doubted 
it.     After  dinner  the  smoke  still  continued.    I  sent  in . 


1820]  CLOSE    OF   THE    YEAE.  273 

haste  for  the  hostess,  and  showed  her  that  her  house  was 
still  burning,  and  some  bricklayers  were  sent  for.  It  was 
ten  o'clock  in  the  evening  before  I  had  again  possession 
of  my  room. 

Wednesday,  27th. — Went  to  the  Church  d'Ara-Coeli,  to 
see  the  'Prsecipio.'  Large  and  very  bad,  without  perspec- 
tive, and  without  any  beauty  whatever.  We  walked  to 
the  Scala  Santa,  which  was  covered  with  people  going  up 
on  their  knees. 

Sunday,  olst — Gell  dined  at  our  house.  In  the  even- 
ing we  had  about  twenty  people  with  us  :  the  Duchess  of 
Devonshire,  the  Ambassadress  of  France,  Lady  Westmore- 
land, Lord  Kinnaird,  &c.  They  stayed  till  nearly  two 
o'clock  in  the  new  year ;  thus  finishing  for  me  the  year 
1820. 


VOL.  in. 


274  MISS    berry's   journal.  [1821 


1821. 

Rome^  Wednesday,  January  ord. — Went  to  Canova's 
studio,  where  we  found  him  working  at  his  enormous 
horse  ;  had  some  most  agreeable  conversation  with  him 
upon  his  art,  upon  tlie  character  of  heads  of  women,  their 
variety,  &c.  &c. 

Friday,  bth. — After  dinner,  at  eight  o'clock,  went  with 
the  Marquis  Massimo  to  the  Princess  of  Denmark  to  be 
presented  :  very  few  people  there.  The  Princess  charm- 
ing— very  handsome,  and  with  very  good  manners.  We 
stayed  there  longer  than  usual,  because  there  were  so  few 
people,  and  she  does  not  dismiss  her  visitors.  The  Prince 
very  civil,  and  sufficiently  disposed  to  talk ;  he  has  rather 
a  heavy  look,  though  handsome  for  a  prince.  The  Prin- 
cess would  be  handsome  were  she  only  a  peasant. 

Saturday,  Qth. — At  eight  o'clock  this  evening  to  the 
Princess  Volconsky,  where  there  were  about  thirty  people 
assembled  to  draw  Twelfth  Night  characters.  The  lot 
fell  very  well  upon  Mr.  Leibzelstern  as  king,  and  Madame 
Oginska  as  queen.  There  was  a  tlirone  raised,  and 
prettily  arranged  in  a  room,  where  also  a  theatre  was 
erected.  After  the  choice  of  king  and  queen,  Madame 
Volconsky  recited  marvellously  well '  Le  Songe  d'Athalie.' 
It  was  not  possible  to  recite  Eacine  better,  nor  with  more 
expression  than  she  did ;  she  gave  us  also  the  '  Declara- 
tion de  Phedre'  quite  equal  to  the  other.  It  made  the 
hours  pass  very  agreeably. 

Sunday,  7  th. — What  odd  people  these  Eussians  some- 


1821]  A   RUSSIAN   PEINCESS.  275 

times  are !     Here  is  a  Princess  Volconsky  reciting  most 
admirably  the  very  difficult  scenes  of  tlie  '  Songe  d'Athalie ' 
and  the  '  Declaration  de  Phedre,'  to  a  company  of  about 
thirty  persons,   under  all  the  disadvantages  of  a  small 
theatre  in  a  small  room,  and  very  ill  supported,  or  rather 
not  at  all  supported,  by  those  acting  with  her — having 
not  the  least  degree  of  shyness  about  the  exhibition  of 
her  talent,  nor  of  affected  modesty  or  of  amour  propre 
about  the  praises  she  received,  and  the  admiration  she 
excited,  but  seeming  quite  as  much  at  ease  and  quite  as 
much    amused   herself  as   any  of  the   company.      Her 
account,  too,  of  the  means  by  which  she  acquired  this 
talent  would  not  sound  less  odd  to  English  ears.     Her 
father.  Prince  Belozelsky,  was  passionately  fond  of  the 
French  theatre,  and  her  governess  had  been  the  intimate 
of  the  Clairon,  the  Dumesnil,  and  all  the  great  actors  of 
that  day.     Thus  educated,  she  was  married  very  young 
to   Prince   Volconsky,    a   man   whose   character   seems 
something   like   his   voice  —  rough,   untuned,    and  half 
pohshed.     They  seem  on  the  best  footing  possible,  and 
he  boasts  to  everybody  of  the  talents,  cleverness,  and 
charms  of  his  wife,  although  he  was  in  England  and 
Prance  about  a  year  and  a  half,  while  she  was  in  Italy, 
at  Odessa,  &c.  &c.     After  seeing  him  in  London,  I  met 
him  this  summer  at  Geneva.     He  came  to  Italy  in  search 
of  his  wife,  but  having  not  the  least  idea  in  what  part  of 
the  country  he  was  to  find  her.     At  last  they  meet  here. 
They  live  very  much  at  home,  surrounded  by  artists  of 
all  sorts,  particularly  musical  ones.     For  music  she  is  an 
enthusiast ;  an  excellent  musician,  singing  with  much  and 
varied  expression.     She  takes  entirely  the  charge  of  the 
education  of  her  son,  a  boy  of  eight  years  old,  to  whom  she 
dedicates  much  time.     She  speaks  well  on  most  subjects, 
with  good  sense,  frankness,  and  an  absence  of  all  affecta- 
tion ;  but  with  the  sort  of  self-satisfied  pride  and  delihere 
which  mark  the  character  and  manners  of  the  Eussians 

T  2 


276  MISS    BERRY'S   JOURNAL.  [1821 

of  this  day,  and  which  has  thrown  quite  into  the  back- 
ground the  sulky  silent  pride  of  the  English. 

Tuesday^  9th. — In  the  morning  went  to  the  Church 
of  Sta.  Maria  della  Pace — a  circular  entrance — inside  a 
Greek  Cross.  The  space  above  the  arch  of  the  first 
altar  an  exquisite  fresco  of  Eaphael's — the  four  sibyls 
predicting  the  different  circumstances  of  the  birth  of  our 
Saviour.  Eaphael  seems  to  have  had  a  particular  faculty 
of  avaihng  himself  of  the  shape  of  a  space  which  would 
have  embarrassed  any  other  painter.  Here  the  figures 
are  set  out  as  regularly  as  in  a  dessert,  and  yet,  from 
their  variety,  grace,  and  beauty,  give  no  idea  of  the 
formality  of  the  old  school.  In  the  evening  went  to 
the  Princess  Volconsky.  The  opera  of  'Tancredi'  was 
very  well  acted ;  costumes  perfect ;  and  she  herself  had 
quite  the  air  of  a  noble  cavalier.  The  accessories  won- 
derfully well  arranged,  and  altogether  it  made  a  very 
pretty  little  spectacle,  and  a  very  agreeable  evening. 

Monday,  Ihtli. — In  the  morning  at  the  Villa  Papa 
Guilio — Vignola's.  The  corridor  beautifully  painted  in 
alcoves  of  treillage,  with  boys  playing  in  circular  aper- 
tures. The  whole  villa  in  a  state  of  lamentable  ruin. 
The  wooden  ceilings  of  the  rooms  within  falling  down, 
while  the  paintings  on  the  upper  part  of  the  walls  still 
remain  sufficiently  fresh  and  perfect  to  show  what  they 
have  been.  In  one  room  on  the  ground-floor  the  ceiling 
is  complete.  It  is  inhabited  only  by  cowherds  and  their 
cattle.  In  the  evening  went  to  a  ball  at  Torlonia,  given 
in  the  fine  large  palace  in  the  Piazza  di  Venezia.  Grand 
in  every  way,  in  its  construction,  its  furniture,  and  the 
number  of  beautiful  things,  antique  and  modern,  which 
it  contains.  It  was  lighted  hke  day,  and  produced  an 
effect  of  such  real  magnificence  as  is  only  to  be  seen  in 
Eome — poor  ruined  Eome,  but  which  still  reigns  supreme 
in  many  things.  > 

This  part  of  Eome,  which  still  keeps  its  ancient  name 


1821]  ANTIQUARIAN   REMxYINS.  277 

of  Velatrum,  ought  to  be  a  mass  of  public  edifices  or 
temples.  Opposite  this  church  is  the  temple  called  Vesta, 
and  at  two  steps  from  this  is  another,  and  still  whole,  now 
the  church  of  the  Armenians. 

Tuesday,  23r(i. — Eeturning  from  our  morning  excur- 
sion, I  met  Mr.  Hutchinson  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the 
Theatre  di  Marcello  (in  the  Piazza  Montenaro),  one  of 
the  most  crowded  and  ill-built  quarters  of  Eome.  He 
had  been  in  search  of  some  considerable  remains  of  anti- 
quity mentioned  to  him  by  an  antiquary  here,  but  of 
which  I  find  few  people  know  the  existence.  He  went 
back  to  show  it  to  me.  We  mounted  up  and  down  some 
vile  staircases,  and  through  the  kitchens  and  backyards  of 
two  different  meanly-built  houses,  and  found  above  thirty 
or  forty  feet  of  a  large  stone  entablature,  apparently  of  the 
Tuscan  order,  supported  by  four  or  five  large  columns  at 
unequal  distances,  the  whole  of  stone,  and  ^o  enclave  in  the 
houses  that  are  built  upon  and  around  and  about  them, 
that  it  is  impossible  to  guess  either  at  the  purpose  of  the 
building,  or  the  extent  of  the  remains.  One  can  only  sup- 
pose that,  from  its  simplicity,  it  must  be  very  ancient ;  more 
columns  and  more  cornices  show  themselves  in  descend- 
ing the  staircase  of  this  said  house,  and  another  separate 
column  of  the  same  order  in  a  neighbouring  house,  but 
so  confused  and  built  up  that  it  is  difficult  even  to  follow 
up  the  search.  The  Cittadina,  in  whose  charcoal  cellar 
the  principal  remains  are,  said  they  called  it  De  Carcere 
di  S.  Nicolo,  but  added  a  '  Chi  sa?'  of  perfect  doubt. 

Tuesday,  ^Oth. — In  the  morning  at  the  Villa  Paulina. 
Princess  Pauline  had  given  me  an  order  to  see  it.  It  was 
formerly  the  ViUa  Serana  Colonna.  Since  she  bought  it, 
she  has  completely  changed  it  within  and  without.  The 
inside  is  in  the  French  style,  a  merveille.  One  sees  by 
the  apartment  on  the  first  floor,  how  well  those  of  an 
Italian  villa  are  made  to  combine  every  advantage,  if  the 
owners  had  only  enough  to  keep  them  up. 


278 


MISS   BERRY  S   JOURNAL. 


[lb2i 


Wednesday^  olst.  —  We  took  a  long  walk  with  tke 
Marquis  Massimo  tliroiigli  the  large  vineyard  situated 
upon  the  Agger — that  is  to  say,  fort  or  citadel  of  Servius 
Tullus — and  then  into  another  large  vineyard  belonging 
to  his  brother,  where,  in  the  deep  digging  of  twenty-two 
palms,  they  found  the  Discobulus  now  at  the  Palais  Massi- 
mo, a  Hercules,  and  four  beautiful  fluted  columns  twenty 
feet  high,  of  African  marble,  of  which  we  saw  two  more 
on  the  spot  where  they  were  found. 

Thursday^  February  \st. — In  the  morning  at  Gibson's, 
to  see  Lord  Colchester's  bust.  Afterwards  we  all  three 
went  to  the  Capuchin  souterrain  in  the  Place  Barbarimi, 
where  they  deposit  their  bones  in  a  thousand  different 
designs  with  the  skeletons  of  capuchins  in  their  dress, 
placed  in  niches  in  the  five  or  six  chambers.  It  is  a 
curiosity  to  see  once. 

Sunday^  Ath. — We  have  passed  our  whole  mornings 
in  these  villas  for  this  last  three  weeks  of  brilliant  fine 
weather.    We  have  not  only  visited  repeatedly 

The  Villas       Pamfili,      ^ 

Borghese, 

Albano, 

Medici, 

Orte  Farnesiani, 
but  the  Villas  Ludovisci. 


Out  of  Porta  del  Popolo, 

The   Villa  of 

The  Villa  ci-devant   . 

C)ut  of  Porta  Pia, 

On  the  Janiculum, 

On  the  Palatine, 

On  Monte  Mario, 

Of  the  Princess  Bordiese. 


(Papa  Giulio  and 

[Poniatowsky. 

Eafaelle, 

Negroni,  now  Massimo. 

Patrizi. 
\  Corsini  and 
[Lanti. 

Spada. 
\Millini  and 
( Madonna. 

Paulina. 


1821]  ROMAN   VILLAS.  279 

A  neglected  Villa,   .         .         .         Casali. 

A  ditto,  out  of  Porta  San  Pancrazio,  Corsini ; 

from  whence  an  exquisite  view  of  the  Villa  Pamjili,  Altieri, 

belonging  to  the  Prince  of  Peace,    Mattel^ 

Out  of  Porta  Salara,        .         .         San  Leverino. 

On  the  Aventine,  .  The  Priorata  di  Malta. 

The  villas  of  Eome  (independent  of  their  local  ad- 
vantages, and  their  luxury  of  marble  and  of  water)  may 
certainly  be  considered  as  a  race  apart  of  country- 
houses,  all  combining  nearly  the  same  advantages,  more 
or  less  magnificent,  upon  a  larger  or  smaller  scale,  but 
all  uniting  every  enjoyment  of  a  beautiful  country 
in  a  fine  chmate,  and  the  means  of  every  luxury  they 
can  afford.  The  house  is  always  small  in  compari- 
son of  their  town  palaces,  and  therefore  called  a  Casino. 
These  casinos  are  generally  entered  by  an  open  log- 
gia, which  ushers  you  by  a  large  door  into  a  hall  or 
saloon,  opposite  to  which  is  another  large  door,  either 
opening  into  a  corridor  behind  or  into  another  saloon, 
having  an  opposite  door  of  equal  size,  so  that  a 
thorough  air  can  be  made  in  the  lower  part  of  the  house. 
From  this  loggia  in  front,  or  the  corridor  behind,  rises 
the  staircase,  an  unornamented  feature  of  these  casinos, 
leading  to  a  large  sala  above,  with  two  large  windows 
furnished  with  balconies  to  give  air  and  coolness,  accord- 
ing to  the  position  of  the  sun.  To  this  upper  part  of 
the  house  the  various  sitting-rooms  open ;  or  if  the  sitting- 
rooms  are  on  the  ground-floor,  which  is  often  the  case, 
these  are,  or  may  be,  used  as  bedchambers.  At  the  top 
of  the  second  story  rises  almost  invariably  a  sort  of  square 
building,  much  higher  than  the  rest,  and  furnished  with 
many  windows,  to  give  the  most  distant  prospect  of  which 
the  place  is  capable,  and  the  beauty  and  interest  of  these 
distant  views  at  Eome,  with  the  magnificent  foreground 
they  all  have,  exceed  those  of  any  other  spot  of  the  earth. 
But  it  is  still  more  without  than  within  that  the  villas  of 


280  MISS   berry's    journal.  [18'21 

Eome  are  super-eminently  beautiful ;  for  as  nearly  all  are 
infested  in  the  summer  with  the  demon  of  malaria,  they 
never  receive  more  than  an  occasional  visit  of  a  few  hours 
from   their   proprietors,   and    therefore   their   furniture, 
marbles  and  such-hke  excepted,  is  all  old,  often  tattered, 
and  very  insufficient  to  the  purposes  of  continuous  habi- 
tation.    A  degree  of  neglect  is  sometimes  observable  out 
of  doors,  but  this  perhaps  may  be  attributed  to  want  of 
tidiness  in  all  the  people  of  this  country.     These  villas 
open  on  the  back  to  a  garden  parterre,  ornamented  with 
flowers  and  fountains  of  every  possible  variety  of  form  and 
contrivance  adapted  to  the  circumstances  of  the  ground. 
They  are   descended   to  by  steps,   and  are  ornamented 
with  statues,  and  bordered  on  two  sides  with  walls  covered 
with  the  brilhant  evergreen  of  orange  and  lemon-trees, 
divided  by  stands  of  stone  (sometimes  of  inverted  Corin- 
thian capitals),  for  large  earthen  pots  filled  with  the  same 
beautiful  plants.      From  the  flower-garden,  other  steps 
and    other   balustrades,    decorated   by   other   fountains, 
generally  lead  into  the  lower  parts  of  the  garden ;  on 
each  side  of  the  house  are  avenues  of  high  evergreens, 
ilex,  box,  arbutus,  laurestinas,  &c.  &c.,  cut  into  green 
walls  perfectly  impervious  to  the  sun,  opening  to  some 
fountain  or  statue  in  the  vista,  and  leading  again  to  open 
spaces,  again  ornamented  with  statues  and  fountains,  and 
furnished  with   stone  seats  for  the  indulgence  of  that 
leisure  '  which  in  trim  gardens  takes  his  pleasure.''  Besides 
this  provision  of  shade  in  distant  walks,  there  is  nearer 
the  house  a  hosco^  which  is  always  of  evergreen  (oak), 
and  generally  cut  in  walks  bordered  by  trimmed  hedges, 
forming  at  all  times  and  in  all  seasons  a  retreat  entirely 
impervious  either  to  sun  or  to  wind.      To  these  villas 
frequently  belong  a  considerable  number  of  acres  laid  out 
in  farm — that  is  to  say,  vines  and  kitchen  garden,  or  some- 
times beautiful  grass  fields,  as  at  the  Villas  Pamfili  and 
Borghese.      These  are  also  surrounded  by  broad  qwqxt 


1821]  AUSTRIAN   TROOPS   MARCHING    ON   NAPLES.  281 

green  alleys.  Another  feature  of  all  the  flower-gardens 
in  the  great  villas  is  an  aviary  upon  a  large  scale — a 
regular  facade  of  building  covered  entirely  with  wire- 
work,  and  ornamented  within  with  fresco  painting,  foun- 
tains, and  sculpture,  besides  the  shrubs,  &c.,  necessary 
for  the  birds.  All  those  I  have  yet  seen  are  unfenanted. 
I  have  not  mentioned  any  of  the  gioca  d'aqua,  the  organs 
played  by  water,  &c.  &c.,  which  in  many  still  exist 
unimpaired,  because  I  have  noticed  only  their  enjoyable 
perfection  and  admirable  arrangement  to  their  chmate 
and  situation.  In  many  there  is  a  summer  apartment,  a 
story  below  the  front  entrance,  opening  upon  a  flower- 
garden,  generally  decorated  with  interior  as  well  as 
exterior  fountains.  In  the  great  villas,  such  as  the 
Pamfih,  Borghese,  Ludovisci,  Albano,  &c.  &c.,  there  are 
always  casinos  in  the  grounds,  sometimes  called  a  coffee- 
house^ richly  ornamented  with  painting  or  sculpture, 
placed  in  the  most  advantageous  sites  for  a  distant  view. 

Tuesday^  1th. — In  the  night  an  estafette  arrived  here, 
announcing  to  the  Austrians  that  their  army  had  passed  the 
Po,  and  were  on  their  march  to  Naples  in  three  columns 
— so  there  is  no  more  hope  for  the  poor  Neapolitans  ! 

Wednesday.,  Sth. — I  met  Madame  Hitsofi*  in  the  morn- 
ing at  the  Duchess  of  Devonshire's,  She  (Madame  H.) 
and  her  two  daughters  set  out  at  four  o'clock  to-morrow 
morning  for  Florence.  M.  de  Fiquelmont,  the  Minister 
there,  who  is  to  marry  her  youngest  daughter,  has  a 
command  in  the  army,  and  is  to  accompany  it  on  its  pas- 
sage through  Florence,  and  is,  besides,  named  Minister  to 
Naples  when  they  have  punished,  or  conquered,  or  re- 
settled it,  or  whatever  their  infamous  ingression  means 
to  do. 

Friday,    dth.* — The   first  proclamation  of   the  Pope 

*  This  diary  of  Feb.  9th,  12th,  13th,  25th,  26th,  28th,  March  1st,  3rd,  and 
6tb,  are  written  in  a  supplementary  book,  apparently  a  few  days  later  than 


282  MISS    BEERY'S   journal.  [1821 

was  pasted  on  the  walls  announcing  his  neutrality,  the 
necessary  passage  of  the  Austrians,  the  assurance  that 
they  were  not  to  enter  Eome,  and  requiring  his  subjects 
not  to  treat  them  as  enemies ;  in  short,  three  blue  leans  in 
a  blue  bladder  !  except  that  it  was  impossible  not  to  per- 
ceive on  which  side  the  bladder  leant,  althouo;h  frio;htened 
on  both  sides.  The  situation  of  Eome  now  became 
critical :  had  the  Neapohtans  possessed  a  disposable  force, 
after  such  a  proclamation,  they  might  have  been  well 
excused  for  advancing  on  Eome  and  taking  possession  of 
it,  as  an  av ant  post  against  the  Austrians,  now  decidedly 
marching  in  arms  against  them,  preceded  by  the  wretched 
letter  of  their  forsworn  King  from  Laybach,  and  by  the 
intolerable  language  and  terms  offered  by  the  allied  sove- 
reigns. But  even  supposing  (as  it  has  turned  out)  that 
the  Neapolitan  leaders  either  found  it  impracticable  or 
imprudent  to  leave  their  own  territory  as  a  regular  corps 

the  events  recorded.  In  the  month  of  July  1820,  Ferdinand  had,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  disturbances  in  his  kingdom,  acceded  to  the  adoption  of  the 
Spanish  Constitution,  which  both  he  and  his  son,  whom  he  had  appointed 
Vicar-General,  swore  to  maintain.  At  the  end  of  October,  the  Emperors  of 
Austria  and  Russia, and  the  Prince  Royal  of  Prussia  met  at  Troppau  to  de- 
liberate on  the  measures  proper  to  be  pursued  towards  the  revolutionary 
government  of  Naples.  The  result  was  an  invitation  from  these  three  Sove- 
reigns to  Ferdinand  to  meet  them  at  Laybach.  The  invitation  was  accepted, 
and  on  the  28th  of  December,  having  sailed  in  an  English  ship  to  Leghorn, 
he  reached  Laybach  to  receive  the  orders  of  the  Holy  Alliance.  A  State 
paper  was  issued  that  declared  the  resolution  of  the  monarchs  not  to  recog- 
nise governments  which  had  been  produced  by  open  rebellion,  and  that  they 
could  not,  therefore,  enter  into  negotiations  except  with  the  King  (of  Naples) 
alone.  France  neither  avowed  nor  denied  these  principles ;  England,  in  a 
circular  dated  January  13,  1821,  and  laid  before  Parliament,  declared  her 
dissent  from  the  principles  which  had  been  adopted  at  Troppau  and  at  Laj-- 
bach.  On  the  9th  of  February,  the  representatives  of  Austria,  Russia,  and 
Prussia  were  desii-ed  to  communicate  to  the  Prince  Regent,  at  Naples,  that 
an  Austrian  army  would  occupy  the  Neapolitan  territory  unless  the  order 
of  tilings  established  since  the  6th  of  the  preceding  July  were  immediately 
abolished,  and  that  even  if  a  spontaneous  submission  took  place,  the  army 
Avould  still  penetrate  into  the  kingdom  to  maintain  the  new  system  which 
was  now  to  be  established.  At  the  same  time  Ferdinand  addressed  a  letter 
to  his  son  to  assure  him  the  will  of  the  Sovereigns  was  irrevocable,  and  that 
they  desired  to  promote  the  prosperity  of  the  Neapolitans. — Ann.  Reg. 


1821]  BALL   AT   THE    AUSTRIAN   AMBASSADOR'S.  283 

darmee^  nothing  could  have  prevented  a  predatory  expe- 
dition of  some  irregular  troops,  joined  to  the  troops  of 
banditti  that  infest  the  roads  and  people  the  moun- 
tains ;  they  might  have  entered  Eome,  taken  what  they 
could  find  in  the  treasury,  and  carried  back  with  them  to 
the  mountains  some  of  the  richest  of  the  nobles  and 
bankers,  to  be  ransomed.  Or,  supposing  banditti  only  to 
have  united  themselves  for  such  an  expedition,  they  miglit 
have  released  the  galley  slaves  in  the  Castel  St.  Angelo 
(if,  as  has  been  suspected,  the  Pope's  troops  would  not 
make  a  great  stand),  and  pillaged  the  town  for  several 
hours,  retiring  to  their  mountains  with  their  newly- 
acquired  allies  (who  would  certainly  have  all  declared 
themselves  to  a  man  Carbonari)  before  any  regular 
defence  could  have  been  made.  I  confess  I  was  one  of 
those  who  thought  such  an  expedition  the  most  likely, 
without,  however,  feeling  much  fiightened  at  the  idea,  or 
allowing  myself  at  all  to  dwell  on  the  consequences.  The 
lodgings  of  the  Piazza  de  Spagna  were  not  those  they 
would  seek  for  money ;  nor  strangers  nor  old  women 
those  they  would  carry  away  as  hostages — while  every 
day  that  they  did  not  come,  made  their  coming  at  all  less 
feasible. 

Monday,  12th. — Evening  at  the  great  ball  and  supper 
at  Madame  d'Appony's,  for  the  Emperor  of  Austria's  fete. 
It  was  a  bad  moment  to  choose  for  such  a  fete,  when  his 
armies  are  expected  here,  and  that  his  conduct  towards 
Naples  has  excited  a  general  feehng  of  detestation  for 
his  cabinet  and  the  pohtics  which  direct  it.  We  went 
there  at  nine  o'clock,  when  there  were  not  a  dozen  ladies, 
but  all  the  cardinals  and  Monsignore  were  assembled  in 
the  last  room  of  the  apartment,  the  only  one  where  there 
was  a  fire.  All  the  others  were  cold  enough  to  kill  one 
before  the  crowd  came  to  warm  them.  Many  of  our 
English,  in  their  virtuous  indignation  at  the  conduct  of 
Austria,  proposed  not  countenancing  the  celebration  of 


284  MISS    berry's   journal.  [1821 

the  Emperor's  birthday  by  his  own  ambassador  in  his 
own  house  !  However,  they  all,  I  beheve,  thought  better 
of  it,  or  were  laughed  out  of  this  piece  of  most  useless 
and  unnecessary  manifestation  of  political  sentiment,  and 
went  to  the  ball,  which  was  a  very  handsome  fete,  in  tlie 
newly-fitted-up  apartment  of  the  Palazzo  di  Venezia,  with 
a  most  excellent  supper,  served  in  I  know  not  how  many 
rooms  to  the  ladies  seated,  and  in  a  long  corridor  to  all 
the  men  standing  at  an  endless  buffet,  but  without  any 
show  of  plate,  even  at  the  table  of  the  Prince  and  Princess 
of  Denmark,  for  (nota  bene)  M.  Appony's  plate  has  never 
yet  been  unpacked  in  Eome,  and  that  Cardinal  Gonsalvi's — 
i.  e.  the  Pope's — has  been  packed  all  this  winter,  is  certain, 
for  at  the  dinners  given  at  the  Quirinal  (remarkably 
handsome  in  every  other  respect),  not  a  morsel  of  plate 
has  appeared,  which  was  never  the  case  before. 

Tuesday,  13th. — A  report  was  said  to  have  been  made 
to  Government,  by  the  Pope's  Governor  of  Albano,  that 
the  Neapolitans  were  advancing  on  Villetri.  This  was 
believed,  and  so  completely  frightened  them  that  it  was 
resolved  immediately  to  remove  the  Pope  to  Civita  Vec- 
chia,  the  only  measure  which  the  extreme  weakness  of 
the  Government  allowed  them  to  be  capable  of!  Canova 
and  his  brother  came  to  us  early  in  the  evening,  saying 
that  the  Pope  was  either  going  or  gone,  that  everybody 
was  talking  of  it  in  the  streets,  and  that  all  was  bustle  at 
the  Quirinal.  I  was  not  well,  and  not  thinking  of  going 
out ;  but  my  sister,  Lady  Charlotte,  and  Mr.  Tighe  were 
going  to  the  Opera,  and  determined  on  their  way  to 
go  round  by  Mount  Cavallo  and  see  what  was  doing. 
They  found  between  eight  and  nine  a  number  of  people 
loitering  about  the  place,  eight  or  ten  Eoman  town  car- 
riages in  waiting,  and  among  the  rest  Marquis  Mas- 
simo's, the  Postmaster-General ;  the  gates  of  the  cortile  of 
the  palace  were  shut.  The  Pope's  travelling  carriages 
were    already   loaded   within   the    court,    when,    either 


1821]  EXCITEMEXT   IX   KOME.  285 

from  receiving;  assurance  that  the  Governor  of  Albano's 
was  a  false  report,  or  from  the  Pope's  unwilhngness  at 
such  an  hour,  and  under  such  circumstances,  to  fly  and 
absent  himself,  the  base  and  ridiculous  project  was  laid 
aside,  and  another  measure  of  security  adopted,  which 
was  almost  as  foolish  and  was  as  soon  reversed.  All  the 
hackney-men's  horses  in  Eome  were  demanded  by  order 
of  Government,  and  between  one  and  two  o'clock  in  the 
morning,  about  thirty  carriages,  either  artillery  fourgons 
or  cannon,  passed  through  the  Piazza  de  Spagna,  going 
from  the  Castel  St.  Angelo  to  the  Quirinal.  From  there 
they  returned  to  whence  they  came  in  the  course  of  the 
night,  and  the  next  morning  nothing  more  was  seen  or 
said  of  this  worse  than  ridiculous  project.  But  it  settled 
one's  opinion  for  ever  of  the  Cardinal  Secretary  of  State, 
of  his  politics,  his  views,  and  his  understanding.  For 
two  or  three  days  after  this,  the  Austrians  were  said  to 
be  advancing.  The  first  columns  of  8,000  men  had  left 
Florence  on  the  12th,  and  were  daily  expected  under  the 
walls  of  Ptome. 

Saturday^  17th. — There  appeared  another  placard  of 
the  Government  to  announce  that  in  four  different  towns 
in  the  Papal  dominions,  symptoms  of  a  revolutionary 
spirit  had  appeared.  The  people  had  been  invited  to 
ask  for  the  Spanish  Constitution,  and  to  support  their 
demand  by  arms,  for  which  four  camps  were  proposed  to 
be  made  at  Ancona,  Macciata,  Spoleto,  and  Trosinoni.  I 
went  that  morning  with  Lord  Colchester  to  the  Duchess 
of  Devonshire,  where  we  found  the  Abbe  Molioni,  the 
English  secretary  to  Gonsalvi.  He  declared  that  the  ap- 
peals made  to  the  people  at  all  these  places  had  been 
quite  without  effect,  and  had  excited  no  disturbance  ;  that 
the  papers  even  were  not  publicly  affiched,  but  put  about 
secretly  from  hand  to  hand.  Why,  then,  publish  them  at 
Eome  ?  But  Appony  told  me  the  day  after  that  they 
were  pubhc  proclamations  which  he  had  seen,  and  had 


286  MISS   BEREY's   journal.  [1821 

been  in  liis  hands.  I  found  that  the  sober  and  thinkinsj 
people  in  Eome  behoved  them  to  be  ires  pen  de  chose, 
or  at  least  accompanied  by  very  little  manifestation  of 
moving,  and  that  they  were  only  remarked  and  pub- 
lished by  the  Government  here  as  an  excuse  for  the 
immediate  arrival  of  the  Austrians,  and  their  passing 
through  and  perhaps  leaving  a  body  at  Eome.  But 
Appony  at  the  same  time  assured  me  that  they  would  not 
immediately  advance  on  Eome,  nor  probably  pass  nearer 
than  ten  or  twelve  miles.  Eome,  he  said,  was  now  a  I'ahri 
d'un  attenie  quelconque  des  Neapolitains,  as  the  Austrians 
could  be  here  if  necessary  in  ten  or  twelve  hours.  The 
danger,  indeed,  of  a  predatory  expedition  of  the  Nea- 
politans had  become  less  and  less  every  day.  And  in 
spite  of  the  every  day's  report  of  the  arrival  of  the 
Austrians  for  the  next  day  at  the  Porta  del  Popolo,  in 
spite  of  half  a  dozen  waggons  full  of  sacks  of  bread  having 
been  sent  to  them  from  this  place  on  the  18th  and  19th, 
and  in  spite  of  quartermasters  inspecting  the  ground  on 
this  side  the  Ponte  MoUe,  they  are  not  here  yet. 


From  Miss  Berry  to  Lady  Elizabeth  Stuart. 

Borne,  Wednesday,  Feb.  21,  1821. 

Beaeest  Elizabeth, —  ...  I  assure  you  the  pleasures  of 
Eome  allow  one  almost  as  little  time  for  writing  as  your  duties 
at  Paris.  When  I  talk  of  pleasures,  you  will  understand  that 
they  consist  in  the  interest  inspired  by  everything  around  one, 
and  the  inexhaustible  variety  of  things  one  has  to  see  and  to 
think  of,  for  everything  at  Eome  leads  to  such  a  long  train  of 
remembrances  that  one  lives  almost  as  much  in  the  past  as 
the  present.  How  long  we  may  be  able  to  do  so,  Heaven 
knows !  and  the  present,  presents  no  very  agreeable  aspect  to 
we  travellers.  I  cannot,  however,  yet  persuade  myself  to  be 
afraid,  or  to  suppose  any  great  or  very  serious  inconveniences 
will  happen  to  us.  But  we  are  certainly  living  (politically 
speaking)  aujour  lajournee.     They  are  at  this  moment  filling 


1821]  LETTER   TO    EARL   OF   HARDWICKE.  287 

waggons  in  the  Piazza  de  Spagna,  before  our  windows,  with 
bags  of  bread  for  the  Austrians,  who  were  last  night  within 
thirty  miles  of  Rome.  A  difference  of  opinion  seems  to  exist 
whether  they  will  immediately  advance  and  pass  under,  or 
perhaps  through  the  walls  of  Rome,  or  whether  they  will  re- 
main some  days  where  they  are — a  strong  military  position.  I 
see  the  Apponys  every  two  or  three  days,  but  you  know  how 
little  is  to  be  learnt  from  Ministers.  Liebzelstern  goes  to-day, 
whither  I  know  not ;  Stakelberg  has  been  here  for  this  fort- 
night ;  the  Austrian  and  Prussian  Ministers  at  Naples  arrived 
yesterday.  The  French  Charge  d' Affaires,  Fontenay,  is  not 
come  yet,  and  one  wonders  if  he  is  to  come.  Lord  Castle- 
reagh's  circular  we  think  a  chef  (Voeuvre  in  lis  way  in  his 
way.  We  won't  affront  your  cleverness  by  saying  what  way 
that  is. 

In  the  midst  of  all  these  wars  and  rumours  of  wars,  pre- 
parations are  making  for  the  Carnival,  which  naturally  begins 
on  Saturday  next,  and  lasting  but  ten  days  here,  is  generally 
particularly  gay — how  it  will  be  this  year  time  will  show. 
Everything  hitherto  has  been  perfectly  quiet  among  the  people 
here,  and  well  it  is  so,  for  Government  there  is  positively  none, 
or  worse  than  none.  The  single  dependence  is  on  the  indi- 
vidual respect  and  sanctity  attached  still  by  the  bulk  of  this 
people  to  the  person  of  the  Pope,  whose  age  and  feebleness  is 
in  fact  his  strength  and  protection. 

Feb.  22. 

We  are  still  in  the  same  uncertainty  to-day  about  Austrians 
and  Neapolitans ;  but  I  begin  to  think  they  are  mutually  shy 
of  coming  to  blows,  although  for  very  different  reasons. 

Farewell  !     Heaven  bless  you ! 

From  Miss  Berry  to  the  Earl  of  Hardwicke. 

Rome,  Feb.  23,  182L 

....  I  persuade  myself  that  you  would  rather  have  a  trifling 
trumpery  letter  from  Rome  than  none  at  all,  and  that  at  all 
events  you  will  be  pleased  to  hear  how  well  the  climate  agrees 
with  me,  and  how  much  I  am  interested  and  amused  here. 
Indeed  all  my  former  recollections  of  this  place,  however  lively 


288  MISS   BEKRY'S   JOUKNAL.  [1821 

and  agreeable  as  being  those  of  early  youth,  are  far  surpassed 
by  the  more  entire  and  undivided  interest  now  inspired  by  the 
whole  scene  around  me. 

Marcli  18. 

Since  writing  the  above,  the  last  days  of  a  Carnival  have 
intervened,  and  the  first  arrival  of  an  Austrian  army  and 
(to  myself  individually)  a  feverish  cold  which  has  effectually 
prevented  my  resuming  my  letter  ....  Do  you  remem- 
ber the  last  days  of  the  Carnival  at  Eome  ?  What  a  com- 
plete ancient  saturnalia  it  is !  How  entirely  all  ranks  and  ages 
enter  into  its  follies !  Indeed  the  common  people  now,  much 
more  than  those  of  a  higher  order.  In  the  midst  of  all  this, 
the  first  division  of  Austrian  troops  arrived  at  the  gates  of 
Eome,  on  their  way  to  Naples,  and  we  all  went  out  to  the  Ponte 
Molle  to  see  them  bivouac,  the  infantry  on  one  side  of  the 
river,  and  the  cavalry  on  the  other,  without  their  seeming  to 
excite  anything  but  curiosity  in  their  numerous  spectators, 
among  whom  were  several  open  carriages  filled  with  grotesque 
masks  from  the  Corso,  uniting  in  a  remarkable  and  striking 
manner,  the  most  serious  business  of  man  with  one  of  his 
idlest  amusements.  These  troops,  whom  we  saw  march  round 
the  walls  of  Eome  the  next  morning  (for  they  had  agreed  not 
to  enter  the  city),  have  been  followed  by  several  other  bodies  of 
men,  all  taking  the  same  direction,  and  we  have  been  waiting 
with  impatience  here  for  the  first  accounts  of  their  meeting 
the  Neapolitans  on  their  own  frontiers.  These  accounts  have 
come,  and  on  every  hand  mark  their  retreat  from  passes  which 
it  was  believed  easy  to  defend.  In  short,  something  more  is 
necessary  than  to  talk  about  freedom,  and  to  wish  to  be  free, 
to  become  so ;  and  I  much  fear  iliat  something  the  poor  Nea- 
politans have  not.  You  may  well  imagine  what  sentiments 
their  situation  and  the  conduct  of  their  enemies  inspire  to  all 
the  English  ;  as  travellers  their  wishes  are  certainly  very  dis- 
interested, for  were  the  Austrians  worsted,  or  likely  to  be  so, 
nobody,  I  think,  could  answer  for  the  peace  of  the  north  of 
Italy  a  single  day,  altho'  all  at  present  remains  perfectly  quiet 
there  .  .  . 

Thursday,  Marcli  15. 

The  Neapolitans  have  met  the  Austrians  in  narrow  passes 
which  they  ought  to  have  defended ;  but,  alas  !  they  have  proved 


1821]  APPROACH   OF   THE   AUSTRIANS.  289 

they  can  only  talh  liberty,  but  are  otherwise  unfit  for  it. 
Their  troops  have  not  stood  a  moment,  and  their  cause  is  con- 
sidered as  desperate,  and  the  war  (for  the  present)  almost 
over  .... 

Saturday^  2^th. — First  day  of  the  Carnival ;  the  length 
of  the  Corso  with  all  the  windows  carpeted ;  gay  and  pic- 
turesque as  possible  ;  few  brilliant  carriages ;  not  one  of 
the  foreign  ministers, 

Sunday^  2bth. — The  Austrians  are  not  advanced  beyond 
Monte  Eosi,  thirty  miles  from  Eome.  The  feeling  of 
all  Italy  is  against  their  lawless  design  on  Naples.  The 
match  it  is  likely  to  put  to  the  train  long  laid  of  liberal 
sentiments,  and  the  necessity  of  a  representative  govern- 
ment all  over  Italy,  must  make  them  pause,  not  so  much 
perhaps  in  their  designs,  as  in  their  method  and  their 
means  of  putting  them  into  execution.  They  wait  the 
successive  arrival  of  an  overwhelming  force  ;  they  are,  in 
spite  of  themselves,  surprised  at  the  undaunted  resolution 
of  the  Neapolitans.  England  has  declared  her  non-adhe- 
sion to  the  AUied  Eowers,  and  her  positive  disapprobation 
of  their  principles.  But  I  am  not  going  to  make  com- 
ments on  any  part  of  the  business,  but  merely  to  record 
dates  and  facts  passing  under  my  eyes. 

Tuesday,  27th. — In  the  evening  to  the  Princess  Volcon- 
sky's,  who  gave  the  opera  '  Des  Horaces,'  she  herself 
taking  the  part  of  the  Curiace  wonderfully  well,  in  sing- 
ing, expression,  and  grace.  Madame  Eenaudin,  as  Sabine, 
good  for  the  music,  but  not  for  the  acting.  Heard  from 
Cardinal  Gonsalvi  that  the  Austrians  were  to  be  at  the 
Eonte  Molle  the  next  day  about  one  or  two  o'clock. 

Wednesday,  2Sth. — I  went  about  three,  and  called  on 
Madame  d'Appony.  Here  I  found  General  Statterheim, 
the  commander-in-chief  of  the  column  coming  this  way, 
in  conversation  with  Comte  Appony  in  the  inner  room. 
When  they  came  out  I  had  the  opportunity  of  making 

VOL.  III.  u 


290  MISS  BEERYS   JOURNAL.  [1821 

enquiries  of  the  General  after  George  Staremberg,  and 
then  at  what  hour  the  troops  were  hkely  to  arrive.  He 
said  he  thought  the  cavalry  might  arrive  by  six  o'clock, 
and  the  infantry  an  hour  or  two  later,  which  seemed  to 
preclude  idlers  seeing  anything  of  them  that  day. 

I  returned  home  with  this  inteUigence  to  my  sister, 
and  we  drove  to  the  Ponte  Molle  to  see  at  least 
what  preparations  were  making.  More  than  a  dozen 
carriages  were  already  assembled  there,  and  perhaps 
t\vice  as  many  people  more  on  foot.  On  the  ground,  on 
the  right  side  of  the  road  beyond  the  Ponte  Molle,  one 
saw  already  some  grey  coats,  and  here  and  there  httle 
heaps  of  billets  of  wood,  and  several  stakes  driven  into 
the  ground  in  a  large  flat  meadow,  bounded  towards  the 
Tiber  by  a  road  and  a  mound  of  earth,  and  on  the  other 
by  a  country  road  under  one  of  the  httle  monticules  of 
the  Campagna. 

In  less  than  half  an  hour  the  Austrian  infantry  began 
to  make  their  appearance  on  the  great  road  which  winds 
round  the  monticule.  Three  regiments  passed  by  us,  and 
entered  the  great  meadow  by  the  road  near  the  river ; 
other  two  or  three  regiments,  after  passing  down  the 
little  hill,  entered  the  same  meadow  on  the  other  side,  by 
the  road  at  the  foot  of  the  hill.  All  near  enough  for  us 
to  see  them  minutely.  They  had  marched  from  Nessi — 
thirty  miles — that  day,  but  did  not  look  much  fatigued, 
and  had  absolutely  no  stragglers.  The  first  regiment 
that  passed  was  of  shorter  men,  and  less  well  dressed,  we 
thought,  than  the  others,  which  were  all  in  a  very  good 
mihtary  tenue^  perfectly  well  shod,  and  looking  healthy 
and  weather-beaten.  Their  officers  were  marching  at 
the  head  of  their  companies,  many  of  them  very  hand- 
some, an  epithet  which  could  not  in  general  be  bestowed 
on  their  men. 

Statterheim,  with  his  aide-de-camp — a  young  Prince 
Lobcovitz,  with  a  remarkably  blooming,  agreeable  coun- 


1821]  ARRIVAL   OF   THE   AUSTRIANS.  291 

tenance ;  Prince  Scliwartzenberg  (the  eldest  son  of  the 
General  lately  dead),  and  belonging  to  the  Eegiment  of 
Hussars  ;  Appony,  on  horseback  ;  Leucotsky,  and  several 
other  officers,  came  round  Madame  Appony^s  carriage, 
which  w^as  already  on  the  road  before  we  got  there. 

Tiie  infantry  entering  in  long  lines  by  two  opposite 
sides,  and  spreading  themselves  all  over  the  great  meadow, 
was  extremely  picturesque.  Our  attention  was  now  directed 
to  the  arrival  of  the  cavalry,  coming  by  another  road 
leading  round  the  side  of  another  little  hill  on  the  oppo- 
side  side  of  the  great  road  ;  and  the  General-in-Chief, 
Appony,  &c.  &c.,  rode  away  to  meet  them.  But  our 
English  scouts,  Mr.  Cartwright  and  Mr.  Tighe,on  horseback, 
brought  us  word  it  would  be  some  time  yet  before  they 
arrived.  We  were  advised  to  go  down  into  the  meadow, 
where  the  fires  of  the  bivouacs  were  already  smoking, 
the  arms  already  piled,  and  the  men  already  stretched  on 
the  ground  in  sort  of  regular  streets,  en  attendant  their 
supper,  the  preparations  for  which  were  only  unpacking 
from  the  baugh  horses'  backs. 

To  me  it  was  a  new  and  very  interesting  sight.  A 
large  body  of  men-^most  of  them  that  had  been  engaged, 
and  all  that  were  going  to  be  engaged,  on  actual  and 
severe  service — taking  (perhaps)  their  last  night's  repose, 
for  to-morrow  will  bring  them  very  near  the  Neapolitan 
frontiers.  The  poor  women,  of  whom,  we  had  seen  about 
six  or  eight  belonging  to  each  regiment,  were  in  the  out- 
skirts of  the  meadow,  collecting  sticks  and  boiling  kettles  ; 
beside  which  a  fire  was  made  and  cross  sticks  placed  for 
the  mess,  at  the  head  of  each  line  of  piled  muskets  and 
reposing  men.  Luckily,  the  weather  was  dry  and  not 
cold  ;  it  was  cloudy,  without  a  ray  of  sun.  I  have  now 
a  clear  idea  of  what  rain  and  bad  weather  must  be  to  an 
army  on  a  long  march  and  biouvacking  in  this  way  every 
night. 

There  were  no  persons  from  Kome  selling  anything  on 


292  MISS   BEERY'S   JOURNAL.  [1821 

the  ground — no  hucksters,  as  would  have  been  the  case 
either  in  France  or  England.  The  soldiers  were  quietly- 
reposing  with  true  German  phlegm — talking  little,  and 
applying  to  their  pipes  for  comfort  and  entertainment. 
When  we  left  the  meadow  and  returned  to  the  great 
road,  the  cavalry  was  still  not  in  sight ;  and  as  the  light 
was  failing,  we  began  to  fear  we  should  be  obhged  to 
return  before  they  arrived.  But  at  last  the  etat-major 
of  the  General,  which  had  gone  to  meet  them,  returned,  and 
placed  themselves  at  the  entrance  into  the  great  road,  and 
a  regiment  of  Hussars  (blue)  shortly  after  appeared.  They 
were,  for  the  most  part,  good-looking  young  men,  mounted 
on  small  and  some  baddish-looking  horses,  all  as  much, 
and  I  think  not  more,  out  of  condition  than  any  horses 
would  be  on  a  long  journey,  and  at  picquet  every  night. 
Their  music,  which  was  excellent,  sounded  as  they  entered 
the  road  and  passed  the  General.  They  traversed  the 
Ponte  Molle,  and  took  up  their  quarters  in  -the  large 
meadows  on  the  right  side  of  the  bridge,  entering  by  a 
gate  from  the  high  road.  They  were  immediately  fol- 
lowed by  a  much  more  numerous  regiment  of  heavy 
horse,  in  white,  with  helmets,  well  mounted  on  strong, 
although  not  often  handsome  horses  ;  and  very  stout, 
service-like  men,  six  field  pieces  (six-pounders),  with 
their  necessary  fourgons,  followed  each  regiment,  and  a 
considerable  number  of  baugh  horses,  and  officers'  horses, 
led,  &c.  All  these  followed  the  Hussars  to  the  same 
ground. 

By  this  time  the  number  of  spectators  was  infinitely 
increased.  Several  open  carriages  of  the  Corso  (for  we 
were  en  plein  Carnival),  filled  with  grotesque  masks,  had 
prolonged  their  drive  hither,  to  the  great  amusement  of 
the  Austrian  cavalry,  as  they  passed  them.  To  a  thinking 
spectator  the  scene  was  remarkable  and  striking.  One 
of  the  idlest  amusements  of  man  thus  brought  in  imme- 
diate contrast  with  his  most  serious  occupations !     We 


1821]  MOEE   AUSTRIANS    EXPECTED.  293 

followed  towards  Eome  at  the  tail  of  the  last  of  the  cavalry, 
and  were  not  at  home  before  six  o'clock. 

Thursday^  March  \st. — We  were  determined  to  see 
the  departure  of  this  body  of  troops  as  well  as  their 
arrival,  and  went  this  morning  at  nine  o'clock,  accom- 
panied by  Lord  Colchester,  in  our  open  carriage,  to  the 
Porta  Pia,  by  which  they  must  necessarily  pass,  and  which 
offered  an  open  space  just  without  the  gate  to  place  the 
carriage  and  to  look  up  a  long  stretch  of  the  road  under 
walls  by  which  they  were  to  pass.  They  began  to  make 
their  appearance  within  half  an  hour  after  the  time  we 
got  there  ;  the  cavalry  first.  Hussars  and  heavy  horse, 
and  then  the  infantry,  of  which  there  were  certainly 
1,000  or  1,500  men  more  than  we  had  seen  before. 
They  had  arrived,  I  conclude,  later  in  the  evening.  The 
baggage  waggons  and  waggons  with  bread,  and  the 
baugh  horses,  were  infinitely  increased,  and  formed  now 
a  very  long  train  ;  for  here  we  saw  them  near  their  depar- 
ture, and  consequently  all  together,  which  never  is  the  case 
at  an  arrival.  The  artillery  horses,  and  those  employed 
in  the  fourgons  and  baggage  waggons,  are  remarkably 
good,  and  seemed  in  admirable  order  and  spirits. 

The  poor  women  belonging  to  the  cavalry  were  mostly 
mounted  on  troop  horses,  riding  like  men,  little  embar- 
rassed by  their  petticoats,  which  showed  good  stout  boots 
and  long  spurs.  Two  of  these  poor  souls  had  infants  in 
their  arms !  The  infantry  women  were  on  foot  by  the 
side  of  the  regiments  to  which  they  belonged,  except  two 
or  three  whom  1  felt  happy  to  espy  in  the  baggage  wag- 
gons. These  baggage  waggons  are  by  no  means  what  ours 
are  in  England  on  a  march — common  carts  or  waggons 
loaded  with  women  and  children — but  covered  fourgons, 
which  seem  much  better  calculated  to  convey  baggage 
than  persons.  The  whole,  without  counting  the  baugh 
horses  (for  we  left  the  place  as  they  began  to  pass),  took 
about  an  hour  and  a  quarter  to  defile.     The  commander 


294  MISS    BEKRY's   journal.  [1821 

of  the  division,  Statterheim,  accompanied  by  Appony, 
&c.  &c.,  rode  with  the  troops  on  their  road.  At  the 
Porte  San  Lorenzo  they  separated,  and  one  division, 
with  the  cavalry,  took  the  road  to  Tivoh,  the  other  to 
Albano. 

Friday,  2nd. — At  two  o'clock  we  went  to  the  Ponte 
Molle,  where  they  were  expecting  another  detachment  of 
Austrians.  We  met  there  a  great  crowd  on  the  same 
errand.  They  all  talked  of  their  arrival,  but  no  one 
knew  when.  We  took  a  short  walk  as  far  as  the  villa 
on  the  side  of  the  road  where  the  colonel  and  some 
officers  had  slept  ithe  night  before.  The  two  peasants 
who  performed  the  duties  of  chambermaids  related  to  us, 
but  without  complaint  or  ill-humour,  the  harm  that  the 
troops  had  done  in  the  neighbourhood  during  the  night 
they  passed  there,  in  burning  the  vine  sticks  and  taking 
the  bread  they  found  in  the  houses  of  the  neighbouring 
peasants. 

Sunday,  Ath. — The  arrival  of  more  Austrians  Wcis 
continually  announced  as  to  happen  every  day.  In  the 
suspension  of  masking  on  Sunday,  and  of  the  horse  race, 
all  the  Corso  had  turned  out  to  the  Ponte  Molle.  We 
were  there  sooner  than  the  crowd,  and  found  a  detach- 
ment of  the  Austrian  commissariat  (belonging,  I  con- 
clude, to  the  division,  a  part  of  which  we  have  already 
seen  pass)  bivouacked  on  each  side  of  the  road.  The 
poles  of  the  long  canvas-covered  carts  made  a  sort  of 
manger  for  the  four  or  five  horses  belonging  to  them, 
their  hay,  or  rather  straw,  being  thrown  to  them  on 
the  side  of  it.  They  were  good-looking  horses,  and  the 
majority  of  a  chesnut  colour.  The  men  were  stretched 
on  straw  on  the  ground  immediately  before  or  between 
their  carts ;  they  had  arrived  the  evening  before. 

Monday,  hth. — Went  to  Madame  d' Appony,  to  see  the 
Eeprisa  dei  Cavalli.  Here  they  spread  across  the  street 
two  cloths  at  ten  feet  distant  one  from  the  other,  to  stop 


1821]  A   TOUCHING   CEREAIONY.  295 

the  horses  ;  there  are  also  twelve  men,  masked,  in  a  red 
cap,  who,  with  howlings  and  frightful  noises,  try  to  catch 
them,  and  are  often  knocked  down  by  them  ;  the  crowd 
and  the  excitement  that  the  race  produces  was  something 
to  see,  and  by  far  the  most  interesting  moment  of  these 
uninteresting  races. 

Tuesday^  Qth. — At  half-past  four  o'clock  we  went  to  the 
Duchess  of  Devonshire's  balcony  to  see  what  was  passing 
in  the  Corso.  The  scene  was  really  curious  and  amusing. 
Groups  of  peasants,  masked,  were  dancing  in  the  Place  to 
the  sound  of  the  tambourine  played  by  other  masks.  The 
■  street  was  blocked  up  as  soon  as  the  horses  had  all  run, 
and  the  day  was  already  closing  in  sufficiently  to  light 
the  little  wax  candles,  called  here  moccaletti,  that  every- 
one holds  in  his  hand  lighted,  and  tries  to  put  out  that  of 
his  neighbours.  It  is  not  only  the  pedestrians,  but  the 
people  in  carriages  hold  them,  and  everyone  at  the  win- 
dows all  along  the  Corso.  This  makes  an  effect  at  once 
brilhant  and  extraordinary.  Canova  said  that  before  the 
arrival  of  the  French  at  Eome,  and  all  that  followed, 
there  were  three  times  more  morcali  than  they  have  ever 
seen  since,  and  that  it  really  was  a  sight  to  see  at  that 
time. 

Thursday,  l^th. — In  the  morning  we  went  to  St. 
Onofrio,  where  grows  an  oak,  said  to  be  Tasso's  * — a  line 
tree,  in  a  divine  situation,  with  one  of  the  finest  views  in 
Eome. 

Friday,  IQth. — I  walked  with  Sotheby  to  Dies  to  sit, 
and  to  Canova,  then  to  several  artists,  where  we  only 
found  the  Prussian  bronzist,  who  I  did  not  think  remark- 
able, and  Boschi,  another  who  has  a  hundred  times  more 
merit. 

Sunday,  2hth. — Before  ten  o'clock  in  the  morning  to 
the  Chiesa  de  Santa  Maria  sopra   Minerva,  to  see  the 

*  Blown  down  in  a  storm  in  the  autumn  of  1842. 


296  MISS   BEREY'S   JOURNAL.  [1821 

fonction  of  the  dotation  to  so  many  poor  girls,  one  part 
of  whom  received  a  dowry  of  25  scudi  to  marry,  and  the 
others  to  enter  the  convents.  The  Pope  was  there.  It  was 
a  touching  ceremony  ;  so  many  young  girls  dressed  all  in 
white,  from  head  to  foot,  the  lower  part  of  the  face  con- 
cealed in  such  a  way  that  the  eyes  and  nose  only  could 
be  seen  ;  the  most  part  very  handsome,  in  procession  tvro 
and  two,  holding  a  small  lighted  torch,  entering  the 
choir  and  prostrating  themselves  four  and  four  at  the 
foot  of  the  Pope's  throne.  The  Pope  blessed  them  whilst 
they  made  the  sign  of  the  Cross,  and  then  they  dis- 
appeared by  a  side  door  of  the  choir.  All  this  is  not  a 
bad  representation  of  a  procession  in  a  pagan  temple  of 
antiquity,  though  the  illusion  is  spoilt  as  much  as  it  can 
be  by  the  Swiss  guards  with  their  halberds  and  their 
harlequin  dress,  by  the  hats  of  the  Pope's  noble  guard, 
and  by  a  crowd  of  English  and  of  loungers  who  blocked 
up  the  space. 

Friday^  30^A. — At  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening  went 
to  the  Ancient  Music,  of  which  a  society  here  has  given 
three  subscription  concerts  at  the  Palais  Caffarelli.  The 
Palace  is  placed  almost  upon  the  Tarpeian  rock  at  the 
capitol,  and,  consequently,  not  of  easy  access  for  car- 
riages. The  music  consisted  of  a  chorus  by  Palestrina 
(music  of  1546)  and  other  masters  rather  later;  it  was 
sung  by  the  choir  of  the  Pope's  Chapel  in  the  greatest 
perfection,  but  it  was  all  in  chorus — no  airs  sung  solo,  no 
variety,  no  melody  to  my  ignorant  ears ;  so  that  it  af- 
forded me  but  little  pleasure,  though  I  was  glad  to  have 
heard  the  most  ancient  music  of  this  musical  country, 
where  music,  like  so  many  other  things,  was  first  revived. 
The  audience  was  not  large,  and  consisted  of  more  Ger- 
mans and  other  foreigners  than  of  English.  It  was  over 
by  half-past  nine  o'clock. 


1821]  LETTER   TO    MRS.    DAMER.  297 

Miss  Berry  to  Mrs.  Darner. 

Rome,  Tuesday,  April  3,  1821. 
.  .  .  A  letter  from  Anne  Turner  to  Agnes  yesterday,  of  the 
16th  March,  mentions  your  being  perfectly  well,  and  impatient  to 
hear  from  Eome.  This  has  immediately  put  the  pen  into  my 
hand,  altho'  long  ere  you  receive  this  you  will  have  heard  that 
the  Neapolitans,  honest  folks,  are  not  likely  to  disturb  the  peace 
by  fighting  anywhere,  and  that  the  passage  of  the  Austrians  has 
only  served  to  procure  us  a  succession  of  some  of  the  most  pic- 
turesque scenes  of  bivouacs  and  marches  possible.  In  the  north 
of  Italy,  too,  where  a  storm  seemed  to  have  arisen  which  might 
have  been  inconvenient  to  quiet  travellers,  things  seem  to  be 
suddenly  tranquillised,  although  I  by  no  means  trust  to  this 
sunbeam  of  peace  or  to  the  noisy  rejuicings  of  the  Neapolitans 
at  the  entry  of  the  Austrians  into  their  city,  where,  instead  of 
hard  blows,  carbonari,  and  patriots,  they  found  nothing  but 
illuminations,  Polcinellos,  and  gaudy  uniforms,  who  all  faced 
about  and  entered  Naples  with  the  Austrians  !  The  King  (old 
nosey,  who  you  remember)  is  still  at  Florence ;  when  the  people 
about  him  press  him  to  return  to  Naples,  he  replies, 

'  Jo  se  Napolitano,  anch'  io  ho  paura.' 

In  the  meantime,  Nature,  who,  thank  Heaven,  depends  neither 
on  Ultras  or  Liberals,  is  already  arrayed  in  all  the  charms  of 
an  Italian  spring.  .  .  .  Leaving  Eome  must  always  be  a 
crepe  cuore;  the  longer  one  stays — the  more  one  sees  of  it, 
the  more  it  interests  and  attaches. 

I  have  got  a  charming  little  savant,  who  reads  with  me  two 
or  three  times  a  week.  He  is  profoundly  learned  in  the  history 
and  antiquities  of  his  country,  and  I  have  been  excessively 
amused  in  reading  Martial,  Livy,  Suetonius,  &c.  &c.  vdth  him 
on  the  spot  on  which  they  were  written,  and  comparing  the 
descriptions  with  the  actual  state  of  the  scenes  described.  To 
leave  all  this,  and  with  as  little  hope  of  returning  to  it  as  at 
my  age  one  must  have,  would  be  cruel,  had  I  not  something  to 
do  which  occupied  me  all  summer,  and  which  I  can  finish  in 
Florence.  Here  all  one's  ideas  take  a  totally  other  turn,  and 
I  have  never  looked  twice  at' what  I  have  written,  and  have 
been  thinking  of  no  families  but  the  Julian  and  Flavian,  no 
monarchs  but  the  Ccesars,  and  no  amusements  but  the  games 


298  MISS   BEERY'S   JOUENAL.  [1821 

and  the  amphitheatres.  When  once  I  have  torn  myself  away 
from  Eome,  I  shall  return  to  Louis  XIV.  and  Charles  II.  as  to 
something  quite  new  to  me. 

In  the  meantime,  Canova  has  got  me  a  piece  of  marble  for 
you,  which  shall  be  expedited  at  the  same  time  with  some 
trifles  of  our  own  which  must  be  sent  by  sea. 

Wednesday,  April  ith. — In  tbe  morning  to  a  break- 
fast in  Lady  Westmoreland's  garden  at  the  Villa  Niollis. 
There  was  a  sort  of  peasants'  game,  called  the  Gioco  delta 
Sicilia,  in  the  garden  for  the  amusement  of  the  company. 
Peasants  mounted  on  donkeys,  as  httle  amusing  as  pos- 
sible ;  but  the  garden  is  dehghtful,  the  party  pleasant. 

Thursday,  19ih. — Went  to  St.  Peter,  where  the 
illumination  of  the  suspended  cross  appeared  to  me 
more  beautiful  than  ever,  though  the  assembly  in  the 
church  is  quite  another  thing  to  what  it  was  formerly  in 
point  of  picturesque  effect.  No  processions  of  confra- 
ternities nor  of  penitents ;  no  great  ladies  followed  by 
their  three  or  four  lacqueys !  It  was  a  mass  of  black 
coats  and  women  in  bonnets,  which  made  a  crowd,  but 
without  any  effect. 

Friday,  2Qth. — In  the  morning  to  our  service,  which, 
with  a  sermon  and  the  sacrament,  administered  to  more 
than  one  hundred  persons,  lasted  till  nearly  three  o'clock. 
We  went  to  St.  Peter's,  where  the  Pope  was  worshipping 
that  brilliant  cross.  The  open  space  left  around  him,  the 
light  thrown  upon  the  crowd  and  upon  the  splendid  edifice 
in  which  it  is  placed,  is  one  of  the  finest  things  in  the  way 
of  ceremonies  that  can  be  imagined. 

Sunday,  22nd. — Went  with  Lady  Colchester  to  see  the 
benediction  again,  which  was  still  grander  than  on  Thurs- 
day; this  time  3,000  Austrians  were  placed  there,  and 
helped  well  to  fill  the  grand  colonnade,  which  on  the 
first  occasion  was  too  empty.  There  were  to-day,  besides 
the  troops,  15,000  persons  at  least,  and  still  the  whole 
Place  could  have  held  double  the  number.     In  the  even- 


1821]  AN   AUGUST   PARTY.  299 

ing  we  went  to  see  the  illumination  of  St.  Peter's,  unique 
in  the  world  !  The  crowd  of  carriages  was  enormous  in 
the  Place  ;  and  as  they  arrived  from  three  or  four  different 
roads,  the  disorder  was  great  when  it  was  time  to  leave 
the  colonnade  and  find  our  places  to  see  the  Girandola.  I 
was  taken  by  our  Abbe  Molioni  to  a  house  to  see  the 
change  of  illumination,  which  realises  one's  idea  of  the 
decorations  of  a  diamond  palace  in  a  fairy  story.  From 
thence  we  went  to  the  house  opposite  the  Bridge  of  St. 
Angelo,  taken  and  decorated  for  the  occasion  by  the 
Cardinal  Gonsalvi  for  those  he  invited.  The  situation 
was  excellent,  and  there  were  not  too  many  people.  The 
King  of  Naples  was  there,  and  the  Duchesse  de  Floridia,  his 
wife  ;  the  old  Prince  de  Saxe  and  his  two  daughters,  one 
of  whom  is  going  to  marry  the  Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany  ; 
Prince  Henry  of  Prussia  and  the  Prince  of  Bavaria,  and 
all  the  corps  diplomatique,  not  only  belonging  here,  but 
all  those  coming  from  Laybach,  and  accompanying  back 
the  King  to  Naples.  This  King,  ugly  when  I  saw  him 
thirty  years  ago  as  a  young  man,  now  resembles,  as  an 
Englishman  said,  '  a  bad  representation  of  a  river  god  at 
Astley's,  with  a  quantity  of  white  sedgy  hair  hanging  all 
about  his  face.'  His  wife  is  still  good-looking,  and  must 
have  been  handsome  for  a  Neapolitan,  and  with  very  good 
manners. 

Tivoli^  Saturday,  May  hth. — I  took  a  lonely  walk  out- 
side the  gates  of  the  town  (Tivoh),  as  far  as  vis-a-vis  to 
the  very  pretty  Temple  of  Vesta,  which  pleases  me  be- 
yond expression  by  its  situation,  and  by  the  beauty  of  its 
proportions  ;  then  en  caritelle  to  the  Villa  d'Este — the 
cypress  and  the  plantains  there  are  of  an  enormous  size  ; 
the  former  the  largest  trees  of  the  sort  I  know.  It 
belongs  to  the  Duke  of  Modena,  the  representative, 
through  his  mother,  of  the  d'Este  family.  He  contents 
himself  with  not  letting  the  palace  fall  down,  and  with  not 
destroying  the  gardens  otherwise  than  by  the  progress  of 


300  MISS   BEERY'S   journal.  [1821 

time.  This  palace,  crowning  the  garden  with  terrace 
upon  terrace,  gives  more  the  idea  of  the  Palace  of  Alcine 
than  anything  else  I  have  seen,  and  would  have  made 
one  imagine  that  Tasso  really  thought  of  this  in  writing 
that  description  in  his  '  Gerusalemme '  had  it  not  been 
constructed  thirty  years  after  his  death  by  his  protector, 
the  Cardinal  Hypohte  d'Este.  Agnes  and  Lady  Char,  and 
Sotheby  sketched,  and  1  walked  alone  through  these  green 
groves  and  upon  the  fine  terraces,  '  chewing  the  cud  of 
sweet  and  bitter  fancy.'  Still  weak  from  recent  illness,  I 
could  not  help  remarking  that,  notwithstanding  a  sort  of 
enjoyment,  I  had  a  stronger  feeling  of  my  own  decay 
than  of  that  which  I  saw  around  me.  On  our  return  we 
drove  past  the  wooden  bridge  outside  the  gates  as  far 
as  a  canvas  arch,  just  raised  on  the  road  and  illuminated 
for  the  eve  of  a  grand  fete  to-morrow  in  honour  of  the 
entry  of  a  Madonna  called  del  Quintiliola,  which  always 
passes  three  months  here,  and  the  rest  of  the  year  in  her 
church,  three  miles  off. 

Sunday,  Qth. — It  rained  a  great  deal  in  the  night ;  so 
much  all  the  morning  that  we  could  not  walk,  and  awaited 
the  entrance  of  the  poor  Madonna  della  Quintiliola,  so 
called  from  her  church,  situated  upon  the  site  of  the 
villa,  as  they  believe,  of  Quintilius  Varo  (friend  of  Virgil 
and  Horace).  The  rain  began  to  increase  before  she  had 
passed  the  arch  erected  in  her  honour,  and  was  so  hard 
that  the  sparro — that  is  to  say,  a  discharge  of  a  thousand 
small  mortars  placed  upon  the  borders  of  the  river — could 
not  take  place,  and  she  was  obliged  to  take  shelter  in  the 
small  church  at  the  foot  of  the  wooden  bridge  which 
crosses  the  Anio.  About  one  o'clock  the  weather  cleared 
up  a  little,  and  we  went  en  caritelle  as  far  as  we  could  go 
upon  the  road  to  the  Cascatelles,  as  they  call  Horace's 
house  ;  then  to  the  Madonna's  usual  abode,  this  villa  of 
Quintilius  Varo's,  where  many  fine  pieces  of  sculpture 
have  been  formerly  found. 


2821]  FAREWELL   VISITS.  301 

Monday,  7th. — Though  the  weather  did  not  appear 
settled,  still  the  Madonna  began  to  think  of  crossing  the 
bridge,  and  went  to  her  home  at  the  cathedral.  This 
cathedral  is  built  upon  the  remains  of  a  Temple  of  Her- 
cules, one  of  the  most  celebrated  of  ancient  Latium,  and 
we  have  seen  the  Virgin  of  Christianity  approaching 
towards  the  temple  of  this  pagan  demigod  with  a  suite 
and  with  ceremonies  that  I  am  persuaded  would  not 
have  been  displeasing  to  his  ancient  worshippers.  We 
left  Tivoli  before  the  sparro.  Everybody  was  out,  and 
everyone  walking  to  guide  and  accompany  the  Madonna 
to  her  summer  domicile  at  the  Duomo. 

Borne,  Wednesday,  9th. — Went  with  Lord  and  Lady 
Colchester,  Miss  Fanshawe,  Tighe,  and  Basse  the  painter, 
to  the  Vatican,  to  see  the  statues  by  torchlight.  I  had 
always  preserved  the  remembrance  of  the  pleasure  this 
sight  had  formerly  given  me.  There  is  nothing  so  fine, 
so  admirable,  so  unique,  as  these  fine  forms  seen  under  a 
new  aspect,  and  in  a  manner  that  there  seems  every  reason 
to  suppose  many  of  them  were  intended  to  be  seen.  I 
have  never  wished  to  go  in  a  large  party,  as  all  my 
compatriots  do,  and  so  we  invited  only  those  Avhom 
we  knew  could  really  enjoy  it.  We  were  at  the  Vatican 
from  nine  o'clock  till  midnight,  but  it  seemed  like  an 
hour. 

Sunday,  ISth. — The  guns  of  the  Castle  of  St.  Angelo 
reminded  us  that  the  King  of  Naples  was  to  leave  Eome 
to-day.  We  went  to  the  gate  of  St.  Giovanni  to  see  him 
pass,  but  he  was  already  gone,  and  we  only  met  the  Garde 
Bourgeoise  and  a  detachment  of  a  regiment  of  the  line 
and  six  pieces  of  artillery,  returning  from  escorting  him 
outside  the  walls  of  Eome. 

Friday,  ISih. — Made  several  farewell  visits,  and  then 
to  St.  Peter's,  to  take  leave  of  that  magnificent  edifice, 
which  afiected  me  more  than  all  the  others.  There  was 
scarcely  anyone  there ;  the  rays  of  the  sun  poured  m  a 


302  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1821 

flood  of  light  through  the  windows  of  the  choir  it  was 
just  what  I  should  have  most  wished  for  a  last  effect  to 
carry  away  as  a  beautiful  remembrance.  We  went  in  to 
see  the  sacristy  built  by  Pius  VI.  It  consists  of  four 
tolerably  large  rooms  for  the  different  orders  of  eccle- 
siastics who  either  belong  to  the  church  or  who  frequent 
it.  At  length  I  gave  the  last  look  to  the  most  magnificent 
temple  that  the  hands  of  man  have  ever  raised  to  his 
Creator. 

Saturday,  19tk — ^Left  Eome. 

Wednesday,  23rd — Arrived  at  Florence. 

Friday,  2b th. — Lady  Charlotte  left  us  for  Bologna, 
where  her  brother  meets  her.  She  parted  from  us  after 
having  passed  more  than  six  months  together,  with  feel- 
ings in  which  we  most  thoroughly  sympathised. 

Thursday,  ^Ist. — At  seven  o'clock  in  the  morning  we 
went  with  M.  de  Boutourlin  and  all  his  family  to  the 
Cascines,  where  every  year,  on  Ascension  Day,  the  neigh- 
bouring peasants,  all  the  bourgeoisie,  great  and  small,  and 
all  the  people  from  Florence,  meet  at  break  of  day  to  eat, 
drink,  and  walk.  All  the  avenues  of  the  wood  are  fiUed 
with  vendors  of  Salatne  de  Jultalo,  wine,  cheese,  &c.  &c. ; 
everywhere — upon  the  grass,  in  the  fields,  and  in  the 
groves, — are  groups  of  people  sitting  upon  the  ground, 
eating  or  resting  themselves.  They  afterwards  go  into  the 
town  for  mass,  and  then  return  to  the  Cascines,  where,  in 
the  evening,  between  five  and  six  o'clock,  still  more  people 
assemble  than  in  the  morning,  more  eaters  and  drinkers, 
and  more  people  to  administer  to  their  wants.  The  Court 
was  there  in  the  morning,  in  three  carriages,  and  after 
going  the  round  of  all  the  drives,  returned  to  the  Palaz- 
zino  to  watch  the  people  under  the  windows.  The  Court 
is  received  everywhere  with  much  respect  and  even  good- 
will, and  deserves  it  well  from  the  people,  for  the  simple 
and  almost  republican  character  which  it  adopts  on  these 
occasions.      No  guards,  no  pompous  attendants — simple 


1821]  ARRIVAL   AT   TURIN.  30 


o 


carriages  with  six  horses,  preceded  by  a  single  piqueur, 
forms  all  the  retinue. 

Thursday,  June  1th.  —  Dined  at  the  Lockes  with 
Bartolini,  at  whose  house  we  had  been  to  see  the  Duke 
of  Devonshire's  vase,  and  two  of  the  young  Campbells, 
Emma  and  Julia,*  grouped  as  dancers ;  they  are  now 
modelled  in  terra  cotta.  The  pose  of  the  figures  is 
really  charming,  and  the  drapery  simple  and  flowing, 
without  affectation. 

Saturday,  9th. — Left  Florence. 

Friday,  10th. — Arrived  at  Bologna.  We  visited  the 
Academy,  where  all  those  chefs  d'oeuvre  which  formerly 
adorned  their  churches  are  to  be  seen  since  their  return 
from  Paris — Guido's  '  Pietk  '  perhaps  the  finest ;  Samson, 
with  two  Philistines  fallen  at  his  feet,  another  chef  d'ceuvre 
of  Guido  ;  in  fact,  it  is  here  that  Guido  shines.  His  pic- 
tures here  have  not  only  perfection  of  form,  of  composi- 
tion, but  a  strength  of  colouring  that  they  rarely  have 
elsewhere.  Andrea  Corsini,  by  him,  is  another  chef  d'ceuvre 
as  a  portrait  of  a  single  figure. 

Tuesday,  \2th. — Slept  at  Mantua.  We  breakfasted  at 
San  Benedetto,  an  open  village  with  arcades  under  the 
houses,  a  la  mode  du  pays.  It  must  have  been  formerly 
merely  the  appendage  to  an  enormous  church  and  convent 
of  Benedictines.  The  convent,  with  all  its  rich  posses- 
sions in  land,  was  confiscated  by  Napoleon,  and  has  never 
been  restored.  The  great  church  now  only  serves  for  the 
parish  priest  to  do  the  duty  of  the  village ;  the  cloister 
and  convent  is  occupied  as  a  military  prison.  In  the 
town  I  saw  neither  fine  streets  nor  fine  houses,  and  I  left 
Mantua  regretting  that  I  had  been  there  only  to  be  con- 
vinced that  Virgil's  country  was  so  little  worthy  of  its 
muse. 

Monday,  ISth. — Arrived  at  Turin. 

*  Afterwards  Mrs.  William  Russell  and  Mrs.  Langford  Brooke. 


304  MISS   BEKKY'S   JOURNAL.  [l821 

Tuesday,  l^th. — M.  de  la  Tour  du  Pin  (the  French 
Ambassador)  told  me,  walking  in  the  garden  of  his  villa, 
where  we  dined  to-day,  that  on  the  night  of  the  abdi- 
cation of  the  King,  Victor  Emmanuel,  13th  of  March,  he 
and  all  the  corps  diplomatique  had  been  summoned  to 
the  Palace  at  midnight,  where  everything  was  in  con- 
fusion and  litter  with  all  the  packages  making  for  the 
departure  of  the  King  the  next  morning.*  When  from 
this  meeting  he  was  dismissed,  and  before  he  left  the 
Palace,  he  desired  an  audience  of  the  Prince  of  Carignano  ; 
it  was  then  between  one  and  two  in  the  morning  of  the 
14th.  The  Prince  instantly  admitted  him  ;  he  was  stand- 
ing bolt  upright,  with  the  most  immovable  countenance. 
M.  de  la  Tour  du  Pin  told  him  that,  hearing  on  all  sides 
of  the  Spanish  Constitution,  now  that  the  power  of  grant- 
ing or  denying  was  in  the  hands  of  the  Prince,  he  thought 
it  right  to  beg  him  to  consider  how  perfectly  averse 
France  must  be  to  such  a  Constitution,  which  she  could 
not  indifferently  see  established  on  the  confines,  however 
averse  she  was  to  any  interference  in  the  affairs  of  her 
neighbours.  The  Prince  replied  with  the  same  immov- 
able countenance,  'Je  ne  ferai  rien  indigne  de  mes 
ancetres.  Je  saurai  mourir  dans  I'occasion.'  The  Am- 
bassador replied,  '  Qu'il  ne  s'agissait  pas  de  mourir,  mais 
de  vivre  et  de  regner,'  for  which  reason  it  behoved  him  to 
exert  all  his  influence  to  avoid  such  a  fatal  measure  as 
adopting  the  Spanish  Constitution.  The  Prince  replied 
again  in  exactly  the  same  words  and  the  same  want  of 
all  accompanying  sentiment,  in  such  a  moment  of  crise  ! 
M.  de  la  Tour  du  Pin  said  the  impression  left  on  his 

*  The  King,  Victor  Emmanuel,  refused  to  grant  the  'Spanish  Constitution  ' 
whicli  was  called  for  by  his  subjects,  and  on  the  13th  of  March  abdicated 
his  throne.  At  five  o'clock  the  following  morning  he  retired  with  his  family 
and  retinue  to  Nice,  leaving  the  Prince  Carignano,  his  nephew,  entrusted 
with  authority  as  Regent.  Though  the  Prince  de  Carignano  was  appointed 
Regent,  the  Crown  devolved  on  the  brother  of  the  King,  Charles  Felix, 
Duke  of  Genoa. 


1821]  THE   COMTE   DE   REVEL.  305 

mind  by   this  interview    entirely  destroyed  any   hope 
from  the  conduct  or  character  of  the  Prince. 

Saturday^  22>rd. — The  Comte  de  Eevel,  le  Lieutenant 
du  Eoyaume,  told  me  to-day,  at  dinner,  that  although  he 
would  willingly  have  given  a  part  of  his 'blood  and  that 
of  his  children  to  have  avoided  the  interference  of  the 
Austrians,  that  he  had  the  intimate  conviction  that  it  was 
perfectly  necessary,  and  that  he  was  sure  they  should  get 
rid  of  them  as  soon  as  they  were  no  longer  necessary ! 
When  I  looked  doubtful  of  this,  as  they  are  now  in  com- 
plete possession  of  the  whole  of  Italy,  he  said  he  only 
answered  for  Piedmont !  It  is  really  difficult  to  beheve 
that  a  man  of  common  sense  and  more  than  conimoti 
honesty,  can  be  thus  bewildered ;  and  yet  Kevel  is  both 
one  and  the  other !  He  said  he  did  not  like  the  Austrians, 
but  that  France  had  thought  proper  to  follow  the  policy 
of  England,  of  which  he  spoke  with  indignation :  '  Qu'il 
ne  donnera  pas  un  sou  pour  des  amis,  qui  vous  verront 
le  pistolet  a  la  gorge  sans  vous  aider ! '  I  ventured  to 
say  that  in  a  constitutional  government  of  the  nature  of 
which  France  now  partook,  neither  the  Sovereign  nor  his 
Ministers  could  follow  their  incHnations  when  decidedly 
against  the  wishes  or  prejudices  (whichever  they  might 
be  called)  of  the  people,  and  that  this  was  the  case  in 
both  countries  in  the  present  instance.  This  seemed  a 
new  reason  to  him  for  avoiding  a  resemblance  to  such 
Governments  ;  and  he  added,  '  Que  si  ce  mouvement  re- 
volutionnaire  avait  passe  dans  la  Savoie,  que  la  France 
I'aurait  tout  de  suite  partage,'  which  I  am  persuaded  is 
no  more  true  than  all  the  rest.  But  to  hear  many  per- 
sons talk  here,  one  would  suppose  oneself  in  the  thir- 
teenth century,  and  that  'tout  k  cote  de  beaucoup 
d'autres,'  speaking,  acting,  and  thinking  with  the  most 
rational  and  well-considered  hberality. 

Poor   people !   never  was  the  enlightened  part   of  a 
nation  in   such  a  cruel  situation,  or  more  to  be  pitied. 

VOL.  in.  X 


306  MISS   BEERY  S   JOUENAL.  [l821 

Deprived  of  all  hope  or  trust  in  tlie  Prince  to  whom  they 
had  looked  forward  for  future  ameliorations  becoming  the 
age  ;  abandoned  by  their  old  King,  to  whom  their  mutual 
sufferings  had  attached  them  ;  turned  over  to  a  man 
whom  they  have  been  in  the  habit  of  considering  as  an 
idiot,  likely  to  have  been  set  aside  when  it  came  natu- 
rally to  his  turn  to  reign,  and  whom  they  can  only  con- 
sider as  a  griffe  in  the  hands  of  the  Austrians,  while  all 
the  thirteenth-century  people  tell  you  with  gravity  that, 
being  now  called  to  reign,  God  has  bestowed  that 
especial  grace  on  him  which  has  made  him  quite  another 
man  from  what  everybody  supposed  the  Due  de  Genoa  to 
be !  His  manifestoes  are  of  the  thirteenth  century  in 
sentiments,  and  the  creature  himself  seems  disposed  to 
think  (if  he  thinks  at  all)  that  implacability  is  steadiness, 
and  that  persecution  will  make  converts  to  sentiments 
already  exploded  without  its  unfailing  aid.  Eevel  gravely 
tells  one  that,  if  this  King  had  been  on  the  throne,  the 
revolution  would  never  have  taken  place !  and  the  sons 
and  daughters  of  the  late  Comte  de  Maistre,  the  worthy 
heirs  of  his  sentiments,  are  firmly  convinced  that,  by  the 
especial  grace  of  God,  this  idiot  Due  de  Genoa  is  gomg 
to  become  a  great  king,  and  to  reign  by  the  only  maxims 
worthy  of  the  throne,  and  happy  for  the  people  ! 

Wednesday,  27th.  —  Left  Turin.  Slept  on  the  Mount 
Cenis. 

Wednesday,  July  itii. — At  Sens,  went  to  see  the  Ca- 
thedral, which  contains  the  tomb  of  the  Dauphin  and 
Dauphiness,  *  father  and  mother  of  the  present  King,  by 
Coustou.  During  the  Eevolution,  a  mayor,  either  out 
of  love  for  the  King  or  for  sculpture,  had  it  taken  away 
in  pieces  and  concealed.  It  deserved  to  be  preserved,  as 
it  is  well  executed,  though  the  design  is  French. 

Thursday,  hth. — Arrived  at  Paris. 

Friday,  'oth. — We  went  with  the  Ambassadress  to  the 

*  The  son  of  Louis  XV.  and  Marie  Joseplie  de  Saxe. 


1821]  LETTER    FROM    CAXOVA.  307 

Garde  Meuble,  to  see  the  Crown  of  the  King  of  France, 
prepared  for  a  coronation  which  perhaps  wiU  never 
take  place.  The  Crown  is  of  great  elegance  as  well  as 
richness  ;  it  is  entirely  composed  of  diamonds  and  sap- 
phires, without  other  mixture  of  stones,  the  enormous 
diamond  called  '  the  Eegent '  forming  the  top  of  the  cross 
which  surmounts  it,  and  of  which  one  does  not  see  the 
workmanship.  In  this  same  Garde  Meuble  there  is  every 
imasjinable  sort  of  furniture,  to  be  taken  to  the  Palaces, 
furnished,  or  to  be  furnished,  whenever  it  is  required. 

Possagno :  Luglio  8,  1821. 

Gentilissima  Signoea  Marietta, — Perch'  Ella  noii  creda 
che  io  sia  dimentico,  e  posto  abbia  in  obblio  la  memoria  e  la 
gratitudine  delle  sue  cortesi  e  amabili  gentilezze,  Le  scrivo 
queste  due  righe  auche  da  qui,  dove  sono  arrivato  in  questi 
giorni.  Beato  me  se  potessi  fra  queste  colline  e  queste  ame- 
nissime  situazioni  indicare  alia  sorella  Agnese  qualche  bel 
punto  per  essere  da  lei  disegnato.  Quantunque  il  tempo  sia 
cosi  cattivo  che  non  permitta  un  sol  giorno  di  puro  sole  senza 
molt'  acqua.  Ho  ritrovato  i  lavori  del  tempio  molto  bene 
avanzati,  con  mia  plena  soddisfazione ;  e  spero  che  le  mie 
cure  avranno  un  felice  successo.  Se  avro  la  sorte  di  essere 
riscontrato  di  questa  mia  lettera.  La  prego  dirigermi  la  sua 
risposta  a  Eoma,  dove  io  saro  di  ritorno  fra  non  molti  giorni 
Anche  di  Eoma  io  Le  diressi  una  letterina  a  Parigi,  ed  e  questa 
la  seconda.  Dico  cio  per  farla  sempre  piu  certa  della  mia 
sincera  amicizia,  e  della  sollecitudine  che  ho  di  tenermi  vicino 
alia  sua  mente,  e  al  suo  cuore,  se  pure  vi  puo  essere  luogo  in 
esso  per  me. 

II  cattivo  abate,  mio  fratello,  manda  a  Lei  e  alia  sorella  i  suoi 

rispetti ,  come  pur  faccio  io  stesso  per  ambedue.     Ella 

mi  continui  il  suo  gentil  animo,  e  mi  creda  sempre  ripieno 
della  piu  ben  sentita  stima  e  attaccamento. 

II  suo  att^°  serv''® 

Can  OVA.* 

*  Possagno :  July  8,  1821. 

That  you  may  not  think  that  I  am  forgetful,  and  could  have  lost  the  re- 
collection and  the  grateful  sense  of  your  courteous  and  amiable  kindness,  I 

X  2 


308  MISS   BERRY'S   JOURNAL.  -     [1821 

Friday,  August  17th. — Left  Paris. 

Tuesday,  21st. — Arrived  in  London,  at  Mr.  Montagu's, 
Portman  Square. 

Friday,  21th. — We  went  at  ten  o'clock  to  Newgate 
with  Lady  Charlotte  Lindsay,  who  had  procured  three 
tickets  from  Mrs.  Pry,  to  see  the  female  side  of  the  prison. 
It  is  an  interesting,  satisfactory,  and,  above  all,  affecting 
sight.  I  have  neither  time  nor  strength  just  now  to 
detail  it.     We  were  above  three  hours  there. 

London,  Thursday,  September  IZth. — In  the  morning 
went  with  G.  Dawson,  Andreas,  and  Lady  Charlotte,  to 
the  New  Bethlehem,  in  St.  George's  Pi  elds.  Dawson  had 
a  letter  to  one  of  the  surgeons.  No  hospital  deserves  so 
well  to  be  visited,  not  only  for  its  perfect  cleanhness  and 
general  arrangements,  but  for  the  good  and  gentle  manner 
with  which  everyone  is  there  treated.  This  new  system 
of  gentleness  and  hberty  has  so  changed  the  nature  of 
the  malady  with  nearly  all  the  poor  inmates,  that  there  is 
scarcely  one  who  is  now  obliged  to  be  tied  down,  and 
those  who  have  been  chained  up  for  years  in  the  old 
Bedlam  are  here  free  and  tranquil. 

Tuesday,  I'^th. — Left  London  for  the  North. 

write  two  lines  from  this  place  also,  where  I  arrived  a  few  days  ago.  How 
happy  should  I  be  if,  amongst  these  hills  and  these  most  lovely  views,  I 
could  point  out  to  Miss  Agnes  some  beautiful  spot  for  her  to  draw,  though 
the  weather  is  so  bad  that  we  never  have  a  day  of  sunshine  without  a  quan- 
tity of  rain.  I  foimd  the  works  at  the  church  getting  on  well  and  to  my 
complete  satisfaction,  and  I  hope  that  my  trouble  will  be  rewarded  by 
success.  If  I  am  to  have  the  good  fortune  of  having  this  letter  answered,  I 
must  beg  you  to  direct  your  reply  to  Rome,  where  I  shall  be  back  not 
many  days  hence.  From  Rome  I  also  directed  a  letter  to  you  in  Paris — so 
this  is  the  second.  I  tell  you  this  to  make  you  more  and  more  certain  of 
my  sincere  friendship,  and  of  my  anxiety  to  keep  myself  close  to  your 
memory  and  to  your  heart,  if,  indeed,  there  can  be  room  in  it  for  me.  The 
wicked  Abbe,  my  brother,  sends  his  most  respectful  compliments  to  you  and 
to  your  sister,  in  which  I  also  join  myself.  Pray  continue  to  feel  kindly 
towards  me,  and  believe  me  to  be  ever  filled  with  the  most  hearty  esteem 
and  attachment. 

Yours,  &c., 

Canova. 


1821]  VISITS   THE   DUKE   OF   DEVONSHIRE.  309 

Thursday,  20th. — We  slept  at  the  Duke  of  Devonshire 
Inn.  at  Derby,  and  found  ourselves  only  twenty-seven 
miles  from  Chatsworth.  It  rained  without  ceasing,  so  we 
lost  all  the  beauties  of  the  road  from  Derby  to  Matlock, 
which  goes  through  a  charming  country ;  we  also  lost  all 
the  beauties  of  Matlock,  and  we  arrived  at  Chatsworth 
without  being  able  to  see  its  magnificence  before  we 
were  at  the  door.  This  door  is  now  surrounded  with  all 
the  preparations  and  scaffolding  for  the  new  wing  that 
the  Duke  has  begun  to  build.  The  Duke  came  out  im- 
mediately to  receive  us,  and  he  took  us  through  all  sorts 
of  lumber  to  the  hbrary,  the  only  room  in  which  he  can 
now  receive  anyone.  James  Abercrombie  joined  us  there. 
There  are  few  people  who  would  have  been  so  agreeable 
to  meet  here  as  him,  or  indeed  to  meet  anywhere,  as  I 
know  but  few  better  minds  than  his. 

Friday,  21st — Walked  with  the  Duke  upon  the  fine 
terrace  at  the  east  of  the  house.  He  ordered  all  the 
waters  to  play,  which  even  to  Eoman  eyes  are  well  worth 
seeing ;  they  greatly  adorn  the  large  style  of  garden 
which  suits  a  palace  like  this,  and  ought  in  fine  weather 
to  have  a  very  good  effect  amongst  the  large  trees  with 
which  they  are  flanked.  From  there  by  a  path  through 
the  English  garden  across  a  fine  wood  to  a  grotto  the  last 
Duchess  had  begun  ;  her  son,  the  present  Duke,  has 
finished  it,  and  is  adding  another  of  stalactite,  all  brilhant 
with  the  pieces  of  metal  found  in  his  mines  in  this 
county.  Went  to  Ashford,  a  small  village  five  miles  off, 
where  the  Duke  enjoys  living  in  a  small  house,  where  he 
has  arranged  in  a  very  simple  style  a  sittmg-room  and  a 
bed-room.  The  situation  of  this  small  house  is  charming, 
with  a  clear  and  rapid  river  running  across  the  meadow 
in  front,  and  crossed  by  a  stone  bridge,  with  its  banks 
well  covered  with  very  fine  trees.  The  Duke  intends 
passing  here  three  or  four  days  at  a  time,  while  Chats- 
worth is  fuU  of  all  sorts  of  workmen ;  besides,  Chatsworth 


310  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1S21 

too  much  resembles  a  palace  not  to  excuse  its  master 
this  taste  of  wishing  to  find  himself  sometimes  in  a 
cottage. 

Saturday,  22nd. — Agnes  and  I  in  an  open  carriage  to 
Haddon,  an  ancient  house  of  the  Duke  of  Eutland.  It  is 
luifurnished,  and  only  protected  from  the  ravages  of  time. 
It  has  never  been  magnificent.  The  castles  of  our  noble- 
men in  the  fifteenth  and  sixteenth  centuries  were  no 
great  things,  and  are  for  the  most  part  remarkable  for 
that  absence  of  ornament  which  is  usual  in  all  the  build- 
ings of  the  North.  At  dinner,  amongst  others,  we  had 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Arkwright,  one  of  the  sons  of  the  very  large 
manufacturer  of  that  name.  She  was  the  daus^hter  of 
Stephen  Kemble,  very  large  figure,  with  a  handsome  face.* 

Sunday,  2^rd. — Left  Chatsworth  early. 

Wednesday,  2Qth. — Arrived  at  the  hotel  on  the  Regent's 
Bridge  at  Edinburgh.  All  this  part  of  the  town  is  new 
feince  our  last  visit  to  Scotland. 

Friday,  2Sth. — Arrived  at  Eaith. 

Tuesday,  October  2ord. — Went  on  a  visit  to  Sir  John 
and  Lady  Oswald.  Sir  John  had  given  me  a  collection 
of  his  grandfather's  letters  to  Ministers  and  several  distin- 
guished persons  of  his  day,  since  the  years  1742  and  1767. 
There  were  many  more  of  the  latter  than  the  former, 
which  is  a  pity,  as  he  appears  to  have  written  and  thought 
so  well,  and  was  in  correspondence  with  all  the  clever 
men  of  his  country  whilst  he  was  in  Parliament,  and 
occupying  himself  very  much  with  public  affairs.  The 
reading  of  these  letters,  which  make  two  large  MS.  books, 
occupied  me  very  agreeably  all  the  morning. 

Eome:  OttobreSO,  1821. 
Sono  stato  piii  di  due  mesi  alia  patria,  e  per  dir  meglio,  ai 
colli  del  mio  patrio  villaggio,  Possagno,  ove  stassi  erigendo  la 

*  Mrs.  Arkwriglit  was  well  known  for  her  great  talent  in  music,  both  in 
singing  and  in  composition. 


1821]  ARRIVAL   AT    CAPESTHORN'.  311 

mia  chiesa  !  Qaante  volte  col  fratello  si  fece  memoria  di  loro 
due,  e  quante  volte  abbiamo  espresso  il  desiderio  di  averle 
ospiti  amiche  in  quel  nostro  campestre  ma  pittoresco  e  ameno 
soggiorno !  Inutili  voti !  e  lusingbe  che  forse  non  vedranno 
giammai  il  lieto  giorno  di  essere  soddisfatte  !  Che  almeno  da 
loro  non  perdasi  la  memoria  di  noi,  e  di  me  specialmente,  che 
ritengo  impresse  nel  cuore  le  cortesi  maniere,  e  le  obliganti 
espressioni  del  gentile  suo  animo  verso  di  me  tanto  benigno  e 
amorevole.  Saro  felice  d'avere  talvolta  le  sue  nuove,  e  la 
sicurezza  che  non  sono  lontano  dalla  sua  ricordanza. 

Mio  fratello  divide  con  me  i  miei  sentimenti,  e  mi  dice  di 
ricordare  all'  una  e  all'  altra  i  suoi  distinti  rispetti,  ai  quali 
unisco  pure  i  miei,  che  sono  animati  dalla  piu  afifettuosa  stima 
e  attaccamento  verso  1'  amabili  sorelle,  che  lasciato  mi  hanno 
uno  si  vivo  desiderio  di  lor  corapagnia  ! 

II  suo  obb^°  servitore, 

A.  Canova.* 

Friday,  November  23rc/. — Left  Eaitli,  and  arrived  at 
Edinburgh. 

Tuesday,  27th. — Left  Scotland. 

Wediiesday,  December  hth. — Arrived  at  Capesthorn, 
the  seat  of  Mr.  Davenport. 

Tuesday,  Wth. — We  went  en  caleche  by  appointment 

*  Rome  :  October  20,  1821. 

I  liave  been  more  than  two  montTis  in  my  own  covintry,  or  rather  amongst 
tbe  hills  of  my  native  village,  Passagno,  where  I  am  building  my  church. 
How  many  times  have  my  brother  and  I  thought  of  you  both  there  !  and 
how  many  times  have  we  expressed  the  wish  that  we  might  have  you  as 
our  guests  and  friends  in  that  rural  but  pictm-esque  and  agreeable  abode  ! 
Useless  wishes  and  flattering  hopes,  which  perhaps  will  never  be  fulfilled  ! 
But  at  least  may  you  never  lose  your  remembrance  of  us,  and  especially  of 
me,  who  retain  in  my  heart  the  impression  of  your  gentle  manners,  your 
obliging  expressions,  your  kind  and  affectionate  bearing  towards  me. 

I  shall  be  happy  if  I  may  sometimes  have  news  of  you,  and  the  assurance 
that  I  am  not  banished  from  your  memory.  My  brother  imites  with  me  in 
these  sentiments,  and  bids  me  present  to  you  both  his  respectful  compli- 
ments, to  which  I  join  my  own,  animated  by  the  most  affectionate  esteem 
and  attachment  for  the  amiable  sisters  who  have  left  with  me  so  lively  a 
desire  to  enjoy  their  society. 

Your  obedient,  &c., 

A.  Canova. 


o 


12  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1821 


to  Alderley,  Sir  John  Stanley's ;  they  showed  us  the 
grounds  of  their  house  and  the  kitchen-garden  ;  then  we 
went,  with  three  or  four  of  their  daughters  and  them- 
selves, in  a  landau  and  four  horses,  besides  our  carriage, 
to  three  miles  from  there  to  Alderley  Edge,  where  there 
is  a  fine  view  of  a  large  extent  of  country  well  cultivated 
and  inhabited,  and  bounded  by  the  Derbyshire  hills.  In 
the  course  of  our  drive  we  came  to  a  very  old  and  very 
fine  forest  of  oak  trees  and  beech — grand  trees,  such  as 
there  only  are  in  England.  Here  we  got  out  and  con- 
tinued walking  as  far  as  the  rectory  of  Edward  Stanley,* 
brother  to  Sir  John  —  one  of  the  prettiest,  most  pic- 
turesque, and  well-arranged  parsonages  I  have  ever  seen, 
and  where  everything  shows  not  only  a  taste  for  the  arts, 
but  general  good  taste.  Mr.  Stanley  and  his  pleasing 
and  spirituelle  wifef  accompanied  us  for  the  rest  of  the 
walk. 

Miss  Berry  finished  the  month  of  December,  after  short 
visits  at  Capesthorn  and  Trentham,  at  Guy's  Ciff. 

Monday,  ?tlst. — We  all  wished  one  another  a  happy 
new  year  before  going  to  bed,  and  so  finished  for  me  the 
year  1821,  began  at  Eome. 


*  Afterwards  Bishop  of  Norwich. 

t  Daughter  of  the  Eev,  Oswald  Leicester. 


1822]  ARRIVES   IN   BELGIUM.  313 


1822. 
JOUENAL. 

Guy's  Cliff',  Tuesday,  January  1st. — Mrs.  Siddons  and 
her  daughter  arrived. 

Wednesday,  2nd. — Mrs.  Siddons  read  '  Othello,'  the  two 
parts  of  lago  and  Othello  quite  a  merveille. 

Thursday,  3rd. — Left  Guy's  Cliff. 

After  a  short  visit  to  Wimpole  and  a  residence  in  London 
from  the  17th  to  the  25th  March,  the  Miss  Berrys  quitted 
England  for  the  Continent,  and  at  the  end  of  March  ar- 
rived at  Brussels. 

Monday,  April  Sth. — Li  the  morning  went  to  visit 
Madame  de  Staremberg  at  the  Hotel  d'Aremberg.  It  is 
one  of  the  finest  noblemen's  houses  I  ever  saw  in  any 
country  ;  an  immense  court  on  one  side,  and  on  the  other 
a  garden  of  several  acres,  with  large  trees,  and  all  that  in 
the  middle  of  the  town.  Within  is  a  beautiful  gallery, 
where  the  Duke  has  placed  an  enormous  collection  of  the 
finest  porcelain  of  Japan,  which  he  has  collected. 

Tuesday,  Qth. — It  was  still  cold  and  uncertain  weather. 
We  started  in  a  covered  caleche  to  go  to  Waterloo.  The 
road  at  half  a  mile  from  Brussels  traverses  for  about  two 
miles  the  forest  of  Soio^nies.  The  little  village  of  Water- 
loo  is  nearly  surrounded  by  it,  and  it  springs  up  again 
between  Waterloo  and  the  very  small  village  of  Mont  St. 
Jean.  At  Mont  St.  Jean  we  left  the  carriage,  and,  ac- 
companied by  a  peasant  of  the  inn,  walked  to  the  field 


314  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1822 

rendered  for  ever  memorable  by  what  may  be  called  the  ' 
greatest  battle  known  in  either  ancient  or  modern  history, 
if  its  consequences,  the  manner  in  which  it  was  contested, 
and  the  equality  of  the  means,  moral  and  physical,  that 
were  brought  into  conflict,  are  all  taken  into  considera- 
tion. All  trace  of  the  havoc  occasioned  by  such  a  rencontre  . 
is  obliterated.  It  is  a  large  open  country,  the  ground 
very  uneven,  and  is  undulating  now  with  young  corn. 
The  Haye  Sainte,  that  isolated  farm  where  the  struggle 
was  so  fierce,  and  which  was  taken  and  retaken  three 
times,  is  all  repaired;  there  is  only  to  be  seen  two  or  three 
bullet-holes  in  a  barn  door.  The  tomb  of  Gordon*  and 
that  of  the  Hanoverian  officers,  though  nothing  remark- 
able in  themselves,  are  well  placed  on  each  side  of  the 
liigh  road,  upon  the  height  where  Wellington  was  stand- 
ing, and  very  near  the  place  where  the  brave  Gordon  fell 
at  his  side.  We  walked  upon  the  high  road  as  far  as  La 
Belle  Alliance,  a  miserable  little  beer-house,  which  had 
borne  for  forty  years  a  name  that  seemed  made  on  pur- 
pose for  it  at  this  time,  when,  after  the  retreat  of  the 
French,  Wellington,  advancing  upon  the  field  which  had 
cost  him  so  much,  met  Blucher  arriving  across  the  country 
in  advance  of  his  Prussians,  who  were  then  defiling  out 
of  a  wood  near  a  farm  about  three-quarters  of  a  mile 
from  the  '  Belle  Alliance.'  We  stopped  at  the  chvuT.h  of 
Waterloo.  It  is  a  little  rotonde,  of  which  the  walls  are 
covered  with  honourable  inscriptions  to  the  memory  of 
the  brave  men  who  fell  in  the  great  battle.  There  are 
afflicted  parents  to  their  children  ;  sisters  to  their  brothers ; 
regiments  to  their  gallant  brothers  in  arms,  with  the 
names  of  all  the  officers,  and  the  number  of  the  soldiers 
that  they  lost,  &c.  In  the  time  of  paganism  this  temple 
would  have  been  consecrated  to  the  god  Mars ;  in  no 
other  place  upon  the  earth  could  they  have  offered  their 
vows  so  favourably.     It  hailed  and  rained  without  ceasing 

*  The  Hon.  Alexander  Gordon,  brother  to  the  late  Earl  of  Aberdeen. 


1822]  REACHES    PAEIS.  315 

till  our  return  to  Brussels,  at  a  quarter  past  six  in  the 
evening.  The  road  is  badly  paved,  with  large  ruts  on 
each  side,  and  one  continually  meets  enormous  coal  wag- 
gons coming  from  Charleroi  to  Brussels,  Ghent,  &c.,  often 
drawn  by  seven  of  the  strong  large  horses  of  this  country. 

Thursday,  11th. — After  dinner  went  to  the  great 
theatre.  The  '  Marriacje  of  Fio;aro,'  turned  into  a  comic 
opera  by  Mozart,  with  delicious  music  ;  but  I  do  not  like 
music  which  from  time  to  time  mars  the  wit  of  Beau- 
marchais.  The  really  comic  effect  of  the  last  scene  is 
entirely  spoiled  by  the  music ;  all  the  actors  entering  the 
joavilion  on  the  two  sides  of  the  stage,  singing  their  inten- 
tions "svith  an  accompaniment  charming  in  itself,  but  which 
entirely  destroys  the  illusion  of  the  scene. 

Saturday,  V6th. — Left  Brussels. 

Monday,  loth. — Arrived  in  Paris. 

Sunday,  May  12th.  —  Dined  at  the  Ambassador's. 
Talleyrand  was  there,  and  very  amusing  upon  the  manners 
and  ways  of  living  of  the  old  ladies  of  the  '  Ancienne 
Cour,'  of  which  he  says  there  is  no  trace  left,  and  '  que 
c'etait  une  chose  qui  manquait  pour  I'entretien  des 
manieres  et  de  la  langage.' 

Wednesday,  22nd. — Went  to  the  private  view  of  the 
exhibition  of  modern  pictures.  With  the  exception  of 
some  small  '  Tableaux  de  genre,'  and  some  views  of 
'  Interiors,'  there  were  none  worth  taking  the  trouble  to 
see.     The  portraits  all  like  tea-boards. 

The  following  extract  of  a  letter  appears  to  have  been 
addressed  to  a  friend  in  answer  to  an  expressed  disinclina- 
tion to  receive  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper : — 

Extract  of  a  Letter  addressed  to  a  Friend. 

Marseilles,  Good  Friday,  5tli  April  1822. 
I  am  seriously  sorry  to  find  you  have  so  misunderstood  me 
on  a  serious  subject.     You  seem  to  forget  that  that  doctrine  is 


316  MISS   berry's   journal.  11822 

founded  upon  the  most  implicit  confidence  in  the  decrees  of  an 
all-merciful  Creator — a  profound,  intimate,  and  unshakable  con- 
viction of  the  spirituality  of  our  nature,  together  with  a  deter- 
mination and  a  power  '  de  prendre  I'incomprehensible  comme 
tel.'    If  such  confidence  and  such  power  exist  not  in  your  mind, 
I  regret  it  for  your  sake.     But,  even  then,  why  should  you  feel 
'  an  awkwardness '  at  doing  *  this  in  remembrance  of  me  ? '    In  re- 
membrance of  the  purest  and  most  beautiful  system  of  morality 
ever  taught  to  mankind — even  considering  the  history  of  the 
Teacher  in  what  is  called  the  least  orthodox  light,  which  I  do 
not  enter  into,  because  my  faith  would  remain  unshaken  and 
my  confidence  unimpaired,  even  if  I  were  capable  of  detecting 
the  mistakes  men  may  have  made  upon  the  subject.     If  their 
opinions  weigh  with  you  so  much,  I  cannot  conceive  what  pre- 
vents your  receiving  it  and  every  other  dogma  of  our  religion 
with  the  implicit  orthodoxy  you  envy.     Still  more  do  I  regret 
to  hear  you  say,  that  since  your  affections  are  increased  in  this 
w^orld,  you  feel  a  stronger  desire  to  be  religious  in  the  narrowest 
sense  of  the  word,  that  you  may  be  assured  such  affections 
will  not  end  here — '  But  here  upon  the  shoal  of  time.'     And 
are   you   really  so    unhappy  as  to  want  a  conviction    of   the 
immortality  of  such  sentiments  ?    To  coldly  ask  how  those  that 
believe  in  it  arrive  at  such  conclusion?     To    calculate  what 
unassisted  reason  and  what  Scripture  say  to  you  on.  the  subject? 
These  are  truths  that  must  be  felt,  and  can  only  be  proved  by 
feeling.     Of  all  errors  on  these  serious  subjects,  the  only  one 
with  which  I  never  could  sympathise  or  forgive,  because  it 
annihilates  every  social  affection  of  the  heart,  and  leads  inevi- 
tably to  the  coldest  selfishness,  is  Materialism.    All  other  errors 
are  venial,  and  degrade  not  our  nature.     If  the  immortality  of 
the  soul  and  its  affections  is  an  error,  so  let  it  remain  for  ever 
to  me ;  I  vjould  not  be  undeceived — I  would  not  believe  it 
otherwise — my  proud  soul  starts  from   the   idea  of  being  so 
degraded  in  the  scale  of  existence. 

Paris,  Wednesday,  June  hth. — To  the  Fran^ais ;  a  new 
piece, '  Kegulus,'  by  Arnault,  the  son.*  Talma  excellent ; 
the  piece  without  interest,  with  some  fine  hues,  and  a  per- 

*  Lucieu  Emile,  son  of  Antoine  Vincent  Arnault. 


1822]         PRESENTED   TO   THE   DUCHESS   OF   OELEAXS.  317 

petual  flourish  of  Eome,  and  its  patriotism  and  liberty,  that 
Eome  understood  nearly  as  well  as  those  who  were 
listening  to  it  here.  A  full  pit,  a  great  deal  of  noise,  and 
many  allusions.  Talma  came  and  announced  the  author, 
and  soon  after  the  father  was  dragged  out  by  a  well- 
arranged  chance  from  a  box  in  the  balcony ;  he  was 
made  to  come  forward  to  receive  the  noisy  applause  of 
the  pit. 

Sunday^  \&th. — Went  to  Tivoli  with  the  two  Williams, 
Mr.  Abercrombie,  Mr.  Ward,  and  the  Due  de  Dalberg. 
Ward  gave  me  his  arm ;  he  is  ill  in  body  and  mind,  and 
I  think  much  more  the  first  than  the  second ;  he,  on  the 
contrary,  thinks,  it  more  the  mind.  He  is  in  a  pitiable 
state,  and  I  know  well  how  to  pity  him ! 

Wednesday,  2Qth. — In  the  evening  with  Lady  Polling- 
ton  at  Neuilly,  to  be  presented  to  the  Duchesse  d'Orleans. 
Nothing  could  be  less  awkward  nor  less  embarrassinsr  for 
a  Court ;  she  stands  in  a  circle  with  Mdlle.  d'Orleans,  both 
frequently  changing  places,  and  in  time  speaking  to  every- 
one. We  were  there  early,  at  half-past  eight  o'clock, 
and  left  before  ten.  There  were  there  nearly  fifty  people 
in  all.  The  Duke  was  standing  about,  and  conversed 
chiefly  with  men. 

Thursday,  July  4,th. — We  started  en  caleche  for  An- 
dilly ;  found  Madame  de  Duras  alone  ;  she  read  to  us 
the  first  part  of  her  '  Edward.'  We  took  a  short  walk 
outside,  as  far  as  the  terrace  where  J.  J.  Eousseau  rested 
himself  in  going  from  the  Hermitage  of  Montmorency  to 
Eau  Bonne. 

Saturday,  Sth. — At  Madame  de  Duras,  to  hear  the  end 
of  '  Edward.'  It  is  touching,  and  very  well  written,  but 
perhaps  a  Httle  less  natural,  and  a  httle  more  stilted,  than 
the  first  part. 

Wednesday,  10th.  —  Dined  at  Neuilly  with  the  Due 
d'Orleans.  Lady  Polhngton  accompanied  us.  A  dinner  of 
thirty  covers.     The  silver  service  was  magnificent — quite 


318  MISS   BERRY'S   JOURNAL.  [1822 

new,  consequently  not  in  such  good  taste  as  the  old.  The 
epergne  and  decorations  all  in  ormolu ;  vases,  &c.,  orna- 
mented with  Howers  —  superb,  but  in  too  many  small 
pieces  and  small  figures  ;  the  dessert  service,  silver  gilt 
and  glass.  The  large  baskets  were  very  handsome,  and 
of  exquisite  workmanship.  The  dining-room,  a  gallery 
well  ventilated,  and  very  pleasant.  On  returning  to  the 
drawing-room,  we  found  all  the  children  there  (except 
the  two  little  ones),  to  the  number  of  six — three  sons  and 
three  daughters  ;  one  cannot  see  a  finer  family,  nor  one 
which  appears  better  brought  up,  nor  more  at  their  ease 
with  their  parents.  The  Due  de  Chartres  tall  for  his 
age,  and  with  the  prettiest  face,  but  looks  perhaps  less 
robust  than  the  others.  The  younger  boys  that  we  saw 
were  the  Due  de  Nemours  and  the  Prince  de  Joinville. 
The  little  Princesses,  Mdlles.  de  Montpensier,  de  Valois, 
and  de  Beaujolois,  all  good  figures,  fair  and  pretty  faces. 
There  were  two  governesses  and  a  tutor  with  them  in  the 
drawing-room,  gens  comme  ilfaut,  but  appearing  on  the 
same  footing  as  a  governess  in  an  English  family.  It  was 
very  fine  weather  ;  and  as  the  drawing-room  opened  into 
the  garden,  everyone  went  out,  and  the  Due  d'Orleans 
proposed  a  walk.  We  accompanied  him,  with  Fagel, 
another  gentleman,  Lady  Pollington,  Lady  Barbara,  and 
Mr.  Ponsonby.  We  passed  by  the  little  bridges  to  the 
small  islands  on  the  Seine,  and  I  have  not  seen  in  France 
a  garden  and  grounds  so  well  planned,  so  well  laid  out, 
nor  so  well  kept  up,  as  at  Neuilly.  It  would  be  a  very 
charming  villa  in  any  country  :  and  though  built  as  a 
pavilion,  which  makes  it  very  pretty  outside,  in  the  in- 
terior it  contains  rooms  so  high  and  large  as  to  look 
like  a  palace.  On  our  return  to  the  drawing-room  we 
found  it  full  of  people  arriving  for  the  evening  ;  we  stayed 
another  half-hour,  and  then  accompanied  Madame  de 
Montjoye  to  another  room,  where  she  showed  us  some 
books  of  drawings  by  M.  Atelin. 


1822]  A   VISIT   TO   ST.    CLOUD.  319 

Friday^  19th. — In  the  morning  with  the  Davenports 
and  Comte  de  Buol  to  the  '  Diorama,'  a  new  sort  of  pano- 
rama, in  which  they  have  found  the  means  of  producing 
the  effects  of  hght  upon  a  landscape  representing  a  Swiss 
valley,  with  a  lake.  There  was  another  scene,  which 
shows  the  interior  of  Canterbury  Cathedral,  where  the 
illusion  is  also  perfect. 

Friday,  27th. — In  the  evening  we  went  with  Mrs.  and 
Miss  Davenport  to  St.  Cloud,  to  visit  Madame  de  Gontaut. 
We  found  Madame  de  Gontaut  occupied  in  drying  the 
tears  of  one  of  her  little  Princes,  under  the  trees  near  her 
apartment  at  the  chateau.  Her  daughter,  Madame  de 
Bourbon  Bussy,  received  us ;  and  her  mother,  with  her 
precious  children,  soon  joined  us.  The  little  Princes  are 
much  better-looking  than  I  expected.  Mademoiselle  is 
certainly  a  very  pretty  little  girl  of  three  years  old,  and 
Monseigneur  (as  he  is  always  called,  and  at  every  minute) 
a  big  boy,  very  fresh  and  lively  for  his  age  of  twenty-two 
months.  They  remained  playing  upon  the  balcony  steps, 
where  we  were  all  seated,  with  Madame  de  Bourbon's 
two  children  ;  then  went  to  supper  in  an  adjoining  room, 
and  then  came  in  to  say  '  Good-night '  (in  their  night- 
gowns) to  Madame  de  Gontaut.     She  was  very  civil  to  us. 

Tuesday,  August  loth. — We  had  got  permission  from 
the  Due  de  Castres,  the  Governor,  to  dine  in  the  little 
park  at  Meudon.*  We  passed  by  Bellevue ;  f  there  we  got 
out.  Having  found  the  door  open  of  the  centre  pavilion, 
I  entered  and  went  through  the  grand  apartment  looking 
on  the  terrace.  What  a  scene  of  desolation  and  past 
magnificence  !  The  large  dining-room  and  its  ante-room 
are  ornamented  with  pilasters  of  the  richest  stuccoes,  and 
in  the  best  possible  taste.     The  fine  white  marble  chim- 

*  The  Chateau  of  Meudon  was  built  by  the  second  DaujDhine.  father  of 
Louis  XV.     It  was  fitted  up  for  Marie  Louise  by  Napoleon  in  1812. 

t  Bellevue  was  built  iu  a  few  mouths,  to  please  Madame  Pompadour,  but 
pulled  to  pieces  during  the  Revolution. 


320  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1822 

ney-pieces,  chased  with  fine  gilded  bronzes,  still  remain, 
and  all  round  the  empty  space  are  large  looking-glasses, 
windows  with  large  squares,  shutters,  C\:c.  &c.,  all  bronze, 
gilded.  The  view  from  these  windows,  which  look  I'lpon 
the  terrace,  and  the  terrace,  extending  along  the  fa9ade  of 
the  pavilion,  is  very  fine,  and  far  surpassing  Meudon.  In 
the  apartments  looking  upon  the  court,  and  those  in  the 
Corps  du  L6gis,  which  forms  the  two  sides  of  the  court, 
several  families  are  lodged.  It  was  the  part,  I  suppose, 
the  least  spoiled  by  the  barbarians  of  the  Eevolution  ;  but 
all  that  surrounds  this  beautiful  pleasure-house  is  in  a 
deplorably  ruinous  condition. 

Saturday,  lith. — Left  Paris. 

Wednesday,  2Sth. — Arrived  at  Lausanne. 

Thursday,  29 th. — After  breakfast  I  saw  Miss  Cergat ; 
then  called  on  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Kemble,  who  have  a  very 
pretty  house  here,  upon  the  road  to  Vevay.  The  affec- 
tionate manner  in  which  Kemble  received  me  gave  me 
real  pleasure. 

Thursday,  September  bth. — It  was  a  day  of  fasting, 
which  is  always  fixed  once  a  year  by  the  ministers  ;  but 
though  a  Calvinist  fast,  it  was  kept  (after  the  preaching) 
very  like  a  Catholic  feast :  everybody  dressed  in  their 
best,  and  walking  about ;  all  the  shops  shut  in  the  morn- 
ing, everyone  appearing  to  amuse  himself  very  well. 
We  dined  at  Kemble's.  It  was  a  lovely  evening.  The 
view  from  his  garden  was  really  grand :  the  eye  pene- 
trates on  one  side  into  the  Valais,  and  on  the  other  the 
view  extends  as  far  as  Mount  Saleve. 

Friday,  Qth. — We  arrived  at  Martigny  in  time  to 
allow  of  our  walking  with  a  guide  the  length  of  the 
valley,  through  which,  four  years  ago,  rushed  down  a 
torrent  of  water,  stones,  sand,  &c.  &c.,  devastating  Mar- 
tigny, and  causing  the  death  of  forty  persons  in  this 
little  bourg.  By  a  strange  chance,  in  the  year  1818, 
when  returning  from  Italy,  via  the  Simplon,  we  slept  at 


1822]  MARTIGNY.  321 

Martigny.  We  left  it  the  16th  of  June,  at  five  o'clock 
in  the  morning  ;  that  same  day,  before  five  o'clock  in  the 
evening,  the  water  was  already  in  the  town,  having 
rushed  nine  leagues  from  the  height  from  whence  it 
came  in  three-quarters  of  an  hour.  In  the  bourg  of 
Martigny  the  havoc  is  repaired ;  only  the  marks  upon 
the  walls  of  many  of  the  houses  are  still  to  be  seen, 
where  the  water  came  from  the  height  of  fifteen  feet. 
But  it  was  a  mile  from  hence,  in  ascending  the  valley  to 
what  is  called  The  Bourg,  that  one  begins  to  see  the 
great  devastation.  All  the  houses  constructed  in  wood, 
all  the  sheds,  &c.,  were  thrown  down  ;  and  one  sees  on 
all  sides  where  some  building  was  destroyed  or  some- 
thing newly  constructed.  The  banks  of  the  torrent  (which 
is  always  running)  are  covered  with  large  masses  of 
stone,  sand,  and  earth,  which  have  raised  the  surface  of 
the  valley.  Half  a  mile  higher,  where  the  valley  turns 
at  the  foot  of  the  mountain  behind  which  came  the 
great  bursting,  its  most  terrible  efiects  are  to  be  seen. 
Formerly  a  village  and  a  factory  of  articles  in  iron  stood 
there ;  there  are  now  no  remains  of  a  village  nor  of  a 
manufactory,  nor  of  anything  but  masses  of  sand,  gravel, 
and  enormous  blocks  of  stone,  between  which  the  torrent 
winds,  reduced  to  its  usual  size. 

Simday,  Sth. — Crossed  the  Simplon. 

Sunday,  15th. — Five  miles  before  reaching  Parma,  we 
passed  the  Taro,  an  immense  bed  of  a  river,  at  present 
without  a  drop  of  water  in  it,  but  formerly  always 
troublesome,  and  often  dangerous  after  rain,  from  the 
inequahties  of  the  ground  and  large  loose  stones,  but 
which  is  noAV  passed  over  by  an  excellent  commodious 
fiat  bridge  of  no  less  than  twenty  arches,  finished  and 
opened  only  this  year  under  the  auspices  of  Marie  Louise. 

Arrived  at  Parma.  The  magnificent  palace  of  the 
Farnese,  never  finished,  has  not  been  inhabited  by  the 
later  Dukes  of  Parma  nor  by  Marie  Louise.     The  palace 

VOL.  III.  Y 


322  MISS   BEEEY'S   JOUENAL.  [1822 

contains  an  Academia^  where  the  fine  pictures  robbed  by 
the  French  from  the  churches  are  now  collected  together  ; 
a  very  fine  library,  well  kept  up,  to  which  Marie  Louise 
has  added  some  valuable  acquisitions.*  The  magnificent 
theatre  of  the  Farnese,f  built  all  in  wood,  threatens  not  to 
last  a  long  time  :  the  Government  wish  and  intend  to  main- 
tain  it,  or  keep  it  at  least  in  its  natural  state ;  but  the  large 
and  well-spent  sums  expended,  and  still  expending,  upon 
the  bridges  of  the  Taro  and  the  Trebbia,  must  eat  up  all 
the  disposable  revenue  of  a  more  considerable  State  than 
that  of  Parma.  In  a  large  room  at  the  top  of  this  same 
Palace  of  the  Farnese  is  kept  and  shown  the  toilet,  in 
silver  gilt,  of  Marie  Louise,  Empress  ;  and  the  cradle,  of 
the  same  material,  of  the  King  of  Eome.  If  I  were 
Duchess  of  Parma,  I  should  keep,  but  not  expose  to 
common  view,  these  remains  of  a  grandeur  which  I  could 
not  regard  otherwise  than  as  the  abasement  of  my  own 
family. 

The  high-born  maid,  in  bridal  garments  shown, 

Led  up  the  last  sad  pomp  that  marked  the  world  o'erthrown. 

But  Marie  Louise  apparently  is  not  sorry  to  recall  to 
those  who  see  her  in  her  httle  duchy  that  she  has  been 
'  of  the  world's  large  rule  possessed.'  The  toilet,  with 
its  numerous  pieces — the  toilet  chair  and  the  cradle — 

are  all  that  the  united  art  of  Th and  Adiot  (and 

their  names  are  put  everywhere)  could  do  in  their  designs 
10  please  an  ostentatious  man.  Display  there  is,  but  taste 
is  wanting.  The  details  are  exquisite,  but  there  is  nothing 
fine  or  graceful  in  the  general  forms. 

*  Marie  Louise  is  said  to  have  added  30,000  volumes. 

t  '  It  is  said  to  be  the  first  theatre  in  which  boxes,  as  we  build  them,  were 
introduced.  The  whole  is  of  wood  ;  and  though  some  effort  has  been  made 
to  keep  it  in  repair,  it  is  in  a  most  dilapidated  state,  and  seems  rapidly 
verging  to  complete  ruin.  The  light  shines  through  the  rafters  above,  and 
the  decayed  boards  are  giving  way  below.'  Such  is  the  account  given  iu 
■*  Murray's  Handbook  '  upwards  of  thirty  years  later. 


1822]  DEATH     OF    CANOVA.  323 

[After  spending  a  month  in  Florence,  tke  Miss  Berrys 
reached  Eome  on  the  16th  of  October.] 

J  0  U  E  N  A  L. 

Sunday^  October  20th. — Went  at  three  o'clock  to  Monte 
Testaccio  to  see  the  Saturnaha  of  Modern  Eome  in  the 
month  of  October.  They  eat  and  drink  every  day  at  all 
sorts  of  cabarets,  which  are  open  and  inhabited  only  in 
this  m-onth.  Thursdays  and  Sundays  there  is  always  a 
crowd  and  dancing  there.  These  dances  are  worth  seeing, 
though  the  dancers  are  often  dirty,  and  rarely  pretty  ; 
they  have  a  grace  in  the  management  of  their  apron  or 
of  their  handkerchief,  which  they  hold  out  displayed  like 
a  piece  of  drapery,  which  is  quite  remarkable,  and  which 
strongly  reminds  one  of  the  ancient  bas-relievos.  The 
music,  which  is  a  sort  of  guitar  or  lute,  with  a  fife,  is 
monotonous,  but  hvely  and  dansant,  and  keeping  time 
with  great  exactness.  Our  party  were  pell-mell  amongst 
the  spectators  in  a  circle  where  they  were  dancing ;  they 
were  very  civil  to  us,  wished  to  place  us  where  we  could 
see  well,  and  the  women  took  us  by  the  hand  and  wished 
perforce  to  make  us  dance  also,  from  which  I  with  diffi- 
culty escaped,  though  pleading  my  age  in  excuse.  All 
went  well,  and  with  a  sort  of  mad  gaiety,  till  jealousy 
intruded.  One  of  the  women,  h^ad  danced  too  long  with 
one  man,  or  would  not  dance  with  another  ;  they  began 
to  menace  one  another ;  then  some  soldiers  of  the  guard 
interfered,  the  dance  finished,  and  the  circle  dispersed 
earher  than  darkness  would  have  made  it  necessary.. 

Extract  of  a  Letter  from  Miss  Berry  to  the  Duchess  of 
Devonshire,  on  the  death  of  Canova. 

Rome  :  Monday,  21st  October  1822. 
...    I  cannot  tell  you  the  effect  this  event  has  had  amoncr 
the  artists  here.    They  feel  it  as  the  loss  of  their  common. parent,^ 

T  2 


324  MISS    berry's   journal.  [1822 

while  we  deplore  the  accomplished  mind,  the  grateful,  attached, 
unalterable  friend,  the  incomparable  artist,  the  honour  of  his 
age  and  his  country.  The  loss  is  ours,  and  ours  alone.  For  him 
no  purer  spirit  ever  entered  the  presence  of  its  Creator,  with 
his  faculties  and  talents  yet  unimpaired,  full  of  his  fame,  and 
just  to  his  virtues.  I  am  sure,  while  thus  indulging  in  the 
expressions  of  my  feeling  of  friendly  sympathy  with  yours,  you 
know  what  reason  I  had  to  be  vain  of  his  early,  his  continued, 
his  unshaken  attachment  to  me ;  *  and  of  what  great  pleasure 
I  had  proposed  to  myself  at  Eome  in  seeing  him  as  usual 
every  day,  and  my  vanity  anticipated  the  pleasure  he  would 
express  at  finding  me  here  again.  I  will  add  no  more,  except  a 
feeling  of  gratitude  for  having  known  and  having  been  loved 
by  such  a  mind  as  his.f     .     .     . 

Extract  of  Letter  from  Miss  Berry  to  Mrs.  Darner. 

Rome  :  24tli  October  1822. 
.  .  .  The  first  thing  one  must  talk  of  in  a  letter  from 
Eome  is  the  death  of  Canova.  The  news  of  this  event,  which 
took  place  at  Venice,  arrived  here  on  Sunday  last.  You  can 
hardly  imagine  the  effect  it  has  produced.  The  poor  lament 
him  as  their  liberal  benefactor;  the  artists,  universally,  as  their 
kindest  patron  and  protector ;  theEoman  public  in  general,  as  the 
honour  of  their  age  and  country;  and  all  enlightened  minds 
who  knew  him  well,  as  one  of  the  purest  spirits  that  ever 
adorned  human  nature.  ...  In  returning  to  Eome,  I 
counted  on  seeing  him  (as  two  years  ago)  some  part  of  every 
day,  and  on  the  pleasure  that  I  knew  my  return  would  give 
him.     He  was  taken  ill  at  Possagno,  his  native  place,  in  the 

*  Canova  had  been  one  of  Miss  Berry's  early  and  devoted  admirers,  and 
she  repaid  his  warm  affection  by  the  highest  appreciation  of  his  genius,  and 
by  the  kindest  feelings  which  friendship  could  inspire. 

t  Canova's  disposition  was  naturally  highly  benevolent;  all  his  pensions 
and  gains  were  devoted  to  useful  and  charitable  purposes,  such  as  the 
foundation  of  the  Roman  Academy  of  Archseology,  in  pensions  for  the 
support  of  young  pupils  in  the  arts,  to  the  procuring  of  books  for  tlie 
Academy  of  St.  Luca,  aiding  the  funds  of  the  Academy  de  Lincei,  in 
annual  premiums  to  young  artists,  in  the  support  of  decayed  artists  and 
their  orphans  and  destitute  families.  Rome,  in  1811,  felt  more  particularly 
the  worth  of  Canova,  when  deprived  of  its  sovereign,  deserted  by  foreigners, 
empty,  and  impoverished.  —  Works  of  Canova,  Biog.  Mem.  by  Ct.  Cicognuna. 


182-2]  EKUPTION   OF   MOUNT   VESUVIUS.  325 

Venetian  State,  when  he  was  building  the  magnificent  church 
which  he  was  to  adorn  with  his  own  sculptures. 

Sir  William  GeWs  Account  of  the  Eruption  of  Vesuvius. 

23rd  October  1822. 
My  deak  Friends, — It  is  more  than  fifty  years  since  Vesu- 
vius has  been  so  active  as  it  is  at  present,  and  was  all  day  yes- 
terday. It  is  really  so  frightful  that  there  is  no  going  to  see 
it  by  way  of  a  party  of  pleasure,  and  I  fear,  on  the  contrary, 
a  great  deal  of  mischief  has  been  done  both  to  vineyards  and 
houses.  About  eight  o'clock  last  night  the  apex  of  the  cone 
seemed  to  burst,  and  the  whole  mountain  was  so  enveloped  in 
black  smoke,  that  those  who  were  on  the  spot  saw  but  little 
more  than  those  at  a  distance.  Yesterday,  about  2  p.m.,  a  mag- 
nificent column  of  smoke,  stones,  and  fire,  suddenly  sprung  up 
from  the  crater,  and  proceeded  with  such  velocity,  and  to  such 
a  height,  that  to  those  who  were  looking  on  it  appeared  to  be 
approaching  to  overwhelm  them.  When  it  reached  an  enormous 
elevation,  about  20,000  feet,  the  whole  turned  into  the  most 
beautiful  silver  clouds,  and,  after  continuing  to  spread  for  about 
an  hour,  filled  the  whole  atmosphere,  and  quite  put  an  end  to 
the  sun,  which  has  appeared  no  more  except  as  a  sky-blue  spot  in 
the  dark  clouds  of  to-day.  The  lava  had  made  great  progress 
down  the  side  of  the  cone  the  night  before  last,  and  even  before 
that  time,  but  its  passage  was  not  first  attended  by  the  usual 
noise,  and  had  excited  so  little  attention  that  I  had  not  heard 
of  it  till  I  drove  out  in  the  evening  ;  but  I  observed  during  my 
drive  that  it  had  advanced  considerably.  After  the  violent  effort 
of  yesterday  it  seemed  again  more  quiet ;  but  when  I  went  in 
the  evening  to  Posilippo,  I  found  that  the  tranquillity  on  the 
Naples  side  was  occasioned  by  the  bursting  out  of  another  vent 
on  the  side  of  Pompeii,  where  a  very  bright  and  tremendous 
stream — of  which  we  have  as  yet  no  certain  accounts,  as  probably 
the  road  is  destroyed — might  be  discovered,  though  on  the  oppo- 
site side,  by  the  smoke  and  flaming  fringe  which  showed  the 
black  outline  of  the  mountains  in  that  direction.  In  the  mean- 
time the  lava  did  not  cease  to  flow  on  our  side ;  and  about  eight 
in  the  evening  of  the  21st,  the  most  terrible  groaning,  hissing, 
and  cannonading,  announced  that  the  eruption  was  at  its 
height.    The  jets  of  red-hot  stones  were  incessant,  but  I  was  not 


326  MISS  beery's  journal.  [1822 

enabled,  from  the  top  of  the  house  where  I  stood,  to  form  any 
estimate  of  their  height,  as  I  could  not  see  the  base  of  the 
mountain ;  I  should  imagine  from  400  to  500  feet.  Sometimes 
the  descending  shower  was  met  by  a  new  jet,  which  forced  it  on 
all  sides  into  the  shape  of  a  cauliflower.  The  smoke  in  the 
meantime  was  so  strongly  illuminated,  that  it  really  resembled 
those  paintings  which  I  had  hitherto  taken  for  exaggerated 
representations.  There  seemed  an  activity,  a  sound, and  a  hurley- 
burley,  even  at  the  distance  of  six  miles,  that  announced  nothing 
less  than  the  end  of  the  world.  I  do  not  wish  to  witness  any- 
thing m.ore  frightful.  The  people  of  the  city,  as  usual,  had 
recourse  to  processions  and  prayers,  in  which  I  hope  they  have 
succeeded,  as  I  think  now  (4  o'clock,  23rd)  the  roaring  is  very 
much  decreased.  The  mischief  threatened  Portici  at  first,  but 
suddenly  the  streams  united  and  took  a  turn  to  the  unfortunate 
Torre  del  Grreco,  as  usual.  Nevertheless,  the  palace  at  Portici  is 
dismantled,  and  everything  removed  that  can  be ;  and  I  heard 
that  the  lava  has  reached  the  sea,  so  that  the  road  is  impassable ; 
but  this  is  not  true. 

October  24. 

My  doctor  went  up  the  mountain  yesterday,  and  says  that 
when  the  smoke  is  dissipated  the  whole  of  the  peak  will  be 
found  to  have  disappeared ;  that  he  saw  it  fly  into  the  air  with 
a  terrible  explosion,  and  fall  again  in  part  into  the  crater,  and 
partly  in  a  shower  of  pumice,  which  fell  upon  him  like  hail. 
I  do  not  find  the  cutting  of  the  road  by  lava  to  be  true;  but 
that  one  of  the  Actons,  going  to  Cast'ella  More,  thought  it  not 
safe  to  venture  on  the  road  beyond  a  certain  point,  and  took  a 
boat  for  surety. 

Twelve  o'clock,  24th. 

The  whole  world  is  covered  with  a  thick  coat  of  smoke, 
between  copper-coloured  and  purple.  The  lava  has  not  cut 
off  the  road,  but  the  police  stop  all  carriages  at  Torre  del 
Grreco,  because  one  was  obliged  to  be  cut  out  of  the  sand 
yesterday  a  little  farther  on.  At  Torre  del  Grreco  the  people 
are  in  very  great  alarm,  though  the  lava  is  yet  at  some  dis- 
tance, and  not  above  a  foot  deep  where  nearest,  but  they 
have  time  sufficient  to  avoid  that.  Their  great  dread  is  a 
deluge  of  black  mineral-looking  sand,  which  lies  six  inches 
deep  in  the  streets,  and  of  which  they  neither  know  the  quantity 


1822]  ERUPTION   OF   MOUNT   VESUVIUS.  327 

that  may  follow  nor  the  suddenness  with  which  it  may  overtake 
them.  The  road  is  rendered  impassable  beyond  Torre  del  Grreco, 
merely  by  the  depth  of  this  sand.  It  rains  a  sort  of  black  sand 
into  all  our  balconies  and  terraces  even  at  this  distance.  The 
poor  trees,  up  which  the  vines  have  been  growing  all  the  summer, 
utter  shrieks  like  140,000  penny  trumpets,  while  the  lava 
embraces  their  trunks  and  expels  the  air  out  of  all  their  pores 
at  once  with  heat  and  compression.  The  main  stream  presents 
a  front  of  from  15  to  20  feet  high  in  some  places;  but  houses  do 
resist  it,  and  turn  the  course  on  each  side,  till  the  opposition 
raises  the  flood,  and  it  curls  into  the  windows  and  overwhelms 
everything.  They  say  the  most  singular  explosions  are  occasioned 
by  the  lava  falling  suddenly  into  the  holes,  12  feet  deep,  which 
have  been  cut  for  planting  vines.  The  noise  caused  by  the  ex- 
pulsion of  the  air,  and  its  opposition  when  suddenly  exposed  by 
the  heat  to  the  mass  of  lava,  is  tremendous.  In  the  meantime, 
though  the  world  looks  like  a  snowy  evening  in  London  in 
December,  and  seems  coming  to  an  end,  the  people  here  are 
going  a-dining,  visiting,  marrying  and  giving  in  marriage,  just 
as  if  there  was  no  danger,  and  the  devil  was  not  at  the  gates. 
It  is,  nevertheless,  very  alarming,  and  I  shall  keep  my  letter 
open  to  the  last  minute  to  give  you  all  the  intelligence  I  can. 

One  o'clock. 
The  gloom  increases,  and  comes  nearer.  One  of  our  people 
going  to  Somma  on  horseback  is  come  back,  having  gone 
till  it  was  so  dark  he  could  go  on  no  further.  My  servant  is 
just  come  in  like  a  miller,  covered  with  white  ashes.  Indeed, 
it  rains  white  sand  or  ashes  rather  fast  at  this  moment. 

Four  o'clock. 

A  rain  of  white  and  red  powder  continues  all  day ;  but  the 
sun  has  contrived  to  pierce  through  it  a  little. 

Friday,  25th. 

The  mountain,  though  emitting  a  smoke  which  quite  puts 
out  the  sun,  and  makes  it  a  dark  December  day  in  London 
at  Naples,  has  ceased  to  alarm  us  with  ashes  or  roaring,  a 
circumstance  which  gives  me  great  pleasure;  and  as  the 
philosophers  have  now  had  enough  of  it,  let  us  hope  it  will  cease 
entirely.  We  do  not  hear  of  any  lives  lost,  or  any  except  soli- 
tary habitations  destroyed.  We  have  reports  that  much  mischief 
is  done  at  Bosco  Eiale,  near  Pompeii.     I  hope  it  will  not  be 


328  MISS  berry's  journal.  [1822 

long  before  I  see  you  in  the  Holy  City.  One  motive  for  not 
immediately  setting  out  is  that  I  am  undergoing  a  cure  for  the 
gout,  which  my  Grerman  doctor  swears  will  set  me  up  and  make 
me  walk,  and  which  I  shall  believe  only  when  I  feel  myself 
tripping  along  from  the  Quirinal  to  the  Piazzo  de  Spagna.  I 
have  been  two  months  in  pain,  and  the  brute,  when  the  natural 
fit  was  over,  gave  me  another  just  as  bad — all  for  my  good, 
as  he  says. 

Please  to  tell  Lady  Charlotte  I  have  had  a  letter  from  Stuart 
Wortley,  who  sa3's  he  will  do  anything  he  can,  but  thinks  the 
Ministry  alone  can  assist  in  my  pension,  which  you  will  say  is  '  a 
likely  story,  thank  ye.'  I  hope  Miss  Agnes  will  find  somebody 
who  speaks  English  remarkably  well  this  year  at  Eome  ;  that  I 
shall  meet  her  in  high  health,  and  ready  to  commence  our 
ancient  feuds  on  my  arrival.  All  this  time  I  can  but  just  put 
my  feet  on  the  ground,  and  cannot  walk  without  two  sticks. 

M.  has  had  another  infant,  which  her  daughter-in-law  owns  to. 
I  should  think,  however,  being  much  recovered,  she  will  return 
shortly  to  protect  you  and  her  ancient  reign.  It  is  quite  sur- 
prising into  what  a  state  of  comparative  insignificance  the 
brightest  star  of  the  Holy  City  sinks  in  this  society,  where  San 
Carlo  does  duty  for  assemblies  and  evening  parties. 

Tuesday^  Dec.  '^Ist. — In  the  morning  we  went  with 
Mr.  Protheroe  and  Mr.  Petre  to  the  church  of  Gesu,  to 
hear  a  fine  Te  Deum.  The  church  was  all  dressed  with 
extraordinary  magnificence  ;  full  of  people  ;  the  music 
very  fine,  but  too  short.     Exit  1822. 


1823]  A   VISIT   TO    THE    GHETTO,   AT   EOME.  329 


1823. 

JOUENAL. 

Rome,  Thursday,  Jan.  9th. — In  the  morning  with  Mr. 
Eastlake  to  the  Ghetto,  the  Jews'  quarter,  where  they  are 
still  shut  up  every  evening  within  large  guarded  gates. 
The  quarter  consists  of  three  or  four  crooked  and  narrow 
streets.  It  is  the  dirtiest  and  most  disgusting  place  one 
can  see  even  in  this  town,  which  is  not  the  capital  for 
cleanliness  !  The  Ghetto  is  in  the  lowest  part  of  Eome, 
quite  near  to  the  river,  ^vithout  having  the  advantage  of 
being  upon  its  banks,  yet  has  always  been  healthy,  and 
never  subject  to  the  fever  when  the  rest  of  the  town 
was  suffering  from  it. 

Wednesday.,  Feb.  bth. — In  the  evening  at  Madame 
d'Appony's,  to  celebrate  her  birthday.  It  was  to  be 
what  was  called  a  '  surprise  '  to  her.  There  was  a  lottery, 
to  which  all  who  were  invited  had  contributed  more  than 
fifteen  days  before.  We  assembled  in  one  of  the  draw- 
ing-rooms soon  after  eight  o'clock  ;  then  passed  into 
another  room,  wliere  there  was  a  sort  of  theatre  arranged, 
upon  which  we  found  Barbari  dressed  a  la  Turque.  After. 
a  speech  from  Barbari,  who  alluded  to  the  fine  things  he 
had  picked  up  in  all  countries,  came  a  dialogue  between 
two  gentlemen  of  the  French  mission  and  the  two  friends 
of  the  Esterhazys,  all  dressed  k  la  Turque  (the  costume 
made  the  two  Esterhazys  look  the  prettiest  boys  one  could 
see) — one  of  the  Frenchmen  acting  the  Cadi,  the  others 
I  know  not  what,  nor  what  they  were  talking  of  in  their 
speech  ;  but  at  last  they  drew  aside  two  curtains,  and  two 


330  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1823 

kinds  of  shops  were  displayed,  with  the  presents  to  be 
given  spread  out.  There  was  every  sort  of  thing  :  a 
carpet,  a  gauze  shawl  embroidered  in  gold,  a  pie — a  real 
cold  pie  ;  there  were  '  objets '  in  marble  and  in  ormolu, 
some  small  clocks,  paper  weights,  &c.  Then  followed 
some  couplets  addressed  to  '  Therese,'  and  sung  by  the 
Princess  Zenaide,  with  the  offering  of  three  presents  to 
her — a  bracelet,  a  muff,  and  a  little  picture  by  Granet. 
Then  other  couplets,  addressed  to  Zenaide ;  and  others, 
again,  by  Artaud  to  the  Duchess  of  Devonshire ;  and 
then  came  the  general  distribution  of  presents,  which  was 
made  with  the  greatest  impartiality.  The  Comte  de 
Brunswick  drew  out  from  a  silver  vase  a  number  ;  and 
from  another  vase  the  Comte  d'Appony  drew  the  name 
of  the  person  who  ought  to  receive  the  lot  attached  to 
such  number.  Mine  was  a  very  pretty  small  model  of 
the  tomb  of  the  Scipios,  in  rosso-antico.  This  distribu- 
tion lasted  some  time,  as  there  were  more  than  eighty 
prizes.  Many  of  the  company  left  immediately  after- 
wards for  the  bal  masque  at  the  Princess  Gabrielli's, 

Monday^  l^th. — Lady  Char,  and  I  went  masked  as  the 
Bourgeoisie  mask  ;  I  as  a  Malta — that  means,  with  a  man's 
shirt  over  the  gown,  tied  with  ribbons,  a  wax  mask, 
a  handkerchief  upon  the  head,  and  another  put  across 
the  shoulder,  &:c.  We  were  accompanied — Lady  C.  by 
Lord  William  Eussell  *  (the  uncle),  en  Pierrot ;  and  I  by 
Mr.  Protheroe,  in  a  grotesque  old  man's  mask,  with  a 
white  beard.  We  took  our  places  upon  the  '  Scahne  di 
Euspoh,'  which  is  the  grand  meeting-place  of  the  best 
masks  in  these  last  days  of  the  Carnival.  Neither  Mr. 
Protheroe  nor  I  were  recognised  by  anyone  amongst 
the  English  who  came  to  speak  to  us  ;  but  it  is  impos- 
sible to  disguise  Lady  Char. 

Wednesday^  19th. — Went,  with  Granet  as  my  cavalier, 

*  Brother  to  the  Duke  of  Bedford,  and  who  was  murdered  in  the  year 
1840  by  his  own  valet;  Courvoisier. 


1823]  EECEPTION   OF  NEW   CARDINALS.  331 

to  the  Piazza  Navona.  It  was  the  market-day.  There 
is  everything  new  to  sell  there  for  the  poor,  from  the 
gridiron  and  the  pot-a-feu  to  the  broccoli  to  boil  in  it ; 
clothes  of  all  sorts,  booksellers,  dealers  in  curiosities 
and  in  pictures.  It  was  amongst  these  that  we  had  to 
do  ;  but  we  found  nothing,  absolutely  nothing,  that  was 
worth  the  trouble  of  looking  at  a  second  time.  I  bought 
some  books  for  a  crown — '  Les  Memoires  de  Montgon,' 
in  good  condition,  and  '  Paulus  Orossius,'  of  1498. 

Monday,  March  \{)th. — Went  out  in  the  evening  to  see 
the  illuminations  in  honour  of  the  twelve  new  cardinals 
appointed  yesterday.  All  their  houses,  and  the  Eoman 
princes'  houses,  were  lighted  with  wax  torch-lights  at  the 
window  and  pots  of  fire  before  the  gates,  and  the  same 
at  the  Ambassadors'  houses  and  Government  offices. 
Private  houses  were  badly  lighted  with  paper-lanterns 
outside  the  windows.  Nothins;  can  be  less  brilliant  than 
the  illuminations  of  Eome,  always  excepting  the  grand, 
the  inimitable  one  of  St.  Peter's. 

Thursday,  \Wi. — At  nine  o'clock  I  went  to  the  Qui- 
rinal  with  Lady  Char,  and  Mr.  Petre,  to  see  the  Consistory 
for  the  reception  of  the  twelve  new  cardinals.  It  was 
in  the  large  room  of  the  Quirinal.  The  crowd  was  enor- 
mous, and  the  seats  for  the  ladies  so  little  raised  that  one 
could  see  little  or  nothing  of  what  was  passing  around 
the  Pope's  throne.  The  old  cardinals  went  to  fetch  the 
new  ones,  who  were  each  introduced  between  two  old 
ones,  and  thus  brought  in  from  the  great  door  of  the 
room  to  the  Pope's  feet.  Then  one  of  the  assistants 
addressed  a  short  speech  to  them,  not  a  word  of  which 
was  heard  where  I  was  ;  then  each  cardinal  knelt  at  the 
Pope's  feet,  who  placed,  or  rather  hung,  a  red  hat  upon 
his  head  for  an  instant,  addressing  some  words  to  him  ; 
then  he  kissed  the  Pope's  foot,  and  received  from  him  the 
accolade,  which  he  immediately  gave  and  received  back 
again  from  all  his  new  brethren,  the  old  cardinals.     This 


332  MISS  berry's  journal.  [1823 

ceremony  was  not  so  long  as  one  might  expect.  As  soon 
as  the  hat  was  on  the  head,  and  the  accolades  given,  the 
Pope  retired  into  his  own  apartments ;  the  throne  upon 
which  he  had  been  seated  was  carried  away,  and  all  the 
cardinals,  old  and  new,  with  everyone  else,  entered  the 
chapel  singing  the  'Te  Deum.'  At  half-past  two 
o'clock  to  St.  Peter's,  to  see  the  new  cardinals  arrive  to 
worship  the  ashes  of  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul.  The  crowd, 
soon  after  our  arrival,  even  in  St.  Peter's,  was  enormous. 
The  cortege  did  not  arrive  till  past  four  o'clock.  The 
cortege  of  carriages  and  gala  liveries  in  the  grand  locale 
of  the  '  Place  '  in  front  of  St.  Peter's,  made  a  very  fine 
effect.  The  large  door  in  the  middle  was  opened,  and 
the  cardinals  entered,  preceded  by  halberdiers,  of  which 
there  were  not  half  enough  to  keep  off  the  crowd. 

Sunday^  IQith.^ — Thirty-nine  years  have  passed  since  I 
was  here  on  the  anniversary  of  this  day,  when  I  had 
reached  my  twenty-first  year.  What  regrets  I  felt  then 
at  having  been  born  a  woman,  and  deprived  of  the  life 
and  position  which,  as  a  man,  I  might  have  had  in  this 
world !  But  1  am  calm  and  resigned  now.  I  will  say 
no  more  about  it. 

Tuesday^  2bth. — Met  Mr.  Miles  in  the  morning,  and 
took  him  with  us  to  the  Scava,  which  is  outside  the  gate 
of  St.  Sebasfciano,  upon  the  estate  of  the  Duchesse  de 
Chablais,  where  they  have  just  found  three  statues,  one 
of  which,  a  Bacchus,  is  of  great  beauty  and  in  perfect 
preservation.  The  two  others  are  a  Bacchante,  very  in- 
ferior ;  and  another  Bacchus,  smaller  and  much  less  well- 
preserved  than  the  other.  They  have  also  found  several 
pieces  of  marble.  The  place  where  they  are  making 
this  Scava  is  known  to  have  been  the  site  of  an  ancient 
villa.  At  the  end  of  the  fourth  century,  when  paganism 
was  proscribed  by  the  Emperor  Theodosius,  these  statues 
were  probably  taken  from  their  altars  and  concealed  in 

*  Miss  Berry's  birthday. 


1823]  LEAVES    ROME.  333 

the  cellar  of  the  house  ;  which  may  account  for  their 
perfect  preservation.  Thorwaldsen  said  that '  this  Bacchus 
is  a  statue  of  the  third  order.'  When  we  see  it  on  its  feet, 
other  good  judges, say  we  shall  esteem  it  more  highly. 

Saturday,  29th. — Lady  Charlotte  and  Agnes  were 
sketching  from  the  window  of  the  Casino  Euspigliosi, 
whilst  I  looked  for  the  last  time  at  one  of  the  finest,  or 
certainly  the  most  charming  picture  in  Eome  —  the 
'  Aurora  '  of  Guido.  The  preservation  is  perfect ;  and 
its  forms  unite  the  truth  of  Eaphael  and  the  colouring  of 
Titian  with  the  taste  and  divine  spirit  of  the  painter 
himself. 

Sunday,  oOth. — In  the  morning  in  an  open  carriage  to 
the  Place  du  Quirinal,  where  the  benediction  was  given  by 
the  Pope.  The  irregularity  of  the  place,  of  its  building, 
and  of  its  surface,  gives  a  peculiar  air  to  the  scene.  The 
garde  of  nobles  with  their  white  plumes,  and  the  Swiss 
with  their  cuirasses,  coming  out  of  the  gates  of  the  Palais 
du  Quirinal,  had  a  very  picturesque  effect  :  it  was  the  re- 
presentation of  one  of  those  palaces  of  which  one  reads 
the  description  in  a  tale  of  the  Middle  Ages.  The  crowd 
enormous,  both  of  carriages  and  of  people  on  foot.  We 
were  opposite  the  balcony  where  the  Pope  appeared,  sur- 
rounded by  as  many  cardinals  as  the  space  would  hold. 
The  moment  of  benediction  here,  as  at  St.  Peter's,  is  the 
only  part  of  this  ceremony  which  fails  in  effect.  The 
animal  man  is  too  small  to  fill  the  place  which  is  assigned 
to  him  in  so  vast  a  multitude. 

Saturday,  April  6th. — Left  Eome.  From  Villetri  took 
an  escort  of  three  drasroons.  On  the  whole  of  the  road 
there  are  new-built  corps-de-gardes.  Passed  Treponte,  a 
wretched  single  station  de  poste,  where  the  last  Pope  had 
intended  to  build  a  church  and  a  town  at  the  beginning 
of  his  new  road.  The  church  is  built,  but  never  finished 
within  ;  and  no  house  but  the  poste,  a  wretched  inn. 

Sunday,  Qth.  —  The  road  over    the  Pontine  Marshes 


334  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1823 

perfect,  with  much  cattle  feeding  on  each  side  in  many- 
parts,  and  in  others  great  tangles  of  wood,  with  large 
willows  and  other  swamp  trees.  Near  Treponte,  pass 
over  two  Eoman  bridges,  with  their  ancient  inscriptions. 
Approach  to  Terracina  beautiful.  Walked  round  the  old 
port  of  Anxur,  of  which  the  outward  row  of  arches  are 
all  fallen  in,  but  remaining  where  they  fell ;  and  in  the 
inner  wall,  or  quay,  the  perforated  stones  at  equal  dis- 
tances for  fastening  the  cables  of  ships.  The  thickness 
of  substructions  to  the  sea  prodigious. 

Monday^  1th. — Within  two  miles  of  Mola  one  comes 
in  sight  of  the  sea  and  the  beautiful  promontory  of 
Gaeta.  Many  ruins  of  tombs  and  ancient  walls,  and 
substructions  by  the  road-side.  Inn  at  the  Eoman  end 
of  the  town.  By  the  orange  garden  of  the  inn,  and  from 
thence  by  broken  terraces,  one  can  go  quite  down  to  the 
sea,  through  all  the  remains  of  Cicero's  Formian  villa. 
The  whole  view  from  every  part  most  beautiful  and  pic- 
turesque, and  the  ruins  themselves  covered  with  every 
species  of  vegetation.  At  the  post  of  the  Gangliano,  and 
near  the  banks  of  the  river,  are  the  ruins  of  Minturni — 
an  amphitheatre,  of  which  one  arch  alone  marks  the  size, 
height,  and  entablature  of  the  arches.  It  is  called  a  gate 
of  the  town,  but  is  evidently  an  arch  of  the  amphi- 
theatre. A  theatre  very  perfect,  and  various  other 
remains  of  a  large  town,  scattered  over  the  whole  plain. 
The  bridge  of  boats  over  the  Gangliano  very  good. 

Tuesday,  8th. — The  road  from  Ste.  Agata  to  Capua 
through  a  richly- cultivated  country  bounded  by  moun- 
tains. Entered  Naples  by  Murat's  new  road,  which  leaves, 
the  old  entrance  at  a  '  Place  '  for  the  exercise  of  troops, 
called  by  the  pedantry  of  the  French  the  '  Campo 
Marzo.'  The  new  entrance  a  fine  wide  road,  winding 
down  to  the  sea,  and  giving  a  magnificent  view  of  the 
great  capital.  On  entering  from  this  side  to  the  Chiaja, 
it  cannot  be  less  than  two  miles,  the  whole  one  continued 


1823]  ARRIVES   IN   NAPLES.  335 

bustle  of  intense  population.  No  gates.  Passports  ex- 
amined at  a  little  dirty  bureau.  No  trouble  with  doganas. 

Thursday^  10th. — Went  to  the  Museum,  to  see  all  the 
utensils  and  burnt  materials  that  were  found  at  Pompeii 
and  Herculaneum.  All  are  in  an  astonishing  state  of 
preservation.  We  went  to  Portici,  to  the  Museum  of 
Ancient  Paintings  taken  from  the  walls  of  the  two  buried 
eities.  They  interested  me  very  much,  and  I  left  them 
with  the  conviction  that  the  ancients  were  not  less  pro- 
ficient in  painting  than  in  sculpture,  since  they  thus 
decorated  the  walls  of  two  towns  of  the  second  order. 

Tuesday,  \hth. — We  set  out,  a  large  party,  in  two 
carriages,  for  Pompeii.  The  drive  of  fourteen  miles  is 
very  disagreeable,  notwithstanding  the  view  of  the  Bay 
and  the  mountains  around  ;  but  the  road  passes  through 
an  enormous  faubourg ;  then  comes  Portici  and  Eesina ; 
then  Torre  del  Greco,  then  Torre  del'Aununciata;  all 
long  streets.  The  cinders  and  lava  of  the  eruption  last 
October  have  scarcely  yet  been  swept  to  each  side  of  the 
streets,  but  are  left  on  the  road.  Outside  Pompeii  it  is 
half-way  up  the  horses'  legs. 

Friday,  l^th. — We  set  out  for  Psestum  at  five  o'clock 
in  the  morning.  Lady  Charlotte,  Agnes  and  I,  and  Mr. 
Dodson,  in  a  caritella  and  four  horses,  and  Lord  Sheffield 
upon  the  box ;  Mr.  Protheroe  in  his  Enghsh  carriage. 
We  arrived  at  Salerno,  after  passing  far  enough  from 
Vesuvius  to  be  clear  of  the  ashes,  which  from  Portici  to 
Nocera  still  cover  everything  on  the  Bay  of  Salerno.  The 
town  borders  the  sea,  ascends  upon  the  side  of  a  moun- 
tain, which  is  crowned  by  the  most  picturesque  of  castles. 
At  two  o'clock  we  set  out  for  Eboli.  The  country  here 
less  inhabited,  but  well  cultivated.  The  route  to  Eboli  is 
good,  the  situation  picturesque ;  in  the  interior  it  is  a 
dirty  httle  town,  with  a  large  nobleman's  palace  (the 
Prince  d'Angheri). 

Saturday,  19th. — We  were  all  in  the  carriage  soon  after 


336  MISS  berry's  journal.  [I823 

six  o'clock,  with  little  hope  of  tolerable  weather;  the 
mountains  were  obscured  by  clouds,   and  a  little  rain 
began  to  fall  before  we  left  Eboli.     So  soon  as  we  were 
within  the  town,  which  one  enters  by  a  gate,  still  very 
visible  in  a  large  depth  of  wall,  we  ran  to  the  temples ; 
two  are  so  near  together,  that  one  only  has  to  '  cross  the 
street'  (as  one  may  say)  to  pass  from  one  to  the  other. 
They  are  indeed  truly  grand  and  imposing ;  but,  unfor- 
tunately, all  effect  derived  from  their  position  and  the 
surrounding  scenery  was  lost  to  us  by  the  weather,  which 
completely  veiled  the  distance.    From  the  temples  I  went 
to  the  walls  of  the  town,  which  border  the  river  (the 
Salso),  now  all  choked  up  with  reeds,  but  formerly  brought 
the  vessels  quite  close  to  the  town  itself.     The  structure 
of  the  walls  is  grand,  with  square  towers  at  certain  dis- 
tances, three  or  four  of  which  still  remain.     The  temples, 
the  walls,  and  whatever  vestiges  of  the  scattered  buildings 
of  the  town  are  to  be  seen,  are  all  constructed  of  the 
same  porous  stone  which  is  found  in  the  environs  ;  it  is  a 
petrifaction  of  reeds  and  canes,  of  which  the  tubes  are 
still  to  be  seen  in  the  columns.     I  shall  say  no  more 
of   the  temples,  their  forms,  &c.,  are    so  well   known. 
The  country  as  far  as  P^stum  is   quite  different  from 
what  I  expected,  for   it   is    well  cultivated,  and  there 
appear  to  be  great  works  for  drainage.     There  is  also  a 
road  recently  made,  which  would  be  very  good  were  it 
not  for  the  flood  which  occurred  this  winter,  and  which 
has  injured  it,  and  swept  away  much  of  the  materials  for 
mending  it.     The  King  has  a  hunting-box  in  a  fine  large 
wood  between  Eboli  and  Passtum,  and  the  post  for  horses 
is  established  from  Kaples  to  Eboli.     There  is  no  village 
at    Psestum ;    there   are   half-a-dozen    miserable   cabins 
scattered  within  the  enclosure  of  the  ancient  town,  and  a 
barn  where  travellers'  horses  are  housed.     As  the  rain 
continued,  we  were  perplexed  where  to  find  a  place  in 
which  we  could  eat  our  refreshment ;  but  the  best-lookmg 


1823]  REACHES   KAPLES.  337 

house  was  fortunately  under  repair,  and  we  persuaded  the 
carpenter  at  work  to  give  us  shelter  there  in  one  of  the 
dilapidated  rooms.  After  having  passed  nearly  three 
hours  at  Passtum,  we  again  took  road  to  Salerno,  twenty- 
nine  miles  off. 

Sunday^  20th. — It  rained  a  great  deal  in  the  night,  but 
the  weather  was  fine  enough  this  morning  to  display  all 
the  beauties  of  the  situation  of  Salerno.  We  started 
earl}^,  that  we  might  have  time  to  stop  where  we  pleased 
on  our  way.  We  halted  a  short  time  at  Vietri ;  afterwards 
stopped  at  Trinita  delle  Cava.  In  a  well- wooded  ravine 
stands  a  little  town  surrounded  by  ruined  walls,  and, 
placed  against  the  rock,  a  fine  large  church  of  Benedic- 
tines. The  inside  is  curious,  because  in  two  different 
places  the  natural  rock  enters  the  church,  and  in  one 
part  makes  a  sort  of  grotto  in  which  are  placed  three 
tombs  very  much  ornamented  with  pietra  dura  of  the 
three  founders  or  benefactors  of  the  church.  The  estab- 
lishment is  very  large  ;  women  cannot  enter.  Eeturned 
to  Naples  through  the  long  ill-built  faubourg  between 
Portici  and  Naples,  swarming  with  people,  carts,  donkeys, 
and  carriages  of  all  sorts,  all  going  full  gallop,  and  scream- 
ing one  louder  than  another. 

Thursday.,  24:th To  the  King's  Palace.     The  staircase 

is  striking  from  its  size,  and  almost  as  dirty  as  a  staircase 
at  an  inn.  The  apartments  magnificent,  without  an  idea 
of  good  taste.  A  Court  theatre  in  the  apartment  equally 
dirty.  The  two  large  pictures  of  Cannnucini,  the  '  Death 
of  Caesar'  and  the  'Death  of  Virginia,'  are  the  best  orna- 
ments of  this  palace. 

Sunday,  21th. — Took  a  walk  in  a  green  avenue  of  Capo 
da  Monti,  which  led  us  to  a  farm,  called  in  this  country 
una  Massena,  where  male  and  female  peasants,  in  their 
Sunday  clothes  (it  was  a  pity  they  were  not  cleaner), 
were  amusing  themselves  at  the  door.  Three  young  girls 
at  our  request  began  dancing  the  Tarentella,  and  their 

VOL.  III.  z 


338  MISS  berry's  journal.  [1823 

grandmotlier — an  old  woman,  but  quite  fresh,  with  all  her 
fine  teeth  still  in  her  mouth — played  upon  the  tambourine, 
animating  them  from  time  to  time  in  singing,  or  rather 
screaming,  the  air  which  she  was  playing.  I  never  saw  a 
scene  more  Arcadian.  We  were  surrounded  by  vines, 
verdure,  and  corn,  and  the  performers  had  nothing  of 
that  dirty  squalid  wretchedness  one  sees  at  Naples. 
Amongst  the  spectators  of  the  dance  were  two  of  the  most 
beautiful  women  I  ever  remember  seeing:,  thouG;h  one 
was  near  her  confinement,  and  the  other  had  an  infant 
in  her  arms,  which  prevented  them  from  dancing.  The 
men  do  not  dance  here,  or  very  rarely. 

Monday^  2Sth. — We  left  Naples  and  took  the  road  to 
Caserta.  Everyone  knows  the  magnificent  staircase  of 
the  enormous  palace  of  Caserta.  What  struck  me  most 
v/as  the  skill  of  the  architect  (Vanutelli),  who  has  so  well 
contrived  to  give  air  and  light  to  such  an  enormous 
square  mass  of  building.  The  chapel  superb.  The  theatre 
in  miniature  what  old  San  Carlo  was. 

Thursday,  May  1st. — Arrived  at  Albano  between  six 
and  seven  o'clock  on  a  most  lovely  evening.  I  went  into 
the  small  room  prepared  for  me,  and  from  a  little  balcony 
I  saw  the  sun  setting  upon  the  Campagna  of  Eome.  The 
interest,  the  sadness,  the  solemnity  with  which  it  inspired 
me,  seemed  to  warn  me  it  was  for  the  last  time.  The  last 
time !  That  thought  always  overcoming,  and  now,  asso- 
ciated with  the  wonderful  and  unique  scene  spread  before 
my  eyes,  produced  an  impression  I  can  never  forget ! 

Friday,  2nd. — Arrived  at  Eome. 

Saturday,  ord. — We  saw  at  the  Villa  Medici  the  exhi- 
bition of  the  Academy  in  Sculpture  and  Paintings.  The 
pictures  detestable  ;  all  in  the  grand  style,  and  positive 
caricatures. 

Sunday,  ISth. — Paid  farewell  visits,  and  later  to  St. 
Peter's.  It  was  Whit-Sunday,  and  there  was  an  enormous 
crowd  ;  we  went  up  into  the  small  gallery.     It  was  from 


1823]  QUITS   EOME    FOK   THE    LAST   TIME.  339 

the  orchestra  I  heard  that  clehGious  sacred  music  that  I 
so  much  enjoy,  which  always  elevates  and  calms  the  soul, 
and  which  I  prefer  to  all  the  operas  in  the  world.  It  is 
true  that  the  music  in  the  Pope's  Chapel  is  always  chosen 
from  the  finest  compositions  of  the  best  masters.  I  heard 
this  music  for  the  last  time,  and  as  I  came  out  I  felt  very 
sad.  I  found  time  to  give  one  parting  glance,  quite  alone, 
to  the  genius  of  Canova  ;  I  crossed  that  magnificent  pave- 
ment for  the  last  time,  and,  on  leaving  it,  I  gave  one  last 
sad  look  to  the  most  imposing,  the  grandest  edifice  that 
has  ever  been  constructed  by  the  hands  of  man.  When 
one  has  said  adieu  to  St.  Peter's,  one  has  said  adieu  to 
Piome.  I  felt  as  if  I  had  already  left  it,  and  I  wished  it 
were  so. 

Monday,  19  th. — Left  Eome. 

Tuesday,  20th. — Arrived  at  Terni.  The  weather  was 
delicious  and  the  walk  charming  ;  everything  seemed  in 
our  favour,  and  I  had  reckoned  much  upon  the  interest  I 
should  feel  in  revisiting  those  spots  that  I  had  viewed 
before  in  1785,  when  C.  H.  and  poor  Edward  Conway 
met  us  there.  All  the  pleasure  that  I  had  promised 
myself  in  these  recollections,  now  far  distant  enough  to 
be  no  longer  distressing,  was  lost  by  feeling  so  ill  that  I 
was  occupied,  in  spite  of  myself,  with  my  own  suffer- 
ings.    I  went  everywhere,  but  enjoyed  nothing. 

Saturday,  2ith. — Arrived  at  Florence. 

Thursday,  29th. — The  Fete  Dieu.  We  were  invited  to 
a  house  to  see  the  procession.  Before  nine  o'clock  a 
large  part  of  the  procession  had  already  passed,  but  we 
saw  the  best  of  it — the  religious  orders  and  the  court. 
There  are  not  a  great  many  monks  at  Florence,  and  the 
court  consists  only  of  the  princes — that  is,  of  the  Grand 
Duke  and  his  son — who  were  walking.  The  princesses 
saw  it  from  the  windows  of  the  Palazzo  Vecchio.  The 
crowd  in  the  streets  and  at  the  windows  was  not  very 
great ;  but  the  weather  was  fine,  and  the  adorning  all  the 

z  2 


340  MISS   BEKRY'S   journal.  [1823 

windows   gives  a  picturesque  air  to  this  town  of  the 
Cinque  Cento  which  was  striking. 

Monday,  June  ^ili. — Left  Florence  at  half-past  five 
o'clock,  with  the  voiturier  and  his  mules.  We  stopped  to 
see  one  of  the  villas  of  the  Medici :  *  it  has  still  much  of 
that  simplicity  which  belonged  to  them.  Nothing  is  so 
fine  as  all  the  country  from  Florence  here :  it  is  almost 
a  continuation  of  pretty  villages,  well  built,  well  kept 
up,  and  of  great  cleanliness,  swarming  with  inhabitants, 
industrious  and  well  clothed,  and  in  the  midst  of  a  coun- 
try which  is  really  a  garden  by  its  culture  and  its  pro- 
ductions. Tuscany  is  certainly  now  the  most  flourishing, 
the  quietest,  and  the  least  discontented  country  in  Europe. 
Its  very  great  and  uninterrupted  prosperity  since  the 
peace,  and  since  the  return  of  its  Grand  Duke,  has  im- 
posed silence  upon  the  frondeurs.  He  is  really  loved, 
persecutes  no  one  for  their  political  opinions,  and  gives 
plenty  of  work  to  a  great  many  people. 

Thursday,  12th. — We  were  in  the  carriage  to-day  at 
five  o'clock.  I  had  heard  it  raining  fast  since  two  o'clock 
in  the  morning.  It  still  rained  when  we  started,  and  we 
had  to  ford  the  bed  of  the  Magra.  The  rain  which  had 
fallen,  and  was  still  falling,  had  swelled  the  stream,  but 
the  peasants  said  we  could  pass,  and  the  Comte  de 
Sommariva's  carriage  had  gone  through  half  an  hour 
before.  We  did  really  pass  the  first  ford  very  well,  with 
the  help  of  a  horse  to  our  three  mules ;  but  the  caleche, 
though  guided  by  a  peasant,  had  not  exactly  followed 
our  track.  The  wheel  came  against  a  large  stone  ;  the 
mules  pulled  in  vain,  and  fell  down  in  the  water  one 
after  another.  We  were  not  clear  of  the  river  ourselves 
when  Giuseppe,  our  coachman,  flew  to  the  assistance  of 
his  comrade.  They  at  last  moved  the  large  stone  by  the 
help  of  our  peasant  guides.  Fortunately,  the  beasts  could 
not  move  the  wheel,  or  inevitably  the  caleche  would  have 

*  Built  by  Lorenzo ;  afterwards  decorated  by  Leo  X. 


1823]  ARRIVAL   AT    GENOA.  341 

been  overturned ;  and  we  ended  by  all  coming  out  safe 
and  sound.  But  for  a  long  time  I  do  not  remember  having 
been  so  frio-htened.  The  thous^hts  of  fording;  that  river 
made  me  nervous  beforehand,  and  I  watched  the  moment 
when  one  horse  after  the  other  fell  into  the  full  force  of 
the  current,  when  their  guide  was  thrown  over  into  the 
water,  and  when  the  carriage  could  not  move,  with  poor 
Harrot  sitting  inside !  There  was  no  possibility  of  her 
getting  out.  She  conducted  herself  with  a  calmness  and 
courage  that  I  could  not  have  had  in  her  place.  One 
crosses  that  horrid  river  five  times  before  reaching  Bor- 
ghetto  ;  but  the  other  fords  were  wider,  and  less  water. 

Friday,  IMi. — Arrived  at  Genoa. 

Saturday,  litli. — Walked  to  the  Aqua  Sol^  to  see  the 
improvements  they  are  making.  In  less  than  a  year  they 
will  have  at  Genoa  a  fine  spacious  promenade  for  car- 
riages as  well  as  walkers,  with  a  fountain  in  the  middle, 
stone  benches  upon  the  road  for  resting,  and  all  this  with 
the  enjoyment  of  the  most  beautiful  scenery.  We  passed 
through  the  Place  St.  Dominique.  It  begins  to  be  cleared 
of  the  rubbish  of  the  church,  now  entirely  destroyed. 
The  space  will  make  a  fine  large  Place. 

Wednesday,  ISth. — We  went  en  portantine  to  the  Ceme- 
tery at  the  Bastions. 

Saturday,  2ist. — Left  Genoa. 

Sunday,  22nd. — Arrived  at  Turin. 

Tuesday,  24:th. — To  the  Theatre  Carignano,  to  see  La 
Marcioni,  the  most  renowned  actress  now  in  Italy,  in  '  La 
Mirra  '  of  Alfieri.  This  play  convinced  me  of  the  talent 
of  the  Marcioni,  and  of  the  great  mistake  which  Alfieri 
made  in  thinking  that  his  'Mirra'  was  his  chef  d'oeuvre.  It 
is  really  a  bad  tragedy,  without  speaking  of  the  subject, 
which  is  not  one  to  put  upon  the  stage. 

Saturday,  28th. — Saw  the  Marcioni  in  comedy.  It  was 
impossible  to  act  comedy  with  more  grace,  simplicity,  and 
ingenuousness  than   she  did.      Her  countenance  is  not 


342  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1823 

striking — she  wants  eyebrows,  wliicli  are  necessary  for 
great  expression — but  she  has  a  graceful  figure,  and  her 
acting  has  the  tone  of  good  company.  After  the  two 
pieces  were  over,  she  came  into  our  box,  when  I  tried  to 
express  to  her  how  much  I  admired  her  talent.  She  has 
very  good  manners  off  the  stage. 

Sunday^  2Qth. — ^The  first  fine  summer's  day  since  we 
have  been  here.  Went  with  Madame  de  Masin  to  the 
King's  Garden,  opened  on  Sundays  and  fetes.  One  of  the 
large  walks  was  filled  with  people,  but  rather  of  the 
second  class  than  of  the  great  people.  Madame  de  Masin 
said  the  King  did  not  go  there  sometimes  for  four  or  five 
years  together.  It  is  a  very  fine  garden  of  Le  Notre's, 
with  a  grand  view  of  the  Alps  at  the  end  of  the  walks. 

[On  the  1st  July  Miss  Berry  left  Turin,  and,  passing 
Mont  Cenis,  reached  Geneva  July  4th.] 

JOUKNAL. 

Sunday,  July  6th. — Went  to  Coppet.  We  found  the 
Due  and  Duchesse  de  Broglie,  and  Auguste  de  Stael  and 
Miss  Eandall.  They  all  received  us  in  the  kindest  manner 
possible.  We  went  up  frolii  the  library  (Auguste's  apart- 
ment) to  the  drawing-room,  that  of  Madame  de  Broglie. 
There  is  a  portrait  of  her  mother  in  this  room.  She  and 
I  fell  into  conversation  in  a  corner  which  very  much" 
affected  us  both.  We  promised  to  spend  the  evening  at 
Madame  Grubstoff's,  and  found  there  Sismondi  and  liis 
English  wife,*  her  sister,  and  Capo  d'Istria  and  his  brother, 
a  very  handsome  man.  He — Capo  d'Istria — is  here  in 
order  to  pass  the  summer  in  a  place  of  no  present  import- 
ance on  the  map  of  Europe,  and  where  opinions  are  free. 
He  is  a  man  of  very  quiet  manners,  and  his  conversation 

*  Sismondi,  the  historian,  originally  of  an  Italian  family,  but  afterwards 
settled  at  Geneva :  married  Miss  AUen^  sister  of  Lady  Mackintosh :  died 
1842. 


1823]  AT    PARIS.  343 

is  very  pleasing  and  interesting.  Sismondi  spoke  of  Italy 
as  the  country  to  which  he  boasted  belonging,  entirely  in 
the  spirit  of  party,  and  boldly  asserted  facts  that  it  was 
difficult  to  believe ;  as,  for  example,  during  his  stay  at 
Piscia,  in  Tuscany,  the  native  country  of  his  family,  that 
there  was  at  least  one  assassination  every  week,  making 
at  least  fifty-two  a  year.  And  that  occurring  only  four  or 
five  years  ago,  and  in  Tuscany  ! 

Monday,  1th. — Left  Geneva. 

Friday,  Wth. — Beached  Paris. 

Friday,  ISth.  —  Went  in  the  evening  to  the  play. 
Mdlle.  Mars  in  the  '  Tartuffe,'  and  in  '  Valerie.'  The  latter 
not  good  in  itself,  but  in  which  she  plays  a  blind  woman 
in  a  manner  to  make  one  cry,  and  to  quite  enchant  all 
who  have  taste  enough  and  mind  to  appreciate  her  in- 
imitable talent. 

Tuesday,  22)id. — Dined  with  Lord  Guildford  at  four 
o'clock.  Only  Pozzo  de  Borgo  and  Brownlow  North  there. 
The  former,  to  our  great  advantage,  never  ceased  talking. 
We  drew  him  out  upon  the  campaign  of  1814.  It  is  not 
possible  to  narrate  with  more  cleverness  and  feeling,  inter- 
spersed with  more  philosophic  reflections,  than  he  does. 

Wednesday,  2  ore/. — At  Keuilly  in  the  evening.  We 
w^ere  received  at  once,  and  very  graciously.  A  great 
many  people  there,  notwithstanding  the  season  and  a  wet 
evening.  Talleyrand  (as  usual),  le  General  Foy,  Starem- 
berg,  Girardin,  &c.  &c.  Mdlle.  [d'Orleans]  spoke  to  me 
in  the  most  flattering  manner ;  said  she  was  sure  if  she 
knew  me  better  we  should  suit  each  other  wonderfully  ; 
that  though  she  had  seen  very  little  of  me,  she  thought 
she  did  me  justice,  &c.  &c.  But  alas !  all  this  availeth 
me  not  while  I  feel  my  failing  physique  attacking  every 
day  my  powers  of  mind,  and  reducing  me  below  a  com- 
mon healthy  bustling  old  woman. 

Thursday,  24:th. — We  drove  as  far  as  Auteuil,  to  see 
Madame  la  Princesse  de  Henin  and  Lallv.     We  found 


344  MISS  berey's  jouenal.  [1823 

them  both  at  home — he  unable  to  move  from  the  sofa, 
and  very  much  changed  in  the  face  ;  and  she  seated  by  his 
side,  thin  and  wasted  away  in  a  remarkable  manner.  They 
are  neither  of  them  long  for  this  world,  but  they  are  going 
together  ;  in  the  meantime,  there  were  two  gentlemen  and 
two  ladies  of  their  intimate  acquaintance  there,  to  make 
what  little  society  they  are  now  capable  of  enjoying. 

Friday^  26th. — We  set  out  for  Andilly,  to  dine  with 
Madame  de  Duras.  We  only  found  there  Madame  de 
Eauzan  and  her  children.  Madame  de  Duras  read  to  us 
'  Le  Moine  de  St.  Bernard,'  a  third  novel  or  tale  that  she 
has  written  in  our  absence.  Another  is  ready  for  us, 
about  which  I  am  still  more  curious.  This  one  is  well 
written,  though  the  descriptions  are  too  much  amplified, 
very  well  imagined,  but  perhaps  a  little  exaggerated  in 
the  manner  in  which  her  hero  takes  his  misfortune. 

Wednesday,  oOfJi. — Saw  Mdlle.  Mars  in  the  'Misan- 
trope  '  and  '  Les  Fausses  Confidences.'  She  appeared  to 
me  more  perfect  than  ever. 

Wednesday,  August  Qth. — We  dined  at  Keuilly  with 
about  thirty  people.  They  w^ere  chiefly  from  the  '  Cote 
Gauche.'  Taheyran^  sat  between  the  two  princesses ; 
then  M.  Mounier  and  I ;  and  then  the  General  Dupont 
(he  of  the  capitulation  of  Bayleu),  a  man  of  very  agreeable 
conversation,  with  a  quiet  clever  countenance,  but  ignorant 
of  England,  politically  speaking,  to  a  surprising  degree. 

Thursday,  7th. — In  the  morning,  at  half-past  twelve,  at 
Madame  de  Duras,  to  hear  the  reading  of  '  Olivier,  ou  le 
Secret.'  It  is  in  letters,  very  well  written.  We  only  got 
through  the  third  of  the  novel ;  it  is  very  interesting. 

Sunday,  10th. — At  home  in  the  evening  with  Miss 
Knight,  Hare,  la  Princesse  Zeneide,  Mrs.  Eawdon,  and 
Miss  Williamson,  La  Zeneide  began  reading  to  us  a 
novel  of  her  writing,  in  v/hich  there  was  much  imagina- 
tion ;  but  the  MS.  w^as  so  confused  that  she  could  not 
even  continue  it  herself. 


1823]  AGAIN   IN   ENGLAND.  345 

Wednesday,  13^/i. — In  tlie  evening  we  went  to  Neuilly 
to  take  leave.  Less  company  than  usual.  Mdlle.  is 
always  most  kind  to  me. 

Monday,  18th. — In  the  evening  went  to  the  Princesse 
Zeneide  to  meet  Mdlle.  Mars,  There  was  only  her  sister- 
in-law,  her  daughter,  and  a  Madame  Eosamofski  (the 
French  one),  M.  Sostene  de  la  Eochefoucault,  the  Due 
de  Eauzan,  Fontenay,  another  gentleman,  and  ourselves. 
Mdlle.  Mars  arrived  very  late.  In  society  she  is  as  natural 
and  as  intelligent  as  upon  the  stage,  talking  with  much 
cleverness  and  very  willingly  about  her  art,  about  Talma, 
and  about  a  new  piece  in  which  she  is  to  appear  with 
him.  In  short,  she  is  in  the  drawing-room  as  much  as 
possible  what  she  is  on  the  stage — the  same  charming 
tone  of  voice,  the  same  ^finesse,  the  same  simplicity.  I 
was  very  glad  to  have  seen  her,  and  also  very  glad  to  find 
her  what  she  is.  Her  dress  was  very  simple,  her  hair 
without  ornament — a  plain  muslin  gown,  with  gold  beads 
round  her  neck.  We  left  her  at  Princesse  Zeneide's  near 
midnight. 

Tuesday,  10th. — Left  Paris. 

Thursday,  21st. — Arrived  at  Dessins,  at  Calais,  where 
we  found  the  Duke  of  Wellington  had  arrived  an  hour 
before  from  England,  on  his  way  to  Brussels,  to  make  his 
journey  of  inspection  of  the  fortresses. 

Friday,  22nd. — Arrived  in  North  Audley  Street. 

Monday,  26th. — In  the  evening  I  went  with  Harry 
Tancred  and  A,  Turner  to  the  Haymarket  Theatre ;  the 
piece,  '  Sweethearts  and  Wives.'  Liston  perfect  in  that 
and  in  another  piece.  The  tone  of  the  theatre  struck  me 
as  a  little  vulgar  and  coarse. 

Wednesday,  21th. — Went  to  Petersham.  Car.*  received 
us  as  she  always  does  ;  she  lodges  us  well,  and  it  is  im- 
possible to  be  more  comfortable. 

*  Hon.  Mrs.  Scott.     She  was  the  author  of  some  very  popular  novels. 


346  MISS  berry's  journal.  [1823 

Thursday,  2Sth. — Loitered  in  the  garden  with  Car.,  and 
read  the  MS.  which  she  gave  me. 

Monday,  September  Ist. — I  continued  working  in  the 
morning  at  Car.'s  MS. 

Monday,  Ihth. — Went  to  Little  Strawberry  Hih,  where 
Washington  and  Captain  Scott  met  us,  by  appointment, 
to  mark  the  trees  that  must  be  cut  down.  This  pretty 
httle  place  looked  prettier  than  ever. 

Thursday,  ISth. — Went  with  Ann  Turner  to  see  the 
house  in  Park  Lane.  It  was  so  charming,  so  perfect 
in  every  way  for  us,  that,  before  leaving  it,  we  were  at 
least  agreed  upon  one  point — this  house  or  Paris  !  It 
would  be  impossible  to  look  at  any  other  after  this. 

Sunday,  21st. — Agnes  went  at  ten  o'clock  with  the 
Turners  to  hear  the  famous  Scotch  preacher  in  Hatton 
Garden  (Irving).  Later  in  the  day,  it  was  proposed  to  me 
to  go  and  hear  the  same  preacher.  I  was  very  glad  to 
accept  the  offer.  The  service  did  not  begin  till  half-past 
six  o'clock.  Notwithstanding  bad  weather,  long  before 
that  time  the  chapel  was  as  full  as  possible  :  it  was  a 
farewell  to  his  congregation.  He  is  going  for  some 
months  to  Scotland.  He  only  spoke  of  himself — of  all  he 
had  done,  and  of  all  the  miracles  he  had  worked.  His 
eloquence,  even  when  his  subject  admitted  of  it,  seemed 
to  me  commonplace  ;  but  one  must  not  judge  upon  once 
hearing,  nor  upon  a  discourse  for  an  occasion.  We  were 
not  home  till  nearly  half-past  ten  o'clock, 

Wednesday,  October  Sth. — Went  to  Wimpole. 

Monday,  20th. — Drove  to  Cambridge  with  Lord  Hard- 
wicke.  Went  to  see  the  rooms  of  the  youngest  York,  at 
St.  John's  ;  then  to  the  Hall  at  Trinity  College.  The 
portraits  of  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  Barrow,  and  Bacon,  which 
are  in  the  place  of  honour,  are  very  bad  as  pictures ;  but 
that  of  Sir  I.  Newton  looks  as  if  it  must  have  been  like 
him.  Then  to  Sidney  Sussex,  to  see  the  Hall,  which  has 
been  newly  painted  and  done  up.     Christ's  College  is  the 


1823]  AT   CAMBRIDGE.  347 

prettiest,  in  all  respects,  that  I  know  at  Cambridge,  They 
are  building  an  apartment  for  the  pensioners,  wlio  super- 
abound  in  all  the  colleges.  They  are  building  every- 
where—  at  Trinity  a  new  court,  and  at  Bennet's,  and  at 
Christ's.  The  garden  of  the  Fellows  of  this  cohege  is 
charming.  Went  to  Downing  College,  where  all  means 
of  enclosure  is  impossible,  as  there  are  neither  walls  nor 
gates.  The  corps  de  logis  and  Grecian  buildings  appear 
out  of  place  here,  and  make  a  much  less  good  effect  than 
even  those  of  that  sort  of  spurious  Gothic,  which  suits  the 
place  wonderfully  well.  From  there  we  went  outside 
the  town  to  the  treadmill,  which  I  was  curious  to  see. 
It  is  established  in  the  county  prison,  built  some  years 
ago,  in  the  modern  taste  of  prisons,  upon  an  elevation  at 
the  end  of  the  town,  where  are  the  remains  of  the  old 
Castle  of  Cambridge.  The  treadmill  appears  to  me  an 
excellent  punishment :  the  labour  is  tedious  and  fatiguing, 
without  being  beyond  the  strength  of  anyone,  or  likely  to 
produce  undue  exhaustion  ;  and  it  is  very  well  calculated 
to  serve  as  a  warning  to  those  who  dislike  labour,  not  to 
put  themselves  in  the  way  of  being  so  employed.  They 
can  make  twenty  go  up  the  wheel  at  once,  in  two 
divisions ;  we  only  saw  four  at  a  time  in  each  division. 
They  are  upon  the  wheel  fifty  minutes,  and  then  have 
ten  minutes  to  rest.  They  work  them  ten  hours  a  day, 
with  two  in  all  allowed  for  eatmg.  The  mill  grinds  corn  ; 
and  the  millers  are  the  only  people  to  complain,  because 
here  they  give  back  all  the  corn  sent  to  be  ground. 

Monday,  27th. — Left  Wimpole  for  Buckingliam. 

Tuesday,  2Sth. — Saw  Stowe  on  our  way  to  Wroxton. 
The  OTounds  of  Stowe,  and  the  entrance,  with  a  lod^e, 
reach  to  Buckingham  (a  poor  little  provincial  town)  ;  it 
is  three  miles  from  there  to  the  house.  The  house  has 
the  appearance  of  a  modern  palace  outside  ;  within  there 
are  not  many  pictures,  and  but  few  very  good.  The 
show   bed-room   very   magnificent,    without    taste :    the 


348  MISS   berry's    journal.  [1823 

furniture  belonged  to  the  first  Lord  Temple,  and  is  there- 
fore fifty  or  sixty  years  old  ;  the  rest  more  modern.     The 
dining-room  is  immense  ;    the  library,  two  large  rooms, 
which  they  use  as  a  drawing-room.     There  are  70  best 
beds  (lits  de  maUre),  and  130  in  all.    From  the  house  we 
walked  into  the  gardens,  but  did  not  make  the  entire 
round  of  the  pleasure-grounds,  which  is  five  miles.     We 
went  to  the  Temple  of  Friendship,  passing  by  the  British 
Worthies.     The  busts  are  in  stone  :  they  are  placed  in  a 
sort  of  semicircle,  and  are    not  worth  much  ;   but  the 
inscriptions,  which  I  already  knew,  are  excellent.    Stowe 
is  a  grand  country  palace,  for  it  is  more  than  the  country- 
house  of  a  great  nobleman,  and  everything  indicates  its 
being  so,  on  whatever  side  it  is  approached  for  three 
miles  round.     I  am  very  glad  to  have  seen  it,  and  very 
glad  not  to  possess  it.     We  arrived  at  Wroxton  before 
three  o'clock.     Here  we  found  everything  prepared  for 
the  reception  of  Lady  Charlotte  and  her  friends ;   good 
fires  in  all  the  rooms,  including  the  large  Gotliic  hall.     I 
am   not   surprised   that   Lady  Charlotte   is   so   fond  of 
Wroxton  :  it  is  one  of  those  places  that  has  a  sort  of  indi- 
viduality wliich  is  always  attaching.    I  never  saw  a  house 
where  the  master  was  not,  and  had  not  been  for  a  year, 
so  perfectly  well  kept  up.     Lady  Charlotte  was  delighted 
to  see  we  agreed  in  her  taste  for  Wroxton.    The  library  is 
a  delightful  room  ;    it  is  very  large,  and  curious  in  works 
relating  to  the  history  of  England,  and  in  pamphlets,  of 
which  there  is  a  grand  collection,  began  by  a  Lord  North 
at  the  commencement  of  the  last  century. 

Wednesday,  29th. — Went  to  Guy's  Chff. 

Wednesday,  November  hth. — In  tlie  evening,  Greathead 
read  a  portion  of  Living's  '  Discourses  : '  very  bombastic 
and  hig-h-flown  ;  strong  in  words  and  weak  in  argument. 

Friday,  7  th. — Ball  at  Warwick  Castle  this  evening. 
The  fine  towers  of  the  castle  were  all  lighted  outside,  and 
a  large  tar-barrel  above  the  two  towers  made  a  fine  effect, 


1823]  AT   ALDEELEY.  349 

though  the  fog  much  spoiled  the  briUiancy.     The  castle 
was  full ;  the  Duke  of  Wellington  amongst  the  guests. 

Tuesday,  11th. — Went  with  Lady  Charlotte  and  my 
sister  to  Leamington.  Greathead  took  us  everywhere,  and 
showed  us  everything  that  has  been  done  since  we  were 
there  two  years  ago.  The  village  is  double  the  size,  and 
will  soon  be  a  large  bourg,  where  a  great  many  strangers 
will  probably  come  to  reside. 

On  the  12th  of  November  the  Miss  Berrys  left  Guy's 
Cliff  for  Cheltenham  and  other  visits. 

JOUENAL. 

Friday,  December  bth. — To  Alderley. 

Sunday,  1th. — Sir  John  Stanley  took  Lady  Charlotte 
and  us  to  the  kitchen-garden,  by  far  the  prettiest  I  know, 
including  tufts  of  trees,  terraces,  and  a  quantity  of  flowers. 
At  half-past  two  we  went  to  church  at  Alderley,  where 
there  is  an  organ,  and  the  service  sung  by  the  children  as 
at  a  cathedral.  A  pew  is  constructed  in  the  gallery  for 
the  family  at  the  Park.  In  short,  a  little  country  church, 
quite  differently  arranged  to  any  I  have  ever  seen,  and 
apparently  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  parishioners,  for  the 
congregation  was  very  large.  Mr.  Stanley  (the  rector) 
preached  remarkably  well  to  my  mind. 

Wednesday,  llth.—'Yo  Guy's  Chff 

Friday,  Vdth. — Lady  Charlotte,  Agnes,  and  I  went  to 
Mr.  Greathead's  room,  to  hear  a  translation  he  has  made 
from  the  German  of  the  life  of  Heyne,  the  celebrated 
savant.  Nothing  can  be  more  touching  than  the  tale  he 
narrates,  for  he  writes  his  own  history  :  the  poverty,  the 
absolute  destitution,  not  only  of  his  early  youth  but  of  the 
greater  portion  of  his  life,  without  any  misconduct  or 
fault  whatever  on  his  part  but  being  born  the  son  of  a 
weaver,  very  poor  and  very  ill-paid. 

Saturday,  20th. — Left  Guy's  Cliff. 


350  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1824 


1824. 
J  0  U  E  N  A  L. 

Thursday,  January  1st. — Thank  God,  I  got  up  this  first 
day  of  the  new  year  quite  well. 

Monday,  12th. — Left  Wimpole  and  returned  to  North 
.Audley  Street. 

Wednesday,  February  18th. — Went  to  Lady  Davy's. 
She  had  had  a  dinner  of  beaux  esprits.  I  saw  there  Sir 
J.  Mackintosh,  Jeffrey,  and  Cranston  ;  I  was  introduced  to 
the  last. 

Friday,  20th. — Our  furniture  moved  to-day  to  Park 
Lane. 

Monday,  2ord. — Left  North  Audley  Street  for  ever, 
after  a  residence  of  more  than  thirty  years,  to  go  to  Peter- 
sham ;  fortunately,  I  was  too  much  occupied  to  think 
much  of  this  adieu,  and  indeed  I  leave  it  without  regret. 

Friday,  21th. — Went  to  our  new  home.  No.  8  in  Park 
Lane.  We  are  delighted  with  the  house ;  though,  as  it 
snowed  all  the  morning  and  rained  the  rest  of  the  day,  the 
beauty  of  the  situation  was  lost. 

Wednesday,  March  2'lth. — I  occupied  myself  in  ar- 
ranging Lord  Orford's  letters,  which  I  have  done  in  chro- 
nological order  in  four  portfolios.  Eobert  and  Mrs.  Fer- 
guson came  in  the  evening  ;  they  were  pleased  with  our 
house. 

From  Lord  Dudley  to  Miss  Berry. 

Naples  :  May  10,  1824 
My  dear  Miss  Berry, — You  are  by  all  means  to  be  encou- 
raged in  so  salutary  a  practice  as  that   of  writing  to  me, — so  I 


1824]  LETTER   FROM    LORD    DUDLEY.  351 

answer  your  letter  immediately.  I  am  very  glad  you  are  as 
well  pleased  with  your  new  house  as  you  expected  to  be :  *  tho' 
I  say  so  that  ought  not  to  say  so,'  it  is  the  best  situation  in 
London.  Arlington  Street  and  St.  James's  Place  are  more  con- 
venient ;  but  for  air  and  prospect  they  are  not  to  be  compared 
to  it.  I  am  afraid  your  rooms  are  not  very  comfortably  dis- 
posed. It  is  by  far  the  oldest  house  in  that  neighbourhood, 
and  was  planned  long  before  comfort  was  invented.  I  speak, 
however,  from  guess  and  hearsay,  for  I  never  was  over  the 
threshold.  However,  I  shall  not  be  long  in  England  without 
becoming  better  acquainted  with  it  than  any  of  its  possessors  for 
the  last  three  generations.  It  is  very  lucky  for  me  that  you 
have  such  a  fancy  for  the  air  of  Hyde  Park :  for  I  regard  it  as 
a  real  advantage  and  comfort  to  have  such  neighbours. — I  have 
been  here  about  three  weeks,  looking  upon  the  Bay  from  the 
windows  of  a  very  agreeable  apartment — the  upper  floor  of  the 
Abp.  of  Tarentum's  house.  It  was  once  occupied  by  Lady 
Hamilton,  who  I  suppose  knew  how  to  choose.  You  probably 
know  it.  The  weather  is  now  delightful ;  but  it  has  only  just 
begun  to  be  good.  We  had  such  a  March  and  April  as  were 
never  heard  of  before  in  Italy — quite  Londonish.  However,  we 
are  sure  that  by  a  certain  time  it  must  grow  fine  here,  whether 
it  will  or  no.  In  England  they  have  a  right  to  leave  out  the 
summer  altogether  once  in  three  years.  Naples  is  very  beau- 
tiful ;  but  it  don't  gain  upon  one  like  Home.  At  Eome  we  had, 
on  the  whole,  a  pleasant  winter ;  tho'  we  very  much  felt  the 
want  of  some  agreeable  person,  who,  like  yourself,  understands 
society,  and  will  be  at  the  pains  of  bringing  it  together.  I  mean 
society,  in  contradistinction  not  only  to  solitude,  but  to  a 
coterie.  I  suppose  the  poor  Duchess  did  keep  an  agreeable 
house;  but  this  last  season  she  was  at  the  beginning  of  it  dis- 
tressed by  the  illness  and  death  of  Gronsalvi,  and  afterwards  she 
grew  ill  herself.  An  opportunity  of  meeting  the  natives  was  what 
I  least  regretted  in  the  loss  of  her  house.  I  knew  the  Eomans 
enough  to  be  quite  sure  that  they  are  not  worth  knowing.  They 
are  a  dull,  sulky,  ill-bred,  ignorant,  inhospitable  people — from 
high  to  low,  the  worst  race  in  Europe  with  which  I  have  any  ac- 
quaintance. Something  of  this  must  be  ascribed  to  the  govern- 
ment, which  is  worse  than  ever.  You  must  go  back  a  century  or 
two  to  find  a  Pope  so  bad — so  childishly  and  ludicrously  bad  —in 


352  MISS   BEREY's    journal.  [1824 

administration,  and  at  the  same  time   so  determined  an  enemy 
to  everything  that   is  wise,  honest,  and  liberal,  as  Leo  XII. 
Luckily,  the  portion  of  wisdom  and  honesty  which  is  necessary 
to  make  human  society  stick  together,  is  very  small ;   but  small 
as  it  is,  it  does  not  seem  to  exist  in  the  councils  of  his  Holiness, 
and  the  Ecclesiastical  State  is  on  the  point  of  being  abandoned 
to  the  robbers,  the  Jesuits,  the  devil,  and  old  Torlonia.     Here 
we  go   on  a  little   better,  thanks  to  the  Austrian  occupation, 
which  is  quite  a  blessing.     The  little  good  that  is  done  proceeds 
from  the  foreign  soldiers.     Their  discipline  is  admirable,  and 
they  conduct  themselves  towards  the  natives  with  perfect  for- 
bearance and  propriety.     They  are  finishing  the  Strada  Nuova  ; 
they  are  making  a  far  more  important  road  to  Eeggio.     If  the 
country  is  at  the  mercy  of  a  foreign  army   and  a  vindictive 
court,  it  has  to  thank  the  wretched  people  that  made  the  last 
revolution.     Till  that  absurd,  ill-conducted  attempt,  the  govern- 
ment was  going  on  very  tolerably. — There  is  not  much  society 
here  at  present,  at  least  so  far  as  the  English  are  concerned ; 
but  one  has  plenty  of  acquaintances  to  live  with.    I  have  bought 
a  huge  library,  and  am  busy  making  arrangements,  with   the 
aid  of  Francis  Hare,  for  packing  it  up  and  sending  it  to  Eng- 
land.    When  that  business  is  accomplished,  I  shall  begin  my 
journey  towards  the  Alps. — Api'opos  of  books.      I  have  not 
many  in  Park  Lane  ,  but  if  they  can  be  of  any  use  to  you,  they 
are  always  at  your  disposal.     Only  speak  to  the  house-steward, 
Linton  by  name,  and  he  will  show  you  the  rooms  where  they 
are,  and  you  may  take  out  any  you  like.     But  I  very  much 
question  whether  I  have  anything  of  which  you  are  not  already 
possessed. — I  saw  your  little  friend,  Santi,  at  Eome,  but  I  had  no 
opportunity  to  cultivate  his  acquaintance.     Hare  learnt  Hebrew 
of  him,  and  was  much  struck  by  the  variety  of  his  knowledge 
and  the  excellence  of  his  understanding.     He  is  evidently  a  man 
of  merit,  and  therefore   quite  thrown  away  upon  such  a  place. 
— Gell  is  at  Eome.     He  is  crippled  by  the  gout ;  but  in  other 
respects  well,  and  very  cheerful. 

I  shall  look  for  you  still  in  Park  Lane  when  I  return.  The 
summer  there  is  very  agreeable.  The  SW.  winds  there  prevail, 
and  it  is  quite  like  being  in  the  country. 

Believe  me,  ever  sincerely  yours, 

D. 


1824]   THE  KING  AND  QUEEN  OF  THE  SANDWICH  ISLANDS.    353 

Thursday,  May  20th. — Drawing-room  for  the  King's 
birthday.  All  the  streets  around  St.  James's  were  filled 
with  carriages.  We  two,  Lady  Charlotte,  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Stanley,  and  the  three  Scotts  went  together  to  the  Exhi- 
bition at  Somerset  House  ;  our  carriages  were  obliged  to 
go  up  beyond  Cavendish  Square,  to  be  able  to  pass.  A 
very  bad  exhibition,  to  my  mind.  I  am  sorry  to  see  how 
much  the  French  surpass  us  in  painting. 

Mo7iday,  2Uh. — I  was  from  five  o'clock  till  half-past 
ten  in  the  House  of  Lords.  It  was  a  motion  of  Lord 
Lansdowne's  upon  the  Irish  CathoHcs.  ^ 

Friday,  2Sth.—At  half  past  ten  o'clock  I  went  with  the 
Prince  and  Princess  Lowenstein,  their  son,  and  my  sister, 
to  Mr.  Canning's,  the  Secretary  of  State,  who  received 
for  the  first  time  the  King  and  Queen  of  the  Sandwich 
Islands !  They  arrived  in  the  midst  of  a  numerous  assem- 
bly of  all  the  best  society,  and  all  e7i  grande  toilette  for  a 
large  assembly  given  at  Northumberland  House.  Mr. 
Canning  entered,  giving  his  hand  to  a  large  black  woman 
more  than  six  feet  high,  and  broad  in  proportion,  muffled 
up  in  a  striped  gauze  dress  with  short  sleeves,  leaving  un- 
covered enormous  black  arms,  half  covered  again  with 
white  gloves  ;  an  enormous  gauze  turban  upon  her  head ; 
black  hair,  not  curled,  but  very  short ;  a  small  bag  in  her 
hand,  and  I  do  not  know  what  upon  her  neck,  where 
there  was  no  gauze.  It  was  with  difficulty  that  the 
Minister  and  his  company  could  preserve  a  proper  gravity 
for  the  occasion*  The  Queen  was  followed  by  a  lady  in 
waiting  as  tall  as  herself,  and  with  a  gayer  and  more  intel- 
ligent countenance.  Then  came  the  King,  accompanied 
by  three  of  his  subjects,  all  dressed  like  him  in  European 
costume ;  and  a  fourth,  whose  office  I  did  not  know,  but 
he  wore  over  his  ordinary  coat  a  scarlet  and  yellow  feather 
cloak,  and  a  helmet  covered  with  the  same  material  on 
his  head.  The  King  was  shorter  than  his  four  courtiers, 
but  they  all  looked  very  strong,  and,  except  the  King,  all 

VOL,  III.  A  A 


354  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1824 

taller  than  the  majority  of  those  who  surrounded  them. 
The  two  ladies  were  seated  before  the  fire  in  the  gallery 
for  some  time.  Mrs,  Canning  was  presented  first  to  them, 
and  then  the  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Gloucester  and 
the  Prince  Leopold.  The  Queen  took  the  Duchess  of 
Gloucester  by  the  arm  and  shook  it.  One  should  have 
pitied  them  for  the  way  in  which  all  eyes  were  turned 
upon  them,  and  for  all  the  observations  they  occasioned ; 
but  it  seemed  to  me  that  their  minds  are  not  sufficiently 
opened,  and  that  they  are  not  civilised  enough  either  to 
notice  or  to  suffer  from  it.  From  the  gallery  Mr.  Canning, 
still  holding  the  Queen's  hand,  conducted  them  through 
the  apartment  and  under  the  verandah  of  the  garden, 
where  the  band  of  the  Guards  regiment  in  their  full  uni- 
form was  playing  military  airs.  Her  savage  majesty  ap- 
peared much  more  occupied  by  the  red-plumed  hats  of 
the  musicians  than  by  the  music.  She  ought  to  have 
been  pleased  to  see  that  the  oflicer's  helmet  of  her  court 
surpassed  them  as  to  colour.  From  there  they  were  con- 
ducted into  the  dining-room,  where  there  was  a  fine  colla- 
tion. The  two  ladies  were  seated  alone  at  a  table  placed 
across  the  room,  and  ate  some  cake  and  drank  wine.  They 
appeared  awkward  in  all  their  movements,  and  particu- 
larly embarrassed  in  their  walk  ;  there  was  nothing  of  the 
free  step  of  the  savage,  being  probably  embarrassed  by 
the  folds  of  the  European  dress.  After  another  walk  under 
the  verandah,  we  left  them  there  about  twelve  o'clock,  and 
returned  home. 

Thursday ,  August  12th. — Went  to  Twickenham. 

Saturday,  lith. — Walked  with  Mrs.  D.  to  yir  Wathen 
Waller's,  to  see  the  wonderful  collection  of  old  Sevres 
china  at  his  house  at  Twickenham,  to  whicli  he  has 
added  I  know  not  how  many  rooms,  all  filled  with  china, 
the  finest  I  have  ever  seen,  even  in  France ;  he  had  also 
a  quantity  of  valuable  French  furniture  of  all  sorts. 

Sunday,  22nd. — Arrived  at  Chatsworth  between  four 


1 


1824]  VISIT   TO    CHATSWORTH.  355 

and  five.  Everyone  was  gone  to  cliurcli  at  Buxton,  to  hear 
a  son  of  William  Spencer  preach,  to  whom  the  Duke  had 
given  the  living.  We  found  here  Mr.  and  Mrs.  G.  Lamb, 
Mr.  Frederick  Foster,  Mrs.  Cavendish*  and  her  four  chil- 
dren, Mr.  Ealph  and  Mr.  Lewis  Sneyd,  &c.  &c. 

Wednesday^  2bth. — We  drove  in  an  open  carriage  with 
the  Duke,  as  far  as  the  tower  upon  the  wooded  hill ;  the 
ascent  is  steep.  A  fine  view  from  the  tower.  From  there 
through  the  woods  ;  then  got  out  and  walked  along  a  path 
truly  picturesque,  which  leads  through  rocks  interspersed 
with  very  old  oaks.  Saw  the  kitchen  garden  ;  magnifi- 
cent in  its  size  and  in  its  walls,  but  cruelly  neglected,  and 
having  positively  nothing  in  it,  even  in  this  season  of 
fruits  and  flowers. 

Thursday,  2Qtk. — Fine  weather.  We  went  with  Mr. 
Lewis  Sneyd  to  Haddon,  an  old  house  belonging  originally 
to  the  Vernons  ;  in  the  time  of  James  L  it  passed  into  the 
Manners  f  family  by  the  marriage  of  an  heiress  ;  it  is  now 
the  property  of  the  Duke  of  Eutland.  The  outside  is  very 
picturesque.  Upon  a  httle  entrance  gate  at  the  side  of 
the  great  gate  is  written,  under  the  arms,  in  Gothic  letters, 
'  God  save  the  Vernon' 

Saturday^  28^/i. — We  went  straight  to  Buxton.  Buxton 
is  soon  seen;  the  Crescent  is  a  fine  block  of  building, 
but  the  form  must  necessarily  make  all  the  apartments 
inconvenient.  The  greatest  charm  of  Buxton  appears  to 
be  its  not  looking  like  a  town  ;  it  consists  of  large  build- 
ings and  good  houses,  placed  in  an  undulating  and  moun- 
tainous country. 

Arrived  at  Capesthorm.  J 

*  Mrs.  Cavendisli,  daughter  of  Lord  Lismore,  widow  of  Wm.  Cavendisli, 
Esq.,  and  motlier  to  the  present  Duke. 

t  Sir  John  Manners,  second  son  of  Thomas  first  Earl  of  Rutland ;  mar- 
ried Dorothy,  second  daughter  and  co-heir  to  Sir  George  Vernon,  of  Nether 
Iladdon,  in  the  county  of  Derby.  Sir  John  Manners  died  at  Haddon^  1611. 
He  was  grandfather  to  Sir  John  Manners,  eighth  Earl  of  Rutland. 

\,  Seat  of  —  Davenport,  Esq. 

A   A   2 


356  MISS   berry's   journal.  tl824 

Monday,  September  Qth. — ^Went  to  Bramhall,  the  oldest 
house  of  the  Davenports  in  this  county,  twelve  miles 
from  here.  The  house  is  one  of  the  most  ancient  and  most 
curious  edifices  of  the  kind  I  liave  seen.  It  is  a  gentle- 
man's seat  of  the  first  class;  one  part  of  it  dates  long 
before  the  reign  of  Ehzabeth.  The  arms  decorate  the 
chimney-piece  of  the  great  hall,  with  the  words,  '  Vive  la 
Boyen,'  in  gold  letters,  underneath.  There  is  also  a  very 
large  drawing-room  for  such  a  house,  of  which  the  roof, 
with  its  arch  buttresses  of  oak,  all  carved,  would  be  very 
fine  if  the  owner  had  not  painted  them  quite  lately  in 
rose-colour.  There  is  not  the  least  vestige  of  a  garden 
to  this  house  ;  it  is  situated  upon  a  mound  of  grass,  which 
comes  up  to  the  windows.  The  outside  is  all  black  and 
white,  constructed  upon  a  regular  design  in  wood  and 
plaister,  and  called  in  this  country  post  and  pan. 

Friday,  10th. — Left  Capesthorm  for  Liverpool.  The 
master  of  the  hotel  accompanied  us  to  the  docks,  which 
are  immense,  and  filled  with  a  forest  of  masts.  They  are 
really  the  only  thing  worth  the  trouble  of  seeing  at  Liver- 
pool— an  immense  town,  all  in  brick,  blackened  by  the 
smoke  of  coal ;  without  grandeur,  without  large  churches, 
and  no  fine  view  of  it  to  be  seen  from  any  eminence,  even 
if  the  smoke  did  not  conceal  it.  Its  provision  markets, 
where  everything  is  together  under  the  same  roof,  are  im- 
mense, arranged  to  perfection  for  convenience ;  nothing 
done  for  appearance.  We  saw  it  on  a  Saturday,  when  there 
was  an  enormous  crowd. 

•  Saturday,  11th. — Went  in  the  morning  to  meet  Eoscoe, 
at  the  Botanical  Garden,  of  which  he  was  the  first  founder  ; 
it  is  scarcely  beyond  the  new  buildings  of  the  town.  There 
we  took  leave  of  him,  after  going  to  the  Institution.  Slept 
at  Preston. 

Sunday,  12th. — All  the  bells  at  Preston  began  to  peal 
this  morning  before  five  o'clock,  in  honour  of  Lord 
Derby's  birthday. 


1824]  ME.    SYDNEY    SMITH.  357 

Thursday^  l<oth. — We  went  to  see  Lowther  Castle,  five 
miles  from  Penrith ;  a  modern  castle.  There  are  too 
many  towers  and  turrets,  but  the  entrance  in  the  court  is 
grand  ;  and  within,  the  staircase  is  also  very  fine.  The 
much- vaunted  green  terrace  of  two  miles  in  length  is 
always  damp,  and  looks  upon  a  not  very  pretty  landscape. 

Friday^  17 th. — Went  to  Brougham  Hall,  half  a  mile  on 
the  other  side  of  Penrith.  We  found  there  the  mother  of 
the  family,  her  daughter,  her  three  sons,  and  the  wife  of 
the  renowned  eldest.  The  mother  is  a  charming  person, 
the  best  specimen  of  an  old  Scotch  lady,  well-informed 
and  liberal  minded,  without  the  least  cant.  Their  house 
is  delightful ;  an  old  manor-house,  well  situated  and  very 
conveniently  disposed,  and  arranged  with  good  taste  within. 

Tuesday,  21st. — Arrived  at  Edinburgh. 

Thursday,  2ord. — Went  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Davenport 
to  the  Grass  Market,  to  the  Castle,  the  Museum,  the  Par- 
liament House,  the  Advocate's  Library  and  Stamp  Office, 
where  Mr.  Thompson,  the  Deputy  Eegistrar,  showed  us 
very  curious  MS.  letters. 

[From  September  to  JSTovember  the  Miss  Berrys  were 
on  a  visit  to  Eaith  ;  towards  the  end  of  November  they 
returned  southwards.] 

JOUKNAI 

Thursday,  November  2bth. — We  breakfasted  at  Thirsk 
on  our  way  to  Mr.  Sydney  Smith,  at  Foston  ;  arrived  by 
a  very  good  cross-road,  without  going  to  York.  We  found 
at  the  Smiths',  besides  their  two  daughters,  Mr.  Vernon, 
one  of  the  innumerable  sons  of  the  Archbishop  of  York, 
and  Mr.  Beverley,  a  young  Yorkshireman  of  very  good 
mind  and  manners.  We  passed  the  evening  very  agree- 
ably'with  music,  and  with  the  inexhaustible  conversation 
of  our  host. 


358  MISS   BEKRY'S   JOURXAL.  [1824 

The  visit  of  Mr.  Vernon  and  Mr.  Beverley  was  com- 
memorated by  Mr.  Sydney  Smith  in  the  following  imi- 
tation of  YirgiL,  in  which  he  enumerates  certain  improve- 
ments effected  at  Foston,  which  may  remind  the  reader 
of  his  most  humorous  description  of  his  first  settling 
there,  described  in  Lady  Holland's  Life  and  Correspon- 
dence of  her  Father. 

Imitation  froTn  VirgiVs  Vlth  Eclogue. 

Vernon  and  Beverley,  two  graceful  swains, 

Whom  youth  made  sportive  on  Fostonian  plains 

(This  famed  for  music,  and  that  famed  for  love). 

Met  with  their  flocks  beneath  a  beechen  grove. 

And  meeting  saw  beneath  the  noonday  shade 

Sidneian  Smith  in  drowsy  skimbers  laid  ; 

His  veins  were  swollen,  and  above  him  stood 

A  jug  of  negus  to  inflame  his  blood, — 

From  which,  as  fame  reports,  each  night  he  drinks 

Two  brimming  bowls,  and  then  in  slumber  sinks. 

The  youths  approached,  and  glad  were  they  to  see. 

The  wily  sage  asleep  so  quietly. 

Long  had  he  promised  wondrous  things,  and  long 

The  youths  deluded  with  a  hope  of  song ; 

But  now  the  time  was  theii-s,  and  firm  they  bind 

With  twigs  and  haybands  that  around  they  find, 

The  snoring  wizard,  who  in  fury  woke. 

And  struggled  hard  ;  at  length  he  gently  spoke  ; 

'  Fair  swains  I  the  day  is  yours — unbind  my  chains, 

And  with  a  song  I'll  pay  you  for  your  pains ; 

A  wondrous  song!  that  learnedly  shall  show 

The  hidden  secrets  and  the  arts  I  know.'     .     .     . 

Attentive  nature  lends  a  listening  ear, 

The  oaks  and  beeches  bend  ther  heads  to  hear ; 

The  sheep  come  round,  the  fawns  and  dryads  run. 

At  last  he  cleared  his  throat,  and  thus  begun : 

*  When  first  I  came  to  Foston,  gentle  swains. 

Chaos  and  night  possessed  these  fertile  plains ; 

Clods  were  unformed,  a  plough  was  quite  unknown ; 

Verdure  ne'er  sprung,  and  Phoebus  never  shone ; 


1824]  AN   IMITATION   OF   YIRGIL.  359 

Chaos  I  chased  away  with  all  his  storms, 
Then  things  at  last  assumed  their  present  forms ; 
Trees  rose,  woods  waved,  and  animals  began 
To  roam  abroad,  and  know  their  master,  man. 
The  plough,  the  drill,  the  pickaxe,  and  the  spade. 
These  fields,  these  pastures,  and  this  plenty  made  ; 
Where  unformed  matter  lay,  now  nods  yon  corn, 
And  oats  and  turnips  all  those  hills  adorn. 
-  Then  might  you  see  bricks  baking  at  my  will ; 
I  formed  yon  cowhouse  with  my  plastic  skill ; 
Those  walls  are  mine,  and  all  the  joys  they  know 
Spring  from  my  arts  and  from  my  prudence  grow. 

The  poker,  tongs,  and  shovel — rebels  three. 
Whom  on  my  hearth  suspended  from  you  see, 
Who  for  four  centuries  mankind  defied, — 
Have  bent  to  me ;  I  checked  their  noisy  pride, 
I  hooked  their  noses,  I  reduced  their  reign ; 
Ne'er  shall  you  see  them  tumble  down  again ; 
Ne'er  shall  you  hear  their  cursed  outrageous  din: 
With  me,  your  peace,  and  their  repose  begin. 

That  learned  scratching-pole  that  yonder  stands 

Owes  its  existence  to  my  curious  hands ; 

Framed  for  all  animals,  or  great  or  small, 

It  perfect  satisfaction  gives  to  all ; 

Their  rumps,  their  tails,  their  flea-bit  backs  confess 

How  e'en  in  scratching-poles  a  priest  may  bless. 

I  know  all  drugs,  all  simples  and  all  pills ; 

I  cure  diseases,  and  I  send  no  bills. 

The  poor  old  women  now  no  lameness  know ; 

Rheumatics  leave  their  hand,  the  gout  their  toe. 

Fell  atrophy  has  fled  from  Foston's  vales. 

And  health  and  peace,  and  joy  and  love  prevails. 

Oft  have  I  thought  on  deeper  things  than  you 
Could  understand,  or  I  unravel  now : 
Oft  have  I  thought,  whilst  all  things  upwards  tend. 
Why  tails  of  milking  cows  alone  descend  ; 


360  MISS   berry's   journal.  '  [1824 

Why  on  Good  Fridays  smoke  the  hot- cross  bun ; 
Why  with  barouches  Danish  spaniels  run  ; 
Or  why  in  yonder  argent  fields  above 
Grreat  Jove's  satellites  are  less  than  Jove.' 

More  did  he  sing,  and  more  could  I  relate. 
But  looking  at  my  watch  I  find  't  is  late  ; 
And  leave  my  bed  where  I  have  lolled  so  long 
To  write  the  wonders  of  Sidneian  song. 

Nov.  25,  1824. 

Saturday,  27th. — Arrived  at  Brompton,  Sir  G.  Cayley's. 


1825]  SEVERE   ILLNESS   OP  MISS   BERRY,  361 


1825. 

JOUENAL. 

Monday,  April  IQth. — I  left  off  writing  last  year  in  the 
month  of  November,  and  I  don't  well  know  why ;  but 
constantly  travelling,  and  having  nothing  particular  to 
remark  upon,  the  thread  was  broken,  and  I  did  not  take 
the  trouble  to  rejoin  it.  I  did  wrong,  and  I  am  going  to 
correct  myself.  After  having  passed  two  days  at  Brompton, 
at  my  cousin's  (Sir  G.  Cayley),  and  having  enjoyed  a 
renewal  of  the  tender  kindness  of  my  old  aunt,  his 
mother,  we  left  on  the  29th  November,  took  Lady 
Charlotte  Lindsay  back  to  Mr.  Sydney  Smith,  and  slept 
at  York. 

Thursday,  December  29^A. — Eeturned  to  Park  Lane, 
after  an  absence  of  more  than  four  months,  from  the 
19th  August.     Thus  finished  for  me  the  year  1824. 

Since  our  return  to  town,  our  time  has  been  passed 
very  agreeably,  giving  every  now  and  then  small  dinners, 
which  went  off  well,  and  with  which  our  guests  seemed 
pleased.  The  last,  fixed  for  the  16th  March,  did  not  take 
place  :  I  was  seized  that  day  with  a  violent  bilious  fever, 
which  fortunately  did  not  attack  my  nerves,  and  I  did 
not  lose  my  head.  I  remained  quiet,  and  was  as  little 
troublesome  as  a  great  illness  will  allow  one  to  be  to 
those  around.  Our  good  A.  Turner  established  herself 
by  my  side  as  nurse  from  the  first  day.  I  had  another  to 
sit  up  during  the  nights ;  and  poor  Agnes  was  surrounded 
by  friends  who  would  not  let  her  indulge  in  gloomy 
apprehensions  on  my  account.     But  when  the  fever  was 


362  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1825 

past  I  fell  into  a  state  wliich  at  first  was  worse  to  bear 
in  every  way.  For  five  weeks  my  recovery  seemed 
scarcely  to  advance.  I  had  not  a  spark  of  life  either  in 
body  or  in  mind.  I  went  into  the  country  for  short 
visits — to  Car's,  at  Petersham,  and  to  Mrs.  Damer,  at  York 
House.  It  was  very  fine  weather,  and  I  was  always  out 
of  doors,  but  that  did  nothing  for  me.  I  could  eat  and 
sleep,  but  I  only  felt  half  alive.  I  returned  to  town 
Thursday  the  13th  of  April,  and  was  taken  ill  again  for 
some  days ;  then  I  began  to  feel  a  shade  more  of  life  in 
me,  and  continued  to  improve.  In  the  evenings  I  saw 
all  those  who  were  kind  enough  to  come  :  they  were 
mostly  ladies.     .     .     . 

Saturday^  October  \st — There  is  a  hiatus  in  my  Journal 
much  longer  than  any  of  the  preceding  ones.  This  must 
not  be.  I  wish  I  could  now  retrace  many  of  the  inter- 
mediate days  since  the  24th  April,  when  I  left  off  writing, 
to  the  1st  October,  when  I  recommenced.  Now  I  cannot 
remember  anything  but  the  general  colour  of  my  life  till 
the  20th  July,  when  I  left  England  for  Paris  with  my 
sister,  accompanied  by  Mrs.  and  Miss  Davenport.  We 
stayed  there  till  the  31st  August.  Soon  after  our  return 
to  London  (September  5th),  we  went  to  see  our  house  in 
Curzon  Street. 

From  Lady  Char.  Lindsay  to  Miss  Berry. 

Wroxton  Abbey,  August  ye  9th. 
Having  made  my  escape  from  three  Eiissian  Countesses  and 
their  English  dame  de  covxpanie,  from  three  Greek  professors 
and  a  Greek  physician,  and  from  Lord  Dudley,  William  Pon- 
sonby,  Daniel  Hailes,  and  a  Mr.  Hartshorn,  here  I  am  in  my 
little  trunk  room,  ready  to  put  a  letter  upon  the  stocks  for 
Berrina.  You  cannot  imagine  a  more  complete  change  from 
the  tranquillity  of  our  first  month  to  the  bustle  and  confusion 
of  tongues  into  which  we  ha^e  been  plunged  since  my  brother's  * 

*  Lord  Guildford  was  the  founder  of  the  colleges  in  the  Ionian  Islands ; 
and  was  constantly  travelling  backwards  and  forwards  between  England 
and  Greece. 


1825]  LETTER   FROM    LADY   CHARLOTTE    LINDSAY.  363 

arrival ;  such  a  jabbering  of  modern  Greek,  Italian,  French,  and 
Eno-lish !  And  I  am  always  talking  tbe  wrong  lanwuacre  to  the 
person  I  address,  and  generally  a  happy  mixture  of  all,  for  I  am 
learning  modern  Grreek.  Lord  Dudley  and  W.  Ponsonb}^  came 
here  last  Sunday  from  Leamington ;  and  yesterday  my  brother 
got  a  letter  recommending  to  his  civilities  the  Comtesse  de 
Korzchakoff  (or  some  such  name),  with  her  two  daughters,  who 
are  making  a  tour  in  England,  and  they  arrived  last  night,  and 
we  amused  fchem  by  making  them  dance,  with  the  Greek  pro- 
fessors, to  the  wretched  scraping  of  three  Banbury  violins. 
These  Russians  are  going  to  spend  the  winter  in  Italy,  and 
chiefly  at  Florence,  for  the  sake  of  being  with  the  Boutourlins, 
with  whom  they  were  well  acquainted  sixteen  years  ago  in  Eussia. 
I  hope  Madame  de  Boutourlin  has  not  the  same  horror  that  I 
have  of  seeing  on  old  friend  that  I  have  not  lived  with  for  many 
years ;  but  I  daresay  that  she  has  not  any  such  wicked  feelings ; 
and  I  must  say  these  people  seem  to  be  very  good-natured,  and 
not  at  all  troublesome :  for  they  have  found  out  that  I  look 
fatigued,  and  have  very  amiably  sent  me  to  my  own  room, 
while  they  are  gone  to  Broughton  Castle  and  Banbury  Church. 
Your  landlord  *  is  in  wonderful  good  humour,  which  surprises 
me,  considering  that  he  is  marvellously  ill-served  :  for  as  we  sit 
down  two  or  three  and  twenty  to  breakfast  and  dinner  every 
day,  with  only  some  job  servants  to  attend,  you  may  imagine 
the  blunders  that  occur.  I  am  wicked  enough  to  be  amused 
when  he  does  not  get  his  coffee  til]  it  is  cold,  or  his  Bohea  tea 
unadulterated  by  green  ;  but,  though  evidently  suffering  mar- 
tyrdom, he  bears  it  with  the  patience  of  a  martyr  !  I  heard 
him  say  that  he  had  just  now  been  offered  24,000Z.  for  his 
house  in  Park  Lane.  *  This  is  the  best  time  for  selling  houses,' 
I  remarked,  but  he  replied  not.  He  is  now  riding  to  Banbury, 
at  my  recommendation,  to  see  the  infant  school,  and  I  hope  he 
will  subscribe  something  handsome  towards  it;  for  it  is  the  very 
best  institution  possible ;  and  Brougham  would  deserve  to  be 
immortalised,  if  he  had  done  nothing  else,  for  setting  this  going 
as  he  has  done  by  the  Westminster  school  for  infants  from  two 
to  seven  years  old.  This  one  at  Banbury  is  in  imitation  of  it, 
and  when  I  tell  you  that  they  have  contrived  to  make  the  mul- 
tiplication table  a  source  of  happiness  to   children,  you  will 

*  Lord  Dudley. 


364  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1825 

allow  that  they  have  done  wonders  !  My  brother  asked  the 
clergyman  why  those  schools  were  not  more  generally  adopted, 
and  he  answered,  '  Because  it  was  invented  by  Mr.  Brougham.'' 
All  Tory  as  he  is,  my  brother  did  not  think  that  a  sufficient 
reason,  and  has  therefore  subscribed  most  largely  to  it.  W. 
Ponsonby  is,  as  usual,  remarkably  gentlemanlike  and  agreeable. 
.  .  .  Good  Anne  has  written  to  tell  me  of  her  having  com- 
pleted the  purchase  of  the  Curzon  Street  house,  of  which  I 
have  of  course  not  said  a  word  to  Lord  D.     .     .     . 

Farewell,  Grod  bless  you,  and  send  you  a  house  looking  into 
the  Park.     Love  to  Agnes. 

Cha. 


1826]  .LIFE   AT   CHELTENHAM.-  365 


1826. 
JOUENAL. 

Cheltenham^  July  7th. — Another  hiatus  of  more  than  a 
year  without  writing  of  the  past,  I  must  begin  again 
from  this  day,  and  fortunately  I  have  httle  to  say.  We 
left  London — my  sister  and  Lady  Charlotte  Lindsay — for 
Cheltenham.  The  aspect  of  Cheltenham  is  so  changed 
by  the  numerous  buildings  on  all  sides,  and  by  the  im- 
mense increase  of  the  town,  that  I  scarcely  recognise  it. 
We  decided  upon  a  small  house,  called  Waterloo  Cottage, 
Victoria  Eoad;  but  notwithstanding  these  triumphant 
titles,  it  was  a  poor  little  house  in  a  small  garden  outside 
the  town,  on  a  shady  road,  and  not  too  far  from  the 
springs. 

Friday,  21st. — We  have  passed  three  weeks  here  in 
the  greatest  tranquillity.  We  have  led  the  most  uniform 
life,  and  all  the  more  agreeable  to  me  for  being  so.  We 
got  up  at  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning ;  walked  from  nine 
o'clock  till  ten ;  after  breakfast  we  each  remained  in  our 
own  room  till  four  o'clock,  when  we  dined ;  then  loitered 
a  Httle  in  the  garden ;  about  six  o'clock  went  to  the 
library  to  read  the  daily  papers  ;  then  a  walk — always 
ending  between  eight  and  nine  o'clock — in  the  portico  of 
the  Sherborne  Spa,  to  hear  the  music ;  and  at  nine 
o'clock,  after  tea,  each  took  a  book  till  past  eleven  o'clock, 
when  we  separated  for  the  night.  This  life  finishes  to- 
morrow :  we  set  out  for  Worcester.  Adieu !  Cheltenham, 
I  will  not  say  for  ever. 

Saturday,  22nd. — Left  Cheltenham  for  Tewkesbury. 


366  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1826 

Saw  the  magnificent  Abbey  cliurch  ;  it  is  of  very  ancient 
Norman  arcliitecture.  The  monuments  are  nmnerous 
and  remarkable;  several  of  the  abbots  of  the  church, 
several  of  the  Knights  Templars,  and  three  fine  ones  of 
the  Clare  family. 

Sunday,  2Srd. — Set  out  for  Malvern.  Our  lodging, 
which  is  called  '  Pomona,'  is  half  a  mile  from  the  terrace 
of  the  town,  or  rather  village,  for  fortunately  Great  Mal- 
vern still  continues  (notwithstanding  some  houses  newly 
built)  very  little  Malvern,  being  nothing  but  a  village 
upon  unequal  ground.  Our  Pomona  stands  upon  the 
edge  of  a  common,  very  dry,  very  airy,  and  on  our  side 
much  ornamented  with  cottages  and  little  villas,  sur- 
rounded by  trees,  picturesque  and  rural. 

Saturday,  August  12th. — We  left  Pomona,  not  without 
regret.  Between  Stourbridge  and  Wolverhampton  is 
Hemley,  Lord  Dudley's  park.  I  could  not  pass  it  by. 
We  went  in ;  he  was  not  there,  but  a  fat  man  and 
woman  who  we];e  in  charge  invited  me  so  politely  to  get 
out  and  see  the  changes  that  had  been  made  there,  that 
I  could  not  excuse  myself 

Wednesday,  2ith.  —  Went  with  the  Davenports  to 
Wootton,  which  is  a  very  prett}^  country-house  now  fitting 
up  by  Mr.  Davenport,  situated  at  the  top  of  a  pretty  little 
ravine.  It  has  been  a  long  time  neglected,  and  nothing 
now  remains  in  the  same  state  as  it  was  in  the  time  when 
Mr.  Davenport's  grandfather  offered  it  as  a  refuge  to  J.  J. 
Eousseau.  He  was  there  for  more  than  a  year  and  a 
half  in  the  years  1767  and  1768.  Certainly,  if  he  had 
liked  solitude  and  perfect  retirement  as  much  as  he  dis- 
hked  both,  he  could  not  have  been  better  placed. 


18-27]  SPA.  367 


1827. 
JOURNAL. 

Tuesday^  July  \Qth. — I  left  off  the  last  volume  of  my 
Journal,  though  there  were  still  several  blank  sheets ;  but 
there  was  such  a  long  gap  from  the  year  1824  till  the 
year  1826,  that  I  am  persuaded  the  little  book  will  bring 
ill  luck  upon  my  regularity,  so  I  begin  afresh  in  a  new 
one. 

Monday^  9th. — Left  Curzon  Street  with  my  sister  and 
Lady  Charlotte  Lindsay  for  the  Tower  Stairs,  to  embark 
in  the  steam-packet  for  Calais. 

Thursday,  12th. — Slept  at  Charleroy.  The  fortifications 
appear  wonderful  to  the  eyes  of  the  ignorant,  and  so 
completely  cover  the  town  that,  though  upon  the  declivity 
of' a  hill,  no  one  could  suspect  their  existence,  even  im- 
mediately outside  tlie  gates. 

N.B. — All  the  fortifications  of  the  towns  of  Flanders 
are  kept  up  in  the  most  perfect  manner,  under  the  in- 
spection of  the  Duke  of  Wellington. 

Saturday,  lUh.  —  Arrived  at  Liege.  I  had  always 
thought  Liege  a  dark  and  ugly  town,  but  it  appeared 
to-day  in  quite  a  different  aspect.  The  gardens  which 
border  the  river,  and  the  rising  ground  on  tlie  other  side 
of  the  road  all  covered  with  buildings,  churches,  and 
towers  mixed  with  trees,  present  an  outline  resembling 
Italy  rather  than  Flanders.  We  reached  Spa  between 
six  and  seven  o'clock. 

Monday,  l^th. — We  were  well  pleased  with  our 
lodeings  and  Hfe.   We  breakfasted  at  nine  o'clock  ;  dined 


368  MISS   berry's   journal,  [1827 

at  three  ;  made  the  necessary  toilette  after  dinner ;  walked 
between  five  and  six  o'clock  till  twilight ;  tea  at  nine 
and  separated  for  the  night  soon  after  ten  o'clock. 
There  is  the  sketch  of  a  fife  which  will  not  furnish  much 
for  my  Journal,  so  I  do  not  expect  to  write  in  it  every 
day.  My  days  will  pass  as  monotonously  as  possible.  I 
shall  never  go  out  till  after  dinner  at  three  o'clock.  I 
shall  take  as  few  long  walks  as  I  can,  amusing  myself 
much  better  alone  in  the  morning  at  home,  and  thus  being 
much  better  fitted  to  amuse  myself  in  the  evening  with 
company. 

Here  the  Journal  a2;ain  breaks  off  till  the  following? 
June. 


1828]  LETTERS,'  369 


1828. 
LETTEES. 

This  neglect  may  in  part  have  been  occasioned  by  the 
necessary  occupation  of  her  time  in  conducting  through 
the  press  the  first  volume  of  her  principal  work,  'The 
Comparative  View  of  Social  Life  in  France  and  England.' 
It  was  published  in  the  month  of  April,  and  the  following 
letter,  addressed  to  Miss  Joanna  Baillie,  shows  that  she 
was  far  from  elated  as  to  its  probable  success  : — 

Petersham,  21  st  April  1828. 

My  dear  Joanna, — If  you  will  send  to  No.  28  Grrosvenor 
Square,  you  will  receive  a  volume  which,  however  unworthy  of 
your  acceptance,  is  due  to  you  from  the  author  by  every  senti- 
ment, so  long  and  so  truly  felt,  of  admiration  for  your  genius, 
and  esteem  and  affection  for  your  virtues. 

Our  short  stay  in  London  this  year  ended  on  the  5th  of  the 
month. 

I  was  particularly  sorry  to  have  missed  you  at  Hampstead  one 
Sunday  that  I  called,  between  three  and  four  o'clock  ;  as  my 
troublesome  health  always  gives  me  too  much  to  do,  when  I  can 
do  anything,  and  this  was  (from  many  circumstances  of  which 
this  volume  was  one)  more  the  case  during  the  three  months  we 
passed  in  London  this  year  than  at  any  former  period. 

I  have  no  hopes  of  any  popularity  for  my  book.  It  will  fall 
between  wind  and  water.  The  trifling  will  think  it  dull,  and 
graver  readers  will  not  think  of  it  at  all. 

I  hope  and  trust  that  it  contains  nothing  that  will  either  dis- 
grace my  heart  or  my  understanding,  which  satisfies  the  conscience, 
although  not  the  vanity,  of  your  always  attached  and  sincere  friend, 

M.  Berry. 

VOL.  III.  B  B 


370  MISS    berry's   journal.  [1828 

From  Miss  J.  Baillie  to  Miss  Berry. 

Hampstead,  April  24,  1828, 

Mt  bear  Fkiend, — I  am  truly  gratified  by  the  affectionate 
expressions  of  your  kind  note,  and  by  those  also  on  the  first  leaf 
of  your  book — the  very  partial  expressions  of  a  friend,  and  I 
value  them  the  more  because  I  know  them  to  be  so.  You 
have  my  warm  wishes  for  your  literary  success  on  this  occasion, 
and  I  have  good  confidence  that  I  shall  not  be  disappointed. 

I  received  your  note  on  Tuesday  before  I  left  home  for  Caven- 
dish Square,  and  yesterday  Mrs.  Baillie  was  kind  enough  to  send 
to  Grosvenor  Square,  and  so  I  was  put  in  possession  of  my 
treasure.  But  merely  put  in  possession,  for  with  dining  out 
two  successive  days  to  meet  my  friend  Sir  Walter  Scott,  and  the 
busy  confusion  of  a  two-days'  stay  in  London,  I  have  had  no 
opportunity  of  reading  it,  part  of  the  introduction  excepted, 
which  I  liked  much.  It  reads  well,  being  clear  and  sensible 
and  happily  expressed ;  and  if  it  hold  out  so  through  the  volume, 
as  I  doubt  not  it  will,  it  can  scarcel}"  fail  of  success. 

Grive  my  kind  love  to  Agnes,  and  believe  me  always,  wherever 
you  are,  affectionately  yours,  J.  Baillie. 

Frorti  Lady  Charlotte  Lindsay  to  Miss  Berry, 

12  Cliarlotte  Street,  Portland  Place,  April  25,  1828. 
Though  I  said  that  I  would  not  answer  the  King's  speech,  like 
Mr.  Hope,  yet  I  must  write  to  tell  you  that  your  book  is  quite 
new  and  perfectly  delightful  to  me.  I  always  thought  it  would 
be  a  very  creditable  work,  but  I  had  no  idea  that  I  should  have 
derived  so  much  amusement  from  it.  I  imagine  that  having 
hitherto  either  read  it  spitefully  to  detect  faults,  or  when 
I  had  rather  have  been  talking  or  talked  to  by  the  authoress, 
prevented  my  really  enjoying  the  entertaining  information,  and 
the  acute  and  just  reasoning  upon  facts  and  persons  sufficiently 
known  to  be  interesting  and  yet  not  enough  so  to  be  common- 
place. In  short,  it  exactly  suits  the  extent  of  my  reading  and 
reasoning  powers ;  and  I  hope  and  believe  that  it  may  also 
suit  those  whose  information  and  abilities  may  be  far  superior 
to  mine.  Everybody  has  asked  me.  since  I  came  to  town, 
when  Miss  Berry's  book  is  to  be  published  ? — never  having  seen 
it  advertised. 


1828]  LETTEES.  371 

From  Miss  J.  Baillie  to  Miss  Berry. 

Hampstead,  June  9,  1828. 

My  deae  Friend, — The  mention  of  one  friend's  book  naturally 
tends  to  another's.  I  have  read  your  '  View  of  the  Social  Life, 
&c.,'  twice ;  and  it  has  lost  nothing,  but  rather  gained,  on  the 
second  perusal.  The  style  is  clear  and  scholar-like,  in  the  good 
sense  of  the  word  ;  it  is  written  in  a  good  spirit  of  liberality  and 
rectitude,  and  it  abounds  in  excellent  observations  concisely  and 
cleverly  expressed.  For  my  own  part  I  should  have  liked  it 
better  had  you  given  us  less  of  court  anecdote  and  more  of 
illustration  of  the  manners  of  the  middling-classes  of  society  ; 
though  I  am  aware  that  such  illustrations  would  have  been  more 
difficult  to  come  at.  There  is  another  thino^  which  I  could  have 
wished  otherwise,  but  perhaps  the  general  run  of  readers  may 
not  feel  it:  the  account  given  of  Voltaire's  mistress,  Madame 
de  Chatelet,  rather  offends  as  to  that  delicacy  which  is  expected 
in  the  writings  of  a  woman.  The  mention  too  of  Lady  W.  Mon- 
tague's poem  on  Lady  Murray's  disagreeable  adventure,  though 
very  justly  reprobated  by  370U,  falls  a  little  under  the  same  con- 
demnation ;  and  these  I  notice  because  they  have  been  felt  by 
others  whose  judgment  and  feelings  I  respect,  though,  as  I  said 
before,  the  generality  of  readers  may  not  see  them  in  the  same 
light.  I  also  mention  them  because  I  know  you  expect  my 
sincere  opinion,  and  the  work  itself  has  sufficient  merit  to  afford 
such  exceptions  to  its  praise. 

I  am  expecting  every  day  the  publication  of  my  Cingalese 
drama,  the  last  proof-sheet  of  which  I  corrected  some  days  ago 
— I  believe  nearly  a  week.  It  is  a  little  cock-boat  to  be 
launched  upon  a  wide  ocean,  bound  on  a  distant  voyage ;  I  hope 
it  will  not  prove  a  cast-away.  I  don't  know  whether  you  saw  it 
in  MS,  When  we  return  from  Devon,  where  we  shall  probably 
remain  two  months,  I  shall  be  anxious  to  know  what  sale  it  has 
had  in  Colburn's  hands,  who  is  the  bookseller  to  whom  Sir  A. 
Johnstone  has  given  it,  for  the  profits  of  this  little  work  may  be 
of  more  consequence  than  itself. 

Your  friend,  Miss  A.  Turner,  called  on  me  last  Saturday, 
and  was  very  kind  in  coming,  for  she  knew  I  was  anxious 
to  hear  particulars  respecting  the  illness  of  our  poor  friend, 
which   could   not   so    well   be   detailed   in  a  note.      What  a 

B   B   2 


372  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1828 

cheerful,  useful  person  Miss  Turner  is!  She  is  one  of  those 
easy  well-conditioned  beings  who  gathers  no  thorns  in  the  world 
for  herself,  and  has  both  time  and  inclination  to  clear  them 
away  from  the  paths  of  other  people.  If  you  are  a  reader  of 
Jeremy  Taylor,  perhaps  you  will  recollect  a  passage  where  he 
says — 'how  many  people  are  busy  in  this  world  in  gathering 
together  a  handful  of  thorns  to  sit  upon.'  I  confess  myself  to 
be  somewhat  a  gatherer  of  thorns,  and  fain  would  I  get  the 
better  of  this  foolish  propensity,  but  I  am  (as  we  say  in  Scotland) 
o'wr  auld  to  mend.     Always  affectionately  yours, 

J.  Baillie. 

From  Miss  Berry  to  Miss  J.  Baillie. 

Baden,  19tli  June  1828. 

My  dear  Joanna, — I  am  much  flattered  by  your  praises  of 
my  book,  and  almost  as  much  by  what  you  blame.  Had  I  pro- 
fessed writing  a  comparative  view  of  the  manners  instead  of  the 
'■social  life''  of  England  and  France,  I  should  have  found,  and 
so  would  you,  that  the  manners  of  the  'middling  classes  of 
society '  in  both  countries  were  always  a  bad  imitation  of  the 
upper.  I  must  have  gone  down  to  the  m^anners  of  the  people 
for  any  difference,  and  that  would  have  led  me  into  a  larger 
field  of  disquisition  than  I  felt  myself  equal  to,  and  involved 
discussions  out  of  the  pale  of  my  personal  knowledge. 

On  the  charge  of  '  offending  the  delicacy  which  is  expected 
in  the  writings  of  a  woman,'  the  two  instances  marked  by  you 
have  been  passed  over  by  others,  who  have  observed  on  a  note  of 
which  you  take  no  notice.  I  have  only  to  say  that,  if  women 
treat  of  human  nature  and  human  life  in  history  and  not  in 
fiction  (which  perhaps  they  had  better  not  do),  human  nature 
and  human  life  are  often  indelicate ;  and  if  such  passages  in 
them  are  treated  always  with  the  gravity  and  the  reprobation 
they  deserve,  it  is  all  a  sensible  woman  can  do,  and  (not  writing 
for  children)  all  she  can  think  necessary. 

I  shall  be  very  curious  to  see  how  you  treat  a  neiv  world 
both  of  men  and  things ;  as  it  can't  be  very  bulky,  if  you  will 
order  one  to  be  sent  to  Miss  Anne  Turner,  directed  for  me,  she 
will  contrive  to  send  it  to  me  if  any  possible  opportunity  offers. 
The  merits  of  the  said  Anne  Turner  you  will  only  admire  the 
more  when  I  tell  you,  instead  of  being  blessed  with  the  happy 


1828]  LETTERS.  .  3/3 

easy  disposition  you  suppose,  her's  is  a  very  anxious  mind,  and 
therefore  she  has  a  double  merit  in  forofetting:  her  own  anxieties 
to  soothe  those  of  her  friends. 

Farewell,  dear  Joanna.  Let  me  hear  from  you  again  in  the 
leisure  of  the  country,  and  believe  me  always  your  sincerely 
attached  friend,  M.  Berry. 


From  Professor  Sniythe  to  Miss  Berry. 

Peter  House,  Cambridge. 

Dear  Miss  Berry, — Your  book  quite  succeeded  with  me, 
giving  me  a  great  deal  of  information  that  was  very  entertain- 
ing to  me,  and  that  had  not  reached  me  before.  You  will,  I 
hope,  go  on  and  publish  your  second  volume,  not  regarding 
much  whether  your  work  be  fashionable  at  present  or  not,  for 
in  this  there  is  a  great  deal  of  chance  and  luck,  good  or  bad. 
The  question  is,  whether  it  is  not  a  book  likely  to  be  always 
agreeable  and  instructive,  and  this  I  think  it  will  be,  and 
therefore  a  book  of  sufficient  weight  to  be  given  to  the  public. 

I  still  observe  in  it  some  long  sentences,  which  it  would  have 
been  very  easy  for  you,  I  should  have  thought,  to  have  broken 
up  into  two  sentences  or  more,  giving  the  g-ood  sense  they  often 
contain  twice  the  chance  of  being  perceived  and  properly  felt  by 
the  reader. 

You  have  not  always  remembered  that  you  are  writing  for  an 
English,  not  a  French  public — where  not  only  men,  but  men, 
women,  and  children,  read,  when  a  book  is  considered  as  worth 
reading. 

I  have  no  doubt  whatever  that  a  few  words  and  sentences 
that  might  just  as  well  have  been  left  out  as  not,  not  half-a- 
dozen  of  each,  will  materially  affect  the  circulation  of  your  vo- 
lume ;  and  if  you  had  not  lived  so  much  among  the  upper  ranks, 
and  so  little  among  the  middle,  and  again  so  much  in  foreign 
society,  you  would  have  been  sufficiently  aware  of  this. 

You  have  been  always  so  very  kind  and  obliging  to  me,  that 
I  trouble  you  with  all  this,  and  tell  you  all  that  has  occurred 
to  me ;  and  you  will  be  so  good  as  to  excuse  my  doing  so  unre- 
servedly. I  am  happy  to  bear  my  humble  testimony  to  your 
merits,  and  I  am  anxious  to  take  every  possible  chance  of  serving 
you.      I  beg  my  best  remembrances  to  your  sister  and  Lady 


374  MISS    berry's   journal.  [1828 

Charlotte  Lindsay.     Believe  me  very  sincerely  and  respectfully 
yours, 

"W.  Smtthe. 

Frora  Chas.  Poulett  TJiomson,  Esq, 

Saturday. 
Dear  Miss  Beery, — I  return  you  your  book,  with  many 
thanks  for  the  instruction  and  amusement  which  it  has  afforded 
me ;  but  I  cannot  do  so  without  at  the  same  time  telling  you 
how  much  I  hope  that  you  have  not  abandoned  your  intention 
of  following  it  up  by  a  second  volume.  The  influence  which 
the  change  in  the  institutions  of  France  especially,  but  of 
all  Europe  more  or  less,  has  exercised  over  the  state  of  society 
since  the  opening  of  the  French  Kevolution,  but  above  all  since 
the  Eestoration,  is  a  subject  of  the  deepest  interest ;  and  we 
have  the  best  proof  in  what  you  have  already  done,  and  in  the 
rare  advantages  you  have  possessed  of  witnessing  the  courts  and 
their  consequences,  of  your  peculiar  fitness  to  treat  it  well. 
Believe  me,  very  truly  yours, 

C.  Poulett  Thomson. 

Criticisms  by  M.  Benjamin  Constant 

MoN  voyage  a  Strasbourg  a  interrompu  non  pas  la  lecture  de 
I'ouvrage  de  Mademoiselle  Berry,  que  j'avais  ete  entraine  a 
achever  auparavant,  mais  les  notes  ecrites  que  je  comptais, 
d'apres  sa  demande,  lui  remettre.  Je  ne  puis  done  que  lui  com- 
muniquer  des  observations  generales,  mes  notes  consistant  en 
renvois  qui  indiquaient  le  lieu  ou  je  comptais  placer  des  obser- 
vations dont  aucune  n'est  ecrite. 

Je  lui  dirai  done  qu'un  des  grands  merites  de  son  ouvrage, 
qui  en  a  de  plusieurs  genres,  est  de  donner  sur  la  restauration 
anglaise,  et  sur  les  mosurs  qu'elle  produisit,  des  idees  neuves  et 
parfaitement  justes,  d'apres  mon  jugement,  fonde  sur  I'etude 
assez  approfondie  que  j'ai  faite  de  cette  epoque.  Les  caracteres 
individuals  sent  parfaitement  bien  traces,  et  le  style  a  une  verve 
et  une  energie  qu'ontrouve  rarement  dans  des  ouvragesdefemme. 
Ce  dont  je  sais  particulierement,  bon  gre  a  I'auteur,  c'est  de 
n'avoir  pas  desavoue  la  noble  lutte  pour  la  liberte,  d'avoir 
reclame  pour  I'honneur  de  I'Angieterre  tout  ce  qu'il  y  a  eu  de 


1828]  CRITICISMS.  375 

beau  et  de  grand  dans  des  epoques  orageuses,  et  par  la  meme 
melangees  d'erreurs  et  de  crimes.  On  voitque  I'auteur  compose 
de  la  partie  pure  de  I'aristocratie  comme  de  la  partie  pure  de  la 
democratic  (ce  n'est  pas  le  mot  propre)  de  I'Angleterre  un 
patrimoine  national  qu'il  aime  a  enrichir  meme  des  splendours 
des  deux  factions,  recueillant  ainsi  dans  son  esprit  patriotique 
tout  ce  qui  peut  faire  honneur  a  son  pays  dans  les  deux  camps 
opposes.  Ce  sentiment  perce  dans  toutes  les  pages,  et  ce  qu'il  y 
a  de  prejuges  dans  ce  sentiment  ne  sert  qu'a  donner  a  I'ouvrage 
plus  d'individualite,  de  chaleur,  et  de  vie. 

Peut-etre  les  previsions  de  I'auteur  sur  I'avenir  politique  et 
social  de  I'Angleterre  se  ressentent-elles  de  ces  prejuges  de 
maniere  a  leur  preparer  quelques  dementis  par  les  evenements. 
Elevee  au  milieu  de  I'aristocratie  anglaise  dont  elle  fait  partie. 
Mile.  Berry  la  croit  trop  inexpugnable.  Elle  croit  qu'il  y  aura 
toujours  cet  atmosphere  de  privilege,  de  distinction,  et  de  con- 
centration de  fortune  qui  donne  a  la  societe  anglaise  une 
elegance  un  pen  dedaigneuse  et  un  peu  roide,  et  une  noblesse 
de  sentiments  que  je  ne  veux  point  lui  contester,  tant  qu'il  ne 
s'agit  que  des  individus  anglais  entr'  eux ;  car  quand  il  s'agit  des 
peuples  etrangers,  c'est  tout  le  contraire.  Elle  ne  veut  pas 
admettre  que  le  nivellement  auquel  I'espece  bumaine  tend  de 
toutes  parts  aura  lieu  en  Angleterre  comme  il  a  eu  lieu 
chez  nous,  et  qu'alors  I'aristocratie  anglaise  et  ses  manieres 
et  tout  son  lustre  social  que  Mile.  Berry  decrit  si  bien  fera 
p]ace  a  autre  chose,  et  en  la  lisant  on  voit  qu'elle  croit 
a  une  duree  centre  laquelle  bien  des  chances  s'elevent  et 
bien  des  probabilites  se  manifestent.  II  est  paradoxal,  mais 
il  est  vrai,  de  dire  que  si  politiquement  et  comme  nation 
le  peuple  anglais  existe  et  a  existe  avant  tous  les  autres, 
11  existe,  socialement  parlant,  beaucoup  moins  que  le  peuple 
franpais.  II  a  eu  des  droits  quand  le  reste  de  I'Europe  n'en 
avait  pas ;  mais  il  n'a  jamais  eu  de  place  sociale.  Aussi  I'auteur 
a  du  se  borner  a  peindre  la  grande  coterie  aristocratique  de 
I'Angleterre,  et  son  tableau  est  d'une  exactitude,  d'une  vie, 
d'un  interet  infini. 

Quant  a  la  France,  I'etat  social  sous  Louis  XIV  et  Louis 
XV  est  decrit  avec  la  meme  fidelite,  la  meme  connaissance  des 
details,  le  meme  talent  de  faire  reporter  les  circonstances  sympto- 
matiques.  Cette  partie  exigeait  surtoutde  la  sagacite,  de  la  finesse. 


376  MISS   BEKKY's   JOUENAL.  [1828 

et  ce  genre  de  gaiete  qui  resulte  plutot  des  aperjus  que  des  expres- 
sions, et  que  I'auteur  excite  plus  qu'il  ne  I'eprouve.  L'Angleterre 
exigeait  plus  de  gravite  et  plus  de  serieux.  Mile.  Berry  a  saisi 
admirablement  cette  nuance  et  le  ton  qui  convenait  ausujet,  et, 
tout  franyafs  que  je  suis,  je  lui  pardonne  le  mepris  qui  perce 
dans  ses  descriptions  de  la  solemnite  pompeuse  et  frivole  de 
Louis  XIV  et  de  la  frivolite  licentieuse  et  aride  de  Louis  XV. 
Je  le  lui  pardonne  parceque  je  le  partage.  Cette  partie  de  son 
livre  a  le  meme  merite  que  la  precedente.  On  vit  avec  les  in- 
dividus  :  ce  n'est  pas  une  lecture,  mais  une  societe  dans  laquelle 
on  entre. 

Mais  elle  aura  une  toute  autre  tache  dans  le  second  volume 
qu'elle  nous  promet  et  nous   donnera  bientot  j'espere.      Une 
nation  nouvelle  a  envahi  la  France  depuis  la  revolution,  et  il  ne 
s'agit  pas  pour  un  auteur  de  la  sagacite  de  Mile.  Berry  de  la 
confondre  avec  celle  qui  I'a  precedee,  ou  de  lui  designer  en  traits 
generaux  de  desapprobation.     Ne  voir  en  France  qu'un  derange- 
ment partiel,  laissant  subsister  les  bases  de  I'ancien  etat  social, 
serait  une   erreur  aussi   grave  que  si  on  ne  voyait  dans  I'etat 
social  du  bas  empire  que  les  courtisans  dTIonorius  ou  d'Augus- 
tule,  et  non  les  barbares  vainqueurs  de  ces  courtisans,  et  devant 
composer  la  societe  dominante.     Deja,  peut-etre,  Mile.  Berry  a 
passe  un  peu  legerement  sur  les  commencements  de  notre  re- 
volution.    Je  conpois  que  sa  partie  theatrale  Fait  fait  sourire,  et 
que  sa  partie  atroce  I'ait  revoltee  :  mais  dans  les  flancs  de  cette 
revolution  etait  renfermee  une  nation  qui  n'etait  ni  theatrale  ni 
anarchique.       Un    peu    badaude    d'abord,    puis  subjuguee  par 
des  hommes  qui  profitaient  de   I'irritation  provoquee  par  ses 
ennemis,   cette  nation  avait  une  volonte  une  et  forte,  qu'elle 
ne  connaissait  pas  elle-meme,    mais    qui    la   dominait,  et    sur 
laquelle  elle   n'a  pas  varie,  car  elle  est  la  meme  en  1828  qu'en 
1789.     C'etait  la  volonte  d'etre  delivree  de  tout  privilege,  de 
tout  monopole  politique  ou  meme  sociale,  de  toute  concentration 
de  propriete  ou  de  pouvoir.     Cette  nation  n'etait  pas  plus  dans 
la  societe  en  France  que  le  peuple  anglais  proprement  dit  n'y 
est  en  Angleterre.     Mais,  de  plus,  elle  etait  hors  du  droit  poli- 
tique, dont  le  peuple  anglais  a  la  puissance,  ce  qui  fait  qu'il  se 
resigne  a  I'autre  exclusion.     La  nouvelle  nation  franpaise  n'a 
pu  s'y  resigner :  elle  a  boule verse  la  societe  de  France,  et  en  la 
bouleversant  elle  y  est  entree.     Elle  constitue  non  seulement 


1828]  DEPAKTURE    FOR   BADEN.  "  377 

I'etat  politique,  mais  I'etat  social  actuel.  L'ancienne  societe  se 
refugie  en  vain,  comme  des  souris,  de  vieux  salon  en  vieux 
salon.  Elle  n'existe  plus  que  par  reminiscence,  et  le  temps  qui 
la  moissonne  donne  a  sa  propre  descendance  les  caracteres  du 
nouvel  etat  social.  C'est  celui-la  qu'il  faudra  peindre :  c'est 
dans  la  nouvelle  generation  qu'il  faut  I'etudier. 

J'allais  dire  ce  qu'est  la  nouvelle  generation;  mais  I'heure  du 
pain  et  du  beurre  arrive,  et  la  perspective  du  miel  repand  sur 
I'avenir  de  la  France  un  brouillard  que  je  ne  puis  dissiper. 

Je  ne  finirai  pourtant  pas  sans  repeter  a  Mile.  Berry  que  son 
ouvrage  est  ce  que  j'ai  lu  de  plus  vrai,  de  plus  piquant, 
souvent  de  plus  eleve,  et  toujours  d'un  interet  et  d'un  charme 
que  bien  peu  de  livres  ont  a  ce  degre. 

[There  is  another  hiatus  in  Miss  Berry's  Journal,  which 
does  not  recommence  till  May  1828.] 


JOUKNAL. 

Monday^  May  12th. — We  quitted  Petersham,  at  seven 
o'clock  on  a  very  fine  morning,  for  Dover,  with  Harrot 
and  Durand,  in  our  new  carriage. 

Tuesday,  loth. — Crossed  in  the  'Salamander'  to  Calais. 
I  shall  not  follow  our  journey  daily.  I  shall  only  say 
that  though  Ypres  and  Courtrai  deserve  to  be  seen — the 
former  for  its  Maison  de  Ville  and  other  buildings,  which 
date  from  the  time  of  the  Spaniards,  and  which  are  grand 
of  their  kind — yet  that  this  route  from  Calais  to  Brussels  is 
the  least  good,  the  longest,  and  through  the  least  pleasant 
country ;  and  I  may  say  the  same  of  the  road  from  Brussels 
to  Aix-la-Chapelle,  through  Maestricht  instead  of  through 
Caltenbourg  and  Liege.  There  is  nothing  to  make  up  for 
the  fine  country  about  Liege,  and  part  of  the  road  from 
Maestricht  to  Aix-la-Chapelle  is  still  unfinished.  Those 
who,  like  ourselves,  seek  the  picturesque  beauties  of  the 
banks  of  the  Ehine,  must  expect  nothing  to  gratify  them 
till  after  Cologne,  where  the  shores  still  continue  as  flat 


378  MISS    berry's   journal.  [1828 

as  those  of  the  Thames  opposite  Greenwich,  the  river 
itself  being  about  the  same  width.     All  the  real  beauties 
of  its  banks  are  to  be  found  between  Andernach  and 
Bingen  ;    there    the    fine    scenery  ceases   till   Mayence, 
which  derives  its  interest  from  quite  a  different  sort  of 
beauty.    Numbers  of  trading  boats  are  to  be  seen,  and  the 
river,  though  losing  the  picturesque  character  of  its  pas- 
sage through  its  mountainous  banks,  becomes  double  the 
width.     From  Mayence  to  Heidelberg  there  is  but  little 
to  attract  sketching  tourists.     Tlie  roads  are  good,  the 
country  well  cultivated,  the  towns  old,  dilapidated,  and 
melancholy  looking  ;   but  no  sooner  has  one  crossed  the 
Ehine,  upon  the  bridge  of  boats  at  Manheim,  than  the 
villages  assume  quite  anotlier  character.    Instead  of  streets 
so  narrow  and  so  badly  paved  that  they  resemble  nothing 
but  the  smallest  villages  of  Savoy,  they  become  at  once 
large,   open,  and   well  built,  with  every  appearance  of 
cleanliness   and   comfort.     Heidelberg,  with   its   ruined 
castle,  its  bridge  over  the  Neckar,  and  its  well-wooded 
hills,  is  one  of  the  most  striking  places  that  I  know,  and 
much  surpassed  in   beauty  even   my  recollection  of  it 
twenty-five  years  ago.     We  stopped  at  Carlsridie,  which 
has  trebled  in  size  since  I  saw  it,  and  Avhich  is  now 
adorned  by  several  public  buildings.     Outside  the  walls 
of  all  these  German  towns  the  road  is  bordered  with 
gardens,  well  kept  up,  and  filled  with  vegetables  and 
flowers.    It  is  worthy  of  remark,  also,  that  in  these  towns 
— at  Mayence,  at  Heidelberg,    and  at  Carlsruhe — the 
Eoman  Catholics  and  Protestants  are  the  best  of  friends. 
There  are  fine  large  churches  for  both  religions,  very 
much  frequented,  and  without  the  least  rivalry  either 
under  the  Cathohc  or  under  the  Protestant  sovereigns. 
Baden  looks  well   on  coming  from  Carlsruhe,  situated 
upon  the  declivity  of  a  well- wooded  hill,  and  its  buildings 
coming  down  to  the  edge  of  a  Httle  river  which  separates 
the'  town  from   the  pubhc  walks  and  assembly-rooms. 


1828]  DEATH    OF   MRS.    DAMER.  379 

We  remained  at  the  hotel  from  Tuesday  the  27th  till 
Friday  the  30th  of  May,  when  we  took  possession  of  the 
Eez  de  Chaussee,  in  the  Baron  d'Ende's  house,  upon  a 
little  hill.  Tlie  view  from  our  lodging  is  delicious,  and 
the  only  inconvenience  is  the  steepness  of  the  ascent  upon 
which  it  stands :  it  is  fatiguing  at  the  end  of  a  long  walk. 

[The  Miss  Berrys  and  Lady  C.  Lindsay  remained  at 
Baden  till  the  17  th  of  September,  then  made  a  short 
tour  to  Switzerland,  and  reached  Paris  the  beginning 
of  October. 

It  was  in  the  month  of  June  that  the  Miss  Berrys 
received  the  afflictino;  news  of  the  death  of  their  old 
friend  Mrs.  Damer  ;  the  loss  was  bitterly  felt  and  tenderly 
deplored.  But  Mrs.  Damer  was  many  years  senior  to  her 
friends,  and  her  health  had  been  for  some  time  in  a 
declining  state,  that  had  diminished  the  active  social 
intercourse  of  former  times.] 

JOUKNAL. 

Friday,  October  ord. — We  arrived  at  Paris.  Went  to 
our  old  lodging  at  the  top  of  the  Hotel  Breteuil,  which 
was  ready  prepared  for  us.  Settled  Lady  Charlotte  in  the 
room  opening  into  our  ante-room,  and  spent  the  evening 
together  at  home.  The  day  after  (Saturday,  October  4th) 
we  all  three  dined  au  coin  die  feu  with  the  Ambassador. 
After  this  I  neglected  to  note  down  what  I  did  each  day. 
I  mean  to  correct  myself. 

[The  intended  correction  did  not  take  place,  and  unfor- 
tunately the  leaves  of  the  Journal-book  remain  unwritten. 
Miss  Berry  has  inscribed  in  a  smaller  note-book  that  they 
left  Paris  on  the  19th  of  January  1829,  and  reached  their 
home  in  Curzon  Street  on  January  24th.] 


380  MISS    berry's  journal.  [1829 


1829. 
JOUENAL. 

Paris,  Friday,  July  ?>rd. — Met  Madame   de  N . 

On  my  enquiring  after  Madame  de  Morte  Fontaine's 
health,  who  had  left  Paris  a  month  ago  extremely  ill,  we 
fell  into  conversation  on  her  early  life,  of  which  I  had 
always  been  very  curious  to  learn  the  particulars.  She 
said  that  a  sort  of  fatality  of  misfortune,  or  of  dreadful 
situations,  seemed  to  have  attached  to  her  through  life ; 
like  the  vengeances  we  read  of  in  fable,  from  the  offended 
heathen  deities. 

Her  mother,  a  daughter  of  the  Procureur-General,  Joly 
de  Fleury,  died  in  her  earliest  youth,  for  she  was  only 
between  ten  and  eleven  years  old  when  her  father  (on 
whom  she  doated  as  the  only  parent  she  had  ever  known) 
was  stabbed  to  the  heart  at  a  restaurateur's  in  the  Palais 
Royal,  as  he  was  paying  his  money  at  the  bar,  the  day 
after  he  had  given  an  unqualified  vote  for  the  death  of 
Louis  XVI.  The  murderer  was  a  garde  de  corps,  who 
committed  the  crime  (without  even  being  certain  of  the 
person  of  his  victim)  from  a  mere  exhalation  of  loyalty 
and  honour ! 

We  all  remember  the  flame  this  event  raised  in  the 
Convention ;  the  accounts  of  the  shocking  exhibition  of 
the  body  with  its  gaping  wound ;  *  the  public  funeral ; 

*  The  assassin  was  a  man  of  the  name  of  Paris.  He  shot  himself  with 
his  pistol  at  the  moment  he  was  about  to  be  arrested.  The  death  of  Le 
Peletier  furnished  to  David  a  subject  of  one  of  his  celebrated  pictures, 
which  it  was  afterwards  said  was  bought  by  Madame  de  Morte  Fontaine 
in  order  to  destroy  it. 


1829]  MADAME   DE    MORTE    FONTAINE.  381 

the  adoption  of  the  orphan  child  by  the  nation ;  and  to 
mark  (as  they  supposed),  for  ever,  its  new  and  strange 
parent,  she  was  re-named  (for  baptism  was  not  of  that 
day)  La  Nation  Le  Peleti^r  de  St.  Fargeau. 

The  care  of  her  person  was  at  first  claimed  by  her 
maternal  grandfather,  M.  Joly  de  Fleury,  but  as  his  prin- 
ciples and  opinions  were  not  a  la  hauteur  de  la  nation, 
or  thought  worthy  to  be  instilled  into  the  Daughter  of 
the  Nation — and  as  she  was  heiress  to  a  very  large  fortune, 
not  less  than  three  hundred  thousand  francs  (12,000/.)  a 
year — her  uncle,  Felix  Le  Peletier,*  insisted  on  his  right 
to  become  her  guardian,  to  which  Joly  de  Fleury,  from  a 
dread  of  the  demagogues  of  the  day,  among  whom  was 
her  uncle,  unfortunately  gave  up.  This  uncle,  Felix  Le 
Peletier,  immediately  placed  a  woman  about  her  entirely 
in  his  own  interests,  and  determined  to  marry  her  himself, 
to  secure  her  large  fortune.  On  her  marking  great  re- 
pugnance to  him,  he  let  it  be  understood  that  he  should 
take  care  in  proper  time  to  make  a  marriage  with  any- 
body else  impossible.  In  the  meantime,  during  her  stay 
with  him,  from  eleven  to  fifteen  years  old,  she  was  led  by 
her  uncle  into  all  the  bad  company  of  the  day ;  went 
down  to  the  country  with  parties  of  his  Jacobin  friends, 
everyone  bringing  his  mistress  along  with  him ;  and  in 
short,  during  this  earliest  part  of  her  career,  she  was  ex- 
posed to  every  danger. 

Meanwhile,  a  Dutchwoman,  Madame  de  W ,  one 

of  the  intriguers  of  the  day,  bribed  the  woman  whom 
Felix  Le  Peletier  had  put  about  his  niece  to  preserve  her 

in  his  own  interests.     Madame  de  W offered  her  a 

settlement  of  five  thousand  francs  to  betray  his  (Le 
Peletier's)  interests,  and  to  preserve  his  niece  till  she  had 
attained  the  age  of  fifteen,  to  marry  her  son. 


*  Felix  Le  Peletier  was  exiled  by  the  Bourbons,  January  1816.     He 
aftei-wards  returned  to  France,  and  died  in  retirement  in  1837. 


382  MISS   BEEKY's   journal.  [1829 

The  woman  earned  the  wages  of  her  treachery,  and 
Mdlle.  Le  Peletier  was  married  at  fifteen  to  M.  de  Witte. 
He  turned  out  an  ill-conducted  young  man,  continually 
drunk,  and  of  manners  most  repugnant  to  a  young  person. 
Here  again,  she  was  thrown,  without  principles,  without 
education,  without  guidance  of  any  kind,  on  the  world ; 
and  such  a  world  as  it  then  was  in  France ! 

Her  marriage  with  M.  de  Witte  was  dissolved  by  the 
easy  method  of  a  divorce  of  those  days,  and  she  very 
soon  after  married  her  cousin,  M.  de  Morte  Fontaine  (Le 
Peletier  also),  in  preference  to  several  great  matches  into 
old  families  then  offered  to  her. 

Better  days  seemed  now  in  store  for  her,  and  she  em- 
ployed them  in  giving  herself  that  instruction,  those 
accomplishments,  and  those  religious  principles  which  had 
been  entirely  neglected  in  her  early  youth. 

But  after  four  years'  union  with-  M.  de  Morte  Fontaine, 
he  was  killed  by  a  fall  from  his  horse,  at  St.  Fargeau, 
their  country-house.  He  survived  the  accident  eight 
days,  during  the  whole  of  which  time  he  was  perfectly 
insensible  to  everything  but  her  voice,  which  he  gave 
signs  of  knowing,  and  she  actually  administered  the  sacra- 
ment to  him  in  his  last  moments,  as  the  assistant-priest 
found  no  other  means  of  making  him  sensible  to  what  he 
was  doing. 

At  the  moment  of  this  dreadful  death  of  her  husband, 
their  eldest  child's  life  was  despaired  of.  As  the  girl  was 
old  enough  to  know,  and  doat  on,  her  father,  the  poor 
mother's  task  was  dreadful  in  concealing  both  her  own 
feelings  and  the  hopeless  state  of  her  husband  from  a 
child  she  adored. 

Since  the  death  of  M.  de  Morte  Fontaine  she  has  de- 
dicated herself  entirely  to  their  children,  two  girls,  the 
eldest  of  whom  was  two  years  ago  married,  very  much 
to  her  satisfaction,  to  M.  de  Boisgelin,  the  son  of  the 
Count  Alexander  de  Boisgelin,  her  ami  de  coeur ;  for  I 


1829]  MADAME   DE   MORTE    FONTAINE.  383 

know  not  what  otlier  name  to  give  to  the  sort  of  liaisons 
between  persons  no  longer  young,  and  where  passion  no 
longer  enters  for  anything,  which  still  exists  in  this 
country,  and  without  drawing  any  disrespect  or  animad- 
versions on  the  contracting  parties. 

But  Madame  de  Morte  Fontaine,  although  apparently 
happy  in  her  children,  and  in  a  large  fortune,  and  a 
perfectly  respectable  existence  in  her  country  ;  reconciled 
to  the  Eoyal  family,  who  visited  not  the  sins  of  the  father 
upon  the  child  ;  possessing  a  most  enviable  habitation  at 
Paris,  and  a  large  establishment  in  the  country  at  St. 
Fargeau ;  yet,  with  all  these  means  of  apparent  comfort 
and  happiness  united  in  her,  she  always  seems  like  a 
person  accabUe  under  some  dreadful  remembrances — 
some  oppression  of  mind,  some  exhaustion  of  feelings 
Avhich  have  destroyed  all  natural  vigour  and  activity  both 
of  mind  and  body.  This,  her  friend  says,  is  precisely  the 
case,  and  she  is  now  dying  at  forty-seven,  worn  out  by  an 
existence  the  early  part  of  which  has  destroyed  and 
poisoned  all  the  rest. 

N.B.  She  died  the  year  after  this  was  written  (1830). 


384  MISS  beert's  journal.  [isso 


1830. 
LETTEES. 

[No  regular  journal  was  kept  during  this  year,  but  the 
letters  from  various  correspondents,  and  the  journal  of  the 
momentous  "three  days  "  at  Paris,  keep  up  the  chain,  which 
now  becomes  year  by  year  thinner,  of  those  links  which 
bound  us  to  the  every-day  hfe,  thoughts,  and  occupations 
of  Miss  Berry.] 

From  le  Comte  Lally  Tollendal  to  the  Miss  Berrys. 

25  Janv.  1830. 
Mes  cheres  bonnes  Amies, — II  m'a  passe  par  la  tete  que  peut- 
etre  vous  seriez  bien  aises  de  voir  cette  Madame  de  Genlis  dont 
vous  avez  tant  entendu  parler  et  tant  parle  vous-memes.  Elle 
se  donne,  on  plutot  sa  fille  Madame  de  Valence  lui  donne,  ce 
soir  un  raout  musical,  litteraire,  dignitaire,  tout  ce  que  vous 
pouvez  imaginer,  pour  celebrer  le  85®  anniversaire  de  son 
jour  de  naissance.*  La  soiree  sera  agreable,  lasociete  brillante 
et  cosmopolitaine,  une  partie  de  la  Cour  du  Palais  Eoyal,  ambas- 
sadeurs,  prelats,  ministres,  academiciens,  dames  anglaises  et 
franpaises  et  russes.  Le  directeur  de  la  soiree  sera  Madame 
Dieude  de  Fly,  votre  traducteur.  Vous  y  rencontrerez  jusqu'au 
roi  des  editeurs,  notre  celebre  libraire  Ladvocat,-  qui  probable- 
ment  sera  charge  de  I'edition  de  voire  livre  en  fin  bien  traduit. 
Madame  de  Grenlis,  a  qui  j 'avals  envoye  demander  bier  quelques 
invitations  en  blanc  pour  mes  amis,  m'a  repondu,  en  me  les  en- 
voyant,  que  je  pouvais  lui  en  amener  cinquante  si  je  voulais,  et 
que  tons  et  toutes  seraient  egalement  bien  reyus.  Voyez,  mes 
cheres  et  illustres  amies,  si  cela  vous  rit ;  a  partir  de  8  heures 
je  serai  la  pour  vous  recevoir.  Je  vous  envoie  le  billet  en  blanc, 
parce  que  dans  le  cas  ou  vous  ne  seriez  pas  curieuses,  d'autres 
amis  pourraient  I'etre  aupres  de  vous.     Vous  mettrez  dans  les 

*  Madame  de  Genlis  died  December  1839. 


1830]  LETTER    TO    LORD    DOVER.  385 

blancs  les  noms  que  vous  voudrez.  Adieu,  ou  plutot  sans  adieu, 
mes  cheres  amies,  vous  dont  les  ecrits  sont  des  peintures,  vous 
dont  les  dessins  sont  des  poesies,  vous  qui  avez  risque  de  me 
laire  crever  d'amour-propre  par  votre  souscription  au  precieux 
cadeau  dont  vous  m'avez  gratifie,  vous  qui  m'avez  remis  a  ma 
place,  et  qui  avez  tempere  mon  orgueil  en  refusant  a  mes  vives 
sollicitations  de  m'ouvrir  les  tresors  de  votre  album,  vous  qui 
apparemment  me  conservez  encore  rancune  d'y  avoir  remarque 
un  jour  I'expression  de  la  verite  toute  nue — ces  pauvres  petits 
sont  bien  grands  aujourd'hui.  lis  ont  fait  une  belle  fortune, 
et  u'ont  plus  besoin  de  la  chemise  que  je  leur  refusals. 
Tendresses,  respects,  reconnaissance  en  dernier  resume. 

Lallt  Tollendal. 

The  following  extracts  are  from  a  letter  addressed  by 
Miss  Berry  to  Lord  Dover,  who  had  undertaken  the  task  of 
editing  Horace  Walpole's  '  Letters  to  Sir  H.  Mann,'  a  task 
which  was  accomplished  in  1833,  when  the  work  was 
published : — 

St.  Germain :  22nd  June,  1830. 

I  must  begin  with  telling  you  how  pleased  I  am  that  Lord 
Orford's  letters  to  Sir  Horace  Mann  have  fallen  into  your  hands 
to  edite.  They  are,  of  all  his  correspondence,  by  far  the  best; 
were  written  in  all  the  force  and  vigour  of  the  peculiarities  both 
of  his  wit  and  of  his  taste,  and  while  his  life  and  habits  in  the 
world  afforded  ample  food  for  both.  Poor  Mrs.  Darner  and  I 
have  often  regretted  that  they  could  not  be  given  to  the  public, 
while  we  deprecated  the  hands  into  which  they  might  fall,  and 
the  improper  manner  in  which  they  might  be  produced  ;  for 
never  was  the  pruning  knife  so  necessary,  nor  so  necessary  to  be 
exercised  by  a  hand  experienced  in  the  world  and  all  its  tales 
for  the  last  half  century.  That  their  writer  meant  them  to  be 
published,  the  copy  on  which  you  are  at  work,  all  collated  and 
transcribed  byKirgate,  will  prove  to  you  ;  and  yet,  with  the  odd 
inconsequence  which  marked  his  latter  days,  his  will  precluded 
its  being  done  in  any  but  in  an  improper  manner.  Enfin,  I  re- 
j  oice,  at  their  having  fallen  right  at  last.  When  will  you  be  ready 
for  the  press  with  them  ?  I  fear  when  I  get  to  England  you 
will,  have  no  time  to  bestow  on  my  pajoerasses,  which  mav 

VOL.  III.  '        C  C 


386  MISS    berry's    journal.  [1830 

perhaps  want  the  pruning  knife  as  much  as  what  you  are  about, 
altho'  from  very  different  reasons. 

I  defy  you  to  have  worse  weather  in  England  than  we  have  in 
France.  We  have  been  established  here  for  the  last  ten  days, 
and  have  not  been  able  even  to  drive  out  more  than  three  times. 

I  don't  wonder  you  think  the  accounts  from  France  frightful, 
even  if  I  did  not  know  you  were  in  correspondence  with  a  lady  de 
I'extreme  Gauche,  who  will  not  soften  the  picture.  Certain  it 
is  that  the  little  they  have  done,  and  all  they  have  counselled, 
have  been  the  most  imprudent  and  worse-judged,  and  most  pro- 
voking measures  possible.  Nothing,  however,  can  in  fact  be 
determined  till  the  colour  of  the  next  Chamber  is  seen.  They 
have  put  off  most  of  the  elections  till  next  month,  on  some  pre- 
tence of  harvest,  but  really  in  hopes  that  the  gloriole  of  the 
success  at  Algeria  may  influence  the  votes.  Perhaps  it  may, 
and  perhaps,  however  composed,  both  parties  may  have  learnt 
something  from  their  follies  last  week,  and  both  the  King  and  the 
Commons  talk  another  language.  It  is,  believe  me,  utterly  im- 
possible to  calculate  upon  anything  deliberate  to  be  done  by 
French  heads  ;  the  very  best  of  them  being  so  easily  excitable  by 
circumstances  of  the  moment.  I  think  the  body  of  the  people 
will  with  difficulty  be  forced  into  anything  like  civil  war,  how- 
ever they  may  have  hallooed  and  serenaded  their  popular 
deputies ;  and  I  believe  the  array,  if  referred  to,  will  be  very 
much  of  the  opinion  of  the  people — in  which  case  there  will  be 
nothing  left  for  the  poor  souls  in  the  Tuileries  but  to  yield,  or 
to  plier  baggage.  Which  they  will  do.  Heaven  knows  !  They 
say  the  King  avows  himself  prepared  to  assume  a  crown  of  mar- 
tyrdom ;  I  don't  believe  it.  But  the  language  they  bear  about 
them  is  what  no  Royal  head  is  at  all  likely  to  refute. 

Letter  from  Miss  Berry  to  the  Countess  of  Hardwicke. 

St.  Germain  :  Wednesday,  27th  July,  1830. 
Dearest  Lady  Hardwicke, — As  Elizabeth  is  away,  and  Lord 
Stuart  by  no  means  ecrivailleur,  we  choose  to  suppose  that  you 
will  be  anxious  to  hear  from  ourselves  that  we  have  no  uncom- 
fortable individual  feelings  as  to  the  new  public  state  of  France. 
The  stories  you  will  hear  in  England  on  the  subject  ive  may 
guess  by  those  which  every  Grondole  Parisienoe  and  every 
acceleree  bring  down  here  every  hour,  at  the  distance  only  of 


1830]  INSURKECTION    IN    PARIS.  387 

twelve  miles !  Lord  Stuart  dined  with  us  yesterday,  in  high 
spirits ;  but  from  these  grandees  one  never  learns,  as  one 
never  asks  anything.  The  inhabitants  of  the  Val,  Madame  de 
Noailles,  &c.,  are  silent,  from  their  near  connections  with  the 
Court.  Under  these  circumstances,  in  compliance  with  the  dictates 
of  a  laudable  curiosity,  we  mean  in  a  week's  time  to  remove  to 
Paris.  Ten  or  twelve  days'  stay  I  must  at  all  events  have  made 
there,  to  pack  up  our  all,  and  dispatch  some  af  them  before 
ourselves,  and  in  the  meantime  we  shall  be  amused  with  the  lie 
of  the  moment,  and  with  seeing  the  colour  things  are  likely  to 
take — which  nobody,  I  conceive,  can  yet  guess.  That  the  list  of 
insignificant  names  that  follow  M.  de  Polignac's,  in  the  Eapport 
au  Eoi,  should  be  quietly  allowed  to  change  the  Constitution 
and  sign  away  the  liberties  of  France,  one  can  hardly  believe  ; 
and  yet,  if  they  are  quite  sure  of  the  army,  envers  et  contre 
tout,  I  don't  know  how  it  is  to  be  prevented.  But  of  the  army 
(in  spite  of  their  late  coaxing  to  them),  many  doubts  are  enter- 
tained ;  and  if  these  prove  true,  I  see  nothing  then  to  prevent 
the  affiche  of  a  '  grand  et  bel  hotel  a  louer,  avec  vue  sur  les 
Tuileries.' 

Things  are  going  on  very  differently  with  us,  thank  Heaven ! 
We  seem  to  be  all  in  a  general  burst  of  loyalty  and  good  humour 
towards  our  good-humoured  King.  That  title  surely  every- 
thing that  he  has  yet  done  well  deserves,  and  if  he  don't  do  too 
much,  and  can  keep  steady,  I  am  persuaded  he  will  continue 
very  popular. 

Now  for  a  word  of  our  own  future  history.  Our  stay  in 
Paris  will  not  exceed  nor  perhaps  reach  a  fortnight,  and  then 
for  London  in  the  month  of  August,  and  a  dirty  house  and  ser- 
vants to  hire,  and  tradesmen  to  see  and  settle  with  about  the 
cleaning  of  said  house.  You  will  own  that  perspective  is  not 
attractive.  At  the  end  of  it  we  see  a  retreat  to  Car.'s  house  at 
Petersham  till  she  and  her  admiral  return  from  Scotland.  En 
attendant,  our  house  in  Curzon-street,  we  hope,  is  to  be  made 
clean  and  comfortable  to  receive  us  in  the  month  of  November ; 
and  further  this  deponent  sayeth  not,  except  that  she  hopes  and 
trusts  a  visit  to  Wimpole  will  somehow  or  other  be  wove  into 
the  autumn  or  winter.  And  now  as  we  intend  to  make  this 
indenture  tripartite,  I  leave  my  pen  to  my  companions. 

M.  Berry. 
c  c  2 


388  MISS  BEREY'S   JOURNAL.  [1830 

P. S.  from  Lady  Charlotte  Lindsay  to  the  Countess  of  Hardwicke. 

Dearest  Lady  H., — Aa  M.  B.  has  given  you  all  that  we 
know  about  this  *  coup  d'etat,'  I  need  only  say  that  we  were  so 
divided  between  curiosity  and  the  love  of  fresh  air,  in  this  de- 
lisfhtful  weather,  that  we.  should  have  been  in  a  dilemma  if  the 
matter  had  not  settled  itself  by  finding  that  we  could  not  have 
our  house  for  more  than  another  week  ;  so  to  Paris  we  go  next 
"Wednesday,  where  I  dread  the  heat  much  more  than  the  riots, 
for  they  will  be  very  interesting  to  those  upon  the  spot,  though 
their  distant  friends  may  be  regaled  every  day  with  accounts  of 
our  murder,  but  I  promise  that  I  will  direct  my  maid  to  give 
you  all  the  particulars  of  our  massacre.  Our  King  at  least 
seems  to  be  pleased  with  and  to  please  his  people,  and  really  to 
be  '  as  happy  as  a  King,'  which  I  had  never  thought  a  true  pro- 
verb till  now.  We  really  will  write  and  keep  you  an  courant 
as  well  as  we  can.     Farewell  at  present. 

Sunday,  2bth. — The  ordinances  of  the  King,  dated  this 
day,  were  published  in  Paris  the  next  day. 

Monday,  2Qth. — In  the  evening  much  noise  and  riot 
about  the  Hotel  of  the  '  Affaires  Etrangers  '  on  the  Boule- 
vard, and  that  of  the  '  Ministre  des  Finances '  in  the  Eue 
de  Eivoli,  but  no  blood  shed  except  accidentally. 

Tuesday,  21th. — Lord  Stuart  and  Mr.  Gregory  came 
from  Paris,  and  dined  with  us  at  St.  Germain ;  brought 
accounts  of  the  discontents  at  Paris  of  the  night  before, 
but  without  seeming  to  dread  anything  either  very  fright- 
ful or  very  decisive  from  them.  Mr.  Gregory  promised 
to  write  to  us  the  next  day,  and  I  intended  to  fulfil  my 
engagement  to  go  to  Paris  on  Thursday  morning,  to  bring 
Mrs.  Hamilton  *  here. 

Wednesday,  2Sth. — No  newspapers  or  post  arrived  the 
whole  of  the  day.  Still,  we  had  no  suspicion  how  things 
were  going  at  Paris  till,  having  dined  early,  we  drove  out 
in  the  evening.  The  weather  was  very  fine,  and  we  were 
down  in  the  meadows  by  the  side  of  the  Seine,  near  Pecq. 

*  Mrs.  Hamilton  Hamilton,  wife  of  tlie  Secretary  of  Embassy  at  Paris. 


1830]  IXSURRECTION    IN   PARIS.  389 

Our  servant,  Manuel,  drew  my  attention  to  the  sound  of 
cannon,  evidently  coming  from  the  side  of  Paris,  and  which 
he  said  he  had  heard  for  some  time,  and  likewise  the 
sound  of  the  discharge  of  musketry.  After  eleven  o'clock 
of  this  day,  no  diligence,  accelerees,  or  public  carriages 
had  come  in,  and  the  people  in  the  toAvn  were  very  un- 
easy and  anxious,  but  perfectly  quiet.  A  number  of 
people  constantly  at  one  end  of  the  terrace  listening,  and 
looking  towards  Paris.     • 

Thursday,  29th. — As  soon  as  I  awoke  in  the  morning, 
I  saw  crowds  on  the  terrace  in  the  same  attitude  as  the 
night  before,  and  heard  too  plainly  continual  discharges  of 
cannon  and  of  musketry.  This  lasted,  with  short  intervals, 
till  between  two  and  three  o'clock.  ISTo  post — no  papei\s 
— no  pubhc  carriages — made  their  appearance  this  whole 
day.  My  going  to  Paris  I  found  w^ould  be  impossible. 
Eeport  said  the  bridge  at  Neuilly  was  barricaded,  and  all 
the  streets  of  Paris,  so  as  to  make  the  passing  of  a  car- 
riage impossible. 

We  sent  Manuel  to  town  with  the  letters  to  the  Ambas- 
sade  and  a  line  to  Mrs.  Hamilton.  He  returned  at  eleven 
at  night,  having  walked  almost  the  whole  way  there  and 
back.  He  arrived  just  as  the  Garde  Rationale  and  the 
people  in  arms  had  made  their  last  attack  on  the  Garde 
Eoyale,  the  Cuirassiers  and  their  artillery,  and  had  driven 
them  all  before  them  to  the  Bois  de  Boulogne  and  St. 
Cloud.  He  had  seen  the  dead  and  wounded  in  the 
streets,  and  all  the  horrors  of  positive  warfare  in  a  populous 
city  ;  the  shops  shut,  and  the  greatest  excitement  uni- 
versal, but  without  any  pillage  or  individual  vengeances. 
In  the  early  part  of  this  evening  we  drove  out  on  the 
Paris  road  as  far  as  the  machine  at  Marly.  We  found  on 
the  road  neither  man,  nor  horse,  nor  cart,  nor  any  sign  of 
population,  except  here  and  there  an  old  woman  sitting 
at  her  door,  and  a  group  of  men  about  a  public-house  at 
Marly-le-port,  and  a  great  part  of  the  population  of  St. 


390  MISS    berry's   journal.  [1830 

Germain  ranged  on  each  side  tlie  road  on  tlie  top  of  their 
hill,  eager  for  news,  and  watching  arrivals  from  Paris. 

Friday^  ^i)th. — Still  no  post  from  Paris.  I  got  an  old 
letter  from  Mrs.  Hamilton,  which  had  laid  in  the  post 
either  here  or  there  for  three  days.  On  going  out  on  the 
terrace,  between  eight  and  nine  o'clock  in  the  morning,  I 
observed  that,  contrary  to  what  was  usual,  there  was  not 
a  creature  on  the  terrace  or  the  parterre,  not  even  a 
straggling  child,  and  I  heard  loud  huzzas  from  the  town. 
Lady  Charlotte  and  I  immediately  walked  to  the  grille 
nearest  the  chateau,  and  there  saw  a  number  of  lads  and 
workpeople  of  all  descriptions  running  into  the  chateau. 
In  a  moment  we  heard  them  at  the  top  of  it.  The  white 
flag  was  in  the  act  of  coming  down,  and  the  tricolor 
hoisted  in  its  place.  They  then  all  issued  again  from  the 
gate  of  the  chateau,  some  with  sabres,  and  muskets,  and 
every  sort  of  arms,  which  the  Gardes  du  Corps  (who  had 
been  summoned  to  St.  Cloud  two  days  before,  and  left  St. 
Germain  at  four  o'clock  in  the  morning)  had  left  behind 
them ;  depot  of  arms  there  was  none.  Before  they  had 
all  got  out  of  the  chateau,  the  Maire  in  his  echarpe  met 
them  from  the  other  side  of  the  Place  du  Chateau,  at  the 
head  of  about  20  or  30  National  Guards,  not  above  half 
in  regimentals,  but  carrying  with  them  a  tri-coloured 
flag.  At  the  door  he  talked  to  the  mob.  What  he  said 
I  was  not  near  enough  to  hear,  but  he  was  immediately 
huzzaed,  and  they  Avent  away  together  parading  round 
the  town. 

In  the  evening  the  National  Guard  were  doing  duty  at 
the  Mairie,  the  entrance  to  the  town,  &c.  &c.,  and  not  the 
smallest  disturbance  or  noise  occurred  from  that  time.  We 
w^ent  to  the  Val  in  the  morning,  where  we  had  some  dif- 
ficulty in  convincing  the  poor  good  Princesse  de  Poix  that 
we  had  not  come  for  refuge,  as  many  of  her  more  distant 
friends  had  done,  and  to  eat  her  out  of  house  and  home, 
but  merely  for  news,  of  which  none   of  her  society  had 


1830]  INSURRECTION   IN    PARIS.  391 

much  to  give,  nor  indeed  do  I  believe  they  knew  where- 
about things  where. 

Saturday^  2>lst. — Still  receiving  no  letters  from  Paris, 
we  again  sent  Manuel  to  town.  He  brought  an  account 
of  quiet  being  restored  in  Paris  ;  the  barricades  beginning 
to  be  taken  down,  and  the  Pont  de  Neuilly  sufficiently 
opened  to  allow  a  carriage  to  pass,  and  consequently  the 
accelerees,  &c.  &c.  arrived  in  the  com^se  of  the  day. 

Again  at  the  Val  in  the  morning ;  the  same  ignorance, 
the  same  lamentations,  and  the  same  repugnance  to  saying 
all  they  thought.  Le  Comte  Juste  de  Noailles,  who  had 
remained  in  Paris  from  the  beginning  of  the  week,  came 
down  to  the  Val  with  his  youngest  son,  Louis,  on  Friday 
night,  having  walked  from  Neuilly  to  St.  Cloud,  and 
come  from  thence  in  a  coucou,  the  only  carriage  on  the 
road. 

The  Miss  Berrys  were  staying  at  St.  Germain  during  the 
days  of  the  Eevolution.  The  following  extracts  are  from 
letters  addressed  to  them  at  that  time  by  different  friends 
from  Paris : — 

Wednesday  night,  28th  July,  1830. 
My  dear  Miss  Beery, — If  this  reaches  you  in  time  to  prevent 
your  setting  out  to-morrow  I  shall  be  very  glad,  for  you  will 
only  be  coming  into  the  lion's  mouth  by  coming  to  Paris,  and  I 
should  feel  uneasy  at  leaving  it,  because  I  should  be  fidgetty 
about  my  father  and  Mr.  H.  We  have  really  had  a  dismal  day 
of  it;  the  tocsin  continually  sounding,  and  the  discharge  of 
small  arms  and  artillery  as  incessant  as  if  it  had  been  2i  pro- 
longed grand  field-day!  There  is  something  too  awful  for 
description  in  the  sudden  manner  in  which  all  this  has  been 
brought  about.  The  tricolor  flag  was  flying  this  afternoon  at 
Notre  Dame  ;  and  the  Hotel  de  Ville,  after  being  taken  by  the 
mob,  was  retaken  by  the  troops  under  Marmont ;  he  also  brought 
round  a  regiment  of  the  line  that  had  refused  to  act  against  the 
people.  It  is  said  that  a  large  body  of  people,  to  the  amount  of 
20  or  30,000,  are  coming  up  to  Paris  from  Eouen,  headed  by 
their  Deputies,  after  having  hung  their  Prefet.      The  Garde 


392  MISS  beery's  jouenal.  [isso 

Nationale  have  re-embodied  themselves,  and  have  turned  out 
armed  and  equipped,  and,  report  says,  are  under  the  command 
of  Generals  Lafayette  and  Sebastiani — the  people  under  that  of 
Greneral  Grerard. 

Thursday,  talf  past  2  p.m.,  29tli  July. 
We  have  had  a  dreadful  morning  since  five  o'clock.  The 
people  have  possession  of  the  Casernes,  and  the  arms  found  in 
them.  A  report  has  reached  us  that  the  King  has  issued  a 
proclamation  reinstating  the  Chamber — announcing  a  change  of 
Ministers,  and  a  free  pardon  to  all.  I  am  inclined  to  believe 
there  is  something  in  it,  as  there  is  a  cessation  of  firing  and  the 
tocsin  has  ceased.  There  is  every  here  and  there  a  shot  heard, 
but  they  proceed,  I  imagine,  more  from  a  mischievous  few  than 
from  the  general  body.  .  .  .  The  Champs  Elysees  has  been 
a  great  scene  of  action.  They  had  cavalry  and  artillery  beside 
other  troops  there,  but  it  appears  they  have  been  but  little  to 
be  depended  on.  God  grant  it  may  soon  be  over,  for  it  is  a 
fearful  work.  Many  of  the  streets  are  unpaved,  and  the  trees 
cut  down  to  make  barricades  for  the  mob.  They  have  possession 
of  the  Elysee,  and  are  forcing  the  Tuileries !  At  this  moment 
I  hear  great  hurraing,  but  don't  know  what  it  means.    .     .     . 

As  yet  I  can  only  give  you  the  news  our  servants  pick  up  from 
passers-by,  as  it  is  by  far  too  dangerous  for  anyone  to  be  seen  in 
the  street.  The  last  report  ■  they  give  is  that  the  soldiers  and 
the  people  mangent  enseinble  dans  la  Place  Vendome,  which 
confirms  the  idea  of  the  disaffection  of  the  army.  The  success 
of  the  mob  is  beyond  everything.  They  do  all  they  M'ishto  do. 
And  if  concessions  of  very  great  magnitude  are  not  really  made 
to  them,  depend  upon  it  they  will  settle  matters  their  own  way. 
It  has  been  quite  horrid  to  see  the  ruffian-like-looking  fellows 
that  have  passed  this  house  to-day,  armed  with  muskets  and 
sabres  taken  from  the  soldiers,  who  in  many  instances  laid  down 
their  arms  and  placed  them  at  the  disposal  of  the  mob.  But 
who  can  wonder  at  the  indignation  of  a  whole  people  so 
insulted  ? 

.  The  Barrieres  have  been  all  deserted  by  the 
Guards,  and  the  people  come  in  and  out  of  Paris  as  they  choose. 
The  most  awful  moment  for  us  was  when  the  cavalry  were 
charging  the  multitude  in  the  Champs  Elysees,  covered  by 
cannon ;  a  ball  whizzed  through  the  trees  opposite.     At   this 


1830]  INSUKEECTION   IN   PAEIS.  393 

moment  a  crowd  is  passing  up  the  rue  ,  wliich  is  a  con- 
tinuation of  this  street,  and  are  firing:  in  the  air  and  hurraing. 
M.  Portier  has  just  said  to  me,  'N'ayez  pas  peur,  Madame; 
c'est  qu'ils  s'amusent!'  All  this  confirms  me  in  the  idea  that 
they  have  gained  their  point ;  if  so,  woe  betide  some  folks. 
.     .     .     .     The  number  of  killed  and  wounded  is  immense. 

Thursday,  July  29,  1830. 

My  dear  Miss  Beery, — I  perceive  you  have  not  received  a 
letter  from  me  which  I  put  into  the  post  on  Wednesday  morning. 
Yesterday  the  insurrection  was  most  complete,  and  the  firing- 
has  been  for  two  days  with  little  interruption  in  various  quarters 
of  the  town.  A  great  destruction  of  life  must  be  looked  for. 
I  never  can  express  to  you  the  consternation  that  is  felt,  mixed 
with  such  elements  of  anarchy.  The  Hotel  de  Ville  was  taken 
and  retaken  several  times  yesterday  by  the  Garde  Nationale, 
which  had  assembled  spontaneously.  The  night,  after  nine 
o'clock,  was  tolerably  tranquil,  but  up  to  that  time  the  fusillade 
was  tremendous  in  the  quarter  of  the  Odean  against  the  Etudiens, 
and  on  the  Place  de  Greve.  In  the  night  cannon  was  planted  all 
around,  and  the  posts  doubled,  and  the  gardens  of  the  Tuileries 
filled  with  troops. 

At  nine  o'clock  this  morning  the  council  of  Ministers  quitted 
the  Tuileries,  probably  from  the  reports  which  had  been  made 
to  them  that  the  troops  of  the  line  had  refused  to  act.  General 
Contard  rode  much  about,  with  a  wish  to  calm  the  populace  by 
saying  that  he  had  expected  orders  from  St.  Cloud  for  an 
accommodation  about  eleven.  The  Garde  Eoyale  also  were 
withdrawn  to  the  Champs  Elysees  after  much  firing ;  and  the 
Chateau  of  the  Tuileries  was  carried  about  mid-day  by  the 
General,  after  a  strong  resistance  by  the  Swiss.  The  firing 
was  violent  to  the  extreme  in  the  Kue  de  1'  Echelle,  where  the 
Swiss  were  blockaded,  and  I  hear  an  immense  destruction.  I 
believe  all  this  is  somewhere  about  the  truth,  but  it  is  in  the 
streets  alone  that  I  have  picked  it  up.  Such  scenes  of  wounded 
and  killed  it  is  well  you  have  not  seen. 

Four  o'clock. 
I  have  just  come  from  the  Chateau  of  the  Tuileries ;  it  is  as 
full  as  it  can  hold  of  the  people  of  the  faubourgs,  decorated  in 
every  way  with  the  Hats  of  Herbault  belonging  to  the  ladies  of  the 


394  MISS  berry's  journal.  [ISSO 

Court  and  the  grand  cordons  of  the  Knights.  The  demolition 
complete  and  the  pillage  also.  It  is  to  me  an  abrege  of  the 
most  revolting  scenes  of  the  Eevolution. 

With  all  this,  there  is  no  insult  offered  to  any,  or  any  private 
mischief.  The  King's  Palace  has  afforded  enough,  and  I  shall 
never  forget  it.  The  tricolor  flag  floats  on  the  Palace  and  the 
column  in  Place  Vendome.  The  Grarde  Nationale  are  assembled, 
and  have  named  the  Due  de  Choiseul,  General  Grerard,  M.  de 
Lafayette,  a  Provisional  Grovernment,  and  we  expect  a  pro- 
clamation out  this  evening. 

.  .  .  .  Most  of  the  principal  streets  have  been  unpaved 
by  the  mob,  but  I  am  surprised  to  see  how  much  forbearance 
there  has  been  for  private  property.  The  Grarde  Royale  is 
also  in  mauvais  odeur  ;  in  short,  the  King  is  upset  in  the  views 
of  the  people.  I  have  confidence  in  the  measures  of  the 
Grarde  Nationale  for  tranquillity.     .     .     . 

Six  o'clock. 
The  Grarde  Nationale  seem  to  be  obeyed  at  their  posts,  and 
the  mob  in  good  humour  with  them ;  but  the  mob  are  afraid 
that  the  King's  troops  propose  to  attack  them  again,  so  they  are 
on  the  alert.  A  proclamation  says  [I  know  not  from  what 
authority]  that  the  Press  is  declared  free.  There  is  every  sort 
of  report  as  on  such  occasions,  and  the  difficulty  is  to  know 
which  to  believe. 

July  30  01-31. 
Dear  Miss  Agnes, —  ...  I  have  heard  nothing  new 
within  these  two  hours  very  important — they  say  9,000  killed 
and  wounded.  We  have  just  been  to  see  them  buried  at  the 
Louvre.  I  hear  St.  Cloud  has  fallen  to  the  nation,  and  the  King 
is  at  Trianon — very  low.  The  Dauphine  not  returned.  The 
Duke  of  Orleans  has  got  a  smooth  concern  for  his  future 
comfort  I  The  Boulevards  are  horribly  mutilated — so  many  of 
the  large  trees  destroyed.  .  .  .  The  bridges  have  all  been 
blocked.  There  has  been  much  difficulty  and  danger  in  getting 
off  the  Couriers  ;  some  have  been  taken.  It  is  just  said  that  the 
artillery  of  the  Gruard  have  surrendered.  ...  I  saw  Benjamin 
Constant  conducted  with  acclamation  to  the  Chambre  to-day,  as 
happy  as  possible.  The  weather  cruelly  close  and  hot  for 
revolutions. 


1830]  QUIET    RESTORED.  395 

Paris :  Jul}^  31. 

.  .  .  The  Eoyal  cause  is  at  an  end.  The  Duke  of  Orleans 
will  be  proclaimed  to-day  Lieutenant-General  of  the  kingdom, 
and  nothing  further  will  be  done  till  the  Chambers  meet  on  the 
3rd  of  August. 

The  town  is  like  one  in  a  state  of  siege,  and  barricaded  in  all 
directions  ;  no  carriages  can  circulate. 

It  has  the  appearance  of  the  Eevolution  over  again,  but  none 
of  its  sanguinary  feeliDg. 

The  massacre  has  been  immense,  and  the  wounded  are,  I 
fear,  in  a  still  greater  proportion.  None  of  the  banks  are  open 
on  the  Bourse,  or  the  theatres.  ...  It  is  impossible  not  to 
admire  the  general  good  order  of  the  populace — no  acts  of 
pillage  or  insubordination.  The  Dauphine  is  not  returned  ; 
the  Duke  of  Orleans  is  at  the  Palais  Royal. 

Sunday,  August  1st — Louis  de  Noailles,  and  Lady  Isa- 
bella Blachford,  her  son,  and  daughter,  dined  with  us. 
All  quite  quiet  at  St,  Germain  ;  numbers  on  the  terrace 
always  watching  and  listening  towards  Pans.  The  King's 
departure  from  St.  Cloud  for  Trianon  known. 

Monday,  2nd. — Lady  Isabella  Blachford,  her  son  and 
myself,  drove  to  Paris  in  the  morning.  The  carts  of 
stones  which  had  served  to  barricade  the  bridge  at 
Neuilly  were  drawn  a  httle  aside ;  the  large  trees,  cut 
down  at  short  distances,  and  were  run  across  streets  that 
diverged  from  the  road,  were  still  laying  with  all  their 
leaves  on,  and  their  boughs  only  sufficiently  lopped  off  or 
pulled  aside  to  allow  a  carriage  to  pass.  In  Paris,  the 
pavement,  torn  up  and  collected  in  a  sort  of  loose  walls 
across  the  streets,  all  remained,  although  they  had  already 
removed  enough  of  them  to  make  way  for  the  passage  of 
a.  carriage  in  any  part  of  the  town.  The  work  of  desola- 
tion appeared  most  in  the  Boulevards,  where,  at  different 
distances,  all  the  trees  were  smashed  down.  But  in  every 
other  respect  the  town  was  as  quiet  as  exactly  as  it  was, 
that  it  was  hardly  possible  to    believe   the   scenes  that 


396  MISS    BERKY'S   journal.  [1830 

had  passed  in  it  four  days  before.  We  returned  to  St. 
Germain  by  seven  o'clock  in  the  evening,  having  found 
no  impediment  of  any  sort,  either  on  the  road  or  in  the 
town. 

Tuesday,  ^rd. — The  drum  and  the  distant  noise  of  a 
crowd  summoned  us  to  the  terrace,  where,  from  the  grille 
of  the  town  issued  above  1,500  persons,  headed  by  some 
National  Guards  in  their  uniform,  and  some  decent-look- 
ing persons  in  plain  clothes,  with  muskets  and  cross-belts; 
the  rest  were  a  motley  tribe  of  all  sort  of  figures,  with  all 
sort  of  arms,  or  no  arms  at  all — ragged  citizens,  some 
with  an  old  sabre,  some  with  a  pistol,  &c.  &c.,  but  all 
perfectly  quiet.  They  were  divided  into  six  companies, 
and  sat  down  on  the  grass  alleys,  under  the  trees  of  the 
terrace,  restinsf  from  their  march  from  Nantes  of  four 
leagues,  which  they  had  made  this  morning.  In  half  an 
hour's  time  a  liberal  breakfast  was  brought  them  from  the 
municipality  of  St.  Germain,  of  bread,  wine,  ham  sausages, 
and  a  minced  thing  they  call  fricot,  &c.  &c.  One  man 
presided  over  the  distribution  to  each  company,  and 
everybody  was  in  good  humour  and  orderly,  and  quite 
satisfied  with  what  they  got.  Les  gens  a  uniforme,  and 
the  well-dressed  persons  among  them,  were,  for  the  most 
part,  provided  for  in  the  town.  We  walked  among  them 
and  talked  to  them  ;  there  was  no  violence  nor  threats 
from  them.  We  told  them  they  would  find  nobody  to 
fight  at  Paris  ;  that  there  everybody  was  of  one  mind.  No 
matter ;  they  would  go  to  show  their  goodwill,  and  what 
the  deputies  had  to  count  on.  Their  banners  spoke  the 
same  great  language  ;  they  were  all  La  Charte  et  Paris. 
No  mention  of  La  Nation  and  Fraternite,  and  the  extreme 
opinions  of  the  former  Ee volution.  After  eating  and 
drinking,  they,  by  way  of  resting  themselves,  began  danc- 
ing— rounds  of  fifty  men  together — to  their  own  singing, 
and  then  playing  at  single-stick  (for  which  it  seems  Nor- 
mandy is  famous).     So  careful  were  they  of  not  drinking 


1830]  STATE    OF    PAEIS.  397 

too  much,  that  great  remains  of  a  barrel  of  wine  was  emp- 
tied on  the  ground  to  prevent  anybody  returning  to  it 
too  frequently.  Between  two  and  three  o'clock  they  all 
rallied  again  to  their  own  company  and  their  own  flag, 
and  were  marched  away  without  having  any  stragglers, 
as  quietly  and  orderly  as  the  best-dressed  guards  could 
have  been. 

Wednesday,  Ath. — We  left  St.  Germain,  and  removed  to 
the  first-floor  of  the  Hotel  de  Breteuil,  at  Paris.  We  found 
most  of  the  trees  that  had  formed  the  barricades  from 
Neuilly  to  Paris  turned  entirely  out  of  the  road,  and  all 
the  barricades  of  stones  replaced  loosely  in  the  pavements. 
JSTobody  driving  about  airing,  either  in  the  Champs 
Elysees  or  the  Bois  de  Boulogne.  On  Wednesday  night, 
or  rather  Thursday  morning,  from  three  to  four  o'clock, 
the  most  violent  and  dreadful  ouragan  that  I  ever  heard. 
The  violence  of  the  wind  united  itself  with  the  continual 
peals  of  thunder  and  blazes  of  lightning.  It  was  long  be- 
fore the  rain  came,  and  the  dust  was  so  carried  up  in  the 
air  as  almost  to  blind  me  when  shuttins^  a  window. 

Thursday,  bth. — Everybody  full  of  the  astonishing  good 
conduct  of  the  people  of  Paris,  even  during  the  four  days 
of  the  greatest  agitation.  Everybody  speaking  of  the 
absolute  necessity  of  determining  on  making  the  Due 
d' Orleans  king-. 

Saturday,  14:th. — I  saw  Pozzo  last  night.  He  had  been 
despatching  a  courier,  and  looked  tired,  occupied,  and 
bothered.  He  said,  certainly  all  the  Governments  of 
Europe  would  feel  awkwardly  on  this  dismissal  of  legiti- 
macy ;  that  the  Ministers  here,  as  their  servants,  must 
wait  their  orders ;  that  the  tricolor  cockade  would 
frighten  Germany,  and  immediately  give  them  fears  of  an 
attack  on  their  independence  ;  that  if  such  attack  was 
made,  they  would  find  it  resisted  in  a  very  different  man- 
ner than  it  had  been  (this  I  did  not  believe).  Pozzo's 
nephew,  who  commanded  a  French  regiment  at  Marseilles, 


398  MISS    berry's   JOURJs^AL.  [1830 

would  not  change  his  cockade ;  had  given  in  his  dismis- 
sion ;  left  his  regiment,  and  was  gone  to  Italy. 

General  Matthew  Dmnas  (the  Inspector-General  of  the 
JSTational  Guard)  says  there  will  be,  in  a  month's  time, 
thirty  thousand  National  Guards  completely  organised  in 
Paris,  and  between  five  and  six  hundred  thousand  over 
the  whole  face  of  France. 

Friday,  Ibth. — Saw  Madame  de  Montjoye  for  half  an 
hour,  at  the  Palais  Royal.  Immediately  after  the  publica- 
tion of  the  Ordinances,  the  Duke  of  Orleans  had  intima- 
tion from  the  wife  of  a  deputy,  who  had  learnt  it  from 
one  of  the  sous  ordre  of  the  employes,  that  on  the  first 
symptom  of  popular  tumult  the  Duke  of  Orleans  was  to 
be  arrested  by  Government.  Easily  done,  surrounded  as 
JSTeuilly  is  by  barracks  at  Courbevoie,  Eueil,  &c.  His 
method  of  safety  was  going  out  in  the  morning  on  horse- 
back unattended,  and  thus  wandering  about  all  the  vil- 
lages in  the  environs  of  Paris,  and  returning  to  Neuilly  at 
night.  On  Friday,  the  30th  of  July,  when  the'Provisional 
Government  at  the  Maison  de  Ville  determined  to  send 
for  him,  the  persons  who  went  to  seek  him  at  Neuilly 
found  him  from  home,  and  his  family  declaring  they  knew 
not  w^here  he  was.  As  this  ignorance,  and  the  word  of 
honour  of  the  Duchess  and  of  his  sister  seemed  to  be 
doubted,  his  sister  (MdUe.)  declared  that,  if  it  would  be 
any  satisfaction  or  assurance  to  those  requiring  him,  she 
Avould  go  with  them  to  the  Maison  de  Ville,  and  remain 
till  her  brother  appeared  there.  The  deputation  desired 
to  know  if  they  might  declare  this,  but  did  not  insist  on 
her  going.  In  the  evening,  as  soon  as  the  Duke  returned, 
he  immediately  took  up  his  stick,  and  walked  to  the 
Palais  Eoyal.  The  next  morning  (Saturday,  the  31st),  he 
went  on  horseback,  accompanied  by  thousands,  to  the 
Hotel  de  Ville.  His  friends,  on  this  trajet  from  the  Palais 
Ptoyal  to  the  Hotel  de  Ville,  endeavoured  in  vain  to  raise 
a  cry  of '  Vive  le  Due  d'Orleans,'  but  the  moment  he  was 


1830]        DUG   d'ORLEANS   APPOINTED    LIEUT.-GENERAL.  399 

received  at  the  door  by  Lafayette,  embraced  by  him  and 
shown  to  the  people,  a  universal  burst  of  applause  assured 
him,  from  that  moment,  of  the  sovereignty  of  France.  The 
title  of  Lieutenant-General  of  the  kingdom  was  imme- 
diately conferred  on  him,  which,  in  his  proclamation,  he 
wisely  declared  to  hold  from  the  will  of  his  fellow-citizens, 
and  never  mentioned  his  appointment  to  the  same  dignity 
by  the  disgraced  king  ;  still  less  his  commission  to  pro- 
claim Henry  V.,  which  would  at  once  have  sent  every 
Bourbon  out  of  France  together  ;  and  to  constitute  this 
fact,  and  his  acceptance  of  the  lieutenancy  from  the 
people  only,  he  deposited  the  King's  commission  to  him  in 
the  archives  of  the  House  of  Peers. 

The  Duchess  and  his  children,  with  their  immediate 
attendants,  Madame  de  Montjoye,  her  sister,  &c.,  came 
all  to  the  Palais  Eoyal  from  Neuilly  at  nine  o'clock  on  the 
Saturday  night,  in  two  Carolines,  to  avoid  all  public  notice. 

The  first  days  the  Duchess  spent  in  continual  tears,  in 
regret  for  their  past  happy  hfe  and  fears  for  the  present. 

Extract  of  a  Letter  to  Miss  Berry. 

August  27,  1830. 
.  .  .  On  Wednesday  I  went  to  the  Opera  to  see  the 
King  and  Eoyal  Family.  You  never  saw  anything  like  the 
enthusiasm  with  which  Louis  PhiHppe,  &c.,  was  received.  Four 
boxes  exactly  opposite  the  stage  have  been  thrown  into  one. 
His  Majesty  sat  between  the  Queen  and  Mademoiselle  d'Orleans, 
next  her  sat  her  three  eldest  nephews,  and  beyond  the  Queen 
the  three  Princesses  and  the  httle  Due  d'Aumale.  .  .  .  The 
ex-King's  box  was  full  of  National  Guards.  The  Eoyal  Family 
came  in  by  the  common  door — old  etiquette  was  set  at  defiance. 
Taglioni  and  Cinti  were  applauded  to  their  hearts'  content. 

Nutes  of  Conversation  with  Dr.  Quin. 

On  Wednesday,  the  28th,  saw  the  troops  (two  battalions 
of  regiments  of  the  line)  drawn  up  across  the  Ptue  de  la 
Paix,  at  the  entrance  of  the  Boulevards.  The  men  formed 
themselves  e?i  ligne ;  but  when  the  officer,  after  the  usual 


400  MISS    berry's   journal.  [1830 

preliminaries,  gave  the  word  '  Tirez  f  my  informant,  who 
had  niehee'd  himself  in  a.  porte-cocher,  and  expected  to  have 
it  followed  by  groans  and  lamentations,  and  to  have  made 
his  ministry  useful  to  some  of  the  sufferers,  heard  nothing 
but  the  general  thump  of  all  the  muskets  grounded  at 
once  on  the  pavement.  After  much  abuse  from  their 
commanding  officer,  they  were  ordered  to  rejtire,  and  ano- 
ther battalion  brought  forward,  who  did  exactly  the  same. 
The  Pompiers  Sapeurs,  whose  barrack  is  in  the  Eue  de  la 
Paix,  were  then  brought  forward  by  their  commander  ; 
they,  too,  formed  themselves  en  ligne^  but  on  the  order  to 
fire  being  given  to  them,  they  all  immediately  returned  to 
their  caserne.  With  such  opponents,  the  triumph  of  the 
people  was  certain.  La  Garde  Eoyale  fought  with  little 
better  heart ;  while  a  whole  body  of  them  were  yet 
intact,  and  filled  the  Champs  Elysees  and  the  Tuileries, 
they  were  lying  about  in  the  Champs  Elysees,  complaining 
of  fatigue  (the  weather  was  dreadfully  and  oppressively 
hot),  and  of  hunger  and  thirst ;  there  had  been  no  pro- 
vision made  for  them  by  the  Court,  and  no  creature  among 
the  people  would  give  them  anything.  They  were  putting 
their  hands  through  the  grille  of  the  Tuileries  to  the  Eue 
de  Eivoli,  with  a  piece  de  cinq  francs  in  them,  and 
beseeching  for  bread  and  a  drink  of  water.  At  last,  when 
brought  up  in  a  body  to  the  garden  front  of  the  Palace, 
to  support  their  companions  in  the  Carousel  and  defend 
them  against  the  body  of  people  attacking  them  on  that 
side,  a  party  of  Lancers  of  the  Guard  were  seen,  between 
twelve  and  three  o'clock  on  the  Thursday,  29th,  issuing 
out  of  the  middle  gate  of  the  Tuileries,  and  followed  by  a 
fourgon  with  four  horses,  evidently  very  heavily  laden  ; 
then  another  party  of  Lancers  ;  then  another  fourgon 
followed  in  the  same  manner ;  while  three  fourgons  at 
the  same  time,  and  with  the  same  accompaniment  of 
Lancers,  took  the  road  by  the  side  of  the  river  towards 
St.  Cloud.    After  thus  securing  their  own  valuables,  which 


.  1830]  JOUENAL   BY   MISS   AGNES   BERRY.  401 

must  have  convinced  the  Garde  Eoyale  that  their  em- 
ployers despaired  of  their  own  cause,  all  spirit  of  aggres- 
sion or  of  defence  seemed  to  have  abandoned  the  troops, 
and  they,  together  with  those  in  the  Carousel,  were  driven 
by  the  people  through  the  garden,  and  through  the 
Champs  Elysees,  cannons  and  all,  which  was  the  finishing 
stroke  to  the  expulsion  of  the  King's  troops  from  Paris, 
and  which  put  an  end  to  the  general  warfare  and  carnage, 
between  two  and  three  on  the  Thursday,  having  lasted 
■  fifty-six  hours. 

KB. — In  spite  of  all  this  passing  through  the  Garden  of 
the  Tuileries,  I  saw  it  on  the  Monday  following  without 
a  flower  disturbed  in  the  parterres,  nor  an  orange-tree 
injured  or  displaced  in  the  alleys.  The  marks  of  violence 
in  the  Chateau  itself  were  only  many  panes  of  glass 
broken  in  the  Galerie  de  Glace,  some  few  in  the  lower 
windows  of  the  King's  and  Dauphin's  apartments,  and  a 
bit  knocked  out  of  one  of  the  columns  of  the  g-arden- 
front  by  a  cannon-ball. 

On  the  Quais and  Voltaire,  the  print  and  other 

shops  full  of  the  marks  of  buhets  having  pierced  through 
the  glass  doors  and  lodged  themselves  in  the  inner  walls 
of  the  houses.  Delpeck,  a  young  woman  who  served  in 
the  hall,  wounded  in  the  shoulder  by  one  of  these  bullets, 
and  in  the  hospital.  These  bullets  came  from  the  other 
side  of  the  river,  fired  both  by  the  people  and  the  Gardes 
Suisses,  in  their  attack  and  defence  of  the  Louvre. 

JOUENAL  BY  MISS  AGNES  BEERY. 

The  report'  of  the  Ministers  to  Charles  X.,  and  the 
Eoyal  proclamations  for  the  changes  in  the  Charte,  and 
the  entire  stop  to  the  hberties  of  the  press,  were  known  in 
Paris  on  the  25th  of  July,  and  in  the  Moniteur  of  the  next 
day.  We  were  then  at  St.  Germain.  Galignani's  paper 
was  stopped  with  all  the  rest,  till  a  new  license  was  taken 

VOL.  III.  D  D 


402  MISS   BEREY'S   journal.  [1830 

out ;  so  that  tlie  first  we  heard  of  it  was  in  a  note  from 
Mrs.  Hamilton ;  and  we,  with  all  the  rest  of  the  world, 
were  astonished  at  the  bold  madness  of  the  measure.  On 
Monday,  26th,  w^e  heard  that  there  had  been  gather- 
ings of  people,  and  attempts  to  break  the  windows  at 
Prince  Polignac's.  Lord  Stuart  and  Mr.  Gregory  dined 
with  us  on  Tuesday,  the  26th,  and  they  told  us  that  on 
Monday  night  there  had  been  a  great  deal  of  riot  and 
violence  ;  that  the  military  had  been  called  out ;  but  they 
seemed  in  very  good  spirits,  and  very  confident  that  the 
military  would  very  soon  quell  all  signs  of  riot  and 
sedition.  Lord  Stuart,  however,  said  that  if  the  military 
did  not  stand  faithful  to  the  Court,  he  would  not  give  the 
King  ten  days  for  his  reign.  They  returned  to  Paris  that 
evening,  and  must  have  found  afiairs  much  more  serious 
by  the  time  they  got  back. 

On  Wednesday,  the  28th,  no  post  arrived  at  St.  Ger- 
main, nor  any  one  of  the  many  public  carriages  that 
pass  daily  on  that  road  ;  nor  any  one  coming  from  Paris. 
The  road  was  absolutely  deserted,  and  we  had  nothing 
but  vague  reports  of  the  desperate  combat  that  was  going 
on  at  Paris.  On  the  corner  of  the  terrace  at  St.  Germain, 
which  was  close  by  our  house,  all  sorts  of  people  were 
collected,  from  morning  till  night,  listening  to  the  dreadful 
report  of  the  cannon  at  Paris,  which  could  just  be  heard 
with  us  ;  and  nothing  but  idle  and  contradictory  reports  to 
satisfy  one's  curiosity.  Everybody  was  telling  what  they 
had  heard  or  seen  of  the  movement  of  troops,  &c.  &c. 
No  carriage,  or  even  horse,  could  pass  the  Pont  de 
Neuilly,  which  was  completely  barricaded  by  the  people, 
as  well  as  the  streets  of  Paris.  We  at  last  grew  so  anxious 
for  some  authentic  information,  that  on  Thursday  morn- 
ing we  sent  our  French  servant  with  letters  to  some  of 
our  friends  in  Paris  (to  find  his  way  there  as  well  as  he 
could),  to  bring  us  our  letters  from  the  Ambassade,  and 
to  tell  us  what  he  himself  saw,  being  a  very  intelligent 


1830]  JOURXAL   BY  MISS   AGXES   BERRY.  403 

person.  During  the  morning  of  that  day,  which  was  the 
last  stand  made  by  the  King's  troops  in  the  Champs 
Elysees,  the  sound  of  the  cannon  and  volleys  of  musketry 
were  distinctly  heard  from  the  terrace  at  St.  Germain. 
In  the  course  of  the  day  we  drove  out  on  the  high  road 
towards  Paris,  in  hopes  of  meeting  somebody  that  could 
tell  us  how  things  were  going  on,  for  in  these  days  of 
strong  interest  one  spoke  to  everybody  ;  but  there  was 
nobody  on  the  road — neither  carriage  nor  horseman,  and 
hardly  anybody  walking.  Our  servant  did  not  get  back 
from  Paris  till  between  ten  and  eleven  at  night,  and  we 
began  to  be  afraid  that  he  might  have  been  obhged  to 
join  the  people,  which  had  been  the  case  with  some  that 
had  no  such  intentions  ;  he,  however,  had  found  no  danger 
or  difficulty  but  want  of  conveyance,  having  been  obliged 
to  walk  great  part  of  the  road  and  the  whole  way  back. 
He  brought  our  letters,  and  confirmed  the  accounts  they 
gave  us,  that  the  whole  town  was  completely  and  entirely 
in  the  hands  of  the  peoj^le,  and  the  National  Guard,  which 
had  risen  to  light  and  to  command  from  the  moment  that 
the  disturbances  broke  out,  with  the  people  who  joined 
them,  in  possession  of  every  public  building  and  every 
corps  du  garde  in  the  town,  of  which  they  had  regularly 
taken  possession  and  mounted  guard  ;  the  great  struggle 
and  slaughter  having  ended  that  very  morning,  and  the 
King's  troops  driven  from  the  Tuileries  and  the  Champs 
Elysees,  where  they  made  their  last  stand,  and  then 
retreated  towards  St.  Cloud.  But  in  the  fear  of  fresh 
troops  being  sent  against  Paris,  or  some  new  attacks  made, 
the  barricades  were  still  kept  up  in  the  streets  and  all  the 
bridges  round  Paris,  so  that  no  carriages  could  come  out 
of  Paris  or  circulate  in  the  streets.  In  the  meantime  we 
were  perfectly  quiet  at  St.  Germain,  the  people  almost 
universally  rejoicing  in  what  had  happened,  and  full  of 
praise  of  the  moderation  and  order  that  the  victorious 
people  had  showed — which,  indeed,  they  could  not  praise 

D    D    2 


404  MISS   BERETS   JOUENAL.  [1830 

too  much  ! — making  the  most  striking  difference  with  the 
horrors  and  barbarity  of  their  former  revohition  ;  no  pre- 
judice against  the  great ;  no  attempt  to  pillage  or  destroy 
even  the  houses  or  property  of  those  who  had  places 
under  the  Government  or  Court.  From  the  old  Palace 
at  St.  Germain  and  from  the  casernes  of  the  Garde  du 
Corps,  all  the  troops  had  been  called  to  St.  Cloud,  so 
that  the  white  flag  was  still  flying  on  the  old  Chateau 
till  the  Friday  morning.  When  my  sister  and  Lady 
Charlotte  were  walking  out  as  usual  before  breakfast, 
they  heard  some  shouting  and  huzzaing,  and  upon 
coming  up  to  the  gate,  saw  some  raggamuffin-looking 
people,  workmen,  &c.,  making  their  way  into  the  Chateau, 
to  hoist  the  national  colours,  and  to  take  away  any  arms 
that  had  been  left  by  the  Garde  du  Corps ;  and  before 
they  could  come  out  again,  they  were  met  at  the  door  by 
the  Mayor,  who  had  put  on  the  national  sash  and  cockade, 
and  was  followed  by  some  of  the  decent  bourgeoisie  of  the 
town,  and  some  few  in  the  uniform  of  National  Guards. 
All  this  was  hardly  the  business  of  one  short  half-hour ; 
the  peace  and  quiet  of  the  town  was  never  in  the  least 
disturbed.  The  tricoloured  flag  was  mounted  at  the 
Maison  de  ViUe  and  aU  the  pubhc  buildings,  and  this 
half-constituted  National  Guard  took  the  service  of  sen- 
tinels, and  all  the  duty  of  the  town,  as  quietly  and  orderly 
as  if  they  had  been  regular  troops.  So  began  and  ended 
our  revolution  at  St.  Germain,  with  no  visible  difference 
but  guard  mounted  without  uniforms,  and  a  little  bit  of  tri- 
coloured ribbon  in  every  man's  hat  or  button-hole.  For 
this  peace  and  quiet,  however,  much  was  due  to  the  good 
sense  and  conduct  of  the  Mayor.  On  the  Friday  or  Satur- 
day a  regiment  which  had  received  orders  to  join  the 
Eoyalists  at  St.  Cloud,  was  expected  to  pass  by  St.  Germain, 
and  if  they  had  attempted  to  force  their  passage  against 
the  will  of  the  people,  it  would  have  been  a  very  serious 
affray  in  the  town.     But  the  Mayor  wisely  went  out  with 


1830]  JOURNAL   BY  MISS   AGNES   BERRY.  405 

a  deputation  from  the  town,  offering  them  any  refresh- 
ments they  required  ;  that  food  and  drink  should  be  sent 
to  any  place  agreed  upon,  provided  they  would  take  an- 
other road  and  not  attempt  to  pass  through  the  town, 
which  was  peacefully  agreed  to.  In  spite  of  the  quiet 
and  order  that  seemed  re-established  in  the  most  marvel- 
lous manner  after  so  great  a  shock,  still  it  was  a  day  or 
two  longer  before  the  post  came  in  as  usual,  or  any  of  the 
immense  number  of  public  carriages  that  pass  daily 
between  St.  Germain  and  Paris ;  for  at  Paris,  although 
entirely  victorious  over  the  King's  troops,  they  dreaded 
some  new  attempt  from  the  regiments  that  were  called  to 
their  assistance  from  every  side,  and  had  they  come  in 
time  or  fought  ivillingly^  the  struggle  would  have  been  far 
more  desperate.  So,  till  the  Eoyal  cause  had  lost  all 
power  of  making  any  further  attack,  the  barricades  were 
still  kept  up,  and  the  Pont  de  Neuilly  was  not  pass- 
able for  horse  or  carriage.  In  the  meanwhile,  volunteers 
to  the  cause  of  the  nation  were  coming  in  thousands  to 
Paris  from  all  sides,  and  far  more  than  were  wanted  or 
wished  for  by  all  who  sought  the  immediate  and  quiet 
re-establishment  of  order  and  good  government. 

On  the  Monday  after  this  dreadful  week,  1,800  volun- 
teers from  Eouen  were  to  pass  through  St.  Germain  ;  but 
instead  of  being  kept  at  a  distance  like  the  Eoyal  troops, 
the  town  had  prepared  everything  for  their  refreshment, 
even  to  shoes  for  such  as  might  have  been  worn  out  on 
their  march.  They  were  marched  into  public  walks  of 
the  parterre  just  opposite  our  windows  in  regular  divisions, 
each  with  their  tricoloured  flags,-  but  the  most  motley 
crew  one  could  well  imagine ;  very  few  in  any  sort  of  uni- 
form— two  or  three  perhaps  in  that  of  the  National  Guard 
with  each  company ;  some  with  coats,  some  without ; 
nor  were  they  all  armed,  but  all  quiet  and  orderly,  rest- 
ing themselves  on  the  grass  after  their  march,  till  the  re- 
freshments the  town  had  prepared  arrived.    A  cart  came, 


406  MISS   BEKKY'S   journal.  [1830 

full  of  casks  of  wine,  which  were  to  be  opened  for  them 
in  due  time,  and  over  which  they  set  a  guard,  and  nobody- 
attempted  to  touch  it.  Then  another  cart,  full  of  bread 
and  cold  meat  of  different  sorts ;  and  all  this  was  distri- 
buted to  each  party  with  quiet  and  regularity.  They  sat 
down  in  circles  on  the  grass,  under  the  shade  of  trees,  and 
we  all  walked  amongst  them  without  the  least  fear  of  any- 
thing disagreeable.  The  wine  (not  too  good,  as  one  may 
guess)  was  taken  out  in  pailsfull,  and  every  party  took 
what  they  wanted ;  but  there  seemed  to  be  a  general  at- 
tention that  they  should  not  drink  to  intoxication,  for  I 
saw  the  people  who  had  the  care  of  the  wine  empty  a 
great  cask  of  it  on  the  ground.  After  their  repast  was 
over,  a  great  many  of  them  sang  and  danced  in  great 
rounds,  and  played  at  a  sort  of  single-stick,  for  which  the 
Eouen  people  are  famous  ;  and  before  twelve  o'clock  the 
ground  was  cleared,  and  they  had  all  marched  off  towards 
Paris  in  the  same  order  they  had  arrived.  As  I  am  only 
talking  now  of  what  I  saw  with  my  own  eyes,  or  had  to 
do  with  ourselves,  or  those  we  were  with,  the  great  events 
that  were  preparing  for  the  settlement  of  a  new  Govern- 
ment and  a  new  dynasty  must  not  be  looked  for  in  the 
mere  remembrances  that  I  am  now  marking  down. 

Before  I  leave  my  remembrances  of  St.  Germain,  I 
must  mention  our  visits  to  the  Vail,  the  Chateau  of  the 
old  Princesse  de  Poix,  where  she  usually  resided,  sur- 
rounded with  her  children  and  grandchildren,  the  Noailles, 
the  Duke  de  Monchie,  &c.  &c. ;  and,  during  the  first 
fright  which  the  commotions  at  Paris  gave  to  all  those 
who,  hke  themselves,  were  in  any  way  belonging  or  con- 
nected with  the  Court,  the  Vail  seemed  to  be  the  gene- 
ral rendezvous  of  all  their  alarmed  acquaintance  in  the 
neighbourhood.  For  some  days,  counting  children,  nurses, 
and  servants,  there  were  above  forty  people  more  than 
the  usual  inhabitants  at  the  Chateau  at  the  Vail,  which  is 
by  no  means  a  very  large  house  ;  and  though  we  used 
to  drive  almost  every  morning,  we  were  sure  of  having 


1830]  ABDICATION   OF   CHAELES   X.  407 

the  latest  intelligence,  both  of  the  Court  at  St.  Cloud  and 
at  Paris. 

On  the  1st  of  August  Charles  X.  and  his  family  re- 
treated to  Eambouillet.  On  the  2nd  he  announced  his  own 
and  the  Dauphin's  abdication,  appointing  the  Duke  of 
Orleans  Lieutenant-General  of  the  kingdom.* 

Extract  of  a  Letter  to  Miss  Berry. 

Paris  :  3rd  September,  1830, 
...  I  wished  so  much  that  you  had  both  been  where  I  was 
last  Sunday,  .  .  .  hearing  the  acclamation  with  which  the  King 

*  The  following  incidents  concerning  the  fallen  family  were  related  to 
the  editor  by  an  eye-witness  : — So  little  did  M.  de  Polignac  appreciate  the 
imminent  danger  of  the  position  of  the  Royal  family,  that  in  the  very  midst 
of  the  Revolution  he  quietly  entered  the  Duchesse  de  G.'s  room  in  order  to 
invite  her  to  dinner.  She  declined,  in  great  excitement  adding,  '  What 
had  the  wretched  Garde  Royale,  who  were  hourly  brought  in  wounded, 
had  to  eat  for  three  days  ?  '  On  hearing  these  words,  Mademoiselle,  then 
a  child,  was  seen  carrying  down  a  dish  with  a  joint  left  from  her  dinner, 
to  the  soldiers  in  the  conrt.  In  vain  did  the  Duchesse  de  G.  urge  the 
King  to  abdicate  in  favour  of  his  grandson.  He  was  furious;  told  her 
she  deserved  d'etre  exilee  for  her  presumption.  'Ah !  sire,  je  le  serai,  je  le 
sais  bien,  mais — avec  vous ! '  Three  days  after,  he  determined  to  sign  his 
abdication.  The  Due  de  Bordeaux  was  to  have  been  conducted  to  Paris  by 
the  Duchesse  de  Berri ;  grief  and  fear  had  overwhelmed  the  whole  court ; 
and  the  day  on  which  he  was  to  be  proclaimed,  nothing  was  seen  but  tears. 
The  children  became  dreadfully  alarmed  at  this  appearance  of  misery  in  all 
who  surrounded  them,  and  they  were  found  on  a  balcony  with  their  arms 
round  each  other,  and  praying  fervently  on  their  knees,  believing  they  were 
both  to  be  killed.  The  Due  de  Bordeaux  was  informed  by  his  tutor,  the 
Due  de  Damas,  that  his  gi'andfather  had  abdicated  in  his  favour,  and  that 
he  was  to  be  proclaimed  king.  The  child  was  terrified,  and  repeatedly 
asked  the  Due  '  Est-ce  bien,  ou  non  .^'  He  even  urged  as  an  objection,  that 
if  his  grandfather,  at  his  age,  was  incapable  of  making  his  people  happy, 
what  could  be  expected  of  a  child  like  him  ;  then,  running  to  the  ex-king, 
implored  him  not  to  make  him  king.  Charles  X.  told  him  it  must  be  so. 
The  poor  boy  wept  through  dinner,  and  immediately  afterwards  was  con- 
ducted between  Charles  X.  and  the  Dauphin  upon  a  balcony,  in  order  to 
be  proclaimed  king  to  those  of  the  troops  who  still  remained  faithful.  A 
dreadful  scene  ensued.  The  troops  wereall  divided  in  opinion  as  to  the  fit- 
ness of  the  measure.  '  Vive  Hem-i  V ! '  '  Vive  CharleS  X ! '  '  N'abdiquez 
pas ! '  &c.,  were  vociferated,  according  to  the  feelings  of  each  individual ; 
quarrels  began,  swords  were  drawn,  pistols_fired,  and  many  were  wounded 
and  killed  in  the  scuffle. 


408  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1830 

was  received  on  the  Champs  de  Mars  by  40,000  of  the  National 
Gruards,  and  at  least  200,000  spectators.  ...  It  was  really  a 
magnificent  sight,  and  made  one  willing  to  believe  all  the 
stories  of  necromancy  and  witchcraft  we  ever  heard  of,  for  it 
seemed  as  if  nothing  short  of  supernatural  agency  could  have 
brought  about,  in  the  short  space  of  one  month,  the  extraordi- 
nary scene  we  then  witnessed.  On  the  29th  of  July,  all  Paris 
was  in  a  disorganised,  disjointed  state — each  man  following  his 
own  desires ;  on  the  1 9th  of  August,  all  was  order,  good- 
humour,  and  obedience  to  the  new  authorities.  The  King  pre- 
sented colours  to  each  of  the  thirteen  Leoions  of  the  National 
Guards,  as  well  as  to  a  small  body  of  convalescents  from 
among  the  wounded  citizens,  who  appeared  among  the  troops, 
bearing  for  their  banners  a  branch  of  oak  with  a  live  cock 
fastened  to  the  top  of  it.  This  reminds  me  to  tell  you  that  a 
Commission  is  to  be  formed  for  altering  the  arms  of  France — 
'  the  Gallic  cock  is  to  be  introduced,  and  the  poor  fleuv  de  lys 
erased  ! ' 

On  the  23rd  of  September,  the  Committee  reported  the 
following  resolution  : — '  That  the  Chamber  of  Deputies 
accuses  of  high  treason  MM.  de  Polignac,  Peyronnet, 
Chantelauze,  de  Guernon,  Eanville  d'Haussez,  Capelle,  and 
de  Montbel,  subscribers  of  the  Ordonnances  of  the  25th 
of  July.  The  trial  lasted  from  the  15th  to  the  21st  of 
December. 

Extract  of  a  Letter  to  Miss  Berry. 

Paris :  24th  September,  1830. 
M.  Beranger  made  his  report  yesterday  upon  the 
examination  of  the  ex-Ministers.  It  was  received  with  the  most 
solemn  attention.  Polignac  shows  to  no  advantage  in  it ;  and 
from  the  reluctance  with  which  the  others  came  into  his 
measures — even  Pejrronnet,  though  he  not  so  much  as  the  rest — 
they  seem  to  have  been  less  wicked  in  their  intentions  than 
weak  in  not  giving  in  their  resignations.  A  fact  has  come  to 
light  through  this  statement  which  was  not  known  before,  and 
that  is,  that  Eaguse  had  received  his  orders  from  Polignac  to  be 
in  readiness  with  his  troops  Jive  days  before  the  Ordonnances 
were  issued,  proving  how  incapable  he  (Polignac)  was  of  making 


'f 


1830]  FUNERAL    OF   B.    CONSTANT.  409 

proper  arrangements  for  the  support  of  his  measures,  though  he 
knew  those  measures  were  of  such  a  nature  that  he  could 
expect  no  less  than  a  violent  resistance  on  the  part  of  the 
people.  Perhaps  he  left  it  to  Marmont  to  decide  on  what 
number  of  troops  he  should  require,  without  the  latter  having 
any  comprehension  of  the  extent  of  the  threatened  dangers. 
The  trial  comes  on  next  month,  and  as  the  almanack  (Moore's) 
would  say,  we  may  look  for  storms  about  that  time — the  day 
before  or  the  day  after  !  Beranger  says  France  demands  justice, 
not  vengeance  ;  and  he  hopes  that  feeling  animates  every  breast. 
This  is  a  calmant,  and  I  trust  will  have  a  good  effect. 

Extract  of  «  Letter  from  a  Friend. 

8tli  December,  1830, 
I  am  induced  to  write  you  a  few  lines  relative  to  your  friend 
B.  Constant,  whose  death  has  created  much  sensation  here. 
There  never  was  anything  to  equal  the  number  of  people  who 
followed  him  to  the  grave  yesterday.  From  nine  o'clock  till 
eleven  there  were  eight  or  nine  processions  at  a  time  crossing 
the  Tuileries  Gardens,  headed  by  tricoloured  flags,  with  his  name 
and  'Liberte  et  Droit'  written  upon  them.  The  procession 
reached  almost  the  whole  length  of  the  Boulevards ;  nothing 
similar  was  ever  seen  at  Paris  except  at  the  funeral  of  Greneral 
Foy. 

Extract  of  a  Letter. 

Paris :  20tli  December,  1830. 
.  .  .  Went  to  the  Chamber  yesterday,  and  came  back 
quite  delighted  with  a  young  man  from  Lyons,  named  Souzet, 
who  spoke  in  defence  of  Chantelauze.  All  mouths  are  full  of  his 
praises.  It  seems  that  to  the  daring  freshness  of  youth  and 
inexperience,  he  adds  a  novelty  of  'political  idea  and  argument 
and  a  depth  of  research  that  has  astonished  everyone.  We  may 
conclude  that  a  brilliant  career  is  just  opened  to  him ;  but 
whether  any  good  may  be  derived  from  his  powerful  eloquence 
to  the  unhappy  man  he  defends,  is  a  problem  to  be  solved  only 
by  the  action  of  the  people,  for  it  will  be  of  little  consequence 
that  the  law  abandons  its  prey,  if  the  fangs  of  the  populace  be 
allowed  to  have  force.  I  sent  my  servant  to-day  on  a  voyage  of 
discovery  round  the   Luxembourg ;  for  as   the    ouvriers    had 


410  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1830 

given  notice  in  many  great  establishments  that  they  would 
renounce  work  for  the  week,  being  de  service  a  Paris,  I  fancied 
there  might  be  some  rassemblement  about  the  Luxembourg; 
and  so  it  proved.  .  .  .  There  were  about  3,000  in  the  street 
which  leads  up  to  the  great  '  grille '  of  the  palace ;  they  made 
no  other  noise  but  low  murmurs,  waiting  the  sortie  of  the  peers ; 
and  there  seemed  to  be  a  promise  made  in  whispers  among 
them  that  they  should  meet  in  numbers  the  day  after  to-morrow% 
when  they  expect  to  hear  the  finale  of  the  proces.  .  .  .  The 
fine  ladies  of  the  ex-noble  quartier,  instead  of  asking  each 
other  whether  they  are  going  '  aux  Bouffes,'  or  to  '  Madame  une 
telle,'  say,  '  Que  voulez  vous  faire  pendant  les  massacres  ? ' 

Extract  of  a  Letter  to  Miss  Berry. 

Paris  :  December  24,  1830. 

You  will  know  the  result  of  our  campaigns  before  this 
reaches  you.  Everyone  had  taken  as  much  pains  as  possible  to 
frighten  themselves :  the  elegans  of  the  salons,  in  making  their 
bow  to  the  ladies,  began  by  asking,  '  Quels  seront  vos  projets 
pendant  les  massacres  de  Paris?'  The  list  of  peers  who  had 
voted  the  death  of  Ney  was  circulated,  and  their  houses  marked 
for  pillage.  The  Council  of  Sunday  last  had  determined  upon 
an  extensive  arrest,  in  which  some  few  deputies  were  included. 
Lafitte  declared  at  the  tribune  that  they  had  the  clue  to  an 
organised  complot,  and  that  it  was  a  question  of  the  existence 
of  the  monarch,  the  chambers,  and  France ;  and  to  complete 
our  alarm,  Frisell  was  made  to  get  out  of  a  fiacre  on  his  way  to 
Chateaubriand,  at  the  cry  of  *  a  bas  I'aristocrat.' 

Alarm  was  general  in  the  city  and  the  palace,  and  the  crowd 
around  the  Luxembourg  so  menacing  and  multitudinous,  that 
the  Court  of  Peers  were  obliged  to  separate  a  I'instant,  and  the 
safety  of  the  prisoners  was  for  some  hours  very  problematic.  A 
great  alacrity  was  evinced  by  the  Grarde  Nationale,  34,000 
troops  were  under  arms,  and  the  mass  of  men  so  imposing  that 
resistance  became  ridiculous.  Paris  was  converted  into  a  camp, 
and  under  the  security  of  18  fires  of  bivouaques,  the  sentence 
was  pronounced.  The  following  morning  we  had  a  more  serious 
appearance  of  things,  as  several  points  were  menaced;  troops 
disarmed ;  the  opinion  of  the  Grarde  Nationale  very  much 
questioned  as  to  the  disappointment  or  approval  of  the  judgment, 


1830]  TRIAL   OF   THE   MINISTERS.  411 

and  their  doubtful  cooperation.  The  fear  of  their  own  pro- 
perties, and  the  rumour  of  Mortaliere,  the  Minister  of  the 
Interior,  having  taken  off  the  prisoners  to  Vincennes  on  his  own 
responsibility,  stripped  the  cause  of  much  of  its  intensity.  Fifty 
thousand  men  bivouacked  around  their  fires  all  night  in  all  the 
streets,  places,  and  quais,  concluded  the  entertainment.  The 
Koyal  Family  are  menaced  by  the  most  horrid  letters,  and  their 
escape  was  arranged  in  case  of  an  emergency.  There  is  not  a 
question  but  that  the  people  demanded  the  execution  of  two 
Ministers,  and  almost  expected  it ;  but  it  is  no  less  a  one  that 
these  feelings  were  made  use  of  by  a  conspiracy,  with  the  view 
of  introducing  the  Republic.  .  .  .  The  Ministers  have  de- 
clared that  they  know  all  the  measures  and  all  the  contrivers, 
and  probably  it  is  to  fear  alone  that  we  do  not  learn  at  this 
present  time  the  full  extent  of  their  knowledge.  There  is  a 
Council  and  a  Directory,  and  money  is  forthcoming ;  and  it  is 
believed  by  the  society  here,  and  by  others  high  in  official  station, 
that  the  King  has  been  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  a  transaction 
with  them,  and  to  that  we  are  indebted  for  the  withdrawal 
of  the  resistance  these  last  two  days.  Primary  assemblies,  and 
the  new  electoral  regulations — the  dissolution  of  the  present 
Chamber,  and  the  destruction  of  an  hereditary  Chamber — are 
mentioned  as  the  stipulated  conditions.  The  less  certain  reports 
are — a  division  in  the  Ministry,  the  warlike  attitude  and  dispo- 
sition of  Soult  and  his  War-office,  and  the  determination  (or 
perhaps  better,  inclination)  of  Louis  Philippe  to  go  lower  down 
the  stream  yet.  The  officers  of  the  army  of  the  Empire  will 
join  the  Republican  party,  and  they  have  nicknamed  the  King 
'  Papa  Jemappes,'  as  he  sings  his  own  battles,  and  forgets  their 
more  brilliant  combats.  We  rather  expect  to  hear  of  movements 
in  the  south  and  west ;  but  in  the  sense  of  the  Priesthood  and 
of  the  Carlistes.  Confusion  continues  to  reign  in  all  money 
transactions,  and  Paris  is  really  so  changed  as  to  its  appearance 
in  the  streets,  that  I  cannot  but  hope  to  make  you  aware  of  it. 
There  is  a  great  ardour  for  security  in  the  eastern,  northern, 
and  central  parts  of  France,  and  the  fear  is  that  they  will  collect 
a  force  which  will  be  too  unmanageable  at  home  not  to  open  a 
safety-valve  towards  the  Rhine,  via  Belgium.  The  enrolments 
have  taken  place  in  several  towns  to  the  cry  of  *  Au  Rhin  ! 
Au  Rhin ! '  and  Soult  is  supposed  to  be  the  new  Bonaparte. 


412  MISS    berry's    journal.  [1830 

Such  is  our  present  case :  the  sovereignty  of  the  people  seems 
the  only  principle  which  remains  unshaken,  and  the  desperate 
and  the  unprincipled  will  fertilise  it  according  to  their  interest 
or  views.  The  sentence  upon  the  ex-Ministers  is  the  most  severe, 
short  of  death.  The  peers  asked  for  it  as  the  alternative.  Four, 
I  hear,  continued  to  vote  death  the  second  tour  de  Senlis,  and 
we  shall  soon  hear  who  they  are,  but  I  do  not  know  yet. 
Martignac  was  brilliant  and  seductive  in  his  defence,  but  it 
has  produced  in  a  M.  Souzet  a  most  extraordinarily  brilliant 
talent.  The  trial  was  imposing  as  a  sight;  and  Martignac 
never  could  persuade  Polignac,  that  if  he  could  save  his  head  it 
would  be  a  great  success.  The  truth  of  the  ordinances  is  this  : 
The  Cardinal  Lattill  and  M.  de  Damas  had  long  turned  the 
King's  mind  to  the  necessity  of  such  a  step,  and  this  is  called 
the  influence  of  the  *  Petite  Porte,'  as  it  was  by  such  an  entree 
that  they  besieged  the  mind  of  the  King.  Polignac  was  not 
against  them,  but  not  the  author,  and  his  great  merit  to  them 
was  his  proneness  to  execute.  The  other  Ministers  were  re- 
luctant, and  the  Dauphin  having  said  at  the  Council  that  it  was 
jpoltron  to  recede,  brought  them  to  their  signatures.     .     .     . 


1831-3]  LETTER   FEOM   JOANNA   BAILLIE.  413 


1831-2-3. 

In  the  years  1831-2-3  there  are  no  Journals,  and  no 
letters  of  interest  preserved.  In  1831  the  second  volume 
of  the  '  Comparative  View  of  Social  Life  '  appeared,  and  no 
doubt  Miss  Berry  must  have  received  letters  on  the  sub- 
ject ;  but  that  from  her  old  and  valued  friend,  Joanna 
Baillie,  is  the  only  one  now  left  amongst  her  papers  on 
that  subject. 

Cavendisli  Square. 

My  deak  Feiend, — I  have  just  read  your  proof-sheet,  in 
which  you  have  made  such  honourable  mention  of  an  author  so 
much  forgotten  by  the  public,  and  think  you  are  a  very  bold 
and  pertinacious  woman  to  venture  at  this  time  of  the  day  to 
put  her  in  the  eminent  station  you  have  assigned  to  her.  How- 
ever, I  am  well  pleased  to  receive  such  distinction  from  your 
partiality  and  constancy,  the  tried  constancy  of  many  years, 
and  thank  you  for  it  with  all  my  heart.  .  .  .  Give  my 
love  to  your  sister.  I  shall  see  you  both,  I  trust,  when  I  come 
next  to  town,  not  long  hence. 

Your  affectionate  and  grateful, 

J.  Baillie. 

P.S. — I  have  forgotten  to  say  how  well  your  pages  read,  and 
how  I  am  pleased  with  the  power  of  expression  and  the  feeling 
of  many  of  the  passages.  Your  tribute  to  Sir  Gr.  Beaumont  I 
admire  very  much. 

Her  travelling  account-book  shows  that  in  the  autumn 
of  1831  she  and  her  sister  were  paying  various  visits  in 
the  north  of  England,  and  in  Scotland,  returning  to 
Curzon  Street  in  December. 

In  the  autumn  of  1832  they  again  made  a  tour  in  the 
north  ;  and  in  the  autumn  of  1833  they  were  for  a  time 
at  Tunbridge  Wells. 


414  MISS    berry's    journal.  .      [1834 


1834. 

Extract  of  a  Letter  from  Miss  Berry  to  Miss  Cayley. 

February  14,  1834. 
I  was  interrupted  by  being  sent  down  for  to  take  leave  of 
Macaulay,  who  leaves  England  this  very  day  for  India.  An 
honourable  desire  for  securing  to  himself  political  independence, 
and  the  fortunes  of  two  sisters,  has  engaged  him  to  take  a  most 
honourable  place  in  the  Council  at  Madras ;  but  there  he  must 
remain  for  at  least  six  or  seven  years  !  So  that  my  farewell  was 
for  ever  ;*  and  it  was  certainly  not  without  sincere  regret  that 
I  saw  depart  so  distinguished,  so  e^Jtraordinary  a  member  of 
society  !  so  very  unlikely  to  be  soon  replaced  !  for  his  conver- 
sational powers  were  yet  greater  than  his  House  of  Commons 
eloquence. 

Miss  Berry  and  her  sister  left  London  for  Paris  in  the 
month  of  April,  and  she  resumed  from  time  to  time 
her  notes  on  passing  events,  though  no  regular  Journal 
was  kept. 

May. — Le  Due  de  B says  there  are  36,000  men  de 

toute  arme  en  garnison  dans  Paris,  et  pres  de  cinquante 
milles  y  compris  les  casernes  dans  les  environs. 

M.  d'Appony  says  there  are  about  30,000  troops  of 
the  line  de  toute  arme  in  Paris  and  Beaulieu  altogether. 

I  think  these  numbers  must  be  exago-erated.  At  the 
great  review,  on  one  of  the  three  days,  of  the  whole  of 


*  Miss  Berry  was  happily  mistaken  in  tliis  prediction ;  slie  lived  to  see 
Mr.  Macaulay  return,  and  to  enjoy  the  pleasure  of  his  society  for  many 
years  afterwards,  and  to  rejoice  over  his  brilliant  success  with  the  affec- 
tionate pride  which  sprang  from  the  warmth  of  her  friendship,  and  her 
clear  appreciation  of  his  extraordinary  powers  and  attainments. 


1834]  FUNEKAL   0/  LAFAYETTE.  415 

the  National  Guard  of  Paris  and  the  Beauheu,  not  more 
than  20,000  mustered. 

Thursday,  22nd. — I  am  just  come  from  the  funeral 
of  Lafayette.  It  was  in  every  respect  as  ill-managed, 
and  as  little  imposing,  as  if  it  had  been  in  England,  et 
c'est  beaucoup  dire.  Five  battalions  of  troops  of  the  line, 
and  five  battahons  of  National  Guards,  were  ordered  to 
attend,  under  the  command  of  General  Dariale ;  and  as 
many  of  the  National  Guards  as  pleased  to  attend,  to 
walk  in  procession  with  their  side-arms  only  j  there  were, 
likewise,  several  detachments  of  the  Gardes  Municipales 
(the  ci-devant  gens  d'armerie)  and  several  of  the  sergens 
de  la  ville,  who  act  the  part  of  our  police — hke  them,  too, 
in  plain  coats,  with  a  number  on  their  cape,  and  some 
other  little  distinctive  marks  about  them.  The  drums  of 
the  regiments  were  muffled  ;  but  there  was  much  too  little 
music,  and  what  there  was,  was  absolutely  without  any 
effect  appropriate  to  the  occasion.  The  catafalque,  on 
which  the  body  was  carried,  was  a  great  awkward  ma- 
chine, almost  in  as  bad  a  state  as  that  of  Nelson.  Most 
hats  of  the  shoals  of  people  on  the  Boulevards  were  pulled 
off  as  it  passed,  but  there  was  no  attempt  at  this,  or  any 
other  part  of  the  ceremony,  to  excite  emotion  of  any  sort. 
After  a  large  detachment  of  National  Guards  immediately 
foUo'wing  the  body,  came  the  Chambre  des  Deputes  (they 
werebetter  than  half  there) ;  then  cameagain  some  military, 
then  another  long;  train  of  men  in  black  coats — I  beheve 
all  the  Americans  in  Paris ;  then  more  military ;  then  a 
carriage  of  the  King's,  ditto  of  the  Queen's,  ditto  of 
Mdlle.  Adelaide  and  of  the  Duke  of  Orleans.  But  where 
was  he  himself  ?  Alas  !  not  there.  Horace  says,  '  Quem 
Deus  vult  perdere,  prius  dementat.'  He  must  have  spoken 
of  kings,  who  are  sure  to  neglect  all  occasions  of  making 
an  agreeable  impression  in  their  own  favour!  What 
could  or  should  have  prevented  the  Duke  of  Orleans 
from  paying  this  tribute  of  his  presence  in  a  marked  and 


416  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1834 

ft 

distinguished  manner  to  the  memory  of  the  man  who  actually 
placed  the  crown  on  his  father  s  head  ?  Had  the  Minis- 
ters opposed  it  (as  they  pretend  to  say),  the  people  would 
have  been  so  much  the  better  pleased  with  him ;  and 
those  who  know  how  much  he  owed  to  Lafayette  would 
have  had  a  better  opinion  of  his  heart  and  feelings.  The 
Court  carriages,  too,  were  in  no  pomp — with  two  horses 
only,  and  with  two,  indeed,  some  with  one  footman  only 
behind,  and  whenever  the  procession  (from  its  great 
length)  stopped,  these  footmen  got  down  and  talked  to 
their  friends  in  the  crowd !  After  all  this  came  what 
was  certainly  the  most,  the  only  gratifying  part  of  the 
procession — hundreds  and  thousands  of  the  National 
Guards,  in  regular  companies,  with  their  officers  at  their 
head,  all  in  uniform,  and  a  thousand  times  better-looking 
people  than  the  troops  of  the  line.  These  last  are  very 
little  men — below  the  ordinary  stature  both  here  and  in 

England.     The  Comte  de gave  me  as  a  reason  that 

from  the  year  IX.  to  the  year  1814,  France  had  been 
drained  of  men,  and  nothing  left  but  the  very  young,  the 
weak,  and  the  unhealthy,  which  had  given  rise  to  a  race 
of  men  really  below  the  usual  stature  ;  that  now,  twenty 
years  having  elapsed  since  that  time,  a  sensible  difference 
will  soon  appear  in  the  size  of  men  called  in  future  into 
the  ranks. 

I  saw  the  procession  from  the  terrace  of  a  house  at 
the  corner  of  the  Eue  de  Choiseul,  occupied  by  the  Due 
de  Massa.  One  could  not  be  better  situated ;  and  the 
weather  beautiful ;  but  I  never  saw  a  less  impressive  show. 
The  character  of  the  mob  was  perfectly  tranquil,  and  I 
think  better  dressed,  and  looking  less  blackguard,  than 
the  same  sort  of  crowd  would  have  been  in  England. 

Saturday,  2ith. — M.  d'Escars  would  not  for  the  world 
that  Charles  X.  had  retired  to  Eome ;  it  would  have 
looked  too  much  like  an  abdication !  too  much  like  follow- 
ing the  steps  of  the  Stuarts !    Alas !  these  poor  bewildered 


1834]  LETTER   TO   MR.    MACAULAY.  417 

people  do  not  see  those  steps  are  already  taken.  Nothing 
more  remains  to  make  the  imitation  complete,  but  the  race 
becoming  extinct  in  the  person  of  the  Due  de  Bordeaux. 
Like  the  Stuarts,  too,  their  little  Court  at  Prague  is  full  of 
dissensions  and  quarrels.  Madame  de  Gontaut  is  just  sent 
away — the  Carlists  here  say  from  some  plot  of  hers 
discovered  by  the  Comte  de  Blacas  to  marry  Mdlle.  to 
the  Due  d'Orleans  !  a  marriage  to  which,  I  suppose,  for 
all  the  world,  Louis  Philippe  would  never  consent,  and 
I  should  think  Madame  de  Gontaut  much  too  wise,  and 
too  well  acquainted  with  the  circumstances  of  the  case, 
ever  to  have  imagined. 

Pozzo  says  that  Louis  Philippe  lays  by  yearly  120,000/. 
sterhng.     I  don't  believe  it. 

To  Mr.  Macaulay. 

Paris  :  23rd  June,  18.34. 

When  I  sought  to  procure  for  myself  the  pleasure  of  main- 
taining some  intercourse  with  you,  by  offering  to  write  to  you, 
I  forgot  what  rapid  advances  old  age  was  making  in  benumb- 
ing my  perceptions,  destroying  my  powers  of  association,  and 
reducing  my  energies  to  the  level  of  much  better  people  than 
myself  when  they  will  persist  in  living  till  my  age.  But  you  so 
willingly  accepted  the  correspondence,  that  it  shall  not  be  on 
my  (certainly  winning)  side  that  the  contract  shall  fail. 

I  have  been  here  since  the  end  of  April.  I  am  very  fond  of 
Paris.  It  is  the  city  of  all  seasons — of  all  ages — of  all  tastes — of 
all  habits  of  life.  I  should  say  I  was  very  fond  of  France,  but 
that  nothing  (socially  speaking)  is  more  different  from  Paris 
than  the  rest  of  France.  Politically  speaking,  both  are  equally 
flourishing ;  or  rather,  I  should  say,  the  country  more  remark- 
ably so  than  the  metropolis :  and  whatever  the  peculiarities  of 
either  the  one  or  the  other,  after  every  residence  among  them 
I  am  always  obliged  to  come  to  the  mortifying  result,  that  these 
people  make,  on  the  whole,  a  better  thing  of  human  life  than 
we  do.  In  political  conduct  (not  in  political  reasoning)  they 
are  still  children  compared  with  us.     But  if  they  once  succeed 

VOL.  in.  E  E 


418  MISS    BEEEY's   journal.  [183J. 

in  establishing  and  consolidating  their  present  government — and 
I  should  say  that  every  year  added  to  their  chance — then  our 
only  security  for  an  honourable  equality  of  independent  exist- 
ence is  sticking  close  to  our  present  alliance.  The  King  has 
shown  himself,  and  is  now  generally  allowed  to  be,  a  very  wisely- 
judging  man.  It  is  strange  that  he  should  continue  unpopular 
with  the  bulk  of  the  population  of  Paris.  Just  the  very  faults 
they  find  in  him,  are  rather  virtues  in  a  sovereign.  He  is  sup- 
posed to  love  money,  although  nobody  accuses  him  of  any  undue 
means  of  acquiring  it,  or  of  any  selfish,  dishonourable  means 
of  spending  it.  But  he  wants  that  expansion  of  character,  and 
those  dispositions  to  showy  profusion  and  parade,  to  which  the 
people  are  too  naturally  inclined,  and  have  been  too  long  accus- 
tomed not  to  regret  the  absence,  although  their  now  better- 
informed  minds  would  not  allow  the  consequences  of  such  pro- 
fusion in  practice.  Their  House  of  Commons  have  by  no  means 
yet  advanced  in  the  knowledge  of  administering  the  finances  of 
so  great  and  rich  a  country  with  becoming  liberality  as  well  as 
economy.  The  reputation  of  the  present  Ministry  is  far  greater 
for  ability  than  for  honesty  of  purpose  or  integrity  of  character. 
The  Due  de  Broglie  having  left  them  on  account  of  a  ques- 
tion of  good  faith  with  respect  to  the  payment  of  the  American 
claims,  has  rather  done  good  than  harm  to  the  Government, 
although  perhaps  not  to  the  character  of  the  other  Ministers ; 
and  whenever  he  is  recalled  to  power,  which  he  certainly  will 
be,  his  character  and  influence  will  stand  higher  than  ever  ;  and 
deservedly  so — for  I  really  believe  him  to  be  a  very  enlightened 
statesman,  without  any  peculiarities  or  prejudices  of  soil  hang- 
ing about  him. 

In  September  next  the  House  of  Peers  are  to  exercise  their 
rights  of  judging,  en  dernier  ressort,  the  disturbers  of  the  public 
peace  in  April  last.  The  evidence  has  been  taking  for  long 
in  what  they  call  '  La  premier  instruction,'  which  I  am  told  is  a 
very  awkward  and  unfair  way  of  producing  proofs.  I  should 
much  fear  the  House  of  Peers  would  acquire  no  new  honour  in 
their  quality  of  judges  ;  and  if  all  these  people  are  to  be  let  off, 
or  oil  of  them  condemned  (and  one  or  other  will  certainly  take 
place),  it  were  better  they  had  been  left  to  the  ordinary  tri- 
bunals. 

However  well  I  may  think,  on  the  whole,  of  their  political 


1834]  LETTEE   TO   MK.    MACAULAT.  419 

state,  that  of  their  literature  is  in  a  far  other  situation.  All 
that  can  be  said  by  its  greatest  admirers  and  well-wishers  is 
that  it  is  in  transitu  to  something  better.  Of  works  of  science 
I  cannot  speak;  but  of  everything  that  goes  by  the  foolish 
name  of  belles  lettres,  everything  connected  with  works  of  imagi- 
nation— their  theatre  and  their  novels — the  exaltation  and  the 
caricature  both  of  sentiments,  situation,  and  feelings,  startle 
the  sober  heads  of  their  English  neighbours. 

This  exaltation  is  not  always  confined  to  works  of  fancy. 
There  is  an  Abbe  de  Lamennais,  who  was  one  of  the  apostles 
of  the  Eestoration  of  the  House  of  Bourbon.  He  some  few 
j^ears  ago  wrote  a  book,  called  '  L'indifference  en  Matieres  de 
Eeligion,'  cited  as  gospel  by  all  the  u^^ra-royal  party.  This 
abbe  now  comes  forth  in  another  volume,  called  '  Paroles  d'un 
Croyant,'  the  most  ruthless  and  bloody  advocate  of  ultra  radi- 
calism. In  words  which  resemble  nothing  but  those  of  the  Old 
Testament,  and  under  the  pretence  of  restoring  the  Church  to 
its  primitive  simplicity  and  its  primitive  power,  he  preaches  a 
crusade  against  all  governors  and  governments,  and  would  resort 
to  the  bloody  wars  of  the  Kings  of  Judah  to  establish  entire 
equality  of  fortune  and  of  rights  among  men.  This  rhapsody — 
for  such  it  is — not  without  a  sort  of  eloquence,  has  been  already 
translated  into  German,  and  they  say  has  produced  a  great 
effect  in  Germany.  If  so,  they  will  shortly  be  slaying  their 
thousands  and  ten  thousands  in  the  name  of  the  God  of  '  Peace 
and  goodwill  towards  men.' 

The  new  general  election  of  Deputies  has  been  taking  place 
this  week  all  over  France.  As  far  as  the  returns  have  yet  been 
received,  they  are  immensely  in  favour  of  the  Government.  Of 
the  fourteen  representatives  of  the  districts  of  Paris,  not  one 
Carlist  or  Republican  has  ventured  to  propose  himself. 

I  have  been  confirmed  in  my  opinion  of  the  deterioration  of 
the  taste  of  France,  not  only  in  literature,  but  in  everything 
amenable  to  the  laws  of  taste,  by  the  Exposition  de  I'lndustrie 
Franpaise,  which  has  been  open  here  for  this  last  month.  It 
consists  of  everything,  from  machines  to  millinery  and  false  hair, 
from  velvet  to  sailcloth,  and  from  silver  plate  to  earthenware, 
cutlery,  saddlery,  chemistry,  and  a  thousand  et  ceteras.  That 
they  have  advanced  in  the  production  of  much  for  common 
purposes,  at  a  lower  price,  such  as  carpets,  earthenware,  &c.,  I 

£    £    2 


420  MISS    BERRY'S   JOURNAL.  [1834 

believe  ;  but  they  have  lost  all  that  grace  in  their  patterns  and 
colours  and  finish  for  which  they  used  to  be  remarkable.  The 
King  spent  six  hours  a  day  at  four  different  times  in  these 
Salles  cVExposition,  seeing  every  machine  in  action,  and  hear- 
ing every  man's  detail  of  the  perfection  of  his  own  goods.  No- 
thing but  a  King  could  have  supported  the  ennui  as  well  as 
fatigue  of  such  an  undertaking. 

Of  English  politics  I  shall  say  nothing ;  you  will  hear  enough 
of  them  from  better-informed  persons.  I  think  from  what  you 
do  hear  you  will  not  much  regret  your  absence  from  a  scene 
where  the  right  side  of  the  question  is  acting  in  such  a  manner 
as  to  be  actually  dependent  on  the  wrong  side  for  their  power 
of  acting  at  all.  Abercrombie  being  called  into  Council,  I  think 
you  will  approve  ;  but  unless  the  miracle  of  the  five  barley  loaves 
were  renewed,  what  can  he  do  '  among  so  many  ?'  All  the  best 
wishers  to  the  Ministry  seem  to  agree  that  they  cannot  last  longer 
than' the  final  discussion  on  the  Irish  Church  next  session. 

Of  ourselves  I  have  only  to  say  that  we  are  most  agreeably 
lodged  here  in  the  Champs  Elysees  ;  that  for  the  months  of  Au- 
gust and  September  we  mean  to  go  to  Bellevue,  a  village,  or 
rather  group  of  houses,  which  well  deserves  its  name,  about  five 
miles  from  Paris.  In  next  October  we  hope  to  return  to  our 
house  here  for  a  month,  on  our  way  back  to  Curzon  Street, 
where,  alas  I  our  boasted  society  will  have  received  an  irrepara- 
ble loss.  Let  us  hope  that  the  loss  is  contributing  to  your 
health,  your  wealth,  and  your  honour.  I  shall  then  endeavour 
to  reconcile  myself  to  a  privation  of  an  enjoyment  I  know  so 
well  how  to  appreciate. 

Let  me  hear  from  you  if  you  have  a  wish  to  continue  receiv- 
ing such  rubbish  as  this,  from  your  sincerely  attached  friend 
and  admirer, 

M.  B. 

At  the  annual  sitting  of  the  French  Academy,  on  the 
9tli  of  August  1834,  the  subject  of  one  of  the  prize  dis- 
courses instituted  by  M.  de  Monthyon  was  Civil  (it  would 
have  been  better  termed  Moral)  Courage.  The  prize  was 
not  awarded,  none  of  the  discourses  on  the  subject  having 
been  thought  worthy  even  of  an  honourable  mention.  I  am 
not  surprised  at  this.    Moral  courage  is  much  less  inherent 


1834]  CIVIL   V.    MOKAL   COURAGE.  421 

in  the  character  of  Frenchmen,  much  less  famihar  to  their 
habits  and  hvely  feehng,  than  mihtary  and  physical  cou- 
rage. Perhaps  it  comes  more  naturally,  and  with  less 
effort,  to  the  slower  intellect  and  the  less  combustible 
feehngs  of  Englishmen.  The  moral  courage  of  what 
Frenchman  could  stand  against  a  ridicule  which  its  dic- 
tates might  fasten  on  him  in  society  ?  Who  could,  for  in- 
stance, like  Sir  S.  Eomilly,  while  a  young  man  on  the  cir- 
cuit, have  born  the  jibes  of  all  his  companions,  that  he 
might  retain  with  him  as  his  servant  an  old,  queer-look- 
ing, awkward  man,  the  son  of  his  nurse,  who  he  was  too 
poor  to  support  by  any  other  means  ? 

The  same  deficiency  of  moral  courage  to  face  the  ills 
or  resist  the  difficulties  and  obstacles  of  life,  appears  in  the 
very  frequent  recurrence  of  suicides,  occasioned  by  attach- 
ments of  the  heart,  either  opposed  by  parents  or  impossi- 
ble from  the  position  of  the  parties.  Instead  of  endea- 
vouring to  subdue  their  passions  in  the  latter  case,  or  to 
remove  the  obstacles  to  its  gratification  in  the  former,  they 
immediately  fly  to  suicide,  and  seem  to  think  a  determi- 
nation to  die  together  with  the  object  of  their  passion, 
takes  ofi'  all  selfishness  from  the  act,  while  in  all  proba- 
bility it  doubles  it.  The  papers  for  ever  record  couples 
found  asphyxed  together,  or  drowned  locked  in  each  other's 
arms — couples  who,  had  their  moral  courage  allowed  them 
a  month's  respite,  would  probably  have  been  mutually 
locked  in  each  other's  arms  as  happy  lovers,  and  becoming 
useful  and  contented  members  of  society. 

We  should  look  in  vain,  in  the  order  of  hfe  in  which 
these  suicides  generally  take  place,  for  such  conduct  as 

Lady 's  femme  de  chamhre^  a  very  young  person,  to 

whom  she  had  said,  when  she  came  to  announce  her  in- 
tended marriage,  '  Oh,  Betty !  it  will  be  quite  time  enough 
to  marry  five  years  hence.'  The  young  woman  made  no 
reply,  but  continued  in  her  service  with  perfect  good  con- 
duct.   At  the  end  of  five  years,  on  the  anniversary  of  the 


422  MISS   BEERY'S   JOURXAL.  [l834 

day  on  which  she  had  first  spoken,  she  came  again  to 

Lady  ,  and  said,  'My  Lady,  you  advised  me  not 

to  think  of  marrying  for  five  years;  the  five  years  are 
now  passed,  and  John  and  I  continuing  of  the  same  mind, 
I  hope  you  have  no  longer  any  objection.' 

It  is  needless  to  add  that  the  marriage  took  place  im- 
mediately ;  that  the  couple  were  settled  on  Lord 's 

estate,  where  they  and  their  children  have  flourished  for 
these  last  twenty  years. 

This  excessive  excitabihty  of  feeling,  and  impatience  of 
obstacles,  has  great  political  inconveniences.  It  first  in- 
vited, or  at  least  made  possible,  the  many  changes  they 
have  undergone  during  the  last  forty  years.  The  mo- 
ment the  details  of  any  Government  become  obnoxious, 
or,  however  unavoidably,  to  press  on  any  order  of  the 
State,  instead  of  quietly  taking  the  legal  means,  which  they 
have  now  long  possessed,  of  ameliorating  their  institutions, 
they  are  ready,  on  the  most  trifling  occasion  of  excite- 
ment, to  destroy  them,  and  to  substitute  some  new  plan, 
which  these  quick  wits  and  hvely  minds  get  up  in  a  mo- 
ment— would  sacrifice  their  lives  to  establish  to-day,  and 
involve  their  country  in  confusion  to  destroy  to-morrow. 

Madame  de  Crequy's  souvenirs,  written  by  a  M.  Car- 
chaud,  who  had  hved  much  and  long  in  her  society — a 
man  of  no  character,  consequently  laying  anything  he 
chose  to  her  account  in  opinions  of  things  and  people, 
but  probably  many  of  them  really  her's.  She  had  a  great 
reputation  for  mechmicete,  which  she  knew,  and  said,  '  Je 
ne  saispas,  pourquoi  on  me  croit  mechante  car  je  ne  dis 
jamais  la  moitie  du  Mai  que  je  pense.' 

Madame  de  Souza,  who  knew  and  remembered  Madame 
de  Crequy,  was  sure  the  souvenirs  were  not  of  her  writing, 
because  there  was  not  in  them  a  story  of  herself  in  her 
youth,  which  she  had  told  Madame  de  Souza — a  story 
better  than  any  she  tells,  and  admirably  told  by  Madame 
de  Souza,  but  which  I  wiU  not  spoil  by  attempting  to  re- 


1834]  LETTER   TO    MES.    SOMERVILLE.  423 

peat.     M.  de  Crequy  was  known  never  to  have  written  a 
word. 

Bellevue :  September  1834. 
My  deak  Mrs.  Somerville, — I  have  just  finished   reading 
your  book,  which  has  entertained  me  extremely,  and  at  the 
same  time,  I  hope,  improved  my  moral  character  in  the  Christian 
virtue  of  humility.     These   must  seem  to  you  odd  results ;  so 
little  like  those  produced  on  the  great  majority  of  your  readers, 
that  you  must  allow  me  to  explain  them  to  you.     Humbled  I 
must  be,   by  finding  my  own  intellect  unequal   to  following, 
beyond  a  first  step,  the   explanations  by  which  you  seek  to 
make  easy  to  comprehension  the  marvellous  phenomena  of  the 
universe ;  humbled,  by  feeling  the  intellectual  difference  be- 
tween you  and  me,  placing  you  as  much  above  me  in  the  scale 
of  reasoning  beings,  as  I  am  above  my  dog.     Still  I  rejoice, 
ivith  humility,  at  feeling  myself  in  that  order  of  understandings, 
which,  tho'   utterly  incapable  of  following  the  chain  of  your 
reasonings  and  inductions,  utterly  deprived  of  the  powers  ne- 
cessary,   sic   itur    ad   astra,  am  yet   informed,    enlightened, 
and  entertained  with  the   series  of  sublime  truths  to  which 
you  conduct  me.       In  some  foggy  morning  of  November,  I 
shall  drive  out  to  you  at  Chelsea,  and  surprise  you  with  my 
ignorance  of  science,  by  asking  you  to  explain  to  me  some 
things  which  you  will  wonder  anyone  can  have  so  long  existed 
without  knowing.       In  the  meantime,  I  wish  you  could  read  in 
the  stars  the  probability  of  our  often  having  such  a  season  as 
this,  of  uninterrupted  summer  since  April  last,  and  when  last 
week  it  was  sobering  into  autumn,  has  now  returned  to  summer 
again.     The  thermometer  yesterday  was  at  83°  in  the  shade, 
and  promised  to  be  as  much  to-day. 

We  are  delighted  with  our  residence  at  this  place,  which  we 
shall  see,  with  regret,  draw  towards  a  close  the  end  of  this  month. 
October  we  mean  to  spend  at  Paris,  before  we  return  to  the 
nebulosities  of  London.  During  my  residence  at  Paris,  before 
we  came  here,  I  had  never  the  good  luck  to  meet  with  your 
friend  M.  Arago.  Had  I  not  read  your  book,  I  should  have 
begged  you  to  give  me  a  letter  for  him ;  but  as  it  is,  and  my 
stay  now  so  short  at  Paris,  I  shall  content  myself  to  look  up  at  a 
respectful  distance  to  all  your  great  fixed  stars  of  science — 
excepting  always  yourself,  dear  Mrs.  Somerville.     I  hope  no 


424  MISS    BEKRY's   journal.  [1834 

'  disturbing  influence '  will  ever  throw  me  out  of  the  orbit  of 
your  intimacy  and  friendship,  whose  value  is,  believe  me,  most 
duly  and  accurately  calculated  by  your  ignorant  and  affec- 
tionate 

M.  B. 

Bellevue*  September  8tJi. — The  day  is  grey  and  covered, 
without  a  breath  of  wind.  It  accords  admirably  with  the 
state  of  my  mind  and  spirits.  Without  positive  suffering, 
I  am  incapacitated  from  doing  anything  for  ten  minutes 
together.  From  occupation  of  any  kind  my  mind  sinks 
into  vague  thought,  into  a  dreamy  existence  not  without 
a  sort  of  charm. 

I  run  over  the  past  (because  the  present  effaces  it),  and 
the  future  has  long  ceased  to  exist  for  me.  I  recall  to 
mind  all  the  different  phases  of  my  hfe,  suffering  in  detail, 
never  satisfactory  to  myself. 

September  11th. — The  vintage  began  this  morning  in 
the  vineyards  near  the  road  side,  sooner  than  the  general 
vintage,  because  the  grapes  are  apt  to  be  stolen,  and 
likewise,  as  my  informant  said,  to  make  some  new  wine, 
to  give  the  vignerons  when  getting  in  the  general  crop. 
This  is  to  commence  on  the  17th,  at  least  ten  days  sooner 
than  a  common  year.  The  grapes  an  average  crop,  and 
of  very  good  quality.  A  little  bit  of  ground  in  this  imme- 
diate neighbourhood — about  a  quarter  of  an  acre — will 
produce  what  they  call  here  a  piece  and  a  half  of  wine, 
containing  about  five  hundred  bottles,  which  will  be  worth 
about  three  sous  the  bottle ;  this  makes  the  produce  of  the 
quarter  of  an  acre  about  60/.  This  is  a  good  rapport. 
But  a  vineyard  must  be  planted  four  years  before  it  brings 
any  crop  at  all,  and  is  reckoned  to  fail  once  in  every 
three  or  four  years. 

The  vintage  is  general  over  all  this  country,  and  in  all 
the  environs  of  Paris,  on  the  13th  of  September.     They 

*  A  village  in  the  environs  of  PariS;  situated  on  the  hill  leading  to 
Meudon  from  Sevres. 


1834]  ARRIVAL   AT   FONTAINEBLEAU.  425 

say  they  cannot  let  the  grapes  remain  till  they  are  ripe, 
for  they  always  moulder  and  drop  off  the  bunches  in 
these  sorts. 

Tuesday^  oOth. — Left  Paris  at  half-past  9  a.m.  for  Fon- 
tainebleau  ;  arrived  before  4  at  the  Chateau  ;  were  driven 
to  the  right  side  of  the  great  Cour  du  Cheval  Blanc.  One 
of  the  many  servants  in  hvery  that  we  found  at  the  door 
where  we  were  desired  to  stop,  had  a  paper  with  our 
names  and  that  of  many  others,  indicating  the  apartments 
allotted  to  us.  Ours  were  on  the  second  floor  of  that 
wing,  the  windows  all  looking  into  the  beautiful  English 
gardens,  and  all  en  suite,  with  degagemens  behind  them, 
opening  upon  the  long  corridor  looking  into  the  great 
cour.  Our  apartment  consisted  of  three  bedrooms,  a  salo7i 
and  another  room,  which  looked  as  if  intended  for  a  salle 
a  manger — all  very  well  furnished  with  silk,  and  perfectly 
clean.  The  ladies'-maids'  rooms  were  behind  ours,  and 
not  well  arranged  or  furnished,  and  inconvenient  from 
haviiig  no  light  but  from  the  corridor.  But  as  the  Eoyal 
family  had  only  arrived  the  day  before  ourselves,  and  as 
there  has  been  no  voyage  de  Fontainebleau  since  the  days 
of  the  Empire,  one  may  suppose  that  many  of  the  minor 
arrangements  will  be  better  another  time.  Our  servants 
were  helped  up  with  our  packages  by  persons  employed 
for  that  purpose.  We  dressed  long  before  we  needed,  for 
the  dinner  was  not  till  half-past  6  ;  at  a  quarter-past  we 
descended  into  the  salon,  having  first  desired  Petrolini  to 
send  somebody  to  show  us  the  way  from  our  apartment, 
which  we  could  certainly  never  have  discovered,  and 
which  was  something  like  half  a  quarter  of  a  mile.  We 
found  a  world  of  about  seventy  or  eighty  persons  assem- 
bled, and  the  King,  Queen,  and  Princesses  and  two 
youngest  Princes,  akeady  there.  We  met  with  a  most 
gracious  reception.  When  dinner  was  announced,  I  fell 
to  the  lot  of  the  Due  de  Bassano  ;*  Pozzo  led  the  Queen ; 

*  Hughes  Bernard  Maret,  Due  de  Bassano,  son  of  a  physician  at  Dijon ; 


426  MISS    berry's   journal.  [1834 

the  King,  as  usual,  his  sister ;  and  the  Princesses,  following 
the  Queen,  placed  themselves  one  on  her  side  of  the  table, 
and  the  other  on  the  left  hand  of  the  King,  opposite.  After 
a  walk  of  above  five  minutes,  we  found  ourselves  in  the 
enormously  long  Galerie  de  Diane,  with  upwards  of  a 
hundred  persons  at  table,  magnificently  and  much  lighted ; 
a  band  of  music  playing  from  time  to  time,  and  remarkably 
well  waited  on  by  a  whole  troop  of  servants — an  upper 
order  of  valet  de  pied,  who  had  quitted  their  scarlet  coats 
and  were  dressed  in  blue  courier  jackets  laced  with  silver, 
and  a  scarlet  waistcoat,  very  neat  and  very  handsome. 
The  dinner  took  up  less  time  than  might  be  imagined. 
We  all  returned  in  the  order  we  had  entered.  Coffee  w^as 
served  by  eight  o'clock ;  everybody,  with  the  King  and 
Queen,  &c.  &c.,  at  their  head,  moved  into  the  theatre — 
another  promenade  of  Heaven  knows  how  long.  The 
theatre  of  a  very  bad  coupe,  but  magnificent  in  its  orna- 
ments of  the  time  of  Louis  XV.  The  Court  occupied  the 
whole  of  the  fond  du  Theatre ;  their  company  the  two 
sides,  on  chairs,  in  a  sort  of  balcon  round  the  house ;  below, 
the  same  space  occupied  by  persons  invited  from  the  town ; 
the  pit  entirely  by  officers,  and  the  gallery  by  soldiers. 
The  pieces,  the  '  Lectrice,'  and  the  '  Lorgnon,'  both  per- 
formed by  the  actors  of  the  Gymnase.  In  the  interim 
of  the  two  pieces,  ices  were  carried  about,  and  tea  to  be 
had  behind  the  Eoyal  box.  After  the  play  we  returned 
to  the  salon  as  we  came,  and  were  very  soon  after  congedies 
for  the  night. 

Wednesday,  October  1st. — We  were  up  much  sooner 

bom  1763 ;  editor  of  the  Bulletin,  in  whicli  he  reported  the  debates  of  the 
National  Assembly.  Sent  to  England  to  attempt  further  negotiations  when 
Chauvelin  was  ordered  to  leave  London.  Afterwards  sent  on  a  mission  to 
Naples,  and,  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  Austrians,  was  prisoner  till  1795. 
He  became  one  of  Napoleon's  favourite  ministers  and  personal  friends,  and 
remained  faithful  to  him  on  his  return  from  Elba,  and  was  with  him  at  the 
battle  of  Waterloo.  The  events  of  that  year  di'ove  him  into  exile.  He 
returned  in  1820 ;  he  was  raised  to  the  peerage  and  made  Minister  of  the 
Interior  by  Louis  Philippe.     Died  1839. 


1834]  A   DRIVE   IX   THE   FOREST.  427 

than  we  need,  as  I  knew  not  how  to  find  the  Gardens, 
At  half-past  ten  we  retraced  our  way,  without  any  guide, 
to  the  salon^  where  we  found  the  whole  of  the  Eoyal  Family 
and  their  guests.  A  httle  sort  of  circle  took  place  before 
we  were  led  to  breakfast,  in  the  same  gallery  in  which  we 
had  dined.  The  breakfast — a  dinner  complete  in  every- 
thing but  fish  and  roast  joints,  and  ending  with  a  cup  of 
tea  or  coffee  set  before  everyone.  The  order  of  the  day, 
we  had  before  learnt,  was  a  long  drive  in  and  round  the 
forest ;  after  breakfast  everyone  retired  to  their  apart- 
ments till  two  o'clock,  when  all  those  choosing  to  partake 
of  the  promenade  were  to  reassemble  in  the  salon.  Before 
two,  the  carriages — all  open  ones,  of  various  descriptions 
and  capacities — were  assembled  in  the  Cour  du  Cheval 
Blanc,  under  the  windows  of  our  corridor.  There  were 
nine  carriages — six  with  six  horses,  and  three  with  four 
horses — and  a  large  group  of  horses  for  the  piqueurs,  in- 
spectors, &c.,  and  for  such  of  the  company  as  pleased  to 
ride.  The  Prince  Butera,  for  example,  chose  to  accom- 
pany the  httle  Due  d'Aumale  on  horseback.  The  car- 
riages were  of  various  forms  and  sizes,  but  all  protected 
from  the  sun  by  a  sort  of  fixed  roof.  That  containing  the 
King  and  Queen  was  a  kind  of  open  omnibus,  which  con- 
tained themselves  and  four  or  five  other  people — Pozzo, 
M.  de  Werther,  &c.  Everybody  had  places  assigned  for 
them,  but  might  change  companions.  We  were  lucky, 
finding  ourselves  in  a  double  phaeton  for  six  persons, 
with  Madame  de  Boigne,  Messrs.  Pasquier,  d'Argout,  and 
Montalivet,  Our  drive  was  nine  leagues  in  the  Forest, 
which  we  traversed  from  one  side  to  the  other,  touching 
at  one  or  two  villages  on  its  confines,  where  the  peasants 
of  the  neighbourhood  had  run,  and  the  King  was  saluted 
with  many  '  Vive  le  RoV  We  all  got  out  of  the  carriages 
two  or  three  times  to  look  at  remarkable  points  de  vues, 
some  of  them  over  interminable  forest,  covering  a  beautiful 
inequahty  of  ground.    Our  cavalcade  itself,  consisting  in  all 


428  MISS    berry's   journal.  [1834 

of  above  a  hundred  horses  and  the  carriages,  winding 
through  the  alleys  of  this  magnificent  wood,  would  have 
been  beautiful,  had  it  not  been  for  the  dust,  which  actually, 
when  the  whole  train  was  in  motion,  often  prevented  our 
seeing  an  inch  beyond  our  vehicle.  At  one  of  the  carre- 
fours  of  the  forest,  post-horses  were  waiting  for  all  the 
carriages,  which  brought  us  back  the  last  half  of  the  way 
about  six  o'clock.  Dinner  was  that  day  postponed  till 
seven,  with  exactly  the  same  details  as  the  day  before. 
In  the  evening  there  was  no  theatre,  but,  after  coffee, 
jeu  chez  la  Eeine,  of  which,  however,  she  did  not  par- 
take, but  was  referred  to  by  her  daughters  to  direct  a 
table  of  Biribi,  at  which  they  were  set  down  with  many 
of  the  demoiselles  of  the  society.  The  rest  of  the  company 
were  at  three  or  four  card-tables,  or  walking  about.  As 
there  was  no  difficulty  of  retreating  early  from  this 
society,  I  retired  before  ten  o'clock  to  my  own  room. 
In  the  second  antechamber,  a  valet  de  pied  was  ready  to 
accompany  the  guests  to  their  apartments. 

Thursday^  2nd. — The  order  of  the  day  after  breakfast, 
which  took  place  exactly  as  yesterday,  was  to  show  the 
interior  of  the  Chateau  to  those  who,  like  myself,  had 
expressed  a  desire  to  see  it,  and  who  the  King  had  pro- 
mised to  gratify.  The  Queen  herself  and  the  two  little 
Princes  accompanied  us,  Madame  de  Werther  and  her 
daughter,  M.  de  Boigne,  and  two  or  three  men,  through 
her  apartment  and  that  of  the  King ;  then  to  the  great 
chapel  of  the  Chateau,  at  present  full  of  scaffolding,  and 
under  complete  restoration  to  its  former  splendour  ;  then 
to  the  gallery  of  Hemy  II.,  where  the  King  joined  us. 
This  is  the  magnificent  hall  of  which  the  upper  part  of 
the  hollow  of  the  windows  is  covered  with  the  paintings 
of  Primaticcio  and  his  school,  many  of  them  nearly  half 
effaced,  which  the  King  is  now  restoring  by  the  care  of 
M. .  Those  he  has  already  brought  to  life,  admi- 
rable.    The  artist  was  there.     The  King  introduced  him 


1834]  THE    CASTLE    OF   FONTAINEBLEAU.  429 

to. US,  and  spoke  in  flattering  terms  of  all  he  was  doing. 
In  tins  hall  the  ball  is  to  be  given  on  Monday  next,  and 
they  were  nailing  up  temporary  drapery  in  the  windows. 
From  thence  we  went  to  the  small  chapel  of  St.  Saturnin, 
said  to  have  been  consecrated  bv  Thomas  k  Becket  in  his 
passage  through  France  to  Eome.  Its  ornaments  are  not 
of  that  date,  but  very  old,  very  rich,  and  very  handsome  ; 
it  is  the  chapel  now  in  use  for  the  Eoyal  Family.  We  then 
saw  the  apartment  which  had  been  occupied  by  the  Pope 
during  Bonaparte's  confinement  of  him.  It  is  of  ten 
rooms,  very  comfortably  but  simply  furnished,  with  a  bed 
of  purple  silk.  Then  Madame  de  Maintenon's  apartment, 
at  present  all  dismantled,  and  serving  as  a  garde  meuble, 
— for  they  are  at  work  repairing  various  parts  of  this 
enormous  mass  of  building,  and  resettling  and  refurnish- 
ing many  other  parts.  The  Queen's  apartment  consists  of 
three  rooms  :  the  whole  of  the  furniture  of  the  bed-room 
that  of  Marie  Antoinette  ;  the  hangings,  a  large  pattern  of 
Chenilles  embroidery  on  a  white  ground,  very  handsome 
and  little  faded,  the  room  not  looking  uncomfortable. 
The  King's  apartment,  of  three  rooms — one  of  which  his 
own  particular  cabinet,  the  other  his  great  cabinet,  in 
which  we  found  two  secretaries  at  work.  In  the  middle 
of  the  room  is  a  small,  plain,  round  mahogany  table  (of 
which  I  saw  several  in  different  parts  of  the  palace),  on 
which  Bonaparte  signed  his  never-to-be-forgotten  abdica- 
tion for  himself  and  family.  The  table  turns  up,  and  on 
the  frame  is  a  brass  plate  with  the  fact  engraved  on  it,  and 
by  the  wording  —  calling  him  simply  Napoleon  Bona- 
parte— must  have  been  placed  there  during  the  Eestora- 
tion. 

After  seeing  the  Chateau,  a  promenade  was  proposed, 
much  less  long  and  less  numerously  attended  than  the  day 
before.  There  were,  I  think,  only  four  or  five  carriages 
and  a  group  of  horsemen,  in  which  the  two  little  boys 
figured  to  their  great  delight.     We  went  first  through  the 


430  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1834 

public  garden  of  the  palace  to  what  is  called  the  Treille 
du  Eoi — an  immense  long  extent  of  vines  planted  against 
the  wall,  and  trained  in  an  espalier.  Here  we  got  out, 
and  everyone  picked  for  themselves  and  ate  as  much  as 
they  pleased  of  the  very  best  Chapelas  that  one  ever 
tasted  —  the  King,  Queen,  Princesses,  and  little  boys, 
always  of  the  party  and  leading  the  way.  The  King  here 
mounted  on  horseback,  with  his  two  daughters,  and  joined 
the  horsemen.  We  then  proceeded  to  a  beautiful  drive 
through  the  park  and  through  a  corner  of  the  Forest,  to 
the  village  of  Avon,  formerly  the  parish  church  of  Fon- 
tainebleau.  Here  we  got  out  to  look  at  a  poor  bit  of 
old  stone  in  the  pavement,  on  which  is  very  badly 
engraved  the  name  of  Monaldeschi,*  I  should  think  placed 
there  long  since  the  event  of  his  interment.  All  the 
village  w^as  out,  and  the  Gardes  Rationales,  some  with, 
some  without,  their  uniform,  presenting  arms,  and  lining 
the  little  crooked  street  of  the  village.  A  seminary  of 
boys,  too,  turned  out,  whom,  I  beheve,  the  King  noticed 
and  praised ;  but  I  thought  the  '  Vive  le  Roi ! '  here  less  than 
they  might  have  been.  From  hence  we  proceeded 
through  another  bit  of  the  Forest,  and  re-entered  the 
park  by  another  gate,  bringing  us  along  the  bank  of  the 
great  canal,  and  at  last  to  the  most  distant  grille  of  the 
Jardin  Anglais,  where  we  got  out  and  walked  to  the 
riding-house  (one  of  the  largest  I  ever  saw),  and  then 
through  the  garden  on  foot  to  the  Chateau,  which  we 
entered  at  the  corner  of  the  Cour  des  Fontaines.  Here 
we  found  a  large  group  of  people  assembled  to  look  at  us. 
From  the  crowd  a  httle  boy  in  deep  mourning  came  for- 
ward and  gave  a  petition  into  the  hands  of  the  Queen.  A 
woman  in  deep  mourning  was  close  behind,  and  was 
attempting  to  come  forward,  when  she  covered  her  face 

*  Marquis  Monaldeschi,  an  Italian  noble,  and  High  Chamberlain  to 
Christina,  Queen  of  Sweden.  He  was  murdered  by  her  order  in  1657, 
when  she  resided  in  the  ChateaU;  during  the  reign  of  Louis  XIH. 


1834]  THE    WIDOW   A?ID    HER   SON.  431 

with  her  hands  and  sank  down  in  the  midst  of  the  group 
which  surrounded  her.  The  Queen  had  already  passed, 
and  saw  it  not ;  but  I  was  behind,  and  so  mucii  struck 
with  the  scene  that  I  could  not  entirely  leave  it ;  and 
luckily  finding  Madame  de  Dolomieu  near  me,  I  told  her 
what  I  had  seen,  and  carried  her  back  to  the  group  of 
people,  where  we  found  the  poor  widow  surrounded  by 
her  neighbours,  and  just  recovering  from  the  faint  into 
which  she  had  sunk.  Her  husband  had  died  lately,  and 
she  had  been  deprived  of  some  little  aid  she  had  counted 
on,  and  was  left  penniless.  Madame  de  Dolomieu  spoke 
words  of  peace  and  of  assurance  to  her  of  succour,  and 
M.  de  Montalivet,  the  Ministre  de  la  Liste  Civile,  who 
came  up  to  us,  promised  that,  though  she  could  not  have 
what  she  asked  (for  he  had  received  a  petition  from  her), 
that  something  else  should  be  done  for  her.  I  own  I 
caught  at  these  assurances ;  for  it  would  have  been  any- 
thing but  pleasant  to  have  gone  in  to  a  great  dinner — 
to  music,  hghts,  and  splendour — with  the  idea  of  that 
poor  fainting  widow  and  her  serious-looking  Httle  boy, 
unassisted,  before  my  eyes. 

After  dinner  we  were  again  summoned  to  the  theatre, 
to  three  pieces — the  '  Chalet ; '  and  the  '  Caprice  d'une 
Femme,'  from  the  Opera  Comique  ;  and,  between  them, 
'  Dominique,  ou  le  Possede,'  from  the  Fran9ois,  admirably 
acted  by  Monrose,  and  very  diverting.  But  three  pieces 
are  too  much ;  the  spectacle  did  not  end  till  half-past 
twelve.  I  was  sorry  for  the  King  and  Queen,  who  were 
obhged  to  sit  it  all  out.  We  were  equally  obliged  to  wait 
for  them,  to  have  an  opportunity  in  the  salon  afterwards 
of  saying  a  word  of  thanks  for  the  great  kindness  we  had 
always  received  from  them.  It  was  done  very  awkwardly 
by  me  ;  I  hope  my  companions  succeeded  better.  We 
were  not  in  our  rooms  till  one  o'clock.  Everybody  who, 
like  ourselves,  were  to  leave  to-morrow,  took  leave  also, 
as  one  is  supposed  to  be  gone  at  the  night  of  the  day  on 


432  MISS   BEREY's   journal.  [1834 

which  your  invitation  ends — a  very  good  rule,  saving 
trouble  to  both  parties. 

Friday^  ^rd. — The  Inspector  of  the  Posts  (un  Monsieur 
Decase)  had  been  sent  to  my  room  the  day  before  to 
know  when  we  should  wish  to  have  our  post-horses.  I 
had  ordered  them  at  half-past  nine,  supposing  that  before 
that  hour  they  would  have  fetched  our  two  carriages 
from  the  remises,  which  in  this  immense  place  are  a 
great  way  off,  but  they  were  waiting  at  the  poste  aux 
chevaux  till  sent  for  ;  in  short,  we  were  not  off  till  half- 
past  ten.  In  the  meantime  I  walked  leisurely  through  the 
four  courts  of  which  this  palace  consists,  and  which  I  had 
never  had  tim e  to  do  before.  I  went  likewise  into  the  public 
garden,  which  communicates  by  an  arch  between  two  of 
the  courts  of  the  palace.  The  morning  was  beautiful,  and 
I  never  recollect  anything  in  this  sort  of  scenery  which 
struck  me  more,  or  left  a  more  agreeable  impression  on 
my  mind.  We  arrived  at  Paris  before  five,  having  stopped 
to  talk  with  Lady  Granville  on  her  way  thither. 

To  Mr.  Macaulay. 

Paris :  15t]i  Octo'ber. 
Nearly  two  months  have  elapsed  since  the  beginning  of  this 
letter.  I  am  again  in  Paris  for  a  month,  preparatory  to  my 
return  to  England.  Everything  is  going  on  both  quietly  and 
prosperously  here,  in  spite  of  the  newspapers  and  the  Eepublican 
dreams  of  the  boys  at  the  colleges.  The  great  question  with  the 
Government  at  present  is,  the  granting  or  not  granting  a  general 
amnesty  for  all  past  political  offences  whatsoever.  This  would 
include  the  wretched  Ministers  of  Charles's  day,  still  in  durance 
at  the  Chateau  of  Ham,  whom  no  Grovernment  can  dread,  thus 
insignificant ;  but  it  would  be  difficult  to  set  free  under  any 
other  arrangement.  The  number  of  prisoners  on  account  of  the 
events  in  April  last  are  so  numerous,  amounting  to  many  hun- 
dreds, that  their  trial,  still  more  their  condemnation,  becomes 
a  difficult  business  to  the  Committee  of  the  House  of  Peers, 
specially  charged  with  those  offenders.  The  Government  has 
been  taking  evidence  ever  since  on  this  affair;  and,  I  fancy,  begin 


1834]  LETTER   TO   MR.    MACAULAY.  433 

to  find  that  their  numbers  would  save  them,  and  make  their 
trial  worse  than  nugatory.  In  these  circumstances  a  general 
amnesty  would  settle  the  matter  with  much  more  honour  and 
safety  to  the  Government  than  any  result  of  the  trial  could  be. 
It  would  show  confidence  in  the  strength  of  the  Ministry, 
and  add  to  the  popularity  which  I  think  I  see  dawning  of  the 
King.  He  has  lately  made  a  visit  of  ten  days,  with  all  his 
family  and  Court,  to  Fontainebleau ;  such  an  event  had  not  taken 
place  since  the  da3^s  of  Napoleon.  We  had  the  honour  of  being 
invited  there  for  three  days.  Nothing  could  exceed  the  well- 
ordered  magnificence  of  the  whole  business,  and  nobody  can  see 
the  interior  of  the  Eoyal  Family,  without  feeling  something- 
like  affection  for  their  good  sense,  good  conduct,  and  good  taste. 
The  best  actors  from  all  the  first  theatres  of  Paris  were  brought 
down  to  give  us  plays  in  the  theatre  of  the  Palace,  and  were  all 
lodged  and  paid  by  "the  King. 

For  the  morning  drives  in  the  beautiful  forest,  open  carriages 
with  six  horses  gave  places  to  everybody  that  chose  to  accompany 
the  Eoyal  Family  ;  and  a  dinner  of  from  eighty  to  one  hundred 
covers  every  day,  splendidly  lighted  and  perfectly  waited  on, 
satisfied  even  the  most  difficult  in  royal  magnificence.  All  this, 
I  should  add,  accompanied  by  a  certain  air  of  bonhommie  and 
unaffected  graciousness,  which  belonged  not  to  such  exhibitions 
in  the  Old  Eegime. 

I  believe  the  voyage  de  Fontainebleau  will  have  done  the 
King  much  good.  He  wisely  asked  nobody  who  would 
have  accepted  and  complained  of  going,  and  did  not  ask  many 
who  would  have  supposed  he  was  anxious  only  to  fill  his  salons. 
The  upper  order  of  the  middling  classes  are  all  pleased  with  the 
magnificence  he  displayed,  and  the  mouths  of  those  are  stopped 
who  accused  him  of  miserly  economy,  and  of  laying  by  120,000Z. 
a-year. 

From  England  we  hear  much  of  the  aristocratical  grandeur 
of  Wentworth  House.  .  .  .  But  I  will  not  repeat  English 
prose  to  you,  which  you  will  certainly  have  much  better  from 
the  spot.  We  shall  return  there  (I  will  not  say  without  some 
regret  on  my  part)  the  beginning  of  next  month.  Our  little 
society  will  have  lost  in  you  one  of  its  brightest  ornaments;  and 
society  here,  altho'  offering  nothing  that  can  be  compared  with 
what  we  lost  nor  what  we  retain,  is  upon  a  much  easier  footing, 

VOL.  in.  F  F 


434  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1834 

and  if  not  so  intrinsically  good,  at  least  costs  nothing  more  than 
it  is  worth. 

I  shall  send  this  letter  before  to  Mr.  Grant,*  to  be  forwarded 
to  you.  They  say  here  that  he  himself  is  to  be  forwarded  to  you 
as  Governor-General.  Have  they  sent  you  among  your  books 
*  Victor  Jaquemont's  Letters  ?'  they  are  perfectly  original,  as  you 
will  soon  see  by  internal  evidence.  I  never  knew  before  half 
so  much  of  the  life  of  our  countrymen  in  India;  and  the  author 
himself  is  so  natural  and  unaffected  a  character,  that  I  had 
well-nigh  cried  at  his  death,  as  if  it  had  not  been  true.  Fare- 
well !  write  to  me  when  you  can,  or  I  shall  never  have  the 
courage  to  go  on  blacking  paper  to  you. 

M.  B. 

Bellevue,  Ociohe^^  oOtJi. — Les  Enfans  trouves,  with  my 
sister,  Mr.  Fullarton,f  and  Lord  Henry  Fitzmaurice.  J 

Between  five  and  six  thousand  children  received  an- 
nually ;  from  eighteen  to  thirty  and  forty  per  month:  of 
these  five  or  six  thousand  not  above  150  are  ever  re- 
claimed by  their  parents.  Between  twelve  and  fourteen 
hundred  die  in  the  hospital  before  they  are  sent  to  nurses 
in  the  country. 

Twenty-one  Soeurs  de  la  Charite  belong  to  this  estab- 
lishment, and  about  forty  servants  under  them,  not  count- 
ing the  wet  nurses,  a  large  cargo  of  whom  arrive  every 
week  collected  from  all  parts  of  the  country,  and  another 
cargo  set  out  with  each  a  child  to  take  care  of.  They  are 
conveyed  in  a  sort  of  long  covered  carriage  like  an  om- 
nibus, belonging  to  the  hospital.  The  perfect  cleanliness, 
convenience,  and  order  of  the  whole  estabhshment  ad- 
mirable— the  kitchen  peculiarly  so.  The  infinite  quantity 
of  linen,  sheets,  and  clothes  are  not  made  in  the  liouse, 
but  at  the  lying-in  and  other  hospitals. 

The  expense  in  all,  with  the  expenses  of  the  children  at 
the  nurses  in  the  country,   1,800,000  francs,  or  about 

*  The  Eight  Honourable  Robert  Grant,  brother  to  Lord  Gleuelg. 
f  Son-in-law  to  Earl  Granville, 
j  Present  Lord  Lansdowne. 


1834]  THE    HOTEL   DIEU   AT    PARIS.  435 

70,000/.  a  year,  partly  supplied  by  funds  left  to  the 
hospital,  and  the  residue  by  the  Ville  de  Paris  from 
the  duties  of  the  octroi.  I  find  that  many  of  the  best 
heads  here  think  this  hospital  subject  to  many  of  the 
same  objections  as  our  poor  laws  in  the  former  adminis- 
tration, as  encouraging  both  vice  and  idleness  ;  for  many, 
perhaps  most,  of  the  children,  are  the  legitimate  offspring 
of  those  who  choose  thus  to  get  rid  of  the  trouble  of 
rearing  their  children  themselves  ;  and  such  facihty  is 
offered  ta  conceal  illegitimate  offspring  as  must  practically 
affect  the  conduct  of  the  lower  and  middle  classes  of 
women.  Eestrictions  are  intended,  I  find,  to  be  put  on 
the  reception  of  children,  and  on  the  time  they  are  to  be 
kept  and  provided  for.. 

Bellevue,  Friday,  '^Ist. — ^The  Hotel  I>ieu,  with  Lady 
Lansdowne. 

About  9,000  inmates ;  two  wards  always  kept  for 
accidents,  and  one  for  femmes  en  couches,  but  they  must 
be  brought  to  bed  within  twenty-four  hours  of  their  entry. 
About  seventy  beds  in  a  ward.  All  iron,  bedsteads,  with 
white  calico  curtains  and  furniture,  at  a  very  sufficient 
distance  from  each  other,  and  the  wards,  called  here  salles, 
very  wide,  airy,  and  clean.  Deaths  reported  to  the  mayor 
of  the  district  every  day  as  they  occur,  from  one  to  seven 
(and  sometimes,  I  suppose,  many  more)  daily. 

Forty  Soeurs  de  la  Charite  attached  to  the  house,  and 
about  a  hundred  servants,  men  and  women,  belonging  to 
it  under  them. 

Kitchen  very  clean,  and  apparently  well  ordered  ;  so 
was  the  lingerie  and  the  arrangements  for  distributing  it 
to  the  wards.  The  linen  sent  to  Boulogne  to  an  estab- 
lishment the  hospital  has  there  for  washing  it. 

No  part  of  the  concern  seeming  neglected.  As  soon  as 
death  takes  place  the  bodies  are  carried  in  a  covered 
bier  to  an  arched  room  below,  where  they  are  placed 
each  under  a  cover  like  an  arched  oilskin  bandbox.     The 

r  F  2 


436  MISS   berry's   journal.  [I834 

man  who  keeps  the  key  of  this  chamber  of  death  asked  if 
we  would  see  any  of  the  bodies.  The  cover  was  taken 
off  the  two  first  and  nearest  the  steps  on  which  we  stood. 
They  were  sufficient.  The  one  was  a  young  woman  who 
had  died  in  childbed  before  accouchement ;  the  other 
an  old  creature,  with  her  arms  laid  together  across  her 
breast. 

From  Miss  Berry  to  Earl  Granville. 

Curzon  Street,  Monday,  November  18,  1834. 

My  deak  Lord  Gtkanville, — I  know  you  like  an  extra-official 
letter,  and  tho'  I  cannot  send  you  one  as  good  as  those  I  some- 
times read  to  you  at  Paris,  you  shall  now  have  (such  as  it  is) 
one  from  me. 

Here  is  a  flare-wp  of  the  Kings  with  a  vengeance !  Had  I 
written  to  you  on  Saturday  morning  I  should  have  told  you  all 
that  any  of  the  Cabinet  Ministers  could  have  told  you.  On 
Saturday,  Lady  Lansdowne  read  the  paragraph  in  the  'Times' 
to  her  lord  at  breakfast ;  they  both  smiled  at  it,  and  thought  no 
more  of  the  matter.  Spring  Rice  was  going  down  to  his  office, 
when  a  man  in  the  street  gave  him  the  first  intelligence.  Lord 
Melbourne  had  returned  late  from  Windsor,  and  had  gone 
quickly  to  bed.  Don't  you  see  him  scratching  his  head,  and 
saying,  *  Why  the  devil  should  I  send  to  them  to-night,  they 
will  hear  it  d d  soon  enough  to-morrow  morning.' 

It  seems  that  when  Lord  Melbourne  was  with  the  King  at 
Brighton,  and  began  to  propose  talking  of  affairs,  the  King 
stopped  him,  saying,  '  Come,  we  are  going  to  dinner,  and  won't 
talk  of  business  till  afterwards.'  When  the  afterwards  came,  and 
Lord  Melbourne  wished  to  take  his  orders  about  filling  Lord 
Althorpe's  place,  he  cut  him  short  by  saying  that  he,  Lord  Mel- 
bourne, had  always  told  him  that  it  was  impossible,  the  Govern- 
ment could  go  on  without  Lord  Althorpe  in  the  Commons;  that, 
therefore,  he  considered  the  Government  dissolved  by  Lord 
Spencer's  death,  and  they  had  better  all  resign.  To  any  further 
observations  of  Lord  Melbourne's  the  King  always  opposed  his 
former  assurances  on  the  subject  of  Lord  Althorpe,  and  that, 
therefore,  he  considered  the  Government  at  an  end.*    To-day 

*  Miss  Berry  forgot  to  mention  tlie  crowning  incident  of  this  extraordi- 


1834]  LETTER   TO    LORD    GRANVILLE.  437 

there  is  to  be  a  Council  at  two  o'clock,  when  all  the  seals  are  to 
be  given  in,  and  all  the  resignations  received.  An  express  has 
gone  to  Peel,  and  they  say,  the  terms  to  which  he  will  accede, 
the  Grovernment  already  know,  as  before  he  went  abroad  he  had 
settled  them.  This  would  seem  as  if  the  determination  in  the 
King's  mind  was  not  of  so  late  a  date  as  one  might  suppose. 

Tliey  say  that  the  Duke  of  Wellington  has  all  his  appoint- 
ments ready,  and  that  they  will  likewise  be  declared  to-day; 
but  this  I  conceive  must  be  premature.  Lyndhurst,  or  Sugden, 
or  Scarlet  are  to  be  the  Chancellor.  Lord  Aberdeen,  certainly 
not  the  Secretary  for  Foreign  Affairs.  .  .  .  The  Duke,  it  is 
said,  means  to  take  the  Foreign  Affairs  himself,  and  not  keep 
the  head  of  the  Treasury.  Those  who  have  yet  talked  of  Paris, 
think  S*"  C.  Bagot  will  be  sent  there  by  the  Duke ;  but  this 
must  as  yet  be  all  conjecture.  ...  I  have  begun  this  letter 
to-day,  but  shall  not  finish  it  till  to-morrow,  to  see  what  I  can 
add.  .  .  .  It  is  in  vain  to  give  you  an  idea  of  the  surprise  and 
astonishment  these  events  have  caused  to  everybody;  indeed, 
the  surprise  and  astonishment  have  hitherto  superseded  the 
regret  and  dismay  which  such  a  change  in  principles  and  mea- 
sures must  occasion  to  thinking  minds,  and  particularly  when 
combined  with  the  odd  similarity  of  affairs  in  France. 

nary  step  on  the  part  of  tlie  King,  viz.  his  asking  Lord  Melbourne  to  act  as 
messenger,  and  convey  the  letter  to  London  which  was  to  summon  his  suc- 
cessor, the  Duke  of  Wellington,  to  form  a  Cabinet. 


438  MISS  berry's  journal.  [isss 


1835. 
L  E  T  T  E  E  S . 

In  the  year  1835  an  old  and  attached  friend  of  Miss 
Berry's  having  taken  up  strongly  what  is  termed  '  Low- 
Church  '  views  in  rehgion,  was  anxious  to  convert  Miss 
Berry  to  similar  opinions.  The  following  extract  seems 
to  conclude  a  correspondence  on  the  subject : — 

Extract  of  a  Letter  from  Miss  Berry  to  a  Friend. 

Saturday  Evening,  7  February,  1835. 

....  Your  ideas  of  Christianity,  of  the  character  and  conduct 
of  the  Deity  in  his  government  of  this  world,  and,  above  all,  of 
what  he  requires  of  his  creatures,  satifies  7/our  mind  and  makes 
you  happy.  Had  I  the  same  ideas  they  would  overturn  and 
destroy  all  my  peace  of  mind  in  present,  and  all  my  humhle 
hopes  of  hereafter. 

Be  satisfied  therefore  with  your  greater  knowledge,  your  more 
detailed  faith,  your  more  accurate  observances  of  what  you 
think  the  letter,  as  well  as  the  spirit  of  the  law.  But  do  not, 
like  the  bigoted  Roman  Catholics  of  yore,  think  nobody  can  be 
saved  who  in  any,  the  minutest  circurhstances,  or  article  of 
belief,  deviates  from  the  path  which  you,  according  to  your 
views,  wisely  and  virtuously  pursue.  Trust  the  fate  of  your 
friend  to  the  infinite  goodness  of  the  Creator,  and  to  your 
prayers  in  her  behalf ;  and  while  you  see  her  conduct,  her  ideas, 
and  her  views  Christian,  do  not  disturb  yourself  that  she  is  not 
blessed  with  Si faith  equal  to  your  own,  while  she  denies  nothing, 
believes  everything  possible,  and  waits,  in  humble  submission 
and  unlimited  confidence,  the  dispensations  of  her  Grod,  both 
here  and  hereafter. 

I  will  imitate  your  truly  Christian  conduct  as  far  as  I  am 


1835]  LETTER   TO   A   FRIEND.  439 

able,  and  I  shall  never  seek  to  influence  or  interfere  with  your 
belief.  I  am  approaching  so  near  my  appearance  at  the  throne 
of  grace,  that  it  would  be  cruel  to  endeavour  to  shake  my  hopes 
of  mercy,  and  to  render  more  awful  a  transition,  to  which  nature 
is,  in  all  cases,  sufficiently  averse.  M.  Berry. 

Extract  of  a  Letter  from  Miss  Berry  to  a  Friend  at  Paris. 

October,  1835. 

My  dear, — I  have  read  with  much  attention  the  '  notice '  on 
the  life  of  M.  Grouthier  that  you  lent  me  at  Paris,  and  on  which 
you  asked  my  opinion. 

It  is  impossible  to  imagine  a  more  perfect  character  as  a 
Christian  priest ;  indulgent  to  all  the  world — severe  only  to 
himself.  1  see  also  the  influence  which  such  a  character  must 
acquire,  and  the  great  benefits  he  can  shed  on  the  entire  circle  of 
those  around  him.  I  am  convinced  also  of  the  strong  support 
which  a  religion  so  pure,  so  fervent,  and  so  charitable  as  his  must 
afford  against  all  the  ills  of  body  or  of  mind.  But  I  am  sure  you 
would  not  expect  that  I  should  place  M.  Grouthier  on  the  same 
level  in  the  scale  of  human  perfection  as  those  who  have  been 
exposed  to  all  the  snares,  all  the  temptations,  all  the  corrupting 
influences  of  the  world  in  a  larger  theatre  and  in  a  more  distin- 
guished part:  as  those  to  whom  the  voice  of  ambition,  of  pleasure, 
of  vanity,  have  never  withdrawn  from  the  path  of  honour,  nor 
from  the  habits  of  the  strictest  honesty,  accompanied  with  all 
the  social  and  domestic  virtues  ?  If  (to  cite  an  example)  your 
own  husband  finishes  his  career  as  he  has  begun ;  if  he  conducts 
himself  always  as  he  has  hitherto  done  in  very  difficult  circum- 
stances (of  which  I  cannot  feel  certain  even  whatever  my 
opinion  of  him  may  be) — but  if  such  a  miracle  should  happen, 
would  5'ou  not  allow  that  I  should  record  his  as  a  character  far 
above  that  of  M.  Grouthier  ?  Do  you  not  think  that  that  Being 
who  renders  justice  to  all  our  efforts,  and  allows  for  all  our 
difficulties — that  Supreme  Being  '  to  whom  all  hearts  are  open, 
and  from  whom  no  secrets  are  hid,'  will  make  allowance  for  the 
temptations  cast  in  his  way,  and  against  which  the  virtue  of  M. 
Grouthier  was  never  tried  ?  It  is  difficult  to  me  to  believe  that 
you  and  I  can  think  differently  on  this  subject.  After  all,  to 
decide  which  of  those  two  characters  in  the  eyes  of  the  Almighty 
will  have  done  most  good — the  pastor  in  his  narrow  district  of 


440  MISS   BEERT's   journal.  [1835 

his  parish,  or  the  minister  conducting  the  affairs  of  a  great 
nation — it  is  certainly  not  for  us  to  judge,  and  certainly  God 
will  never  account  it  as  a  crime  to  us  if  we  are  mistaken  there- 
upon. 

After  writing  to  you  about  M.  Gouthier  you  will  not  like  me 
to  speak  of  Mr.  Peel,  and  in  truth  I  hardly  know  what  to  tell 
you.  Our  ministerial  crisis  is  not  over  yet.  I  know  not  when 
it  will  end.  I  only  know  that  I  regret  much  that  whoever  our 
Ministers  may  be,  they  should  not  have  to  deal  with  your 
husband.  I  was  impatiently  awaiting  the  termination  of  your 
crisis,  always  wishing  to  see  his  name  replaced,  but  in  vain.  It 
is  impossible  not  to  remark  the  difference  of  the  two  nations  in 
their  estimate  of  characters.  The  two  persons  upon  whom  the 
settlement  of  affairs  has  in  fact  most  turned  were — chez  vous, 
un  ancien  of  much  '  esprit, '  of  great  knowledge,  of  admirable 
eloquence,  but  with  small  reputation  for  honesty — chez  nous,  it 
was  a  man  without  a  shade  of  what  is  called  esprit,  whose  poli- 
tical knowledge  was  limited,  and  who  was  so  far  from  being 
eloquent  that  he  could  not  even  explain  what  he  knew  the  best; 
but  having  inspired  such  confideoce  in  his  loyalty,  his  honour, 
and  his  truth,  that  the  Ministry  of  which  he  formed  a  part 
could  not  continue  without  him.  It  is  said  you  are  coming  to 
us  as  ambassadress  ;  I  am  afraid  of  believing  such  good  news. 
Never  would  an  ambassador  have  been  preceded  with  such  a 

reputation  as .     You  would  find  yourself  in  the  midst  of 

old  acquaintances  and  of  some  old  friends  who  are  attached  to 
you  for  life,  and  amongst  whom  I  hope  you  will  always  place 
in  the  front  row. 

Your  faithful  and  affectionate 

M.  Berry. 

Extract  of  a  Letter  from  Miss  Berry  to  a  Friend. 

Raith,  Sth  November,  1835. 

What  do  you  understand  by  Nature — Nature  doing  this,  and 
requiring  that  ? — said  Sylvia  to  me.  By  Nature  I  understand 
the  laws  which  the  Almighty  has  assigned  to  all  animal  and 
vegetable  life,  and  imposed  on  all  matter. 

I  have  observed  you  to  be  jealous  of  my  using  the  word  Nature 
instead  of  God  ;  but  in  my  opinion  it  is  both  more  accurate  and 
more  seemly  to  make  use  of  the  word  Nature  in  all  matters 


1835]  LETTER   TO   A    FRIEND.  441 

regulated  by  the  aforesaid  laws,  with  which,  once  imposed,  the 
Creator  interferes  no  farther — laws  which  direct  the  growth  of 
a  tree  and  the  habits  of  a  fly  as  undeviatingly  as  the  motions 
of  the  planets  and  the  events  of  the  solar  system.  Allow  me, 
therefore,  to  talk  of  Nature's  benevolent  purposes,  and  of  obey- 
ing the  dictates  of  Nature,  without  supposing  me  denying,  or 
ignorant,  or  forgetful  of  the  moral  checks,  the  higher  order  of 
spiritual  existence,  instilled  into  the  same  Nature  by  the  same 
Almighty. 

Extract  of  a  Letter  from  Miss  Berry  to  a  Friend. 

November,  1835. 

....  I  enclose  you 's  letter,  a  melancholy  proof  how 

entirely  these  (to  me)  exaggerated  ideas  of  imaginary  duties 
towards  a  Creator,  and  of  an  eternal  occupation  of  mind  with 
one's  own  feelings,  and  one's  own  hopes  for  oneself,  become 
selfish,  and  destroy  all  the  little,  kind  interests  of  life.     .     .     . 

Beware  of  such  abstraction  from  the  affairs,  the  interests,  and 
the  innocent  pleasures  of  this  world.  Beware  of  thinking  you 
were  sent  into  it  to  be  eternally  occupied  with  the  world  to 
come,  which  I  can  never  believe  the  way  to  attain  it. 

Farewell.  By  however  different  paths,  that  we  may  both 
meet  in  whatever  future  existence  may  best  suit  us,  is  the  sin- 
cere prayer  of  your  faithfully  attached 

M.  Berrt. 


442  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1836 


1836. 

The  year  1836  affords  a  few  scattered  memoranda  and 
thoughts,  though  little  that  can  be  called  a  journal,  at 
Paris. 

Letter  from  Miss  J.  Baillie  to  Miss  Berry. 

Hampstead,  Monday,  May  2. 

My  dear  Friend, — I  hope  your  retirement  at  Petersham  has 
had  the  desired  effect,  and  restored  all  the  health  and  strength 
you  had  lost  during  your  gaiety  in  Curzon-street.  I  do  not 
wonder  that  people  should  forget  your  age ;  in  company  you 
seem  to  have  spirit  and  vigour  for  anything,  and  it  is  not  your 
uttering  a  complaint  or  two  of  being  old  and  other  ailments  that 
will  convince  them  of  the  contrary  while  your  face  is  so  ani- 
mated, and  your  eyes  nearly  as  bright  as  they  were  some  twenty 
years  ago.  I  am  very  glad  that  you  are  out  of  the  bustle  of  a 
London  life,  and  have  got  something  to  do  to  occupy  your 
thoughts.  Undoubtedly  a  volume  of  Lord  Orford's  Letters,*  with 
the  addition  of  those  addressed  to  yourself,  require  a  notice  from 
your  pen,  and  it  will,  I  am  sure,  be  well  done,  though  you  say 
something  about  being  dry  as  a  stick,  which  I  hope  is  only  a 
tigure  of  speech  more  humble  than  applicable.  Do  not  in  the 
fear  of  saying  too  much  say  too  little—  a  fault  you  have  (unlike 
other  modern  writers)  frequently  committed.  I  hope  your  sister 
has  also  benefited  by  the  quiet  and  good  air  of  the  country. 

I  was  in  town  last  week ;  dined  out  twice,  besides  going  to 
Drury  Lane  to  see  Mrs.  Bartley  act  Lady  Macbeth — great  doings 
for  me  !     She  acted  the  character  admirably  well ;  and  had  she 

*  The  notice  to  which  Miss  Baillie  alludes  appeared  in  1840  as  '  Adver- 
tisement to  the  Letters  addressed  by  Lord  Orford  to  the  Miss  Berrys/  and 
first  published  in  Bentley's  Chronological  Edition  of  Lord  Orford's  Works. 


1836]  LADY   BYKON's   SCHOOL   AT   EALING.  443 

been  a  new  actress  beginning  her  career,  it  would  have  been 
most  hopeful.  I  thought  while  in  town  I  might  have  got  some 
information  that  might  have  enabled  me  to  answer  your  query — 
*  What  has  become  of  Henriquez  ? ' — but  I  could  learn  nothing. 
I  dare  say  there  has  been  some  quarrelling  in  the  Grreen-room 
about  it,  and  that  the  actors  have  not  liked  their  part — though 
the  piece  was  so  favourably  received  by  a  very  full  house. 
However  this  may  be,  I  don't  expect  it  to  be  produced  in  Drury 
Lane  again. 

Ten  days  ago  I  went  to  see  what  gave  me  great  satisfaction — 
Lady  Byron's  school  at  Ealing,  on  the  plan  of  Fellenberg,  but 
only  for  the  boys  of  the  common  ranks.  There  were  60  of 
them,  who,  after  doing  their  lessons  of  writing,  &e.,  got  up  at 
the  sound  of  a  little  bell  and  ran  eagerly  each  to  his  spade  or 
his  mattock,  and  worked  away  at  levelling  groxmd  and  other 
country  work,  as  sturdily,  and,  in  proportion,  as  effectively  as 
men,  but  far  happier.  They  work  as  carpenters  too,  and  keep 
all  the  premises  in  order,  and  mend  their  own  shoes  and  clothes. 
It  seems  to  be  an  education  well-fitted  to  make  them  industrious 
and  happy,  and  ready  to  turn  their  hand  to  anything;  boys 
especially  qualified  for  new  settlers  in  our  colonies ;  and  the 
carpenters  and  gardeners  of  Acton  and  Ealing  are  mighty  glad 
to  have  them  for  apprentices ;  a  very  good  proof  of  the  good 
effects  of  their  schooling.  I  saw  there,  likewise,  many  things, 
too  tedious  to  mention,  which  I  greatly  approved  of — nothing  too 
refined  or  fantastical.  I  think  you  would  have  been  much  in- 
terested in  it  had  you  been  with  me. 

Give  my  love  to  your  sister,  and  write  to  me  by  and  by,  if 
you  are  graciously  disposed,  for  you  must  have  time  enough 
now.     Yours  affectionately, 

L  Baillie. 

JOUENAL. 

« 

Champs  Elysees,  July  2dth,  1836. — I  am  very  glad 
that  I  determined  on  cominsj  to  Paris  this  summer.  It 
has  finally  summed  up  my  accounts  with  the  world. 
They  liave  run  on  longer  than  most  people's,  and  I  hope 


444  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1836 

with  more  credit,  more  absence  of  social  meannesses,  and 
of  all  misconceptions  of  its  real  value.  Had  it  not  been 
for  this  last  reckoning  with  society  at  Paris,  I  might 
have  dragged  on  a  little  longer,  making  painful  efforts  to 
keep  on  a  level,  which  is  no  longer  mine,  in  the  society 
of  younger  people.  To  these  efforts  my  enfeebled  state 
makes  me  quite  unequal. 

I  remember  that  my  youth,  which  ought  to  have  been 
so  brilliant,  never  brought  any  enjoyments  that  satisfied 
either  my  heart  or  my  understanding ;  and  that  I  have 
suffered  much  less  acutely,  and  enjoyed  more,  since  I 
ceased  to  be  young ;  but  between  ceasing  to  be  young 
and  the  daily  failing  of  age,  there  is,  luckily  for  human 
nature,  a  marked  and  considerable  space.  I  pity  those 
who  arrive  at  it  unprepared  to  make  the  most  of  its 
enjoyments.  Having  now  long  past  all  those  terraces 
which  I  used  to  say  stopped  one  and  kept  one  nearly  on 
a  level  for  a  certain  time  in  one's  passage  downward  in 
life,  I  find  myself  on  the  last  slope,  without  further 
power  of  stopping,  nor  desire  to  do  so  if  I  could.  It  is 
now  that  I  figure  Petersham  and  our  quiet  garden  there, 
as  everything  on  earth  that  I  most  covet,  and  from  which 
I  no  longer  desire  to  wander.  There  in  the  immediate 
neighbourhood  of  a  friend  [Lady  Scott],  more  my  child 
than  any  other  can  ever  be — there  I  feel  that  I  can 
patiently  wait  for  the  last  stroke  which  is  to  send  me  to 
the  neighbouring  country  churchyard,  where  I  have  long 
intended  to  have  my  bones  deposited.  In  the  meantime 
I  can  there  still  indulge  in  my  passion  for  a  garden  and 
flowers  ;  I  can  yet  be  cheered  by  the  contemplation  of 
Nature,  and  charmed  by  the  lively  beauties  of  the  banks 
of  the  Thames,  immediately  within  reach  of  even  my 
diminished  powers  of  walking.  And  I  can  then  look  up 
to  the  Great  Author  of  this  beautiful  creation,  with  un- 
bounded  gratitude  for  all   the  innocent  enjoyments  of 


1836]  EUSSIAN   CONSPIKACY.  445 

which  He  has  made  us  capable,  and  with  unbounded 
confidence  in  His  merciful  judgments  for  our  future 
existence. 

August  19th. — Prince .     C.  told  me  that  Pahlen 

was  not  one  of  the  four  assassins  of  Peter.  Pahlen  was 
then  at  the  head  of  the  Pohce,  and  held  Peter's  safety 
and  hfe  in  his  hands.  He  might  therefore  be  said  to  be 
the  soul  of  the  conspiracy,  aiding  it  with  his  head  but 
not  his  arm.  Zuboff,  one  of  the  brothers  of  him  who 
was  afterwards  the  lover  of  Catherine,  was  amongst 
those  who  fell  upon  the  Emperor ;  the  others  were  people 
without  name,  who  were  never  thought  of  again  after 
the  business  was  done.  Catherine  conspired  on  one 
hand  with  the  Princess  Dashkoff  and  the  highest  nobles, 
and  on  the  other  hand  with  the  Orloffs  and  their  fol- 
lowers— the  one  party  knowing  nothing  of  the  other. 

This  confirms  what  Madame  Dashkoff  says  in  her 
Memoirs,  of  her  astonishment,  and  the  new  light  which 
burst  upon  her,  when,  in  crossing  the  Empress's  boudoir, 
in  the  evening  of  the  day  of  her  triumphant  entry  into 
Petersburg,  she  found  Orloff  lying  upon  the  sofa,  with 
his  leg  bruised. 

Sunday,  September  18th. — As  I  am  now  fast  failing 
every  day,  I  have  a  mind  to  recommence  a  journal  of  my 
feelings,  mind  and  body.  When  equal  to  writing,  it  may 
amuse  myself,  and  may  in  future  be  curious  or  interesting 
to  some  other  old  woman  aware,  like  myself,  of  her 
situation.  I  have  been  unequal  this  day  to  anything  but 
reading  my  Bible  for  amusement ;  for  I  cannot  say  that 
I  am  capable  of  any  reasonings  on  it  I  have  a  very 
heavy  head,  and  much  languor.  Luckily  I  have  nothing 
particular  that  I  want  to  do,  and  may  bless  Heaven 
for  the  absence  of  violent  pains,  and  for  having  all  the 
comforts  about  me  which  make  effort  unnecessary. 

Monday,  19th. — I  am  much  pleased  with  the  idea  of 


446  MISS  berry's  journal.  [isse 

having  a  little  colloquy  with  myself  every  day,  or  most 
days.  I  have  now  no  really^  no  entirely  confidential 
intercourse  but  with  Heaven — with  a  Creator,  the  Father 
and  the  Friend  of  all  the  desolate  in  mind,  body,  or 
estate — with  that  Almighty  God  to  whom  I  can  confide 
all  the  wayward  thoughts  of  my  failing  mind,  all  the 
weaknesses  inherent  in  my  nature,  and  all  my  sorrows 
and  regrets  at  having  combated  them  too  ineflfectually. 

Oct.  Wth. — It  is  a  long  time  since  I  had  a  httle  talk 
with  myself.  I  have  been  so  unwell.  Sufficient  for  the 
days  have  been  the  evils  thereof.  .  .  ,  Harriet  [Lady 
Williams]  and  her  husband  arrived  on  Sunday.  All  the 
hotels  are  so  fuU  ^  but  luckily  I  got  them  placed  in 
I'Hotel  du  Rhin. 

Nov.  '2nd. — Since  my  last  date  I  have  been  decidedly 
better  in  health. 

Saturday.^  November  Sth. — We  set  our  old  friend  Frege- 
ville  a  talking  this  evening  about  the  dix-huit  brumaire, 
in  which  (partly  by  accident)  his  role  was  by  no  means 
an  insignificant  one.  The  discourse  was  brought  on  by 
his  showing  us  a  letter  he  had  received  from  Lucien 
Bonaparte  in  England,  begging  him  to  send  him  the  names 
of  some  of  the  secretaires,  &c.  of  the  Conseil  de  Cinq  cents 
at  that  time ;  this  led  to  what  he  himself  had  been  and 
had  done  on  the  ever-memorable  visit  made  by  Bonaparte 
to  the  Orangery  at  St.  Cloud.  Fregeville  was  at  this 
time  one  of  the  Cinq  cents.  It  seems  a  large  party  of 
them  were  disgusted  with  the  conduct  and  the  govern- 
ment of  the  Directory.  Two  of  the  directors,  Eoger 
Duras  and  Gohier,  thought  with  them,  and  were  looking 
about  for  some  imposing  character  to  put  at  the  head  of 
a  movement  to  overturn  the  Directory,  and  resettle  the 
Eepublic  in  another  form.  They  all  sounded  Moreau  on 
the  subject,  and  wished  him  to  be  the  man ;  but  he 
positively  declined,  and  they  were  at  a  loss  where  else 


1836]  BONAPAETE   AND   THE    FIVE  HUNDEED.  447 

to  address  themselves,  when  Bonaparte  arrived  from 
Egypt  (perhaps  having  received  a  hint  from  them),  but 
of  this  our  friend  was  ignorant.  Indeed  in  no  circum- 
stances could  he  I  think  have  been  taken  for  a  tete  de 
Conseil.  And  to  do  him  justice,  he  spoke  only  (in  detail) 
of  his  share  of  the  scene  at  St.  Cloud.  The  Conseil  of 
Cinq  cents  and  the  Conseil  des  Anciens  had  been  removed 
there,  to  avoid  the  populace  of  Paris. 

Fregeville,  as  a  military  man,  commanded  the  guard  they 
had  given  themselves ;  Lucien  Bonaparte  v^^as  president 
of  the  Cinq  cents  ;  Fregeville  one  of  the  members.  The 
Orangery  in  which  they  met  was  a  long  narrow  hall,  with 
only  one  door  at  the  bottom.  The  violent  party  wanted 
Lucien  to  bring  forward  an  act  of  accusation  against  his 
brother  for  having  left  his  army  without  leave.  Lucien 
declared  this  impossible  on  his  part,  thinking  as  he  and 
every  one  must  of  his  brother's  services. 

In  the  midst  of  this  the  door  at  the  bottom  opened, 
and  Napoleon  appeared  between  two  grenadiers  unarmed, 
that  is  to  say,  carrying  nothing  but  their  side-arms,  and 
other  soldiers  following  him ;  he  had  not  advanced  to 
the  middle  of  the  room  before  the  whole  assembly  arose, 
and  the  cries  of  a  has  le  tyran  !  point  de  diciateur !  were 
so  general  and  so  loudly  repeated,  that  he  and  his  two 
grenadiers  turned  round  and  marched  out  as  fast  as  they 
could.  The  whole  assembly  was  following  at  their  heels, 
and  would  probably  have  cut  short  the  history  of  JSTapoleon 
from  that  day,  had  not  Fregeville,  who  was  standing  at 
the  door  of  a  small  ante-chamber  whicli  adjoins  the 
Orangery,  ordered  his  guards  to  cross  their  bayonets  over 
the  door,  and  thus  stopped  at  once  their  exit.  They  con- 
ceived a  great  military  force  was  brought  against  them, 
and  all  those  who  were  not  of  the  complot  made  their 
escape  out  of  the  windows  of  the  Orangery  as  fast  as  they 
could.     In  the  Council  of  Ancients  they  (the  Bonapartes) 


448  MISS  berry's  journal.  [isse 

had  more  friends,  and  Lucien  having  made  a  report  to  them, 
and  got  some  of  the  Cinq  cents  to  join  them,  Fregeville 
was  sent  by  Lucien  to  endeavour  to  stop  as  many  as  he 
could  persuade  to  return  of  those  who  were  scampering 
away  to  Paris,  assuring  them  no  violent  measures  were 
intended.  When  these  were  got  together,  and  presided 
over  by  Lucien,  Bonaparte,  who  was  still  on  horseback 
with  the  troops  in  the  courtyard,  was  pressed  to  make 
his  appearance  among  them.  Fregeville  was  one  of  the 
messengers  to  him.  He  hung  back  at  first  and  asked 
Fregeville,  '  S'il  n'y  aurait  pas  des  assassins.'  On  being 
reassured  on  this  point,  he  entered  the  assembly  :  the  rest 
has  been  told  a  hundred  times  over. 

Wednesday^  November  ^Oth. — At  the  Tuileries  last 
night  I  had  ten  minutes'  conversation  apart  with  the 
King,  which  is  much  more  than  I  have  had  any  other 
time  since  I  have  been  here.  We  began  about  Versailles : 
much  is  going  on  there,  but  when  it  could  be  ready  to  be 
livre  au  publique  he  had  still  no  idea;  certainly  not  by 
the  1st  of  January,  as  some  of  the  journaux  had  chosen 
to  announce.  He  then  talked  of  the  affairs  of  Spain,  of 
which  he  declared  no  one  could  form  any  idea  of  the 
probable  issue  ;  that  in  this  case  foreign  intervention  would 
be  madness ;  that  they  must  be  left  to  settle  the  matter 
entirely  among  themselves ;  that  as  to  sending  a  French 
army  there,  '  ce  serait  les  jeter  dans  un  puits  d'oii  il  ne 
sortiroit  pas  un.'  At  the  same  time  that  it  exposed  them 
to  contamination  with  the  worst  of  radical  principles  with 
which  the  whole  of  Spain  was  at  present  travailU  by 
clubs  and  associations.  He  lamented  the  evil  done  by 
the  journaux  and  all  the  lies  that  they  raised  and  spread, 
but  said  for  that,  as  well  as  for  the  present  evils  of  Spain, 
there  was  no  remedy ;  and  that  therefore,  in  the  case  of 
the  journaux,  he  had  made  up  his  mind  to  read  none  of 
them.  I  regretted  that  our  English  journals  wrote  so 
ignorantly  of  himself  and  of  this  country;  he  repeated 


1836]      CO]STERSATIOX  WITH  THE  KING  OF  THE  FEEXCH.      449 

that  it  was  impossible  to  be  helped,  and  owned  to  his 
sometimes  reading  the  English  papers  (which,  par  paren- 
theses I  know  he  does  very  often,  and  is  vexed  by  their 
abuse).  He  said  the  only  way  was  to  continue  steadily 
on,  doing  all  the  interior  good  possible  to  maintain  peace, 
and  to  leave  those  nations  in  a  state  of  perturbation  to 
settle  their  own  affairs,  and  fight  their  way  through  it. 
I  said  I  fancied  our  intervention  in  Spain  had  been  badly 
calculated :  at  this  he  smiled  and  bowed,  but  gave  no 
opinion.  I  repeated  my  old  and  only  doctrine  that,  while 
France  and  England  continued  firmly  united  and  hand  in 
hand,  we  might  snap  our  fingers  at  the  rest  of  Europe, 
and  at  any  attempts  to  injure  us,  as  all  combinations 
must  be  nought  against  the  united  physical  and  moral 
strength  of  our  two  nations  thrown  into  either  scale.  Of 
the  continued  good  fellowship  of  England  and  France  he 
hoped  everybody  was  now  of  the  same  opinion.  But  he 
recurred  to  the  affairs  of  Spain,  to  his  decided  noninter- 
vention, as  the  thing  uppermost  in  his  mind,  and,  as  I 
thought,  as  that  which  he  conceived  might  not  be  well 
understood  in  England. 

Friday s  December  2nd. — By  appointment  of  Madame 
Adelaide,  to  her  apartment  at  the  Tuileries  at  one  o'clock  ; 
it  is.  on  the  first,  or  what  might  be  called  the  ground- 
floor,  in  the  Pavilion  en  Flore. 

December  11th. — Returned  to  Enoland. 


VOL.  III.  G  G 


450  MISS  bekry's  jouenal.  [issy 


1837. 

[A  few  letters  remain  to  mark  this  year.] 

From  Lord  Jeffrey  to  Miss  Berry. 

Craigcrook,  15tli  April,  1837. 

My  dear  Miss  Berry, — Since  my  disappointment  at  not  get- 
ting to  London  this  spring,  I  have  been  so  haunted  with  the 
images  of  the  pleasant  people  and  dear  friends  I  so  often  met 
there,  that  I  cannot  help  murmuring  out  a  little  of  my  regret  in 
the  ear  of  one  on  whose  indulgence  I  can  most  safely  rely. 

At  the  age  we  have  reached  there  is  something  startling  in 
the  delay  of  a  year,  and  I  am  not  at  all  sure  that  the  impedi- 
ments which  have  stopped  me  now  may  not  recur  again  at  my 
next  interval  of  leisure ;  so  I  want  to  prevent  myself  from  being 
quite  forgot,  and  also  to  draw  out  some  signs  of  remembrance 
by  this  foolish  importunity,  which  I  know  you  will  forgive,  and 
expect  indeed  that  you  will  comply  with,  by  writing  me  two 
lines  to  say  that  you  are  sorry  I  have  not  come — that  you  are 
well  and  happy — that  you  will  come  to  see  me  in  this  my  castle, 
in  the  course  of  the  autumn,  and  that  you  hope  we  shall  meet, 
and  be  friends,  in  Curzon  Street  next  year,  and  in  a  still  better 
place  in  some  few  years  after  ! 

Give  my  love  to  your  sister,  to  my  dear  Lady  Charlotte,  and 
to  all  those  in  your  pleasant  circle  who  were  kind  to  me  for  your 
sake.  I  think  rather  too  much,  I  believe,  of  those  things,  but 
it  does  me  good  on  the  whole  and  no  harm  to  anybody. 

I  forget  whether  you  saw  Rutherfurd,  our  new  Solicitor-General, 
when  you  were  here ;  he  is  now  in  town,  and  Theresa  Lister 
will  bring  him  to  you  any  evening  you  will  let  him.  He  is  my 
especial  friend ;  and,  notwithstanding  severe  stings  of  both  envy 


1837]  LETTERS.  451 

and  jealousy,  I  have  the  generosity  to  recommend  him  to  you. 
Pray  forgive  me  for  this  and  all  the  other  freedoms  I  use  with 
you.     I  really  am  not  forward  by  nature,  but  I  sometimes  sus- 
pect that  you  have  spoiled  my  ingenuous  modesty. 
Address  to  me  always  at  Edinburgh. 

Ever  very  affectionately  yours, 

F.  Jeffrey.* 

Petersham,  April  29tJi. — At  Paris,  in  August  last,  feel- 
ing myself  unequal  to  the  world,  I  wrote,  '  It  is  now  that 
I  figure  Petersham,  and  our  quiet  garden  there,  as  every- 
thing on  earth  that  I  most  covet,  and  from  which  I  no 
longer  wish  to  wander.' 

Well,  here  I  am  in  possession  of  that  quiet  garden  for 
the  next  six  months,  and  I  am  happy  to  say  with  exactly 
the  same  feelings  towards  it  that  I  anticipated  in  Auo;ust ; 
this,  too,  in  spite  of  the  very  bad,  cold,  winter  weather  we 
have  had  ever  since  we  came  on  the  15th.  But  I  am  con- 
vinced that,  if  I  am  not  well,  and  content,  and  comforta- 
ble here,  I  should  be  less  so  anywhere  else.  Here  I  am 
quiet  without  being  lonely ;  here  I  need  never  be  idle, 
nor  ever  be  hurried  ;  here  I  can  read  as  long  as  my  eyes 
last,  and  work  in  my  garden  as  long  as  my  strength  lasts, 
alternate  one  with  the  other,  and  both  contribute  to  en- 
sure me  what  must  be  considered  as  one  of  the  enjoyments 
of  old  age — sleep. 

*  Lord  Jeffi-ey's  legal,  literary,  and  political  career  are  too  well  known  to 
he  recapitulated  here.  He  was  born  1773,  called  to  the  bar  in  1794,  became 
Lord  Advocate  in  1830,  died  1850.  The  credit  of  the  establishment  of  the 
'  Edinburgh  Review,'  in  1802,  was  said  to  belong  to  the  Rev.  Sydney  Smith 
but  the  success  of  its  management  was  mainly  owing  to  the  exertions  of 
Mr.  Jeffrey  during  his  editorship  of  twenty-seven  years.  Whether  in 
speaking  or  in  writing,  he  possessed,  as  his  biographer.  Lord  Cochrane 
observed,  '  the  weapons  of  ridicule,  sarcasm,  argument,  statement,  pathos, 
or  moral  elevation,  and  could  excel  in  them  alL'  In  conversation  his  wit  was 
so  mixed  with  kindness,  his  sarcasm  with  the  love  of  justice,  and  his  ner- 
vous excitability  so  sweetened  by  the  gentleness  of  his  disposition,  that  he 
inspired  a  degree  of  fondness  and  attachment  in  all  who  enjoyed  the  happi- 
ness of  his  intimacy,  that  no  respect  or  admiration  for  his  great  and  varied 
powers  could  alone  have  effected. 

G   G    2 


452  MISS   BEEEY'S   JOUENAL.  [1837 

If  I  find  my  mind  dosing  too  much,  I  can  rouse  it  by 
taking  a  couple  of  days  in  London  to  sharpen  my  grati- 
tude for  having  such  a  place  to  return  to,  and  to  recover 
its  exertion. 

From  the  Rev.  Sydney  Smith  to  Miss  Berry. 

Engaged,  my  dear  Miss  Berry,  up  to  the  teeth  on  Saturday,  or 
should  be  too  happy.  It  gives  me  great  comfort  that  you  are 
recovered.  I  would  not  have  survived  you.  To  precipitate  my- 
self from  the  pulpit  of  Paul  was  the  peculiar  mode  of  destruction 
on  which  I  had  resolved.     Ever  yours, 

Sydney  Smith. 

February  22,  1837, 

33  Charles  Street,  Berkeley  Square. 

From  the  Same  to  the  Same. 

Are  you  well,  that  is  the  great  point  ?  When  do  you  mean  to 
come  and  pay  us  a  visit  ?  The  general  rumour  of  the  town  is 
that  you  are  tired  to  death  of  the  country,  and  that  nothing  will 
ever  induce  you  to  try  it  again.  That  you  bought  a  rake  and 
attempted  to  rake  the  flower-beds,  and  did  it  so  badly  that  you 
pulled  up  all  the  flowers.  It  is  impossible,  as  they  say  also,  to 
get  into  the  Lindsay  the  smallest  acquaintance  with  the  vege- 
table world,  and  that  if  it  was  not  for  the  interference  of  friends 
she  would  order  the  roses  to  be  boiled  for  dinner,  and  gather  a 
cauliflower  as  a  nosegay. 

Your  friends  the  John  Russell s  and  Labouchere  are  here, 
talking  of  the  sweet  and  sacred  cause  of  liberty. 

I  am  getting  innocent  as  fast  as  I  can,  and  have  already  begun 
to  purge  my  parishioners,  which,  as  I  don't  shoot  or  hunt,  is  m}'- 
only  rural  amusement.  Seriously  speaking,  my  dear  Miss 
Berry,  you  and  Agnes  and  the  Lindsay  owe  us  a  visit,  and  in 
your  heart  you  cannot  deny  it.  Remember  me  to  Gulielma, 
your  neighbour.  Accept  my  benediction  and  affection,  too  often 
coupled  together  in  the  feelings  and  language  of  monks. 

Sydney  Smith. 

July  31,  1837, 
Combe-Florey,  Taunton, 


1837]  LETTERS.  453 

Titter  hanger,  Tuesday,  November  2\st. — I  have  been 
longing  to  have  some  conversation  with  myself,  but  alas ! 
for  these  last  ten  or  twelve  days  I  have  been  almost  doubt- 
ing that  I  should  ever  have  such  conversation  again.  I 
have  been  ill.  I  felt  altogether  closing  in  for  ever,  and 
have  only  to  pray  that  my  body  may  take  precedence  of 
my  mind  and  go  first.  I  was  wise  in  not  allowing  myself 
to  be  tempted  to  make  any  visits  last  summer,  but  remain- 
ing quietly  at  a  home  of  my  own.  There  I  must  endea- 
vour to  be  goodnatured  to  those  that  serve  me,  grateful 
to  those  that  seek  me,  and  satisfied  with  everybody.  I 
hope  to  recover  strength  enough  to  be  able  to  read. 
Eeading,  of  all  things,  still  amuses  me  most. 

From  Miss  J.  Baillie  to  Miss  Berry. 

Hampstead,  Thursday  Evening,  Oct.  27. 
My  dear  Friend, — Your  last  kind  note  gave  me  as  good  an 
account  of  yourself  as  I  could  reasonably  expect  to  hear,  though 
I  had  heard  so  much  of  your  beauty  and  good  looks  lately  that 
it  seemed  as  if  old  age  and  you  were  to  have  nothing  to  do  with 
one  another :  for  we  know  very  well  that  such  reports  of  a  lady 
(we  need  not  say  of  what  age)  are  to  be  received  with  due 
limitation.  But  you  go  down  the  hill  gently,  and  are  not  afraid 
of  the  last  step ;  and  may  Grod  support  both  you  and  me,  and 
give  us  comfort  and  consolation  when  it  is  most  wanted  !  As 
for  myself,  I  do  not  wish  to  be  one  year  younger  than  I  am,  and 
have  no  desire,  were  it  possible,  to  begin  life  again,  even  under 
the  most  favourable  circumstances.  I  have  great  cause  for 
humble  thankfulness,  and  I  am  thankful.  I  thank  you  and  I 
thank  Mrs.  Somerville  for  the  friendly  interest  you  take  in  me, 
which  makes  you  regret  my  '  coming  forward  as  a  sectarian.' 
This  expression  struck  me,  for  I  consider  myself  as  less  of  a  sec- 
tarian than  almost  any  one  whom  I  am  acquainted  with.  I  have 
endeavoured  to  set  in  array,  for  the  use  of  common  readers,  all 
the  texts  of  the  New  Testament  bearing  upon  a  certain  point  of 
faith,  leaving  every  one  to  judge  for  himself  from  the  general 
tenour  of  the  whole.  .  .  .  We  have  very  high-church  peo- 
ple here,  Calvinists  and  Evangelicals  also;  but  I  have  never 
heard  that  any  one  of  them  ever  said  an  unkind  thing  regarding 


454  MISS  bekey's  journal.  [ISST 

me,  and  I  am  sure  they  have  never  done  one.  You  are  kind 
in  saying  that  you  are  impatient  to  see  my  new  edition  of  '  The 
New  Testament  Views,'  with  the  bishop's  letters,  &c.  I  hope, 
however,  you  are  not  very  impatient,  for  my  printer  moves  at 
so  slow  a  pace  that  one  cannot  say  how  many  months  it  may 
he  before  it  be  published.  ...  I  flatter  myself  that  both 
you  and  Mrs.  Somerville  will  approve  of  it  when  you  read  it, 
and  I  shall  send  you  copies  of  it  as  soon  as,  perhaps  a  week 
before,  it  is  published.  I  am  indeed  glad  that  there  is  such 
an  able,  amiable,  and  liberal  bishop  on  the  bench  as  your  friend. 
I  saw  the  sermon  that  made  such  disturbance,  and  liked  it  very 
much.  God  prosper  his  endeavours  to  introduce  more  charity 
and  common  sense  into  the  Church  ! 

I  should  have  liked  very  much  to  have  seen  Mrs.  Banister.' 
She  is  always  animated  and  agreeable,  and  is  moreover  a  very 
excellent  woman.  I  am  pleased  that  she  has  anything  in  her 
house  to  put  her  in  mind  of  me.  I  cannot  recall  her  neat 
pretty  house,  and  all  the  fair  country  in  her  neighbourhood,  with- 
out having  a  shade  of  melancholy  pass  across  my  mind ;  and, 
occupied  as  I  have  been  lately  in  reading  the  life  of  Walter 
Scott,  my  friend  of  many  years,  I  have  had  melancholy  thoughts 
enough.  .  .  .  Farewell,  and  hoping  to  see  you  and  Agnes 
before  long  in  Curzon  Street, 

I  remain,  my  dear  friend,  affectionately  yours, 

J.  Baillie. 

P.S. — Have  you  seen  Dr.  Norton's  work  of  the  genuineness 
of  the  Gospels  ?     It  is  an  excellent  work,  and  quite  satisfactory. 

[Amongst  the  most  intimate  friends  of  Miss  Berry's  latter 
years  was  the  late  Countess  of  Morley ;  in  lier  brilliant 
conversation  Miss  Berry  had  the  greatest  enjoyment, 
whilst  her  character  and  feelings  inspired  her  with  that 
affectionate  admiration  she  so  delighted  to  bestow  on 
merit  and  worth.] 

From  Miss  Berry  to  the  Countess  of  Morley. 

22nd  December,  1837. 
My  dear  Lady  Morley, — Nothing  but  having  been  entirely 
disabled  by  a  bad  feverish  cold  could  have  prevented  my  sooner 
thanking  you  for  giving  me  all  you  could   of  your  theatricals. 


1837]  LETTERS.  455 

You  know  you  address  yourself  to  an  old  stager.  Ever  since 
my  first  appearance  on  any  stage,  I  have  always  agreed  with 
M.  de  Catellane,  '  que  de  tons  les  plaisirs  ou  le  coeur  n'y  entre 
pcur  rien,  jouer  la  comedie  est  le  premier,'  and  so  it  always  is 
when  one  does  it  for  its  own  sake ;  that  is  to  say,  to  entertain 
one's  audience  and  do  justice  to  one's  author,  and  not  to  exhibit 
oneself  looking  pretty,  and  showing  off  a  becoming  dress. 
You  are  too  handsome  for  the  first,  and  too  wise  for  the  second, 
therefore  I  am  quite  sure  you  must  have  amused  yourself,  as 
well  as  your  audience,  remarkably.  If,  as  you  kindly  say,  you 
■would  have  given  half  a  year's  wages  to  have  had  me  present, 
I  would  have  given  a  whole  year's  to  have  been  with  you.  I 
remember  still  enough  of  the  little  technicalities  of  the  theatre 
to  have  been  of  some  use  in  hearing  parts  and  snuffing  candles. 
It  is  sad  that  London  and  its  environs,  either  from  amour 
propre,  or  fashion,  or  pride,  or  something  or  other,  are  always 
deprived  of  this  amusement.  The  amusements  here  are  of 
another  description,  although  perhaps  hardly  less  theatrical. 
Lord  Brougham  and  Lord  Melbourne  in  the  House  of  Peers 
rivalling  the  quarrel  of  Brutus  and  Cassius,  only  without  the 
reconciliation  at  the  end  of  it. 

A  young  princess,  looking  like  fourteen,  acting  the  Queen  at  the 
great  house  in  the  Park  with  all  the  dignity,  all  the  propriety,  all 
the  retenue  of  any  old  sovereign,  and  at  the  same  time  enjoying 
the  theatres,  and  her  dinner-parties,  and  her  newly-acquired  inde- 
pendence like  any  other  girl  of  her  age.  A  new  theatre,  just 
opened  at  No.  20  Orchard  Street,  for  the  exhibition  of  all  the 
disgraceful  fooleries  of  animal  magnetism,  frequented  by  all  the 
fine  ladies  of  London,  from  two  o'clock  to  four.*  These  fooleries, 
all  of  which  I  saw,  underivent,  and  saw  put  down  at  Paris  forty 
years  ago,  have  started  up  from  their  ashes,  and  all  they  pro- 
fess, and  all  that  they  lead  to,  will,  if  I  am  not  much  mistaken, 
secure  their  success  with  many  of  my  acquaintance  who  I  saw 
there  on  Friday  se'nnight.  When  will  you  come  among  them  ? 
You,  who  I  have  always  admired  for  contriving  to  pass  yourself 
off  as  neither  better  nor  wiser  than  any  of  them  ! 

Our  quotidian  fireside  has  been  very  well  attended  every 
evening  that  I  have  been  able  to  be  out  of  my  own  room  ;  but 
this  week  clears  everybody  away  for  the  holyday.     . 

*  An  exhibition  of  mesmerism  by  a  man  called  Dupotet. 


456  MISS   berry's   JOUR^UL.  [1837 

Saturday,  23rd. 
My  old  machine  has  righted  within  these  two  days,  and  I 
have  been  this  morning  from  twelve  till  two  o'clock  seeing 
the  Queen  on  her  throne,  surrounded  by  Lords  and  Commons, 
and  giving  her  assent  to  a  shoal  of  Bills,  at  the  head  of 
which  was  the  Civil  List.  Such  an  elixir  of  majesty  vas 
never  contrived  before,  for  certainly  on  her  throne  she  looks  all 
that  is  necessary  to  fill  it,  both  with  dignity  and  grace.  The 
bellman  cuts  me  short  in  my  admiration,  for  I  positively  will 
not  be  another  two  days  appearing,  as  I  must,  ungrateful  in 
your  eyes  for  an  attention  and  a  remembrance  which  I  value 
so  highly.  | 

Yours  ever,  dear  Lady  Morley,  gratefully  and  affectionately, 

M.    BERRYf 


1838]  LONGFORD   CASTLE.  457 


1838. 
JOUKNAL. 

May  15th. — Eichmond. 

July  Srd. — Left  Mrs.  Lamb's  house. 

Highcliffe,  Friday,  August  17th. — How  badly  I  keep 
my  resolution  to  have,  every  day,  some  little  communi- 
cation with  myself !  It  is  now  a  fortnight  since  I  have 
written  a  word.  In  the  meantime  I  have  been  ten  days 
in  London,  and  came  here  on  Tuesday  last,  the  14th. 
I  felt  less  weak  and  less  oppressed  in  London  than  I  had 
done  for  three  months  before  at  Richmond.  I  found 
most  of  the  people  I  cared  most  to  see  in  town,  and,  did 
I  still  care  for  the  world,  could  have  amused  myself  very 
well.  But  the  salt  of  hfe  is  gone.  I  was  somewhat 
disturbed  by  not  feeling  certain  about  our  plans  for  the 
next  three  months,  and  how  this  pilgrimage  into  the 
west  may  turn  out — my  companions  nearly  all  as  old 
and  feeble  as  myself,  and  feehng  myself  quite  unequal 
to  all  the  sort  of  little  active  exertions  that  I  used  to 
make  in  such  circumstances. 

Torquay,  Sunday,  Sept.  9th. — This  western  pilgrimage 
has  hitherto  turned  out  better  than  I  expected.  From 
Hio;hcliflre  we  went  for  a  nio;ht  to  Long-ford  Castle, 
arriving  to  luncheon  the  day  we  left  Lord  Stuart's.  The 
pictures  are  well  worth  a  longer  pilgrimage  to  see  them. 
There  are  more  fine  original  pictures  (beside  the  far- 
famed  Claudes)  than  I  know  anywhere — perhaps  even 
than  at  Castle  Howard.  The  flower-garden  under  the 
windows    of    the    house   beautiful,   much    ornamented. 


458  MISS  berry's  journal.  [ISSS 

stone  terraces,  vases,  &c.  &c.  The  next  day,  much  against 
the  wishes  of  our  hosts,  we  went  away  time  enough  to 
see  Sahsbury  Cathedral,  and  got  to  Wincanton,  a  dull 
stupid  village  town,  in  the  evening.  We  might  have 
gone  on  to  Honiton,  but  did  not  like  to  arrive  at  Bab's  * 
late.  The  four  days  from  Wednesday  the  22nd  of 
August,  to  Monday  the  27th,  we  spent  at  Combe-Florey, 
Mr.  Sydney  Smith's  Rectory-house,  the  beauty  of  which 
we  had  heard  much  more  vaunted  than  we  thought  it 
deserved.  It  is  in  a  complete  bottom,  the  ground  rising 
on  all  sides  ;  consequently  seeing  positively  nothing  but 
a  neat  flower  garden  before  the  windows.  Au  7-este,  a 
very  comfortable  house,  in  a  very  pretty  well-cultivated 
English  country.  At  Bab's  we  spent  three  nights, 
making:  her — ijood  kind  soul ! — and  all  her  household  as 
happy  as  possible.  She  had  contrived  everything  for 
making  us  and  our  servants  comfortable,  and  everybody 
was  comfortable  and  pleased.  From  there  we  arrived 
here  (Torquay)  between  three  and  four,  on  Thursday 
the  30  th  of  August.  We  were  equally  struck  with  the 
beauty  of  the  place ;  it  far  exceeds  all  the  many  praises 
we  had  heard  of  it.  I  don't  think  I  ever  saw  any  spot 
in  England  so  much  to  my  taste — so  cheerful,  so  gay,  so 
rocky,  so  woody,  such  a  beautiful  sea  view,  and  such  a 
pretty  little  port  all  under  one's  eye.  On  the  3rd  of 
September  we  settled  ourselves  in  our  house.  And  here 
I  am  pleased  to  think  I  am  going  to  spend  five  or  six 
weeks  in  perfect  quiet  and  ease.  I  cannot  yet  always 
remember  what  an  old  woman  I  am.  I  am  for  ever 
thinking  I  should  like  to  go  here  or  go  there ;  and  the 
first  step  I  take  out  of  my  chair  convinces  me  I  am 
neither  fit  to  go  hei^e  or  there. 

Sunday   Evening^  \Qth.  —  What   an   exquisitely   fine 
evening  !    And  what  a  lovely  scene  before  me ! — looking 

*  Mrs.  Banister  resided  at  Honiton. 


1838]  TORQUAY.  459 

from  a  gaj^,  cheerful  rocky  shore,  studded  with  houses, 
and  ahve  with  population,  to  the  ocean  in  a  beautiful 
bay,  calm  as  the  quietest  brook  at  this  instant.  What 
thousand  bright  inspiriting  ideas — what  aspirations  after 
everything  great  and  good — what  hopes  and  what  pro- 
spects would  such  a  scene  have  formerly  excited  in  my 
youthful  mind  !  What  visions  for  the  future — what 
hvely  enjoyment  for  the  present ! — now  looking  on  it 
with  the  sober  eye  of  age,  with  the  certainty  of  that 
eye  being  so  soon  closed  upon  it  for  ever — such  thoughts 
and  such  aspirations  cannot  exist  for  me.  But  I  look 
up  in  calm  enjoyment  to  the  Author  of  all  good,  pene- 
trated with  gratitude  and  with  adoration  for  allowino;  me, 
so  near  the  natural  end  of  my  existence,  to  be  able  to 
partake  of  and  enjoy  the  beauties  of  such  a  scene,  and 
of  such  an  evening,  in  peace  of  mind  and  ease  of  body. 

Same  Evening,  6  o'clock. — The  shades  of  night  are  now 
fast  closing  on  this  beautiful  scene.  0  God  of  mercy ! 
may  I  be  allowed  to  hope  that  my  closing  hour  may  be 
as  calm,  as  quiet,  as  satisfactory  as  this  ! 

Sunday,  23r(i. — A  more  perfect  contrast  to  the  wea- 
ther of  last  Sunday  cannot  be  conceived  than  the  weather 
of  this.  An  east  wind,  and  a  thick  fog  on  the  sea,  which 
prevents  one  seeing  the  opposite  side  of  the  bay — ac- 
companied by  continued  rain.  I  don't  dislike  a  decided 
bad  day  like  this,  sometimes.  One  has  no  scheme  for 
passing  the  day  in  conjunction  with  others  ;  one  is  drawn 
closer  to  oneself,  and  one's  own  thoughts  take  a  soberer 
hue,  than  during  the  '  gaudes '  of  a  fine  sunny  day. 
Mine  certainly  require  not  this  aid  to  sober  them  ;  my 
only  best  resource  against  too  much  of  this  sobriety  is 
reading,  falling  on  a  book,  instead  of  dwelhng  on  vague 
thought.  With  Heaven,  '  in  trembling  hope,'  I  have  (as 
far  as  my  understanding  allows  me)  settled  my  accounts. 
With  the  world  I  have  done  ;  with  my  remaining  friends 
I  am  now  an  unprofitable  comrade.     But  for  them  and 


460  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1838 

by  them  alone  I  still  hold  to  this  world ;  and  am  still 
sometimes  flattered  by  their  opinion  of  me,  and  still 
sometimes  (by  little  services  rendered  to  them,  by  kind- 
nesses and  hospitality  to  them)  reap  the  fruit  of  former 
sacrifice  and  self-denials. 

Bo  wood,  Saturday,  Oct.  27  th. — Much  as  I  have  heard 
of  the  good  style  of  Bowood  in  every  respect,  both  as  to 
arrangements  of  life  and  of  society,  it  much  exceeds  my 
expectations.  I  have  never  seen  such  comfortable  and 
elegant  luxury  pervading  every  department,  without  any 
cumbrous  pomp.  The  communications  throughout  the 
house  are  singularly  commodious  ;  the  furniture  mag- 
nificent, as  to  pictures  and  as  to  books.  As  to  ever5^thing 
else,  every  comfortable  elegance  of  table  and  of  chairs 
and  sofas,  without  such  gilding  and  satin  as  prevents 
one  ever  settling  comfortably  on  them.  A  sufficient 
litter  of  books  and  boxes  to  give  the  look  and  the  means 
of  occupation,  along  with  a  perfect  air  of  orderly  ar- 
rangement in  the  different  rooms — a  thorough  disposition 
to  enjoy  them  all.  Breakfasting  in  the  drawing-room, 
among  all  the  finest  pictures  ;  because  the  morning  sun 
makes  that  room  the  most  cheerful,  and  allows  leisure  to 
enjoy  the  pictures,  which  are  not  so  numerous  as  to 
perplex.  The  hours  are  regular,  without  any  punctilious 
exactness.  The  mornings  entirely  your  own,  from  break- 
fast to  luncheon,  at  two  o'clock ;  after  which  every  one 
takes  exercise  their  own  way,  or  does  anything  that  is 
proposed  to  them ;  leaving  always  time  to  rest  before 
dinner,  at  seven  o'clock.  The  library  open  to  everyone, 
and  the  books  all  easily  got  at.  In  the  evening  the 
house  and  its  walls  are  accustomed  to  conversation,  and 
it  never  seems  to  flag.  Little  Moore,  who  lives  within 
three  miles  of  this  place,  and  is  always  a  well-received 
guest,  helps  it  on,  and  diversifies  it  sometimes  with  his 
singing  some  of  his  own  verses.  Since  the  two  Liddells 
have  been  here,  Lady  Barrington  and  Lady  Williamson, 


1838]  BOWOOD.  461 

we  have  liad  delightful  music,  and  much  of  it,  every 
evening.  Their  voices  are  admirable,  and  their  style  of 
singing  excellent.  I  don't  know  when  I  have  been  more 
dehghted  with  music,  although  they  have  seldom  sung 
any  of  my  particular  favourites.  This  morning  we  have 
been  in  the  chapel,  which  very  conveniently  opens  from 
the  greenhouse.  The  organist  of  the  neighbouring  town 
comes  every  Saturday  to  instruct  the  parish  children  in 
singing.  Our  two  ladies  gave  us  several  pieces  of  Handel 
divinely  well,  with  the  accompaniment  of  the  organ  ; 
Lord  Lansdowne  always  much  enjoying  music. 

Too  little  is  said  of  the  out-of-door  beauties  of  Bo- 
wood  ;  but  the  water  is  the  very  least  artificial  water  I 
ever  saw — a  stream  widened  into  an  irregular  sort  of 
lake.  There  are  the  finest  evergreens,  such  as  cedars, 
evergreen  oaks,  and  all  the  pine  tribe,  that  one  can  see  ; 
and  the  walks  among  them  are  the  most  practicable  and 
enjoyable  sort  of  hardened  sand  without  stones  that  can 
be  felt. 

Sunday,  2Sth. — The  Bishop  of  Sahsbury  has  been 
preaching  in  the  chapel  this  afternoon — a  sensible  well- 
arranged  discourse.  Arundel  Bouverie  read  the  rest  of 
the  service  better,  much  better,  than  ever  I  heard  it  read 
before.  The  prayers  seemed  something  new  to  our  ears, 
and  I  could  not  detect  one  false  accent. 

Tittenhanger,  Sunday^  Nov.  Wth. — Here  I  am  once 
again  with  my  old  friend  at  this  place,  where  last  year, 
about  the  same  time,  I  have  noted  myself  very  unwell 
and  very  suffering,  and  in  my  own  mind  much  doubted 
my  ever  retiu-ning  here.  Yet  here  I  am,  for  the  present 
neither  ill  nor  suffering,  although  with  the  weight  of 
another  year  on  my  shoulders. 


462  MISS   BEKRY'S   journal.  [1839 


1839. 

[In  the  montli  of  August  the  Miss  Berrys  made  their 
usual  pilgrimage  to  Scotland  and  the  North  of  England, 
returning  to  Curzon  Street  m  the  beginning  of  December.] 

JOUENAL. 

Richmond,  July  \^th. gave  us  the  other  day 

some  very  entertaining  and  curious  details  of  the  latter 
part  of  the  life  of  the  celebrated  Czartoriska,  who  lived  to 
the  age  of  ninety-four,  and  died  only  three  years  ago. 
After  the  age  of  fifty,  she  adopted  a  totally  new  system  of 
life,  of  interests,  and  of  occupations.  She  retired  to  her 
own  great  possessions,  or  rather  the  possessions  of  her 
husband's  family,  at  Pultovie,  in  Poland,  and  there  lived 
for  above  thirty  years,  the  respected,  admired,  and  looked 
up  to,  of  the  whole  country,  adored  by  her  own  family, 
and  making  herself  useful  in  a  thousand  ways  to  the  sur- 
rounding country.  In  her  chateau  at  Pultovie  she  had 
collected  a  museum  of  the  precious  remains  of  Polish 
magnificence — ancient  crowns  of  their  kings,  jewels,  fine 
works  in  metals — in  short,  of  everything  that  was  valuable 
or  interesting.  These  she  allowed  to  be  seen,  and  people 
came  from  far  and  near  to  look  at  the  Princess,  her 
curiosities,  and  her  abode.  The  hohday  treat  for  school- 
boys was  a  pilgrimage  to  Pultovie.  Till  within  the  last 
ten  years  of  her  life  she  was  perfectly  active,  marching 
about  and  looking  after  all  her  establishments.  She  had 
had  a  remarkable  fine  figure,  tall  and  upright,  with  a  cer- 
tain air  de  reine  when  she  entered  a  room,  with  which  I 


1839]  PULTOVIE.  463 

remembered  seeing  her  in  society  in  London  in  the  year 
1786.  She  was  in  her  last  years  bent  ahnost  double, 
without  its  depriving  her  of  activity,  and  her  head  was  to 
the  last  perfectly  clear  and  unimpaired.  While  she  was 
living  the  most  regular  and  sanctified  life,  with  almost  the 
reputation  of  a  lamb  in  her  neighbourhood,  out  came  the 
'  Memoirs  de  Lauzun,'  where  her  jeunesse  figures  in  no 
ordinary  manner.  Judge  how  it  must  have  shocked  her 
family,  if  not  herself.  Perhaps  (I  say  perhaps,  for  this 
was  not  hinted  to  me)  she  might  in  her  old  and  respected 
age  have  not  been  altogether  so  much  displeased  at  having 
the  powers  of  her  captivation  in  youth  recalled  to  her. 
In  the  last  invasion  of  the  Eussians,  when  she  was  above 
ninety  years  old,  they  twice  surrounded  Pultovie,  the 
commander  earnestly  recommending  her  to  leave  it.  She 
never  would  stir,  and  thus  twice  saved  it  from  pillage ; 
but  a  third  and  last  time  the  general  came  with  such 
positive  orders  to  take  possession  of  it  and  to  burn  it, 
and  the  little  town  belonging  to  it,  that  she  was  forced 
away  from  it  and  conveyed  by  her  children  across  the 
Vistula  into  Galhcia,  where  her  son  and  his  family  had 
already  taken  refuge.  Here  she  continued  to  live,  always 
surrounded  by  some  of  her  children  or  grandchildren, 
and  here  she  died  in  1835. 

Thursday^  25th. — I  met  yesterday  at  dinner,  at  Sir 
Wilham  Dundas's,  Chantrey  *  the  sculptor,  with  whom  I 
had  a  great  deal  of  curious  conversation  about  his  inter- 
course with  William  IV.  Very  soon  after  his  accession 
to  the  throne  he  sent  for  Chantrey,  and  told  him  he  had 
a  commission  to  give  him  that  was  very  interestino-  to 
him.     He  was   anxious   to   erect  a  monument   to  Mrs. 

*  Sir  Francis  Chantrey,  bom  1782.  He  began  his  career  in  the  more 
humble  path  of  carver,  but  under  the  patronage  of  Nollekins,  whose  atten- 
tion had  been  attracted  to  his  early  efforts  in  sculpture,  he  soon  rose  to  the 
highest  reputation  as  a  sculptor  of  busts.  In  1818  he  became  Member  of 
the  Royal  Academy,  and  iu  1837  was  knighted  by  the  Queen.  He  died 
1841. 


464  MISS   BERRY  S   JOURNAL.  [1839 

Jordan,  and  desired  the  sculptor's  opinion  what  it  should 
be,  and  where  it  should  be  placed.  To  this  latter  enquiry- 
he  had  no  answer  to  give.  The  King  then  went  into  a 
thousand  particulars  of  their  private  life,  always  ending 
that  she  had  been  an  excellent  mother  to  her  children. 
He  said  he  knew  he  had  been  much  blamed  for  his  con- 
duct to  her,  but  that  from  the  time  they  parted  he  had 
allowed  2,000/.  a  year,  which  was  regularly  paid  every 
quarter,  although  often  with  great  difficulty  to  himself  to 
find  the  money.  The  monument  Chantrey  executed  and 
was  paid  for,  but  it  remains  still  in  his  studio,  where  it  is 
to  be  erected  never  having  been  settled  during  the  King's 
life,  and  Lord  Munster  (the  eldest  of  the  children)  having 
made  some  objection  to  where  it  was  proposed  to  be 
placed. 

Raiih,  September  2nd. — With  Eobert,  in  the  little  pony- 
chaise  consecrated  to  my  use,  round  three  of  his  principal 
farms,  Ferbaun,  Bank  Top,  and  Balbarton,  and  from  thence 
round  by  Boglillie,  home.  A  charming  drive,  which 
occupied  us  nearly  four  hours.  At  Bank  Top  we  went 
over  the  house  and  garden.  The  house  is  approached 
through  a  well-kept  shrubbery,  and  contains  three  or  four 
good  bed-chambers,  a  dining  and  a  drawing-room,  with 
good  mahogany  furniture.  The  garden  in  the  nicest 
order,  and  containing  a  small  hot-house,  in  which  were 
excellent  nectarines  and  grapes.  This  is  a  farm  of  about 
500/.  a  year.  From  Bank  Top  we  went  to  Balbarton. 
It  is  cultivated  by  two  brothers,  living  together.  There 
was  excellent  sherry  and  cake  produced  for  us,  and 
much  good  farming  conversation  from  two  hearty,  cheer- 
ful youths,  well  pleased  with  the  world,  with  their 
condition,  with  their  farm,  and  boasting  of  a  turnip- 
field  in  Fife  far  behind  it.  It  was  pleasant  to  see  two 
creatures  hving  alone  (for  all  those  large  farms  are  at  a 
mile-and-a-half  or  two  miles'  distance  one  from  another), 
wanting  nothing  but  their  daily  labour  and  daily  occupa- 


1839]  FARMING   IN   SCOTLAND.  465 

« 

tions  to  keep  them  happy.  Nothing  can  be  less  Arcadian 
than  these  Scotch  shepherds  in  a  vile  cHmate,  which 
supposes  an  eternal  struggle  to  get  the  better  of  its  efiects. 
But  they  are  a  race  apart,  remarkable  for  their  sober 
industry,  their  intelhgence,  and  their  superior  instruction 
not  only  in  things  relative  to  their  situation,  but  often  on 
others,  for  which  their  long  winter  evenings  give  them 
time.  This  Balbarton  farm,  which  in  fact  is  two  farms 
put  together,  pays  about  700^.  or  800/,  rent.  From  Bal- 
barton we  drove  round  by  Boglillie.  This  farm  of  500Z. 
a  year  is  cultivated  by  one  of  the  most  active  and  enter- 
prising of  all  the  surrounding  farmers,  and  his  farm  in 
consequence  may  be  cited  as  the  crack  farm.  The  house 
might  suit  a  small  squiralty ;  the  garden  and  shrubbery, 
&c.  in  perfect  order.  He  has  this  year  (1839)  eighty 
acres  in  one  stretch  of  wheat,  without  a  weed  or  a  break 
of  any  kind. 


VOL.  III.  H  H 


466  MISS  berey's  journal.  ri84o 


1840. 

[Miss  Berry's  comments  on  the  life  and  writings  of  the 
Princess  Dashkoff,  which  were  pubhshed  in  the  year  1840.] 

Tlie  Princess  Dashkoff 's  Writing  and  Miss  Wilmot.    ' 

The  Princess  Dashkoff  ?^e6  Woranzoff,  born  in  1744 

Married  at  sixteen  years  old 1760 

Just  sees  and  is  noticed  by  Catherine,  while 

Grand  Duchess,  same  year 1760 

Heads  the  Eevolution  which  placed  Catherine 

on  the  throne  when  eighteen  years  old .     .  1762 

Loses  her  husband  when  twenty 1764 

Dies  at  sixty-five  in 1809 

The  memoirs  of  her  own  life,  written  by  herself,  and 
given  to  and  transcribed,  verbatim  et  literatim,  by  Miss 
Wilmot  (now  Mrs.  Bradford),  an  Irish  lady  who  had  lived 
with  her  as  a  companion,  or  dame  de  compagnie,  for  seve- 
ral years  before  her  death  in  1809,  are  singularly  curious 
and  interesting. 

They  give  an  account  of  one  of  the  most  extraordinary 
human  minds  that  ever  animated  a  female  form.  The  lan- 
guage in  which  they  are  composed  is  very  awkward  and 
bad  French,  but  they  bear  every  internal  mark  of  sincerity 
— of  her  telling  the  truth,  and  nothing  hut  the  truth — al- 
though not  always  the  whole  truth,  which,  indeed,  she  pro- 
fesses, saying,  in  the  address  to  Miss  Wilmot,  with  which 
the  whole  is  prefaced,  that  she  had  never  restrained  her 
pen,  but  when,  by  dwelling  on  her  own  feehngs  upon  cer- 


1840]  MEMOIRS    OF    THE    PRINCESS    DASIIKOFF.  467 

tain  occasions,  she  must  have  dwelt  on  and  enlarged  on 
the  misconduct  of  others — plainly  referring  to  that  of  the 
Empress,  and  that  of  her  own  children. 

The  account  of  the  first  opening  of  her  mind  when  sent 
into  the  countr}^,  unattended  by  anybody  to  whom  she 
was  attached,  after  having  had  the  measles,  at  twelve  years 
old;  the  thoughtful,  serious  habit  of  mind  into  which 
she  fell ;  her  eagerness  for  reading,  and  especially  such 
reading  as  called  forth  thought  (how  hke  myself  at  the 
same  age!);  her  early  youth, passed  always  at  Petersburg 
and  at  Court],,  because  bred  up  by  her  uncle,  "WoranzofF; 
her  first  interview  with  Catherine,  then  Grand  Duchess,  at 
a  supper  at  the  Chancellor's,  before  she  was  fifteen  years 
old ;  the  enthusiastic  attachment  she  conceived  for  Cathe- 
rine (which  the  superiority  of  her  manners  and  of  her  pur- 
suits well  justified) — is  most  interestingly  detailed.  Much 
about  the  same  time  she  ^Yiis  Jlancee,  and  soon  after  mar- 
ried, to  Eicar  Dashkofi",  with  perfect  mutual  attachment, 
which  remained  unimpaired  to  the  end  of  his  life,  four 
years  afterwards. 

What  she  does  7iot  sufficiently  explain,  and  what  one 
desires  most  to  know,  is  how  her  youthful  mind  was  first 
turned  to  the  idea  of  political  revolution — and  such  xi  revo- 
lution ! — in  her  country.  Perhaps  this  first  ardent  friend- 
ship, entering  her  mind  at  the  same  time  with  her  first 
sentiments  of  love,  called  forth  at  once  all  the  powers 
of  her  character,  and  settled  for  ever  that  enthusiastic 
energy  which  inspired  the  idea  (or  made  the  development 
easy  to  her)  of  elevating  this  adored  friend — this  being 
whom  she  then  considered  as  of  a  superior  nature — to  Im- 
])erial  power.  Still,  we  want  to  know  to  whom  she  first 
gave,  or  from  whom  she  first  received,  the  hint.  She 
talks  only  of  much  pohtical  reading ;  of  turning  over  in 
lier  own  mind  various  plans ;  and  then  speaks  immediately 
of  conspirators,  and  of  a  conspiracy  being  all  ready,  al- 
though in  no  respect  organised. 

H   H   2 


468  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1840 

The  whole  detail  of  the  27th  of  June,  1762  ;  of  her 
conduct ;  of  the  trifling  arrest  of  a  subaltern  officer,  which 
determined  the  moment  of  execution,  and  her  decision  in 
taking  advantage  of  it,  most  interesting  and  admirable ; 
her  feelings,  returning  triumphant  by  the  side  of  her  Em- 
press, at  the  head  of  the  Guards  ;  certainly,  such  as  any 
head  of  eighteen  must  envy,  and  which  it  must  have  been 
a  wonderful  head  of  eighteen  not  to  have  turned ! 

Her  discovery,  the  next  day,  that  Gregorie  Orloff  was 
the  Empress's  lover,  is  mentioned  with  all  the  sensibility 
and  mortification  which  every  young  and  ingenuous  mind 
must  some  time  or  other  have  felt,  at  being  obliged  to 
lower  the  standard  of  perfection  which  they  had  established 
for  the  idol  of  their  hearts. 

Her  manner  of  receiving  from  the  Empress  the  Order 
of  St.  Catherine  ;  her  proud  avowal  of  the  impayability  of 
her  services,  as  being  those  of  friendship  and  affection  ;  her 
backwardness  at  accepting  any  remuneration  for  them — 
all  natural,  all  consistent  Vv^ith  the  mind  from  which  she 
acted  at  eighteen ! 

The  part  the  Empress  acts  is  far  l-ess  noble,  although 
made  the  best  of,  and  not  dwelt  on  by  her  still  partial 
friend. 

Her  subsequent  account  of  her  own  life  in  retirement 
for  three  years  after  the  death  of  a  beloved  husband,  when 
left  a  widov/  at  twenty,  and  her  conduct  during  her  first 
travels,  prove  the  strength  and  rationality  of  her  mind. 
Indeed,  the  whole  work — of  which  I  saw  only  the  first 
part,  which  comes  down  to  1783,  when  she  returned  to 
Kussia  after  her  tour  through  Italy — is  the  picture,  not  only 
of  a  human  mind  and  character  placed  in  most  extraor- 
dinary circumstances,  and  acting  a  most  extraordinary 
part,  but  endowed  by  nature  with  those  extraordinary 
powers,  and  that  energy,  which  I  have  ever  thought,  and 
liave  here  additional  reason  for  thinking,  always  accom- 
panied by,  or  more  properly,  perhaps,  always  springing 


1840]  LETTERS.  469 

from,  warm,  pure,  and  ardent  affections  of  the  heart.  Had 
the  Princess  Dashkoff,  as  well  as  the  Empress,  had  a  lover, 
she  would  never  have  been  placed  by  her  on  the  throne 
of  Russia. 

[The  following  letter  from  Mr.  Sydney  Smith  to  Miss 
Berry,  though  not  dated,  seems  to  belong  to  this  year.* 
It  is  written  on  a  deep  pink-coloured  paper.] 

Combe-Florey. 

I  am  reading  aofain  Madame  du  Deffand.  Grod  forbid  I  should 
be  as  much  in  love  with  anybody  (yourself  excepted)  as  this 
poor  woman  was  with  Horace  Walpole. 

Did  I  ever  write  to  you  before  on  this  paper  ?  It  is  called  in 
the  shops  criminal  blush  demy.  There  is  an.  innocent  blush 
demy,  which  is  cheaper  ;  but,  in  writing  to  ladies,  I  am  for 
Crimes.  I  shall  be  very  glad  to  get  an  holiday  in  London 
from  all  this  eternal  verdure  and  fioresoence. 

I  see  some  serious  evil  has  befallen  Ferguson  of  Eaith.  I 
lament  it  for  your  sake  and  for  the  general  good,  as  he  is  an 
excellent  person* 

The  smell  of  war  is  not  over.  I  lament,  and  can  conceive  no 
greater  misery.  Among  other  evils,,  everybody  must  be  ready 
for  fighting;  and  I  am  not  ready,  but  much  the  contrary.  I  am 
ten  miles  fram^  the  coast;  a  French  steamer  arrives  in  the 
night,  and  the  first  thing  I  hear  in  the  morning  is,  that  the 
cushions  of  my  pulpit  are  taken  away,  and  my  curate  and 
churchwardens  carried  into  captivity.  Besides,  we  shall  lose 
that  conceited  coxcomb  Mr. . 

I  was  sorry  to  be  forced  to  give  Ifetr&polis  such  a  beating, 
but  he  was  very  saucy,  and  deserved  it.  However,  now  the 
battle  is  over,  and  I  hope  to  live  in  good  humour  with  all  the 
world  for  the  rest  of  my  life,  and  to  bviry  the  war  hatchet. 
Mrs.  Sydney  has  eight  illnesses,  and  I  have  nine — gout  and 
asthma  at  the  head  of  them;  in  other  respects  we  are  pretty 

*  This  letter,  some-what  abridged,:  is  piiblislied  in  the  collection  of  Mr. 
Sydney  Smith's  letters  in  the  '  Life  and  Correspondence.'  It  is  there  dated 
as  supposed  to  belong  to  1842,  but  it  more  probably  belongs  to  1840,  being- 
the  time  of  the  Syrian  question,  which  threatened  the  peace  between  France 
and  England. 


470  MISS   berry's   JOURXAL.  [1840 

well.     I  am  glad  to  hear  such  excellent  accounts  of  your  health. 
Live  as  long  as  you  can ;  nobody  will  be  more  missed. 

Give  my  love,  if  you  please,  to  Agnes  and  Lady  Charlotte. 
If  you  return  all  of  you  in  good  health  to  London,  I  will  speak 
to  Milnes,  and  have  a  poem  written  in  praise  of  Eichmond. 

[Amongst  Miss  Berry's  papers  was  a  printed  copy  of 
Mr.  Sydney  Smith's  famous  recipe,  in  verse,  for  making  a 
salad.  The  lines  differ  a  good  deal  from  those  given  in 
Lady  Holland's  book.  The  post-mark  of  the  letter  in 
which  they  were  sent  is  1840,  and  being  headed  last  edi- 
tion, it  is  to  be  presumed  they  were  at  least  subsequent  to 
some  other  version.] 

A  EECEIPT  FOE  SALAD  :  * 

LAST    EDITION. 

Two  large  potatoes,  passed  through  kitchen  sieve, 
Unwonted  softness  to  the  salad  give  ; 
Of  mordent  mustard,  add  a  single  spoon, 
Distrust  the  condiment  which  bites  so  soon  ; 
But  deem  it  not,  thou  man  of  herbs,  a  fault. 
To  add  a  double  quantity  of  salt : 
Three  times  the  spoon  with  oil  of  Lucca  crow^n. 
And  once  with  vinegar,  procured  from  town  ; 

*  To  make  the  condiment,  your  poet  begs 
The  pounded  yellow  of  two  hard-hoil'd  eggs  ; 
Two  boil'd  potatoes,  pass'd  through  kitchen  sieve, 
Smoothness  and  softness  to  the  salad  give. 
Let  onion  atoms  lurk  within  the  bowl, 
And  half  sixspected,  animate  the  whole  ; 
Of  mordent  mustard  add  a  single  spoon  ; 
Distrust  the  condiment  that  bites  too  soon ; 
But  deem  it  not,  thou  man  of  herbs,  a  fault 
To  add  a  double  quantity  of  salt. 
And  lastly,  o'er  tlie  flavour'd  compound,  toss 
A  magic  soupQon  of  anchovy  sauce. 
Oh,  green  and  glorious !  oh,  herbaceous  treat ! 
'Twould  tempt  the  dying  anchorite  to  eat ; 
Back  to  the  world  he'd  turn  his  fleeting  soul, 
And  plunge  his  fingers  in  the  salad  bowl ! 

Life  and  Correspondence  of  Rev.  Sydney  Smith,  pp.  252-3. 


1840]  A   RECEIPT   FOR   SALAD.  471 

True  flavour  needs  it,  and  your  poet  begs 

The  pounded  yellow  of  two  well-boiled  eggs  ; 

Let  onion  atoms  lurk  within  the  bowl, 

And  scarce  suspected,  animate  the  whole ; 

And  lastly,  on  the  flavor'd  compound  toss 

A  magic  tea  spoon  of  anchovy  sauce  :    ' 

Then  though  green  turtle  fail,  though  venison's  tough, 

And  ham  and  turkey  are  not  boiled  enough. 

Serenely  full,  the  Epicure  may  say — 

Fate  cannot  harm  me, — I  have  dined  to-day. 

A  WINTER  SALAD. 

Two  well-boiled  potatoes,  passed  through  a  sieve ;  a  tea 
spoonful  of  mustard ;  two  teaspoonsful  of  salt ;  one  of  essence 
of  anchovy ;  about  a  quarter  of  a  tea  spoonful  of  very  finely 
chopped  onions,  well  bruised  into  the  mixture ;  three  table 
spoonsful  of  oil ;  one  of  vinegar  ;  the  yolk  of  two  eggs,  hard 
boiled.  Stir  up  the  salad  immediately  before  dinner,  and  stir  it 
up  thoroughly. 

N.B. — As  this  salad  is  the  result  of  great  experience  and 
reflection,  it  is  hoped  young  salad  makers  will  not  attempt  to 
make  any  improvements  upon  it. 


472  MISS   BERRY'S   JOURNAL.  [l841 


1841. 

From  Rev.  Sydney  Smith  to  Miss  Berry* 

56  Green  Street,  Grosvenor  Square,  April  6, 1841. 
Deak  Beerys, — I  dine  on  Saturday  with  the  good  Widow 
Holland,  and  blush  to  say  that  I  have  no  disposable  day  before 
the  26th,  by  which  time  you  will,  I  presume,  be  plucking  goose- 
berries in  the  suburban  region  of  Eichmond  ;  but  think  not.  Oh 
Berries,  that  that  distance,  or  any  other  of  latitude  or  longitude, 
shall  prevent  me  from  following  you,  plucking  you,  and  eating 
you ;  for  whatever  pleasure  men  find  in  the  rasp-berry,  in  the 
straw-berry,  in  the  coffee-berry,  all  these  pleasures  are  to  my 
taste  concentrated  in  the  May-fair  Berries. 

Ever  theirs, 

Sydney  Smith. 

From  3Iiss  Berry  to  Lord  Jeffrey. 

6th  April,  1841. 

You  told  me  you  did  not  understand  my  '  thesis,''  when  I  said 
it  was  impossible  to  console  a  perfectly  selfish  person.  I  never 
at  any  time  edited  my  thoughts  well,  and  now,  of  course,  much 
worse  than  ever.  But  I  meant  that  a  person  whose  thoughts,  cares, 
and  interests  had  always  been  confined  to  one  person,  and  that 
one  person  self;  when  misfortune  falls  on  them,  either  in  mind, 
body,  or  estate,  you  have  nothing  to  hold  out  to  them  as  a 
rallying  point.  They  have  neither  children  nor  friends,  whose 
interests,  or  whose  successes,  or  whose  woes  can  draw  them  off 
from  the  contemplation  of  their  own,  or  give  them  a  reason  for 
any  exertion  in  their  behalf,  or  any  reward  for  the  success  of  such 
exertions. 

If  you  amuse  them  for  half-an-hour,  you  leave  them  just  as 
necessitous  for  amusement  as  you  found  them ;  and  if  you  were 

*  This  letter,  though  dated  1841,  has  been  published  in  Mr.  Sydney 
Smith's  correspondence  amongst  those  of  1843. 


1841]  LETTERS,  473 

to  dedicate  your  whole  day  to  them,  you  would  find  them  just  as 
indifferent  to  you  as  to  the  rest  of  the  world,  who  will  he  equally 
necessary,  and  equally  inadequate,  to  their  consolation — that  is 
to  say,  to  divert  their  minds  from  the  eternal  recurrence  of  self, 
and  of  everything  interfering,  or  likely  to  interfere,  with  their 
present  indulgencies.  To  them  they  will  continue  in  vain  to 
look  for  what  such  indulgencies  are  incapable  of  giving.  Where- 
fore, I  again  say,  you  cannot  console  a  completely  selfish  person. 
Q.  E.  D. 

M.  B. 

From  Lord  Jeffrey  to  Miss  Berry. 

Craigcrook,  Sunday  18th. 

It  is  very  kind  in  you  to  think  of  me,  and  yet  I  feel  that  I 
deserve  it  a  little,  for  I  think  a  great  deal  of  you.  I  have  been 
ill  enough  certainly,  but  I  hope  I  am  getting  better  ;  and  I  am 
quite  sure  that  it  is  no  pain  to  me  to  write  to  you,  but  a  very 
great  pleasure.  I  had  a  smart  attack  of  bronchitis  about  three 
weeks  ago,  and  I  have  since  been  suffering  from  my  old,  and  I  fear 
I  may  now  call  it  constitutional,  vice  of  the  circulation,  which 
keeps  me  pale,  and  thin,  and  languid,  and,  in  short,  indicates 
itself  by  a  general  decay  of  vitality,  like  the  dimming  of  a  lamp 
as  the  oil  begins  to  run  low.  .  .  .  You  say  nothing  of  your 
own  health,  from  which  I  should  infer  that  it  was  pretty  good, 
did  I  not  know  it  to  be  a  part  of  your  cheerful  and  considerate 
magnanimity  to  dissemble  yonr  uneasinesses,  in  order  to  spare 
your  friends  the  pain  of  what  you  think  an  unavailing  sympathy ; 
but  I  will  not  believe  that  it  is  always  unavailing,  and  at  any 
rate  I  can  assure  you  that  some  of  us  have  more  pain  in  ima- 
gining what  you  occasionalty  suffer  than  if  we  fairly  knew  the 
worst — so  lay  aside  your  Spartan  reticence  with  me  at  least, 
and  tell  me  frankly  how  you  are.  At  the  very  least,  I  know 
I  shall  have  a  new  lesson  of  patience  and  firmness  to  profit  by. 

It  is  very  gratifying  to  me  to  know  that  you  have  been  in- 
terested by  Horner's  Memoirs.  To  me  it  was  so  full  of  touching 
recollections,  that  I  did  not  dare  to-  hope  it  would  affect  other 
people's  feelings  as  it  did  mine ;  but  I  find  all  good  people  and 
good  judges  approve,  and  it  is  very  pleasing  to  see  that  even  the 
'  Quarterly  Review '  has  allowed  Milman  (as  I  understand)  to 
do  it  justice. 


474  MISS    beret's   journal.  [1841 

You  had  but  cold  weather,  I  fear,  for  the  airy  "brow  of  Eich- 
mond  Hill.  But  they  say  it  is  to  change  on  Midsummer  night, 
and  I  do  trust  that  Titania  and  Oberon  will  consider  it  and 
make  up  matters  again  by  that  time.  We  have  had  enough  of 
heavy  headed  frosts  falling  in  the  fresh  lap  of  the  crimson  rose 
for  one  June  surely. 

I  hope  my  dear  Lady  C.  Lindsay  is  with  you,  and  quite  well. 
Do  assure  her  and  your  sister  of  my  constant  love  and  most 
kind  remembrance.     God  bless  you. 

Ever  yours, 

To  Miss  Berry.  F.  JEFFREY. 

Extract  of  a  Letter  fromi  Miss  Berry  to  a  Friend. 

I  have  read  every  word  of  Mazziui,  and  agree  entirely  with 
him  in  his  views  of  what  civil  liberty  ought  to  be,  and  with 
most  of  his  statements  of  the  absence  of  it  in  Italy. 

As  the  consolidation  of  Italy  proper,  from  the  top  to  the 
toe  of  the  Boot,  was  alway  the  dream  of  my  youth  from  the  day 
I  first  saw  it ;  and  my  persuasion  that,  if  so  consolidated  under 
good  government,  it  would  soon  rise  to  imperial  power  in 
Europe,  and  beat  out  of  the  field  all  its  oppressors  ;  but  I  have 
lived  a  long  life  since,  and  acquired  the  sad  conviction  that, 
for  want  of  consistence  of  character,  and  for  want  of  a 
master  mind  to  create  it,  they  have  let  slip  all  fair  occasion  of 
realizing  their  high  aspirations.  If,  while  Europe  was  yet  in 
arms,  they  had  united  to  make  a  great  stand  for  their  indepen- 
dent existence,  much  might  have  been  done,  or,  at  all  events, 
it  would  have  been  a  groundwork  from  which  to  start  on 
future  occasions.  If  such  had  been  the  case,  never  would  the 
*  Independenza  d'ltalia '  been  allowed  to  float  on  Lord  Wm.  Ben- 
tinck's  banners,  and  not  been  followed  up  by  some  demands 
and  serious  consequences  ;  while  nothing  having  been  done  in 
consequence  was  disgraceful  to  England  as  well  as  to  Italy. 
But  Mazzini  seems  to  me  to  dwell  on  details,  melancholy  enough, 
Grod  knows,  while  he  exhorts  to  awaiting  England  to  relieve 
them. 


184-2]  LETTERS.  475 


1842. 

From  Lord  Jeffrey  to  Miss  Berry. 

8  Caledonia  Place,  Clifton,  Wednesday,  6tli. 
I  am  anxious,  my  dear  friend  and  fellow-sufferer,  to  know 
how  you  come  on  in  this  cold  weather.  I  stood  it  wonderfully 
well  at  first,  but  have  had  a  little  affection  of  the  trachea  for 
the  last  few  days,  and  have  some  fear  of  being  driven  from 
this  airy  and  very  beautiful  locality  to  a  more  sheltered  situa- 
tion. However,  I  think  I  shall  make  out  another  week  here,  at 
all  events,  and  long  enough  to  hear,  as  I  trust,  good  and  cheer- 
ing tidings  of  you ;  and  I  think  you  will  not  grudge  one  little 
line  for  my  comfort.  Though  the  trachea  is  at  this  moment 
my  most  urgent  malady,  the  most  obstinate  and  formidable  is  in 
another  quarter,  and  one  with  which  you  are  unfortunately  but 
too  well  acquainted.  You  and  I  should  be  in  a  very  tolerable 
condition  if  it  were  not  for  that  frigidus  circwm  pra^cordia 
sanguis,  though  I  confess  I  should  scarcely  have  expected  that 
our  hearts  should  be  the  first  things  that  failed  about  us,  and 
(privately)  take  it  rather  amiss.  Nor  am  I  very  much  recon- 
ciled to  my  doom  by  the  assurances  my  doctors  give  me  (and 
you  too,  I  daresay),  that  with  great  care  and  caution  I  may 
keep  the  said  poor  heart  going,  at  a  dull  shuffling  pace,  for  a 
little  time  longer ;  that  is,  that  by  giving  up,  not  only  all  my 
'  pleasant  vices '  (for  which  I  have  a  great  affection),  but  all 
those  exertions  of  intellect  and  excitement  of  feeling  which,  I 
fear,  are  nearly  all  I  have  to  show  for  virtues,  I  may  contrive 
to  hobble  along  the  broken  arches  to  some  rather  more  distant 
pitfall  than  mi^-ht  now  be  found  at  my  feet.  You  who  have  no 
vices,  and  rather  a  larger  endowment  of  virtues,  take,  of 
course,  a  more  pleasant  view  of  things ;  and  I  am  very  desirous, 
as  well  as  ambitious,  of  profiting,  not  merely  by  your  advice, 
but,  if  possible,  also  by  your  example ;  and  so  I  humbly  beg 
for  the  benefit  of  any  suggestions  you    can   spare   me,   and 


476  MISS   BEERY's   journal.  [1842 

any  little  notes  of  your  own  spiritual  experiences  wMdi  you 
think  may  be  applicable  to  my  case,  when  in  a  more  laudable 
disposition  than  usual.  Indeed,  such  is  my  faith  in  the  plastic 
nature  even  of  our  old  humanity,  that  T  do  not  despair 
(especially  if  you,  will  assist  me)  of  still  being  able  to  put  off 
the  old  Adam,  and  even  of  living  to  boast  of  the  tranquillity  of 
the  last  stages  of  my  existence,  and  of  my  gentle  triumph  over 
all  the  vanities  and  tumults  of  my  earlier  life.     Grod  help  us ! 

•I  have  been  amusing  myself  lately  by  looking  over  the  cata- 
logue of  the  Strawberry  Hill  collections,  and,  as  you  may  sup- 
pose, have  had  you  often  enough  in  my  mind  as  I  went  through 
names  and  little  anecdotes  which  must  be  pregnant  to  you  with 
so  many  touching  recollections.  I  should  like,  if  I  were  rich 
enough,  to  have  some  twelve  or  twenty  of  the  pictures  and 
miniatures,  but  would  really  give  nothing  for  the  china,  furni- 
ture, and  bijouterie,  and  not  a  great  deal  for  the  library.  But, 
above  all,  I  should  like  to  have  a  little  drawing  or  two  by 
a  certain  amateur  artist,  and  trust,  at  all  events,  that  they  will 
not  be  allowed  to  go  into  the  hands  of  mere  strangers.  Alto- 
gether I  suppose  they  will  bring  a  good  deal  of  money ;  and  so 
passes  the  glory  of  this  world  !     Vanity  of  vanities  ! 

I  do  not  know  why  I  bore  you  with  all  this,  except  that  I  am 
idle  and  stupid,  and  very  desirous  of  hearing  of  you.  Do  take 
compassion  on  me,  and  let  me  know  that  you  are  well  again, 
and  as  tolerant  as  ever  of  the  dull  people  whom  your  goodness 
may  sometimes  make  a  little  presumptuous.  But  never  mind  ; 
the  most  of  them  will  not  plague  you  long. 

The  stir  of  the  mighty  Babylon  is  again  at  its  height,  and  I 
listen  to  the  distant  echo  from  my  hill-top  of  speculation,  and 
commune  with  my  own  heart,  and  am  still. 

And  so,  with  kindest  remembT-ance  to  your  sister,  and  all 
good  wishes  and  prayers,  believe  me  always 

Very  faithfully  yours, 

F.  Jeffrey.. 

To  Hiss  Berry  from  Lord  Jeffrey. 

Livermead,  near  Torquay, 
Friday  Evening,  22nd  April,  1842. 

I  have  just  been  reading  over  your  admirable  letter  for  a 

third  time,  and,  after  nourishing  the  meditations  to  which  it 

led  by  gazing  for  half-an-hour  on  the  long  waves  which  come 


1842]  LETTERS.  477 

glittering  in  the  moonlight  to  the  beach  below  my  windows,  and 
listening  to  the  soft  and  solemn  roar  they  send  up  to  the  silent 
stars,  I  find  that  I  cannot  lay  myself  down  with  a  quiet  con- 
science till  I  have  thanked  you  for  the  pleasure  it  has  given, 
and  the  good  it  has  done  me.  Never  was  wisdom  so  gentle,  or 
magnanimity  so  simple  and  modest.  I  heartily  wish  you  joy  of 
them,  and  feel  already  that  (though  without  much  hope  of  being 
able  to  copy  them)  I  cannot  but  profit  by  being  allowed  to 
look  on  them;  so  nearly.  And  yet  you  are  one  of  '  the  world's 
veterans,'  of  whose  closing  scene  your  friend  Pope  has  made  so 
frightful  a  picture,  and  one,  too,  who  has  had  more  spoiling, 
more  temptation  from  circumstances,  and  more  apology  from 
natural  endowments,  for  worldly  pride  and  vanity,  and  all  their 
hardening  influences,  than  ninety-nine  in  the  hundred  of  those 
who  have  become  their  victims.  But  as  there  are  fine  and  pure 
complexions  which  will  not  tan  in  the  fiercest  glare  of  summer, 
so  there  are  hearts  and  tempers  on  which  the  wickedness  and 
folly  of  the  world  make  no  impression  and  leave  no  stain ;  and 
in  both,  too,  it  is  a  felicity  of  nature  for  which  you  ought  to  be 
humbly  thankful,  instead  of  insolently  vain !  And  so,  having 
redeemed  myself  from  all  suspicion  of  flattery  by  this  moral 
truism,  I  think  I  had  better  go  to  bed,  and  try  whether  I  can- 
not dream  of  something  as  true,  and  rather  more  original. 

Saturday  Morning. 

We  have  been  here  since  last  Tuesday,  with  continual  bright 
sun,  and  blue  waves  dancing  at  the  feet  of  dark  red  cliffs ;  but 
still  to  the  low  whistle  of  a  spiteful  and  mocking  east  wind, 
which  will  not  let  me  forget  that  I  have  a  trachea,  and  that  much 
of  this  goodly  show  of  summer  is  but  a  counterfeit  of  the  reality. 
However,  it  is  very  beautiful,  and  I  use  precaution,  and  enjoy 
it ;  joining  trembling  with  my  mirth,  according  to  the  precept  of 
the  Psalmist,  and  hoping  every  day  that  the  trembling  may  be 
less  and  the  mirth  greater. 

We  are  in  a  nice  lodging  about  a  mile  out  of  the  town,  stand- 
ing in  a  sort  of  lawn  immediately  above  the  sea,  and  as  lonely 
as  if  it  were  in  a'  bay  of  Argyleshire.  The  perfect  quiet  and  deep 
repose  are  delightful  to  me,  especially  when  the  sun  goes  down, 
and  twilight  and  moonshine  come  to  sleep  together  on  the  soft 
heavings  of  the  water.  We  shall  stay,  I  think,  all  next  week  ; 
and  if  you  write  to  me  before  moving  to  Eichmond,  I  may  hear 


478  Jiiss  bekry's  journal.  [iS42 

again  from  you  before  we  go.  It  is  very  unreasonable,  I  know, 
to  think  of  breaking  in  on  your  parting  hours  with  so  selfish  a 
request,  but  I  want  to  have  a  few  more  last  words  from  Curzon 
Street,  and  I  do  not  wish  or  hope  for  anything  like  so  long  a 
letter  as  the  last. 

I  do  not  think  I  am  any  better  since  leaving  Clifton — but  do 
not,  I  hope,  grow  worse — and  contrive  to  dawdle  about  a  good 
deal  in  sheltered  places,  and  drive  to  pretty  places,  with  much 
facility  and  satisfaction.  I  still  read  a  good  deal  too,  and  with 
unabated  interest  and  pleasure.  I  have  just  finished  the  last 
number  of  the  '  Edinburgh  Keview,'  and  have  been  charmed 
more  than  ever,  I  think,  with  that  splendid  paper  of  Macaulay's, 
on  Frederic  of  Prussia.  I  have  read  it  twice  over  already,  with 
thrillings  of  admiration  which  make  my  very  weak  heart  leap 
rather  too  strongly ;  but  it  is  delightful.  He  is,,  indeed,  a  very 
wonderful  writer — so  brillianty  so  exact,  so  graphic,  and  varied, 
and  concise  ;  and  all  the  time  so  candid,  and  just,  and  generous 
— so  large  in.  his  views — so  pregnant  in  his  suggestions;  and,  I 
will  add — though  rash  here  and  there,  rather  in  expression  than 
thought — so  firm  and  fearless  in  his  censures  of  baseness  and 
cruelty,  and  humane  and  indulgent  in  his  apologies  for  lighter 
infirmities.  Well,  there  is  a  tirade  for  you,  but  it  is  all  true, 
and  I  could  not  help  it.  I  need  not  tell  you  of  the  pleasure  there 
is  in  'praising  heartily,  without  envy  or  grudging,  or  in  finding 
that  one  can  be  delighted  as  much  as  ever  with  excellence  long 
after  one  has  ceased  to  hope  to  'profit  by  it. 

And  now  I  hope  the  true  spring  will  still  stir  the  sap  in  both 
our  decaying  trunks  for  a  few  more  buddings  of  leaf  and  flower, 
and  that  we  may  have  a  longer  period  of  moderate  enjoyment 
in  this  beautiful  world  than  it  would  be  quite  wise  perhaps  to 
reckon  on.  And  so,  with  kindest  remembrances  to  your  sister 
Lady  Charlotte,  belieTe  me  always 

Very  faithfully  yours, 

F.  Jeffrey, 

I  have  a  strange  curiosity  to  know  the  name  of  the  young 
lady  who  was  with  you  when  I  came  to  bid  you  farewell  in 
Curzon  Street.  Do  you  at  all  remember  of  any  lady  being 
there?  She  was  dressed  in  mourning,  and,  though  not  perhaps 
very  pretty,  had  so  much  varying  expression  of  countenance 
that  she  has  haunted  my  imagination  ever  since.  She  must  be 
a  pet  of  yours  too,  I  think,  for  she  kissed  you  very  tenderly. 


1842]  LETTERS.  479 

Is  all  this  very  impertinent  ?   I  hope  you  will  not  think  so  ;  but 
if  you  do,  forget  and  forgive  it. 

September. — Amidst  the  pale  and  failing  sensations  of 
old  age,  it  is  refreshing  to  find  any  scene,  or  any  moments, 
leaving  an  agreeable  impression  on  the  mind  and  on  the 
feelings.  Such  is  the  remembrance  of  the  afternoon  of 
the  21st  of  September,  in  the  apartments  of  Hampton 
Cornet  Palace.  The  music  of  the  regiment  on  guard  was 
playing  under  the  palace  windows  ;  a  brilliant  sunset  was 
lighting  up  the  high  trees  bounding  the  parterre  in 
the  gardens  ;  the  pictures  in  the  room  in  the  windows 
of  which  we  were  sitting  were  interesting  in  various 
ways — so  that  the  senses,  both  of  hearing  and  sight,  were 
every  way  gratified,  while  the  calm  of  a  fine  evening 
gave  the  means  of  enjoying  them. 

To  the  Countess  of  Morley  from  Miss  Berry. 

Richmond,  16th  October,  1842. 

Although  I  have  nothing  but  very  dull  thanks  to  offer  you  for 
your  very  entertaining  letter  from  Drummond  Castle,  you  shall 
not  by  my  silence  suppose  me  ungrateful  for  your  so  kindly  re- 
membering and  keeping  your  promise  of  letting  me  hear  from 
you.  All  you  have  done  and  seen  almost  takes  one's  breath 
away  ;  but  what  I  most  rejoice  in  is  your  having,  by  your  valu- 
able receipt,  secured  yourself  good  weather,  which  in  general  is 
the  one  thing  wanting  in  the  beautiful  scenes  j^ou  have  been 
visiting.  That  you  have  not  seen  Eaith  gives  a  twinge  to  my 
family  vanity,  for  I  will  not  honour  ^t  with  the  name  of  pride. 
When  the  weather  is  good  in  Scotland  there  is  much  less  fog 
than  in  these  our  more  favoured  climes,  and  for  effects  of 
light  on  landscape,  and  on  clouds,  I  never  saw  any  that  sur- 
passed, or  even  rivalled,  Scotland.  That  you  found  everything 
good,  down  to  inns  and  horses,  must  be  the  effect,  as  the 
Italians  say,  of  sua  honta\  and  your  compliments  on  those  points 
v/ill  have  been  particularly  well  received,  as  being  the  least  de- 
served. I  hope  in  Edinburgh  you  went  to  the  Royal  Hotel,  in 
Princes  Street,  where  the  view  of  the  old  town,  both  by  day  and 
by  night,  is  the  most  picturesque  town  view  I  know  anywhere. 


480  MISS   BERKY'S   journal.  [1842 

My  sister  and  I  always  went  there  on  that  account,  although 
our  family  frequented  another  hotel,  more  famous  for  eating. 

You  will  be  charmed  with  Dalmeuy.  I  never  was  much  so 
with  Minto,  but  I  saw  it  in  the  old  lady's  time,  and  I  daresay 
it  is  marvellously  improved  both  outside  and  in.  Indeed,  as  to 
the  present  lady,*  I  know  nobody  so  completely,  so  uniformly 
amiable;  so  always  surrounded  by  an  atmosphere  of  cheerful, 
rational,  good  humour.  Now,  if  you  are  not  capable  and  worthy 
of  judging  such  a  character  as  this,  I  know  nobody  that  is. 

You  will  have  rejoiced  with  me  at  the  safe  return  of  Morpeth. 
You  will  certainly  have  him  at  Castle  Howard  when  you  are 
there.  How  I  should  have  enjoyed  joining  you !  but  I  have 
already  resisted  the  kindest  of  invitations  from  the  Duke  to 
Chatsworth,  where,  as  it  happened,  I  should  have  witnessed  the 
arrival  from  America.  But  I  have  just  sense  and  resolution 
enough  left  to  know  that  at  my  age,  with  every  da^  increasing 
weakness,  the  only  way  of  prolonging  that  kind  interest  of 
friends  which  is  still  so  necessary  to  my  comfortable  existence 
is  by  avoidiug  being  troublesome — in  the  way. 

At  my  own  fireside  I  can  still  hear  and  see ;  for  which,  I  assure 
you,  I  am  duly  grateful. 

We  have  been  so  well  pleased  with  this  summer  residence, 
that  if  we  can  have  it  next  spring,  and  are  ourselves  forthcoming, 
I  think  we  shall  take  it  again. 

Having  now  paid  my  debt  of  gratitude  for  your  letter,  the 
sooner  I  conclude  the  better,  or  I  shall  have  no  hopes  of  you 
allowing  me  to  incur  another  debt  of  the  same  sort. 

Your  sincerely  attached  and  affectionate, 

M.  Berry. 

Tittenhanger,  November  12th. — Here  I  am  once  more 
with  my  old  contemporary  in  the  same  room  which  for 
these  many  years  I  have  always  inhabited  in  my  annual 
visits  here.  Did  I  want  a  scale  for  calculating  my  decay, 
I  should  find  it  here.  For  several  years  I  was  equal  to 
exertions  in  walking  of  which  my  contemporary  was  in- 
capable. For  these  last  three  or  four  years  every  one  has 
marked  my  regular,  although  not  rapid  failure.  My  soul 
turns  with  humble  hope  to  heaven,  to  an  all-pitying  and 

*  Mary,  daughter  of  Patrick  Brydoue,  Esquire. 


184-2]  RESIGNATION.  .  481 

all-merciful  Creator,  for  that  support  in  its  approaching 
hour  of  entrv  to  another  state  of  existence,  which  Perfec- 
tion  only  can  grant  to  weak  and  failing  human  nature. 
To  this  Perfection,  although  under  the  most  profound 
sense  of  her  own  unworthiness,  she  cannot  feel  a  dread  in 
addressing  herself — 

*  My  God,  my  Father,  and  my  Friend, 
Do  not  desert  me  in  my  end.' 


VOL.  III.  I  I 


482  MISS    berry's   journal.  [1843 


1843. 

From  Rev.  Sydney  Smith  to  Miss  Berry* 

Combe-Florey. 

I  hope,  my  dear  friends,  you  are  well.  I  met  Protheroe 
on  the  railroad,  and  he  gave  me  some  account  of  you,  but  not 
enough  for  my  ravenous  desire  for  your  welfare.  Oh,  happy 
women !  the  suburban  beauties  of  Eichmond  were  not  enough  ; 
but  Providence  sent  you  — — ,  a  woman  of  piety  and  ancient 

faith,  and   the    heureux   chevalier  ■ ,  sans  peur   et   sans 

reproche. 

Mrs.  Sydney  and  I  are  tolerably  well ;  the  diminished  tem- 
perature has  restored  my  locomotive  powers,  such  as  they  are ; 
but  in  the  dog-days  I  could  not  move. 

We  have  had  Tommy  Moore  and  Lady  Morley,  and  a  few  more 
unknown  to  fame.  Dr.  Holland  has  just  made  a  rush  from 
Combe-Florey  to  Jerusalem.  By-the-by,  I  saw  a  piece  of  news 
the  other  day,  in  which  a  gentleman  made  his  good  fortune 
known  to  the  world  in  the  public  papers  : — '  Last  week  the  Rev. 
Elias  Johnson  was  made  examining  chaplain  to  the  Bishop  of 
Jerusalem  !  '  I  should  like  to  know  what  his  questions  are  to 
the  candidates. 

'  How  far  from  Jerusalem  to  Jericho  ? ' 

'  Where  are  the  ten  missing  tribes?' 

'  How  tall  was  Pontius  Pilate  ? ' 

I  presume  you  have  never  been  a  day  without  crowds.  Has 
D.  glittered  at  Richmond  ? 

I  mean  to  be  in  London  about  the  20th  or  the  22nd.  I  hope 
to  find  you  there — I  mean  in  October.  By  deaths  and  marriages 
the  world  is  thinned  since  I  saw  you.  I  see  by  the  fuss  in  the 
papers  that  an  Hon.  Stafford  is  going  to  be  married.j  The 
Howards  are  gathering  in  every  direction. 

*  This  letter  is  already  published,  though  somewhat  abridged, 
f  Lady  Evelyn  Levison  Gower,  daughter  of  the  late  Duke  of  Sutherland, 
was  married,  this  year,  to  Lord  Blantyre. 


1843]  ANXIETY   ABOUT    HER   SISTER.  483 

My  kindest  regards  to  Lady  Charlotte,  and  to  both  of  you, 
and  those  of  Mrs.  Sydney. 

November  20th. — I  wanted  once  more  to  have  dated 
from  my  old  contemporary's  at  Tittenhanger ;  but  I  have 
left  her  this  morning,  after  a  ten  days'  visit,  with  the  too 
sm^e  conviction  (had  I  wanted  any)  how  much  I  have 
lost  since  I  was  there  this  time  last  year.  And  yet,  I 
am  capable  of  holding  a  sort  of  place  in  society — at  least 
such  as  not  to  sadden  it  with  my  apparent  decay.  It 
is  much,  and  indeed  all  I  ask,  pourvu  that  it  does  not 
last  too  long. 

December  \2th. — I  have  an  internal  sentiment  that 
I  cannot  count  on  myself  for  a  single  day.  I  am 
therefore  most  anxious — indeed  it  is  the  only  thing 
about  which  I  am  anxious — to  have  all  ready,  to  give 
as  little  trouble  and  hurry  at  the  last  as  possible.  I 
am  very  anxious  our  intimate  friends  should  support  poor 
Agnes,  if  I  leave  her  behind  me.  Jane,  I  hope,  will  do 
much  for  her.  I  swore  her,  before  she  went  to  Scotland,  if 
I  dropped  off  during  her  absence,  to  come  immediately 
up  to  Agnes.  I  knew  nobody  else  that  could  fill  her 
place  on  that  occasion  for  dear  Agnes. 

December  27th. — I  have  had  a  severe  fit  of  illness  in 
the  form  of  influenza.  Eepose,  solitude,  and  a  book  are 
all  I  can  attempt.  I  still  make  an  effort  to  gather  together 
some  sparks  of  life  for  my  sister's  sake.  My  only  anxiety ! 
my  only  one !  is  thinking  what  I  can  do  to  secure  her 
some  comfort  of  society  after  I  am  gone.  I  think  of  this 
without  ceasing. 


I  I  2 


484  MISS    berry's    journal.  "[1844 


1844. 
J  0  U  E  N  A  L. 

Febf'uary  ord. — My  doctor  has  long  taken  his  leave, 
saying  that  I  am  well;  and,  did  life  consist  in  nothing 
but  eating,  drinking,  and  sleeping,  I  am  so  ;  but  my 
wiser  Dr.  Grant  allows  that,  after  such  a  severe  attack,  at 
my  age,  I  cannot  easily  regain  even  my  previous  state. 

Richmond,  July  ^Oth. — I  now  wonder  every  morning 
when  I  find  myself  waking  again  in  this  world.  I  have 
hitherto,  on  my  sister's  account,  made  every  effort  to 
keep  up,  and  to  keep  on  with  hfe,  but  for  this  I  am 
beginning  to  feel  my  spirits  failing. 

From  Lord  Jeffrey  to  Miss  Berry. 

E.  I.  College,  Wednesday,  12tli. 

You  are  very  kind  to  me,  and  I  cannot  resist  your  seduc- 
tions ;  and  so  I  shall  appear  to  you  on  Monday,  though  I  had 
almost  promised  to  dedicate  the  whole  week  to  fasting  and  medi- 
tation in  these  shades.  But  when  there  is  but  little  left  of  life, 
at  any  rate,  it  is  not  worth  while  to  refuse  the  few  innocent 
pleasures  we  may  still  make  sure  of  for  a  poor  chance  of  adding 
a  possible  fraction  to  its  dull  duration ;  a  sentiment  which  I 
hope  you  will  think  natural  and  becoming  to  be  conceived  in 
Lent,  and  acted  upon  in  the  Carnival. 

I  am  in  admiration  of  your  calligraphy,  and  feel  inspired,  as 
I  hope  3^ou  perceive,  with  a  noble  ambition  to  rival  it,  but  dare 
not  persist  farther, 

Ever  most  faithfully  yours, 

F.  Jeffrey. 


1844]  LETTER   FROM   LORD    JEFFREY.  485 

From  Lord  Jeffrey  to  Miss  Berry. 

21  Wimpole  Street,  Monday,  llth  May,  1844. 

My  dear  Miss  Beret, — If  I  had  not  been  very  unwell,  I 
should  have  darkened  your  rustic  doorway  long  before  this  time. 
But  the  truth  is,  that  I  drooped  the  moment  you  departed ;  and, 
though  I  made  a  fight  for  a  few  days  to  impose  on  the  heartless 
world,  I  was  obliged  very  soon  after  to  leave  the  field,  and  re- 
treat into  Hertfordshire  with  my  daughter,  to  recruit  my  health, 
and  compose  my  ruffled  spirits.  I  have  been  slowly  recovering 
from  influenza  for  the  last  week  there,  and  we  only  returned 
here  to  make  up  our  packages  for  embarking  on  the  railroad 
to  Preston,  on  Wednesday  morning.  It  would  have  been  a  con- 
solation if  I  could  have  seen  you,  or  even  heard  of  you,  before 
my  departure.  I  shall  try  to-morrow  what  I  can  learn  at  the 
Fergussons,  or  somewhere  else ;  and  in  the  meantime  shall 
believe  the  summer  has  not  come  too  much  before  its  time  for 
nothing,  and  that  quiet  and  fine  weather  have  settled  down  all 
the  throbbing  of  your  heart  to  a  sober  and  healthful  standard. 

I  cannot  leave  the  latitude  you  inhabit,  however,  without  again 
expressing  my  thanks  to  you  for  all  your  kindness,  and  the 
gratification  I  always  receive  in  my  thoughts  from  the  feeling 
(which  I  hope  you  will  not  tell  me  is  fallacious  or  too  pre- 
sumptuous), that,  though  not  among  the  oldest  of  your  friends, 
I  am  to  you  something  more  than  a  common  acquaintance,  and 
have  been  permitted  to  see  parts  of  your  character  which  I  know 
how  to  prize,  in  comparison  even  with  those  social  graces  of 
which  everybody  confesses  the  charm.  It  is  foolish,  perhaps,  to 
trouble  you  by  saying  this.  But  I  have  learned  so  much  good 
from  you,  that  I  feel  it  to  be  a  duty  to  thank  you,  and  seem  also 
to  have  learned  that  it  will  not  offend  you  that  I  should  do  so. 
With  kindest  remembrances  to  your  most  kind  sister,  ever,  my 
dear  Miss  Berry,  very  faithfully  yours, 

F.  Jeffrey. 

Fro/Yi  Miss  Berry  to  Lord  Jeffrey. 

Richmond,  13th  May. 
No,  your  feeling  is  not  fallacious.     Of  all  the  superior  intel- 
lects which  it  has  been  my  good  fortune  to  meet  with  in  these 
my  latter  days,  yours  has  been  that  which  has  been  best  under- 
stood by  me,  which  I  have  found  always  unclouded,  always 


486  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1844 

satisfactory,  and  always  convincing;  a  character  improved  and 
perfected  by  the  commerce  of  the  world,  without  having 
moulted  a  feather  of  imagination,  and  having  preserved, 
through  a  busy  life,  a  touch  of  romance,  without  which  know- 
ledge may  inform,  but  can  never  attract. 

Thank  you  a  thousand  times  for  not  letting  me  remain  in 
ignorance  of  sentiments  which  must  ever  gratify  me,  and  in 
this  case  flatters  something  better  than  my  vanity.  I  am  very 
sorry  not  to  have  seen  you  before  your  departure,  for  instead  of 
the  future,  it  is  to  the  paulo  post  futuro  that  I  must  now  look. 
This  exquisite  spring,  such  as  England  has  rarely  seen,  has  as 
yet  done  little  for  me.  But  the  doctors  say  I  may  so  live  on 
for  years.  This,  thank  Grod,  in  spite  of  doctors  and  draughts, 
/  donH  believe.  But  in  the  meantime  I  am  most  grateful 
to  be  able  to  enjoy  quietly  the  present  enjoyable  season,  and 
to  look  forward  undismayed  to  future  changes.  The  unco' 
gude  would,  I  fear,  call  this  presumption ;  but  their  ideas  must 
be  very  different  from  mine  of  infinite  goodness  and  power, 
which  spreads  before  me  this  beautiful  nature,  enjoyable  even 
for  age  and  weakness. 

Lady  C.  Lindsay  joins  us  on  Saturday  next — that  is  to  say, 
takes  possession  of  a  house  in  our  immediate  neighbourhood. 
As  her  love  of  nature  and  views  of  life  (although  seen  through 
a  naturally  purer  medium)  are  very  like  my  own,  we  can  rather 
help  one  another  down  hill,  and  be  only  desirous  of  going  first. 
I  shall  send  this  line  to  Wimpole  Street,  and  see  that  it  will  be 
forwarded  to  you.  My  sister  desires  her  kindest  remembrance 
to  you,  and  we  both  regret  not  having  seen  Mrs.  Jeffrey.  Let 
us  hope  that  she  will  not  therefore  wipe  us  out  of  her  memor}^, 
and  punish  the  feelings  of  my  heart  for  its  useless  and  trouble- 
some throbs. 

I  will  not  plague  you  with  a  correspondence  which  could  only 
be  troublesome  to  you  ;  but  if  ever  I  could  suppose  any  spirit 
would  again  move  me  to  anything  w^orthy  of  you,  you  should 
again  hear  from  your  most  attached  and  grateful  friend, 

M.  B. 

From  Lord  Jeffrey  to  Miss  Berry. 

Penrith,  Thursday  Evening,  16th  May,  1844. 
My  dear  Miss  Berry, — Perhaps  you  have  heard   how  very 


1844]  LETTER   FROM    LOED    JEFFREY.  487 

ill  I  have  been,  almost  ever  since  I  last  saw  you.  At  all  events, 
I  hope  you  felt  assured  that  nothing  but  absolute  inability  could 
have  prevented  me  from  making  my  varied  and  pleasant  pil- 
grimage to  the  Shrine  of  my  Lady's  of  Lower  Richmond.  But 
the  fates,  you  see,  will  ever  marshal  themselves  against  the  in- 
nocent pleasures  of  those  who  have  just  learned  how  best  to 
value  and  enjoy  them.  '  Still  drops  some  joy  from  withering 
life  away ! '  And,  though  it  be  still  life,  it  is  always  more  and 
more  doubtful,  after  it  once  begins  to  wither,  whether  another 
spring  will  come  to  replace  the  buds  thus  cruelly  blasted.  Well, 
but  the  plain  prose  of  the  matter,  in  case  you  should  not  have 
heard  of  it,  is,  that  I  was  nearly  a  fortnight  confined  to  bed,  in 
Hertfordshire,  with  influenza-fever  and  bronchial  cough,  and 
have  been  hardly  able,  by  great  care  and  obedience  to  my 
doctors,  to  muster  such  a  poor  pittance  of  strength  as  to  obtain 
their  slow  consent  to  my  setting  out  to  resume  my  duties  at  the 
meeting  of  the  Courts  next  week  at  Edinburgh  ;  and  that  I 
have  progressed  thus  far,  with  caution  and  good  heed,  on  that 
laudable  errand.  I  shall  be  at  home,  I  hope  (with  my  Scythian 
waggon-full  of  grandchildren  and  nurses),  next  Saturday,  but 
could  not  cross  the  Border  with  an  easy  mind  till  I  had  wafted  a 
word  of  kind  greeting  to  you,  and  recommended  myself  yet  for 
a  little  while  to  your  indulgent  remembrance.  It  was  a  great 
pleasure  to  me  to  see  you  so  well  when  I  last  called  on  you ; 
and  I  have  not  parted  from  you  for  several  years  with  so  com- 
fortable an  impression,  both  of  your  present  time  and  your 
futurity,  and  it  will  be  a  great  gratification  if  you  would  now 
and  tlicn  favour  me  with  a  little  bulletin  of  your  welfare.  In 
the  meantime  I  must  close  mine,  and  go  to  bed  to  recruit  for 
the  little  journey  of  to-morrow ;  and  so  good  night,  and  God 
bless  you  !  which  is  all  in  all.  With  kindest  remembrances  to 
your  sister,  and  my  ever  dear  Lady  Charlotte,  ever  very  faith- 
fully yours, 

F.  Jeffkey. 

The  following  letter  shows  that,  in  spite  of  age  and 
frequent  illness,  the  Miss  Berrys  had  not  lost  their  former 
reputation  for  gathering  under  their  roof  a  society  who, 
under  their  auspices,  knew  well  how  to  contribute  to  each 
other's  amusement : — 


488  MISS    berry's   journal.  [1844 

From  Rev.  Sydney  Smith  to  Miss  Berry. 

Combe-Florey,  August  28,  1844. 

The  general  notion  here  is  that  the  two  Miss  Berrys,  in  con- 
iunction  with  Lady  Charlotte,  have  been  destroyed  by  fire  at 
Eichmond.  I  am  told  that  the  Hand-in-Hand  and  the  Phoenix 
fire-engines  played  upon  them  for  a  considerable  time  without 
the  smallest  effect ;  that  they  were  so  brilliant,  and  emitted  so 
many  sparks,  and  showed  themselves  to  be  composed  of  mate- 
rials so  combustible,  that  it  was  impossible  to  save  them  ;  that 
the  elder  Miss  Berry  (Elder  Berry)  was  heard  in  her  last  suf- 
ferings, inviting  a  party  to  dinner  after  the  fire.  Lady  Char- 
lotte, with  her  glass,  eyed  to  the  last  moment  the  fire  people  who 
were  playing  upon  her ;  and  Agnes  screamed  out  to  a  police- 
man to  write  to  the  housekeeper  in  Curzon  Street  to  inform  her 
that  they  were  all  burnt  alive. 

If  all  this  is  untrue,  I  beg  it  may  be  contradicted.  If  you  are 
spared,  I  must  tell  you  of  the  honour  paid  to  me  at  New  York. 
There  arrived  there  at  the  beginning  of  the  month  a  Sydney 
Smith,  whose  name  was  in  due  form  announced  in  the  papers  ; 
forthwith  a  meeting,  and  a  debate  whether  or  not  he  should  be 
tarred  and  feathered,  carried  in  the  negative;  proposed  and 
carried,  by  an  immense  majority,  that  he  should  be  invited  to  a 
public  dinner :  in  short,  an  uproar  a  la  mode  de  Dickens  !  The 
arriver  turned  out  to  be  a  young  man,  a  cooper.  My  correspon- 
dent at  New  York  encloses  me  an  invitation  to  myself  to  pay 
him  a  visit,  and  to  accompany  him  in  a  tour  to  Niagara.  So, 
though  you  think  so  little  of  me  in  May  Fair,  I  am  a  great  per- 
sonage in  the  other  quarter  of  the  world. 

We  are  tolerably  well,  and  at  Sid  mouth  for  the  confirmation 
of  Mrs.  Sydney's  health.  Pray  tell  me  (always  supposing  you 
are  not  burnt  alive)  how  you  are,  and  always  believe  me  your 

grateful  friend, 

Sydney  Smith. 

In  the  month  of  October,  Miss  Berry  republished  an 
edition  of  her  writings,  in  two  vols.  8vo.  The  list  of  the 
contents  is  as  follows  : — 

Comparative  View  of  Social  Life,  &c. 


1844]  LETTEE   FEOM   JOANNA   BAILLIE.  489 

Advertisement  to  the  Letters  addressed  by  Lord  Orford 

to  the  Miss  Berrys. 
Some  Account  of  the  Life  of  Madame  du  Deffand. 
Some  Account  of  the  Life  of  Eachael,  Lady  EusselL 
Lady  Eussell  and  Madame  de  Sevigne  considered  as 

Contemporaries. 
The  Fashionable  Friends  (a  Comedy). 

In  a  MS.  hst  of  her  works  she  had  included  '  The  Two 
Martins,'  a  farce,  never  published,  and  the  '  Preface  to  Lord 
Orford's  Works  and  Notes,'  published  1797,  but  they  did 
not  form  a  part  of  the  two  vols,  published  in  1844. 

From  Miss  J.  Baillie  to  Miss  Berry. 

Hampstead,  October  IGtli. 

Mt  dear  Friend,- — I  was  much  pleased  with  your  last  letter, 
though  this  does  not  a])pear  very  plainly  in  my  being  more  than 
a  month  of  thanking  you  for  it.  I  by  no  means  wished  you  to 
set  your  brains  to  work  on  what  you  felt  no  inclination  for ; 
and  as  my  principal  objection  to  the  '  Social  Life  '  was  rather  a 
childish  one — the  unequal  sizes  of  the  two  volumes — and  as 
this  will  be  rectified  by  adding  more  matter  already  written  and 
known,  it  would  be  very  captious  in  me  not  to  be  satisfied.  If 
I  were  much  given  to  envy,  I  should  envy  you  for  two  things: 
first,  that  a  clever  knowing-in-the-trade  bookseller  calls  for 
permission  to  reprint  your  works  ;  and  next,  that  you  can  still 
read  with  undivided  attention,  and  take  an  interest  in  every 
subject  before  you.  On  what  spot  of  the  earth  lives  that  book- 
seller who  would  now  publish  at  his  own  risk  any  part  of  my 
works  ?  and  what  book  could  you  give  me  to  read  of  which  I 
should  have  any  distinct  recollection  three  months  hence  ?  May 
all  good  fortune  attend  your  forthcoming  publication,  which  I 
shall  read  with  more  than  my  common  stint  of  attention,  and 
many  thanks  for  your  friendly  intention  of  sending  it  to  me, 
though  I  possess,  from  your  former  liberality,  all  the  different 
pieces  it  will  contain. 

This  will  still  find  you  and  your  sister  in  Richmond,  and,  I 
hope,  enjoying  the  later  beauties  of  autumn,  and  the  compara- 
tive rest  from  so  many  visitors  from  town.     May  you  by-and-by 


490  MISS    BEKET'S   journal.  [1844 

find  your  excellent  friend,  Lady  Hardwicke,  well,  and  be  re- 
freshed with  her  agreeable  society  before  you  settle  yourselves 
in  Curzon  Street  for  the  winter  ;  for  we  still  look  forward  to 
months  and  half-years  lying  before  us  as  we  formerly  did  to 
longer  periods,  willing  to  remain  here  as  long  as  our  Heavenly 
Father  pleases  we  should,  and  no  longer.  For  me,  the  walking 
through  our  churchyard  is  no  unpleasant  thing;  it  cannot  ex- 
tinguish the  lights  beaming  from  the  promised  house  in  which 
are  many  mansions.  Grive  my  kind  love  to  your  sister,  and 
with  all  true  affection  to  yourself,  believe  me, 

Very  sincerely  yours, 

J.  Baillie. 

From  Miss  Berry  to  Miss  J,  Baillie. 

Richmond,  24tli  October. 

Why,  what  a  goose  you  are  ! — (that  ever  I,  M.  B.,  should  dare 
to  call  Joanna  Baillie  a  goose !)  But  don't  you  see  that  '  a 
clever  knowing-in-the  trade  bookseller '  reprints  trifles  made  for 
a  drawing-room  table  and  the  talk  of  the  day,  and  not  works 
written  for  posterity  and  to  take  their  place  in  the  small  band 
of  real  poets  who  have  adorned  our  country.  There  you  will 
flourish  ever  green,  and  will  rise  in  importance  as  you  recede 
from  the  present  generation  ;  there  Shakspeare  will  acknowledge 
that  you  dared  walk  on  the  same  plank  with  him,  without 
copying  him,  or  falling  from  the  height  of  which  he  had  shown 
you  the  example ;  there  Byron  will  own  that  your  expression  of 
passion  in  '  Basil '  exceeds  any  of  his,  although  calling  to  his  aid 
sentiments  and  scenes  drawn  from  that  vicious  circle  to  which 
you  disdained  having  recurrence,  and  into  whose  precincts  your 
muse  never  wandered. 

Our  residence  here  is  drawing  very  near  a  close.  We  remove 
to  town  on  Thursday  next,  the  31st,  and  shall  remain  in  Curzon 
Street  till  the  7th  or  8th,  when  our  dear  old  friend  at  Titten- 
hanger  expects  us.  Lady  Davy  has  been  staying  with  us  since 
Monday  last,  and  leaves  us  on  Saturday.  Her  health  is  quite 
restored,  and  it  is  impossible  to  be  a  less  troublesome,  or,  in- 
deed, more  agreeable  inmate  than  she  is,  amusing  herself  when 
alone,  and  her  hostesses  when  in  company.  And  now,  my  dear 
Joanna,  God  bless  you  !  .  .  .  .     Once  more,  God  bless  you  ! 

M.  Berry. 


1844]  LETTER    FROM    COUNTESS    OF  MOELEY.  491 

I  have  been  reading  '  Mrs.  Grant's  Letters '  with  considerable 
amusement.  She  often  writes  very  well,  and  thinks  well,  within 
her  horizon ;  but  her  horizon  is  a  narrow  one,  and  her  mistakes 
of  character  often  laughable. 

From  the  Rev.  Sydney  Smith  to  31iss  Berry* 

My  dear  Miss  Berry, — Many  thanks.  I  have  no  doubt  I 
shall  receive  great  pleasure  from  the  book — I  am  sure  I  have 
from  the  words  of  kindness  in  the  blank-leaf.  I  am  very  sorry 
you  are  going,  but  will  protect  you  from  Eogers  after  you  are 
gone  ;  Eogers,  of  whom  Sharp  sings,  that  he  is 

Less  fitted  for  the  many,  than  the  few 
Who  loVe  the  beautiful,  and  seek  the  true. 

The  beautiful  and  true  Eogers  !    Grod  bless  you  ! 

S.  S. 

TittenJianger,  November  Ihth. — Once  again  I  find 
myself  with  my  old  friend  and  contemporary  at  this  place  ; 
this  must  be  for  the  last  time,  being  in  my  eighty-second 
year  now.  If  one  may  escape  without  severe  suffering, 
who  could  hesitate  about  welcoming  their  removal  ? — 
who  would  hesitate  in  throwing  themselves  on  the  mercy 
of  an  Almighty  Creator,  and  returning  their  spirit  (more 
or  less  soiled  by  its  passage  through  this  world)  to  Him 
who  gave  it,  who — punishing  or  rewarding — will  ever  do 
the  best  possible  for  the  creatures  of  His  word  ?  To  Him., 
therefore,  while  I  yet  retain  the  power  of  lifting  up  my 
thoughts  to  heaven,  I  pray  that  I  may  be  removed  before 
I  become  more  than  I  am — a  burthen  to  others  and  to 
myself. 

From,  the  Countess  of  Morley  to  Miss  Berry. 

'  ■ Castle,  24th  November,  1844. 

My  dearest  Miss  Berry,—  I  daresay  'tis  a  very  good  thing 
to  be  safely  stowed  away  in  a  well-fortified  castle,  but  I  don't 

*  There  is  no  date  to  this  letter,  but  it  may  have  been  in  acknowledg- 
ment of  the  complete  edition  of  Miss  Berry's  works. 


492  MISS    berry's   journal.  [1844 

think  it  cheerful  in  these  piping  times  of  peace.  Magnificence 
is  always  melancholy  to  me.  Here  I  sit  at  this  present  writing, 
choked  up  with  velvets  and  satins  and  mirrors,  and  gold  and 
silver  and  precious  stones.  There  is  my  bed  !  redolent  of  damasks 
and  carvings,  with  crowns  of  gold  on  the  top,  as  if  it  were  all 
prepared  for  a  Eoyal  corpse  to  lie  in  state.  I  feel  afraid  of 
stepping  into  it,  and  have  serious  thoughts  of  passing  my  night 
on  the  sofa.  Then  when  I  try  to  cheer  my  spirits  by  looking 
out  of  my  window,  I  see  nothing  but  hornworks,  and  breast- 
works, and  bastions,  and  cheveux-de-frises.  .  .  .  All  the 
sweet  face  of  nature  shut  out ;  not  a  bit  of  green  grass  or  trees  to 
be  seen.  '  I'd  rather  be  a  frog  {not  a  toad),  and  live  upon  the 
vapour  of  a  dunghill '  (provided  it  commauded  a  pretty  prospect 
of  the  surrounding  scenery),  than  pass  my  life  in  a  fortified 
castle.  .  .  .  The  H — • — s  both  desire  their  kind  regards  to  you, 
and  both  agree  so  entirely  with  me  that  you  are  the  most  agree- 
able mistresses  of  the  most  agreeable  house  in  England,  perhaps 
Europe ;  but  that  I  can't  answer  for  from  my  own  personal 
knowledge  as  I  can  for  my  own  country.  And  how  are  you  both  ? 
Is  i/our  head  in  the  right  place?  I  fancy  you  enjoying  your 
soirees  d'automne  in  Curzon  Street,  and  shall  be  very  glad  when 
I  am  within  reach  of  them. 

Now,  to  relieve  you  from  further  prosing,  believe  me,  with 
kind  love  to  Miss  Agnes, 

Yours  very  affectionately, 

F.  MOELEY. 


1845]  INFIRMITIES    OF    OLD    AGE.  493 


1845. 

J  0  U  E  N  A  L. 

Richmond,  May  ^'ihnd. — Here  I  am  still,  and  once 
again  in  Mrs.  Lamb's  house,  where  we  came  on  the 
1st  of  this  month.  After  all,  few  women  at  eighty-two 
have  so  little  to  complain  of ;  the  complaint  is  the  age^ 
not  in  its  necessary  accompaniments.  My  mind  has  been 
saddened  for  this  last  fortnight  by  the  sufferings  of  poor 
Agnes  ;  the  weather  has  been  so  constantly  unseasonable 
— so  rainy  and  so  cold — as  to  prevent  any  relief  to  her 
by  being  in  the  country.  Well,  but  what  of  all  this? 
Almost  all  our  neighbours  are  as  bad  or  worse  off. 

Richmond,  June  2Qth. — Life  begins  to  be  very  fatiguing 
to  me,  although  aware  how  much  better  off  than  most 
or  almost  any  woman  of  my  great  age,  both  as  to 
physical  and  as  to  moral  advantages.  Instead  of  neglect 
of  the  world  and  of  friends,  I  feel  myself  more  considered, 
more  sought  after,  more  flattered  by  worldly  attentions, 
than  ever  I  was  when  I  might  be  said  to  have  deserved 
them  ;  and  my  poor  sister,  so  near  my  own  age,  will,  I  feel 
convinced,  either  precede  or  follow  me  in  a  very  few 
months. 

Tittenhanger,  November  19th.  —  Here  I  am  still,  at 
my  annual  visit  to  my  dear  old  contemporary.  I  have  so 
often  thought  it  would  be  my  last  visit  that  I  will  say  no 
more  about  it.  I  begin  to  hope,  from  certain  occasional 
feelings  of  fulness  in  my  heart,  that  I  may  go  off  suddenly, 
which  is  devoutly  to  be  wished.  I  should  better  like  to 
have  a  moment  to  say  farewell,  and  to  say  to  my  poor 


494  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1845 

sister,  '  Don't  be  afraid  to  follow  me.'  But  these  are 
foolish  speculations,  and  are,  luckily,  much  better  ordered 
for  us  than  we  could  order  them  for  ourselves.  I  have 
nothing  to  settle — nothing  to  wish — but  to  die  in  good 
fellowship  with  all  my  fellow-creatures,  and  not  to  lose 
my  confidence  in  the  infinite  mercies  of  the  Almighty, 
who  has  called  such  frail  beincrs  into  existence. 


1846]  LETTER   TO   MR.    EVERETT.  495 


1846. 

Tittenhanger,  May  lih. — I  will  not  leave  this  place 
without  testifying  to  myself  that  I  have  again  made 
my  appearance  here,  again  been  received  with  open  arms 
by  my  dear  old  contemporary,  and  again  found  her  better 
than  I  expected  from  the  accounts  I  had  heard  of  her 
great  weakness. 

Amongst  Miss  Berry's  occasional  correspondents  was 
Mr.  Everett,  of  the  United  States,  for  some  time  resident 
in  England,  and  much  valued  by  those  who  enjoyed  the 
pleasure  of  his  society  in  this  country.  He  had  apparently 
sent  Miss  Berrv  his  Inaugural  Discourse  at  Harvard 
College.  Her  letter  bears  no  stamp  of  the  decay  in  which 
she  lived  in  constant  dread,  and  the  handwriting  scarcely 
varies  from  that  of  her  early  journals  : — 

Richmond,  2oth  August  1846. 

Dear  Mr.  Everett, — If  I  had  not  now  lying  in  my  writing- 
case  a  letter  half  wi'itten  to  you  near  a  twelvemonth  ago,  in 
answer  to  that  you  so  kindly  addressed  to  me  immediately  on 
your  first  return  to  Boston,  I  should  really  not  now  venture  to 
intrude  on  your  valuable  time  my  thanks  for  your  flattering 
recollection  in  sending  me  your  inaugural  discourse  at  Harvard 
College. 

My  approbation  can  in  no  respect  add  weight  to  its  excellence, 
nor  my  opinions  to  its  reasoning,  nor  my  admiration  to  its  good 
taste ;  but  it  wiil  be  a  sort  of  satisfaction  to  my  own  mind — a 
sort  of  association  to  the  varied  excellence  of  yours — while  to  you 
it  will  be  a  sort  of  assurance  that  you  have  spoken  to  the  feelings 
and  understandings  of  that  large  order  of  intellects  among 
whom  I  may  venture  to  class  myself. 


496  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1846 

Your  opinion  of  the  importance  of  physical  as  well  as  mental 
education  is  dwelt  on  with  reasons  which  should  influence  this 
our  Old  World  quite  as  much  as  it  can  those  to  whom  you  speak ; 
for  our  youth,  when  after  leaving  college  they  become  their  own 
masters,  are  apt  to  seek  such  violent  exertions  as  hunting, 
rowing,  cricket,  &c.,  as  can  only  be  made  wholesome  by  previous 
habits  and  training. 

You  must  allow  me  to  admire  your  opinion  and  counsel  as  to 
the  cultivation  of  classical  learning  as  of  essential  service,  not 
only  in  framing  the  taste  and  style,  but  of  influencing  the  mind 
and  all  its  faculties  in  after-life. 

Let  me  add,  your  truly  pious  wish  that  the  means  could  be 
found  of  avoiding  the  paralysing  influence  of  routine  and  habit 
in  religious  services,  and  infusing  new  life  into  duties  now  per- 
formed as  mere  barren  forms. 

The  pleasure  which  you  say  you  receive  from  recalling 
England  and  its  society,  I  assure  you  is  amply  repaid  by  that 
society's  remembrance  of  you — a  remembrance  which  I  have 
rarely  before  seen  extended  to  the  New  World. 

My  sister  desires  to  be  particularly  recalled  to  your  memory. 

Our  friends  kindly  continue  to  surround  us  with  every  atten- 
tion which  could  lead  us  to  forget  the  rapid  approach  to  a  final 
separation,  did  not  the  still  more  rapid  decline  of  all  powers, 
both  of  mind  and  body,  for  ever  keep  in  view  the  fallutie 
semita  viice  in  which  we  are  still  lingering.  I  say  this  without 
any  of  the  depression  which  often  accompanies  it,  and  endeavour 
still  to  make  the  most  of  the  hours  that  are  still  allowed  me,  and 
the  faculties  which  still  remain  low.  My  sister  and  Lady 
Charlotte  Lindsay  desire  to  unite  with  me  in  very  kind  remem- 
brance to  yourself  and  Mrs.  Everett. 

I  dare  not  venture  to  ask  to  hear-  from  you,  although  you 
must  know  how  much  any  intelligence  from  and  of  yourself 
would  be  valued  by  your  sincerely  attached  friend,  &c., 

M.  B. 


The  following  letters  from  Lady  Dufferin  (now  Lady 
GifFord)  contain  a  most  amusing  account  of  the  loss  and 
partial  recapture  of  goods  stolen  from  herself  and  from  her 
mother,  Mrs.  Sheridan  : — 


1846]  LETTER   FROM    LADY   DUFFERIN.  497 

Lady  Dufferin  to  Miss  Berry. 

Frampton  Hall,  Dorchester,  Saturday. 
Your  kind  little  note  followed  me  hither,  dear  Miss  Berry, 
which  must  account  for  my  not  having  answered  it  sooner.  As 
you  guessed,  I  was  obliged  to  follow  my  '  things '  (as  the  maids 
always  call  their  raiment)  into  the  very  jaws  of  the  law  !  I 
think  the  '  Old  Bailey '  is  a  charming  place.  We  were  introduced 
to  a  live  Lord  Mayor,  and  I  sat  between  two  Sheriffs.  The 
Common  Sergeant  talked  to  me  familiarly,  and  I  am  not  sure 
that  the  Grovernor  of  Newgate  did  not  call  me  '  Nelly.'  As  for 
the  Eev.  Mr.  Carver  (the  Ordinary),  if  the  inherent  vanity  of  my 
sex  does  not  mislead  me,  I  think  I  have  made  a  deep  impression 
there.  Altogether,  my  Old  Bailey  recollections  are  of  the  most 
pleasing  and  gratifying  nature.  It  is  true,  I  have  only  got  back 
three  pairs  and  a  half  of  stockings,  one  gown,  and  two  shawls ; 
but  that  is  but  a  trifling  consideration  in  studying  the  glorious 
institutions  of  our  country.  We  were  treated  with  the  greatest 
respect,  and  ham  sandwiches ;  and  two  magistrates  handed  us 
down  to  the  carriage.  For  my  part,  I  could  not  think  we  were 
in  the  criminal  court,  ^s  the  law  was  so  imcommonly  civil. 
But  I  will  reserve  any  observations  I  may  have  made  in  those 
pleasant  and  polite  regions  until  we  meet,  which  I  hope  will  be 
soon  after  I  leave  Frampton,  and  I  shall  make  it  a  point  to  call 
on  the  hermits  of  Curzon  Street  as  soon  as  I  go  to  town.  I  was 
so  glad  to  hear  such  excellent  accounts  of  your  health  and  looks 
from  Frederick  Pigou,  for  you  were  very  unwell  when  I  left 
England  about  this  time  two  years  ago.  Pray  keep  me  in  re- 
membrance, and  believe  me,  yours  very  truly, 

■   Nelly. 

Hampton  Court,  Oct.  22. 

Mt  deak  Miss  Beery, — I  began  a  little  note  to  you  the 
other  day,  to  thank  you  for  your  kind  remembrance  of  me,  and 
for  coming  so  far  to  see  me  (which  opportunity  I  was  very  sorry 
to  have  missed),  but  my  note,  in  the  agitating  agonies  of  packing 
up,  disappeared,  and  I  had  not  strength  of  mind  to  begin 
another.  My  mother  and  I  have  returned  to  this  place  for  a  few 
days  in  order  to  make  an  ineffectual  grasp  at  any  remaining 
property  that  we  may  have  in  the  world.  Of  course  you  have 
heard  that  we  were  robbed  and  murdered  the  other  night  by  a 

VOL.  III.  K  K 


498  *  MISS   beret's   journal.  [1846 

certain  soft-spoken  cook,  who  headed  a  storming  party  of 
banditti  thro'  my  mother's  kitchen  window  ;  if  not,  you  will  see 
the  full,  true,  and  dreadful  particulars  in  the  papers,  as  we  are 
to  be  '  had  up '  at  the  Old  Bailey  on  Monday  next  for  the  trial. 
We  have  seen  a  great  deal  of  life,  and  learnt  a  great  deal  of 
the  criminal  law  of  England  this  week — knowledge  cheaply  pur- 
chased at  the  cost  of  all  my  wardrobe  and  all  my  mother's  plate. 
We  have  gone  thro'  two  examinations  in  court;  they  were  very 
hurrying  and  agitating  affairs,  and  I  had  to  kiss  either  the 
Bible  or  the  magistrate,  I  don't  recollect  which,  but  it  smelt  of 
thumbs.  The  magistrates  seemed  to  take  less  interest  in  my 
clothes  than  in  my  mother's  spoons — I  suppose  from  some  secret 
affinity  or  congeniality  which  they'  were  conscious  of,  '  Similis 
gaudet '  something — (I  have  lost  my  Latin  with  the  rest  of  my 
property).  When  I  say  '  Similis,'  I  don't  po  much  allude  to  the 
purity  of  the  metal  as  to  its  particular  form. 

I  find  that  the  idea  of  personal  property  is  a  fascinating  illu- 
sion, for  our  goods  belong,  in  fact,  to  our  country  and  not  to  us ; 
and  that  the  petticoats  and  stockings  which  I  have  fondly  ima- 
gined mine  are  really  the  petticoats  of  Grreat  Britain  and  Ireland. 
I  am  now  and  then  indulged  with  a  distant  glimpse  of  my  most 
necessary  garments  in  the  hands  of  different  policemen ;  bvit,  '  in 
this  stage  of  the  proceedings,'  may  do  no  more  than  wistfully 
recognise  them.  Even  on  such  occasions,  the  words  of  justice 
are  :  '  Policeman  B  25,  produce  your  gowns.'  '  Letter  A  36, 
identify  your  lace.'  '  Letter  C,  tie  up  your  stockings.'  All 
this  is  harrowing  to  the  feelings,  but  one  cannot  have  everything 
in  this  life !  We  have  obtained  justice,  and  can  easily  wait  for 
a  change  of  linen.  Hopes  are  held  out  to  us  that  at  some 
vague  period  in  the  lapse  of  time  we  may  be  allowed  a  wear 
out  of  our  raiment — at  least,  so  much  of  it  as  may  have  resisted 
the  wear  and  tear  of  justice  ;  and  my  poor  mother  looks  confi- 
dently forward  to  being  restored  to  the  bosom  of  her  silver  tea- 
pot. But  I  don't  know  !  I  begin  to  look  upon  all  property  with 
a  philosophic  eye,  as  unstable  in  its  nature,  and  liable  to  all 
sort^  of  pawnbrokers ;  moreover,  the  police  and  I  have  so  long 
had  my  clothes  in  common,  that  I  shall  never  feel  at  home  in 
them  again.  To  a  virtuous  mind,  the  idea  that  *  Inspector 
Dowsett '  examined  into  all  one's  hooks  and  eyes,  tapes  and 
buttons,  &c.  &c.,  is  inexpressibly  painful.    But  I  cannot  pursue 

A  A 


184G]  LETTER   FROM   LADY   DUFFERIN.  499 

that  view  of  the  subject.  Let  me  hope,  dear  Miss  Berry,  that 
you  feel  for  us  as  we  really  deserve,  and  that  you  wish  me  well 
'  thro'  my  clothes '  on  Monday  next !  If  I  were  sure  you  are  at 
Richmond  still,  I  might  endeavour  to  return  your  kind  visit ; 
but  at  present  our  costumes  are  too  light,  and  our  hearts  too 
heavy,  for  the  empty  forms  and  ceremonies  of  social  intercourse. 
I  hope,  however,  to  see  you  ere  very  long ;  and  with  very  kind 
remembrances  to  your  sister,  believe  me. 

Yours  very  truly, 

Helen  A.  Dufferin. 


K  K  2 


500  MISS   BEREY'S   journal.  [1847-48 


1847-48. 
JOUENAL. 

Petersham,  Saturday,  July  Zrd. — Here  I  am  still ;  thus 
far  advanced  in  another  year!  I  am  never  ten  days 
without  an  attack  of  those  pulsations  of  heart ;  still,  this 
is  not  acute  pain,  and  I  must  be  and  I  am  grateful. 

Tittenhanger,  Monday,  November  8th. — I  will  write  a 
line  or  two  to  cojistater  my  appearance  at  my  old  contem- 
porary's. I  find  both  her  and  myself  much  disabled 
since  we  last  met  here,  a  year  and  a  half  ago. 

From  Countess  of  Morley  to  Miss  Berry. 

Saltram,  6th  Jan.  1848. 
Dearest  Miss  Berry, — The  sight  of  your  writing  was  very 
refreshing  to  my  eyes,  for  I  began  to  fancy  your  right  hand  had 
lost  its  cunning,  as  I  had  no  unanswered  letter  of  yours  weigh- 
ing on  my  conscience,  and  it  was  long  since  I  had  direct  infor- 
mation of  you.  I  have  heard  two  or  three  collateral  reports 
of  the  joys  of  Curzon  Street,  and  thereby  felt  satisfied  that  you 
were  pretty  well.  Thank  you  thousands  of  times  for  the  really 
good  account  you  give  me  of  yourself. .  I  do  like  you,  of  all 
people'  in  the  world,  warning  one  against  octogenarianism,  when 
all  you  think  and  look  and  speak  and  do,  tend  to  the  conclusion 
that  the  enjoyments  and  attractions  of  youth,  and  even  the 
middle  ages,  are  '  flat  and  unprofitable '  when  compared  with 
those  of  riper  years.  Somebody  says,  'I  look  for  old  age  as  a 
cheerful  and  happy  time;  the  affections  are  often  full  as  warm 
as  they  ever  are.  Well  may  the  affections  of  piety  be  so  !  they 
almost  grasp  the  prize  that  shall  crown  them ;  the  battle  is 


1848]  COUNTESS    OF   MORLEY   TO   MISS    BERRY.  501 

almost  fought,  the  victory  is  near  at  hand.'  You  and  I  have 
talked  on  these  matters,  and  I  think  we  fully  agree  in  this 
view  of  life — as  it  advances  onward,  it  is  anything  but  a  melan- 
choly prospect.     .     .     . 

Grod  bless  ye  both,  my  very  dear  friends ! 

Believe  me,  ever  most  affectionately  yours, 

F.  MOELET. 

Extract  of  a  Letter  from  Countess  of  Morley  to  Miss  Berry. 

Feb.  27. 
Dearest  Miss  Berry,  —  You  have  no  business  to  say  ill- 
natured  things  of  old  age.  It  is  an  evil  or  a  good  (like  most 
things)  according  as  we  take  it;  but  it  is  scarcely  an  evil  to 
you ;  and,  as  I  always  take  you  for  my  model  in  that  matter, 
it  shall  not  be  an  evil  to  me,  if,  please  Grod,  I  live  two  or  thrc^ 
years  longer,  and  have  no  lingering  painful  disease  to  prevent 
my  enjoying  and  making  the  best  of  it.  You  are  surrounded, 
almost  as  you  were  in  your  youth,  by  those  who  admire  and 
love  you  with  all  their  hearts  and  souls.  You  have  a  large 
volume  of  past  events  in  your  memory  to  interest  you  at  all 
times ;  you  have  still  a  cheerful  enjoying  spirit,  and  above  all 
that  blessed  hope  that,  as  the  world  and  its  pleasures  draw  to  a 
close,  a  far,  far  higher  state  of  enjoyment  awaits  you.  'Tis  for 
'  crabbed  age '  to  grumble — standing  alone  like  a  blasted  yew 
in  a  churchyard,  with  nothing  around  but  the  graves  of  con- 
temporaries— without  the  sweet  compensation  of  those  gentle, 
kindly,  warm  feelings  and  affections,  which  attach  all  who  come 
within  their  influence,  old  and  young,  and  make  life,  if  it  were 
to  last  as  long  as  did  that  of  Methuselah,  cheerful  and  happy. 
Now  is  not  that  the  truth  ?  I  begin  to  have  a  craving  to  drive 
up  to  your  door,  and  to  have  a  merry  evening  at  dear  No.  8. 
.     .     .     God  bless  you,  &c.  &c. 

Extract  of  a  Letter  from  a  Friend  at  Paris. 

"  June  30,  1848. 

Dearest  Miss  Berry, — Though  I  dare  say  Lady  Dillon  will 

tell  you  that  I  and  mine  are  safe,  I  write  you  a  few  lines  to  tell 

you  so  myself,  now  that  my  apoplectic  fit  has  gone  off.    I  know 

you  take  the  '  Journal  des  Debats,'  which  is  not  one  of  the  eleven 


502  MISS   berry's   JOURJN^AL.  [l848 

suppressed  papers ;  those  who  were  ahonnes  to  *  La  Presse '  or 
*  L'Asserablee  Nationale  '  are  in  a  bad  way.  Emile  de  Grirardin 
has  been  in  prison  ever  since  the  etat  de  siege.  I  cannot  see 
sufficient  to  warrant  such  severity  in  the  two  articles  pointed 
out  in  his  journal  as  the  cause  of  this  measure.    Our  first  legion 

of  National  Guards,  in  which is  a  lieutenant,  was  the 

whole  time,  from  Friday  morning  till  Monday  evening,  out,  and 
in  the  thick  of  the  fight  on  this  side  of  the  water,  at  the  Clos 
St.  Lazare,  the  terminus  of  the  Chemin-de-fer  du  Nord,  the 
Place  de  la  Bastille,  and  Faubourg  St.  Antoine,  where  on  Mon- 
day morning  they  assisted  in  taking  five  barricades.  Thank 
Grod !  he  escaped  unwounded,  though  twice  hit  by  balls  on  his 
epaulette ;  had  he  been  an  inch  taller,  he  would  probably  have 
been  killed.  The  carnage  was  dreadful ;  the  blood  ran  down 
the  gutters  of  the  Faubourg  St.  Antoine  in  streams,  but  the 
newspapers  tell  you  all  about  this  frightful  insurrection.  There 
is  still  much  danger  for  officers  of  all  arms ;  shots  are  constantly 
fired  at  them  from  windows.     One  at  eleven  o'clock  yesterday 

morning,   from  a  house  in   the  Faubourg  du happily 

missed  the  officer  at  whom  it  was  directed ;  some  of  the  mobile 
rushed  in,  and  brought  out  the  assassin,  a  blacksmith,  and  shot 
him  instantly.     Every  night  we  illuminate,  so  as  to  make  the 
streets  so  light,  that  the  patroles  can  move  in  safety  through 
them.     They  are  still  searching  for  arms  and  ammunition ;  a 
vast  deal  have  been  found  concealed  in  this  quarter,  which  has 
been  pretty  quiet,  though  the  National  Ateliers  at  Monceaux 
are  near  us,  and  La  Petite  Pologne,  a  very  bad  quarter,  and  mal 
hablte,  is  in  this  neighbourhood.     The  Chef  de  Bataillon,  an 
ouvrier-mecanicien,  that  they  elected  in  March,  has  given  in 
his  demission;  they  talk  of to  replace  him,  and  the  re- 
sponsibility is  very  great.     Think  of  that  ouvrier  seeing  his 
father  and  two  brothers  on  one  of  the  barricades  he  had  to  lead 
his  men  against,  while  his  sisters  were  handing  cartridges  or 
drink  to  the  insurgents,  and   his  father's  house  contained  a 
depot  of  ammunition !    Do  you  wonder  his  men  thought  him 
un  peu  mou  on  the  occasion  ?  but  what  is  more,  they  say  he 
did  not  follow  the  line  of  march  traced  out  by  Lamoriciere,  but 
took  them  by  back  streets  where  they  were  mitraille.     This 
most  probably  was  not  treachery;  he  did  not  know  that  the 
insurgents  were  placed  in  their  houses,  but  he  did  wish  to  keep 
away  as  much  as  possible  from  the  home  of  his  family.     We 


1848]  LETTER   FROM   A   PRIEXD   AT   PARIS.  503 

are  sorry  that  Cavaignac  has  kept  Carnot  and  Eunot  in  the 
ministry,  but  are  very  glad  to  have  got  rid  of  the  Executive 
and  Tubat,  Duclerc,  and  Florion.  -I  hope  the  etat  de  siege  may 
continue  for  some  time,  for  there  are  many  dangerous  indi- 
viduals about.  I  believe,  beyond  the  fortifications,  it  would  be 
by  no  means  safe  either  to  live  in  a  lonely  house  or  to  walk 
alone.  Half  the  formats  liberes  had  broken  their  bans  and 
come  to  Paris;  they  no  doubt  committed  the  dreadful  atrocities 
we  hear  of.  It  was  rather  comical,  I  hear,  on  Monday,  Tuesday, 
and  Wednesday,  to  see  everyone,  men,  women,  and  children, 
stopped  and  examined  at  every  corner  of  a  street.  There  was 
one  of  these  posts  under  Elizabeth's  window,  as  hers  is  a  corner 
house,  and  it  greatly  amused  my  little  grand-daughter.  The 
National  Guard  in  general  discriminated,  but  the  little  mobiles 
thought  it  good  fun  to  palper  every  woman  that  came  across 
them.  They  took  from  one  woman  a  large  bundle  of  cartridges. 
Every  trick  imaginable  was  put  in  practice  to  feonvey  arms  and 
ammunition  to  the  insurgents,  and  women  were  found  with  pistols 
and  sabres  under  their  clothes  ;  hence  the  orders  given.  Those 
who  like  myself  did  not  like  to  be  searched  stayed  at  home. 
They  say  that  M.  de  la  Rederte,  who  has  the  same  reputation 
that  Pozzo  had  some  thirty  years  ago,  volunteered  to  stand 
sentry  at  a  crossing. 

Landrin  is  to  be  our  new  Prefet  of  Police.  We  had  rather 
have  had  another  President  of  the  Assemblee  than  Marie  ;  how- 
ever, he  was  latterly  the  best  of  the  Executive.  I  suppose  we 
shall  never  again  see  such  an  outbreak ;  more  blood  was  shed 
in  three  days,  Soult  says,  than  at  Austerlitz  or  at  Saragossa; 
but  we  shall  have  many  shots,  I  have  no  doubt.  It  is  a  horrid 
life.  '  Mon  Paris  est  gate,'  for  the  rest  of  my  days.  I  write  in 
haste  not  to  miss  the  post. 

Ever  most  affectionately  yours. 

Letter  from  Mr.  Everett  to  Miss  Berry. 

Cambridge,  U.S.A.,  19tli  September,  1848. 

My  dear  Miss  Berry, — I  will  not  tell  you  how  much  plea- 
sure your  letter  of  the  3rd  September  1847  gave  me,  because 
you  will  justly  say  that  if  there  was  a  word  of  truth  in  such  pro- 
fessions, I  should  show  my  gratification  by  expressing  it  at  once. 


504  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1848 

But  I  am  indeed  very  busy  and — but  never  mind ; — I  am  in  all 
sincerity  truly  grateful  for  your  letters ;  truly  proud  of  the 
friendly  interest  you  still  take  in  us. 

My  year  has  passed  away  in  a  quiet  round  of  duties,  which, 
affording  no  incidents,  is  one  reason  why  I  do  not  write  to  you 
more  punctually. 

The  subject  of  greatest  interest  to  us  on  this  side  of  the  water, 
during  the  past  twelvemonth,  has  been  the  condition  of  affairs 
in  Europe.  Do  you  recollect  that  when  you  wrote  me  a  year 
ago,  the  then  recent  Praslin  tragedy  was  a  topic  of  sufficient 
interest  to  occupy  a  distinct  place  in  your  letter  ?  How  insig- 
nificant does  such  an  event  now  seem,  after  what  the  past  year 
has  exhibited  to  us  in  every  country  in  Europe ! — each  steamer 
almost  bringing  us  the  intelligence  of  some  amazing  catastrophe. 
We  feel  the  extent  to  which  the  continent  is  shaken  by  the 
number  and  character  of  the  fugitives  it  drives  to  our  shores.  A 
few  days  ago  a  widow,  who  professed  to  be,  and  I  believe  is,  a 
relative  of  ,  came  out  to  New  York  as  a  steerage  pas- 
senger, and  is  now  living  on  charity.  About  three  weeks  since. 
Father  de  Vico,  of  the  Collegio  Romano  at  Rome,  who  has  six- 
teen times  been  the  first  discoverer  of  comets,  paid  us  a  visit  here 
at  Cambridge.  The  liberals  (?)  of  the  pontifical  city  drove  out 
the  Jesuits.  They  were  willing  to  allow  Father  de  Vico,  out  of 
tenderness  for  his  comets,  to  stay  at  Rome  with  two  of  his 
learned  colleagues.  But  the  Jesuits  triumphed  over  the  astrono- 
mer ;  and  the  good  father  shook  off  the  dust  of  the  ungrateful 
city.  M.  Agassiz,  whom  you  well  know  by  reputation,  estab- 
lished himself  here  in  a  chair  of  Zoology,  founded  for  him  before 
the  troubles  began  in  Europe.  But  one  of  the  first  measures 
of  the  liberal  party  of  the  Canton  of  Neuchatel,  of  which  he 
was  a  citizen,  was  to  break  up  the  collegiate  institution  in 
that  city,  and  turn  the  professors  out  upon  the  world;  stop- 
ping also  a  travelling  pension  which  the  King  of  Prussia  at 
Alexander  von  Humboldt's  instance  had  granted  poor  Agassiz 
out  of  the  treasury  of  Nevichatel.  His  old  friends  and  colleagues 
are  constantly  arriving  here ;  he  has  quite  a  colony  of  them 
(honest  men  who,  speaking  nothing  but  French,  have  come 
to  lecture  to  us  Yankees,  who  speak  nothing  but  English,  as 
George  Primrose  went  to  Holland  to  teach  the  Dutch),  alread}'' 
gathered   round   him,  and   quartered  upon    his   own   humble 


1848]  MR.  EVERETT   TO    MISS   BERRY.  505 

resources,  four  in  a  room.  He  showed  me  the  other  day  a  letter 
from  an  aged  professor  in  Heidelberg,  praying  him  to  find  a 
buyer  in  America  for  a  choice  library  of  12,000  volumes,  which 
its  owner,  who  has  spent  his  life  in  collecting  it,  can  now  no 
longer  use,  and  wishes  to  exchange  for  a  farm  in  America. 
These  are  incidents  of  your  tremendous  vicissitudes  of  an 
humble  academic  cast  which  have  passed  within  the  range  of 
my  individual  observation.  There  is  probably  no  person,  having 
any  relations  with  Europe,  social  and  commercial,  that  cannot 
tell  the  same  story.  Immigration  pours  in  upon  us  in  a  swell- 
ing tide  ;  not  less  than  three  or  four  thousand  a  year !  You 
must  not  blame  us  for  grasping  at  Oregon  and  dismembering 
Mexico,  while  you  are  pouring  in  upon  us  these  needy  myriads. 
The  outlet  we  are  thereby  able  to  afford  the  overcrowded  popu- 
lation of  Europe  is  a  very  important  mitigation  of  the  distresses 
of  their  condition.  Then  when  one  turns  his  thoughts  from 
these  troubles  and  trials  of  humble  men — the  nameless  cyphers 
in  the  great  account  of  humanity — to  the  fate  of  the  privi- 
leged (?)  few  who  give  import  and  significance  to  the  tale  of 
human  fortune — when  one  contemplates  not  'the  fear  of  change 
which  perplexes  monarchs,'  but  the  frightful  realization  of  that 
fear  in  almost  every  palace  of  continental  Europe — one  ceases  to 
wonder  that  Father  de  Vico  has  discovered  sixteen  comets,  and 
yields  a  ready  belief  to  Sir  John  Herschel's  calculation,  that 
there  are  three  millions  of  these  omnibus  bodies  within  the 
orbit  of  Saturn. 

Meantime,  my  dear  friend,  I  rejoice  most  truly  with  you  that 
dear  old  England  has  thus  far  ridden  out  the  storm  so  nobly. 
Grod  grant  she  may  still  do  it !  I  have  no  fear  to  the  contrary  ; 
her  stability  has  not  been  the  growth  of  the  day.  Too  many 
centuries  and  generations  of  wise  and  good  men  and  women 
have  contributed  to  the  edifice,  and  it  is  "founded  on  a  rock  ' — 
the  rock  of  public  and  private  virtue. 

Dr.  Holland  occasionally  gratifies  me  with  a  hopeful  account 

of  your  health Remember  me   most   kindly  to  Miss 

Agnes  and  Lady  Charlotte  Lindsay,  and  believe  me,  my  dear 
Miss  Berry,  Your  affectionate,  faithful  friend, 

Edward  Everett. 

Curzon  Street,  Sunday^  November  12th. — I  am  sorry  I 


506  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1848 

did  not  write  a  line  in  this  book  yesterday,  when  I  might 
once  more  have  dated  from  Tittenhang;er,  where  I  had 
been  staying  from  Monday  the  6th,  and  wlien  I  left  my 
dear  old  friend  in  much  better  plight  than  for  several 
years  back,  both  with  regard  to  her  own  feelings  and  to 
her  existence. 

From  the  Countess  of  Morley  to  Miss  Berry. 

Saltram,  3rd  December,  1848. 

Dearest  Miss  Beery, — Corresponsively  speaking,  I  am  in 
nowise  a  punctilious  woman  as  to  the  question  of  debtor  and 
creditor ;  but  if  everybody  had  their  due,  a  letter  was  due  from 
you  to  me,  in  answer  to  one  I  did  myself  the  honour  to  address 
to  you  from  Bowood,  and  I  have  had  my  pen  on  the  half  cock 
ready  to  fire  at  you,  in  hopes  that  the  ricochet  would  bring  me 
a  good  report  of  you  and  your  proceedings.  However,  my 
ammunition  is  saved  by  your  small  dispatch  received  this 
morning,  by  which  I  may  infer  that  you  are  pretty  flourish- 
ing, as  you  only  refer  to  your  eighty -sixth  ailment,  which  I  hold 
to  be  a  very  light  matter,  and  to  you  above  all  people — with 
your  ears  and  your  eyes,  and  your  limbs  and  your  mind,  and 
your  zest,  and  your  capabilities  of  enjoyment  all  alive  and  kick- 
ing, as  if  you  were  eighteen,  instead  of  eighty -five !  Depend 
upon  it,  it  is  no  bad  position  to  be  safely  landed  on  the  isthmus 
between  this  world  and  a  better,  without  shipwreck  or  disaster ; 
to  look  calmly  back  on  the  storms  and  shoals  we  have  escaped ; 
to  feel  each  year  a  diminished  grief  for  those  we  have  lost  on 
our  side,  because  it  brings  us  nearer  to  the  hope  of  joining  them 
again  on  the  other ;  and  then  of  feeling  that,  through  the  mercy 
of  Grod  and  the  firm  faith  in  His  promises,  we  may  dare  to  look 
with  hope  and  confidence  to  that  other  world  !  No,  no  !  I  shan't 
waste  any  good  pity  on  you  in  the  enjoyment  of  your  isthmus ; 
nor  do  I  think  you  are  the  least  disposed  to  pity  yourself. 

Dear  Lady  Dunny*  has  been  here,  and  we  had  at  the  same 
time  the  John  Abel  Smiths  and  Lord  de  Mauley — very  good 
ingredients,  producing  an  excellent  result.     At  Port  Eliot,   I 

*  A  familiar  appellation  of  one  of  tlie  Miss  Berrys'  most  constant 
friends — Lady  de  Dunstauville.     Died  1865,  aged  eighty-eight. 


1848]  LETTER   TO    COUNTESS   OF   MOELEY.  507 

managed  to  hatch  a  cold,  which  I  came  back  to  nurse  on  Wed- 
nesday, and  have  abided  in  my  own  room  ever  since,  though 
to-day  I  am  better,  and  have  dressed  myself  like  a  gentlewoman 
and  returned  to  the  bosom  of  my  family,  though  I  am  still  not 
up  to  my  usual  vigour;  but  have  that  ricketty,  duck-in-a- 
hackney -coach  feeling  which  remains  for  some  days  after  a 
feverish  cold.  Poor  Charles  Buller  !  his  death  appears  to  have 
been  caused  by  typhus  fever.  Don't  you  hate  that  that  tran- 
quil, sacred.  Eternal  City  should  have  caught  the  odious  Revo- 
lutionary mania,  and  turn  out  just  as  wild  and  savage  and  tur- 
bulent as  Paris  ?     Alas !  alas !  what  times  we  live  in  ! 

Grod  bless  you,  my  dearest  Miss  Berry.  It  will  be  a  very 
great  pleasure  to  find  oneself  knocking  at  the  door  of  No.  8 
Curzon  Street.     Best  of  loves  to  Miss  Agnes. 

Ever  your  most  affectionate, 

F.  jMorley. 

Letter  fromi  Miss  Berry  to  Countess  of  Morley. 

Curzon  Sti*eet :    Thursday,  Till  December,  1848, 

A  thousand  thanks  for  your  most  comfortable  letter  of  the 
3rd,  whether,  corresponsively  speaking,  I  deserved  it  or  not.  It 
came  most  opportunely,  for  I  have  been  more  than  ordinarily 
unwell  for  the  last  week,  and  am  much  more  than  ordinarily 
weakened  by  it,  although,  therefore,  I  can  less  than  usual  agree 
with  you  in  your  statement  of  what  I  have  to  meet  and  combat, 
with  the  ills  of  eighty-five  years  of  life.  I  most  entirely  agree 
with  you  in  your  view  of  the  prospects,  the  consolations,  and  the 
comforts  of  that  state  of  existence,  when  we  can  look  back  to  the 
sufferings,  the  anxieties,  the  baffled  hopes,  the  cruel  disappoint- 
ments, the  poignant  griefs,  the  crushed  dictates  of  high  aspira- 
tions, and  the  quiet  sufferings  of  tender  hearts,  at  discovering 
that,  short-lived  as  we  are,  our  sentiments  often  die  before  us. 
To  have  cast  all  this  behind  one,  I  must  think  a  great  relief, 
and  I  pity  those  who  do  not  feel  it  so.  But  at  the  foot  of  that 
isthmus  which  you  so  well  describe,  lays  a  morass  in  which  mere 
physical  weakness  often  more  than  half  smothers  all  powers  but 
those  of  mere  existence,  and  all  sense  but  of  the  failure  of  those 
powers.  This,  this  is  death,  not  the  -  mere  yielding  up  of 
breath  which  can  no  longer  be  of  any  value. 


508  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1848 

I  am  interrupted,  and  you  must  have  had  enough  of  me  by 
this  time ;  so  God  bless  you. 

M.  Berry. 

Can  I  send  off  a  letter  with  this  date  without  mentioning 
Macaulay's  book  ?  Of  all  the  seducing  books  you  ever  read,  I 
will  venture  to  say  you  will  agree  this  is  the  first.  I  hope  you 
have  got  it  already,  or  you  must  wait  for  it,  as  the  whole  2,000 
copies  are  already  sold,  and  a  second  edition  preparing. 

Extract  of  Letter  from  Miss  Berry  to  Countess  of  Morley. 

24th  December,  1848. 

.  .  .  You  may  have  heard  from  some  correspondent  in 
London  wanting  a  paragraph  to  garnish  their  letter,  that  I  am 
wonderfully  well ;  have  been  seeing  people  every  night,  and 
had  Macaulay  to  dine  with  me,  and  six  other  men  to  meet  him  ; 

and  this,  you  may  easily  conceive,  may  be  all  true 

Talking  of  Macaulay,  I  hope  you  have  got  his  book,  as  the 
very  most  entertaining  reading  I  ever  met  with.  .  .  .  The 
first  edition  of  3,000  copies  was  sold  in  the  first  week  ;  another, 
of  3,000  more,  is  to  come  out  on  Thursday  next. 

He  bears  his  honours  most  quietly ;  but  the  men  who  dined 
with  him  here  last  week  said  they  had  never  seen  him  so  enter- 
taining. 


1849]  LETTER   FROM    LADY   C.    LINDSAY.  509 


1849. 

This  year  the  Miss  Berrys  sustained  a  heavy  loss  in  the 
death  of  Lady  Charlotte  Lindsay.  She  had  been  their 
most  constant  companion  for  years  and  years,  and  dear  to 
both  as  though  she  had  been  another  sister.  Her  affec- 
tion for  them  is  so  tenderly  expressed  in  a  little  note  that 
had  been  preserved  amongst  Miss  Berry's  correspondence, 
that  it  claims  a  place  here  to  show  how  worthy  these 
firm  friends  were  of  each  other's  attachment. 

Saturday,  December  14. 

I  cannot  wait  till  half-past  six,  but  must  say  a  word  now  to 
thank  you  all  for  the  kind  tokens  I  got  yesterday.  You  say 
that  you  are  '  the  most  grateful  of  my  friends.'  Dearest  Mary, 
that  gratitude  is  due  to  your  Creator,  who  made  you  so  lovable 
that  I  could  not  help  loving  you.  But  what  gratitude  do  I  owe 
Him,  who,  when  I  had  the  misfortune  to  survive  all  those  who 
were  nearest  and  dearest  to  me,  disposed  two  hearts,  like  yours 
and  dear  Agnes  s,  to  receive  into  your  intimacy  and  warm  affec- 
tion a  heart  that  must  otherwise  have  withered  in  hopeless  soli- 
tude !  Whenever  either  of  you  feel  low  or  discouraged,  as  we  all 
do  at  times,  say  to  yourselves,  '  There  is  one  creature  at  least 
who  owes  to  us  the  comfort  of  her  latter  days.' 

Dear  Anne's  *  remembrances  I  truly  value  ;  they  are,  like  her- 
self, so  judicious  and  useful.  Pray  thank  her  for  me^ — and  now 
farewell,  till  dinner.     Your  own 

Charlotte. 

Lady  Charlotte  died  October  the  25th.  The  following 
letters  have  been  kept  out  of  the  many  that  poured  in 
upon  them  expressive  of  their  writers'  sympathy  on  this 
trying  occasion  : — 

*  Miss  Tui-ner. 


510  MISS   berry's   journal.  [1849 

FroTYi  the  Countess  of  Morley  to  Miss  Bei^y. 

Bowood,  Sunday,  28tli  October,  1849, 

My  dearest  Miss  Berry, — I  cannot  resist  the  impulse  I  feel 
to  trouble  you  with  one  word  to  express  that  which  I  know  you 
will  believe  in,  without  my  expressing  it  at  all — my  deep  sym- 
pathy in  your  sorrow. 

I  know  from  your  last  letter  that  you  were  prepared  for  what 
has  happened,  and  that  you  had  even  for  some  months  foreseen 
that  a  change  was  working ;  but  I  fear  you  were  not  prepared  for 
the  suddenness  of  the  great  change.  The  best  of  all  consolations 
you  have  is  the  peacefulness  of  her  end !  So  happy  a  termina- 
tion of  an  existence  so  gentle  and  so  good.  Grod  grant  us  all 
the  like  !     What  can  we  wish  for  a  greater  blessing  ? 

You  shall  not  write  to  me  yourself,  no  more  shall  Miss  Agnes  ; 
but  let  me  have  a  word  from  anyone  about  you  who  can  tell 
me*  how  you  both  are,  and  I  shall  be  most  grateful.  All  here 
do  feel,  as  I  do,  most  deeply  for  you.  I  am  most  anxious  for  a 
little  word  of  information  about  vourself. 

Grod  bless  and  support  you  both,  my  very  dear  friends.  Be- 
lieve me  ever  most  truly  and  affectionately  yours, 

F.  Morley. 

From  the  Hon.  R.  K.  Craven  to  Miss  Berry. 

Naples,  November  16,  1849. 

My  dear  Friends, — However  painful  the  obligation  imposed 
upon  me  by  the  reciprocal  feelings  of  affectionate  regard  which 
have  united  us  for  so  many  years,  and  the  severe  shock  which 
they  have  received,  I  should  ill  deserve  a  continuance  of  those 
sentiments  on  your  part  if  I  deferred  any  longer  expressing, 
not  all  I  have  suffered  from  so  unexpected  a  blow,  but  how 
greatly  its  effects  have  been  aggravated  by  the  conviction  of  the 
share  of  sorrow  which  must  fall  to  your  lot. 

I  cannot  assume  the  thankless  task  of  offering  consolation 
which  I  feel  unequal  to  receive;  and  my  object  in  writing  is 
merely  to  assure  you  of  the  depth  and  sincerity  of  the  sympathy 
which  binds  me  to  your  regrets,  and  to  solicit  permission  not  to 
sever  a  correspondence  which,  once  a  great  enjoyment,  must 
now  become  a  comfort. 

You  are  well  aware  that  my  communications,  though  directed 


1849]  LETTER   FEOM   IIOX.    E.    K.   CRAVEX.  511 

in  form  to  our  dear  lost  friend,  were  in  fact  equally  addressed 
to  yourselves,  and  that  in  the  continuance  of  the  correspondence 
which  I  request,  the  transfer  of  one  name  for  another  is  the 
only  change  I  can  contemplate. 

To  these  lines  I  hope  for  a  speedy  reply,  if  even  of  only  a 
few,  to  inform  me  of  your  state  of  mind  and  health ;  but  in 
future  I  shall  not  be  so  unreasonable  as  to  exact  strict  regularity 
of  response  from  such  as,  like  yourselves,  have  to  fulfil  a  con- 
stant course  of  social  and  friendly  duties,  if  you  will  allow  me 
to  write  whenever,  not  inclination  (for  that  I  am  certain  of), 
but  materials,  with  a  sheet  of  paper,  may  suggest  the  act. 

Of  political  or  private  intelligence  of  any  interest  I  can  offer 
no  sample ;  His  Holiness  is  still  at  Portici — that  is,  he  sleeps 
there,  but  most  of  his  days  are  occupied  in  visiting  monasteries 
or  public  establishments  in  the  Capital,  diversified  by  an  occa- 
sional visit,  by  railroad,  to  Caserta,  where  the  Court  is  established, 
and  lately  by  an  excursion  to  his  own  kingdom  of  Benevento. 
There  were  accredited  rumours  of  his  provisional  return  to  the 
Holy  City,  and  the  twenty-fifth  of  this  month  had  even  been 
fixed  upon  as  the  certain  perio'd  for  that  important  event ; 
but  the  news  of  the  change  of  Ministry  in  France  seems  to 
have  excited  misgivings  of  some  obstacles  to  this  wished-for 
consummation,  and  everything  is  thrown  again  into  doubt  and 
uncertainty.  Naples,  never  very  animated  at  this  season,  ex- 
cept by  the  arrival  of  strangers,  is  more  than  usually  dull 
from  their  deficiency,  and  many  other  causes.  The  quarantines 
against  every  port,  and  indeed  every  capital,  except  Eome, 
will  of  course  contribute  greatly  to  keep  away  all  aliens.  The 
public  native  mind  is  much  oppressed  by  uneasiness  and 
uncertainty;  numberless  arrestations  have  been  effected,  and 
indeed  continue ;  and  the  ignorance  of  the  community  as  to 
the  real  motives  of  all  these  preventive  or  repressive  measures, 
and  the  impossibility  of  guessing  when  the  trials  will  take 
place,  or  what  will  be  their  result,  has  cast  universal  gloom  on 
the  surface  of  the  whole  place,  as  well  as  on  the  higher  ranks  of 
society.  Matters  in  Sicily  seem  going  on  satisfactorily,  under 
the  direction  of  its  conqueror,  Filangier,  who  is  in  fact  the  only 
individual  who  rises  above  the  common  herd  in  any  one  article 
of  capacity  or  honesty.  I  have  been  in  town  rather  less  than 
a  fortnight,  having  quitted  my  ruralities,  which  have  shared  the 


512  MISS   BEKRY'S   journal.  [1849-51 

fate  of  the  whole  kingdom,  in  having  been  wasted  by  the  driest 
summer  ever  known,  and  not  restored  or  refreshed  by  the  usual 
quantum  of  autumnal  rain,  which  is  yet  a  desideratum.  Not 
only  have  the  deciduous  trees  lost  their  ornaments  two  months 
earlier  than  customary,  but  the  evergreens  are  denuded,  and 
what  remains  of  leaves  upon  their  shrunken  limbs  is  a  kind  of 
dusty  cobweb  of  most  unsightly  quality. 

Knudtzon  and  Baillie  have  not  yet  resumed  their  stations  as 
household  gods  in  this  city,  b,ut  are,  I  am  told,  on  their  way. 
There  are  no  married  diplomates,  and  no  rich  or  illustrious 
foreigners,  so  society  has  but  an  indifferent  perspective  before 
it ;  but  I  believe  it  is  not  better  in  any  other  part  of  the 
peninsula.  As  to  myself,  I  am  not  more  flourishing  than  my 
neighbours,  having  been  worried  in  the  hot  weather  by  com- 
plaints denominated  nervous  by  the  faculty,  and  now,  in  the 
cooler  season,  distressed  by  other  ailings ;  but,  as  they  say  here, 
*  Bisogna  compativa  alia  debolezza  umane.'  And  now,  my 
dearest  friends,  be  so  good  as  to  join  in  that  benevolent 
feeling,  and  forgive  your  sincere  and  affectionate 

E.  K.  Craven. 


1850. 

Neithee  letters  of  any  interest  nor  journals  of  any  kind 
were  kept  during  this  year. 

1851. 

In  the  month  of  February  in  this  year,  died  at  Hampstead, 
Miss  Joanna  Baillie,  in  her  eighty-ninth  year. 


1852]  DEATH  OF  MISS  AGNES  BEERY.  513 


1852. 

THE  LAST  YEAR. 

The  year  opened  sadly  by  the  death  of  Miss  Agnes  Berry. 
She  had  been  failing  for  some  time,  and  in  January  her 
days  were  closed. 

Miss  Berry  says,  in  a  letter  to  a  relation,  '  her  death  was 
most  peaceful,  and  without  any  great  previous  suffering  : ' 
then,  speaking  of  the  effect  on  her  own  health,  she  adds, 
'  Certainly,  no  creature  had  ever  reason  to  be  so  grateful 
for  the  kindness,  the  sympathy,  and  the  affection  of  friends, 
as  myself.  In  short,  I  hope  I  am  tolerably  prepared  to 
follow  dear  Agnes  at  as  short  a  distance  as  I  ever  thought 
I  should,  and  of  which  we  have  so  often  talked  with 
mutual  satisfaction.' 

Miss  Agnes  was  buried  at  Petersham  Church.  Amongst 
the  mourners  were,  Mr.  Cayley,  sen.  (a  cousin);  the  Hon. 
Frederick  Byng  (also  a  distant  relation);  Mr.  Crauford, 
sen. ;  Mr.  William  Twopeny ;  Mr.  Kinglake ;  Mr.  Foley 
Wilmot.  Miss  Berry  insisted  on  attending  herself,  in  the 
church;  and  there  were  many  others  attending  volun- 
tarily, both  in  the  church  and  at  the  grave. 

Amono;st  the  friends  who  devoted  themselves  verv 
constantly  to  ministering  comfort  and  consolation  to  Miss 
Berry  during  these  weary  months  of  bereavement,  were 
Mrs.  Frederick  Elliot,*  and  the  friend  of  long  years' 
standing.  Lady  Scott.  But  little  remains  to  mark  the  last 
months  of  her  life.  A  few  letters  of  condolence  on  Miss 
Agnes'  death  were  kept ;    but  one  must  suppose  that, 

*  Wife  of  Frederick  Elliot,  Esq.,  sister  of  Sir  Erskine  Perry. 
VOL.  III.  L  L 


514  •  MISS   BEEKY'S   death.  [1852 

with  the  sense  of  approaching  death,  she  cared  httle  to 
preserve  any  letters  or  memoranda.  The  only  event  she 
has  recorded  in  a  letter  to  a  friend,  June  28,  1852,  was 
her  private  presentation  to  Her  Majesty. 

'  I  have  had  the  honour,'  she  says, '  of  having  been  sent 
for  by  the  Queen,  who,  by  my  friend  the  Duchess  of 
Sutherland,  desired  (as  she  said)  to  make  my  acquaintance. 
Luckily,  I  had  strength  enough  to  carry  me  through  the 
interview  very  agreeably ;  and  I  was  much  pleased  to  find 
our  sovereign  so  pleasing  and  so  unaffected  a  person,  to 
say  nothing  of  her  extreme  graciousness  to  me.' 

Miss  Berry  had  been  staying  in  the  autumn,  with  Lady 
Scott,  at  Petersham.  Towards  the  end  of  October  she 
returned  to  London.  A  very  decided  change  took  place 
in  her  health;  the  illness  soon  became  serious.  Miss 
Ferguson  arrived  in  Curzon  Street,  to  stay  with  her,  on 
the  11th  of  November  ;  and  a  few  days  later,  seeing 
there  was  no  hope  of  recovery,  Lady  Scott  came  to  town 
also,  that  she  might  be  near  her. 

Miss  Berry  was  right  in  her  conviction,  that  the  one 
sister  would  not  long  survive  the  other! — the  same  year 
was  fatal  to  both.  On  the  20th  of  November,  at  mid- 
night, without  a  struggle,  scarcely  a  sigh,  she  breathed 
hex  last,  in  her  90th  year.  She  was  buried  by  her  sister 
at  Petersham.* 

The  chief  mourners  were,  Mr.  Crauford;  the  Hon. 
PrederickByng;  Dr.  Milman,  Dean  of  St.  Paul's;  and  Mr. 
Twopeny :  and  amongst  the  numerous  friends  who  volun- 
tarily paid  this  last  tribute  of  respect  were,  Sir  H. 
Perguson  Davie,  the  Earl  of  Carlisle,  Mr.  Monckton  Milnes, 
Mr.  Charles  Greville,  Mr.  John  Abel  Smith,  &c.  &c. 

♦  The  following  montli,  December,  died  Miss  Ann  Turner.  Their  faith- 
ful old  servant,  so  often  mentioned  in  Miss  Berry's  journals,  Mrs.  Han-ot, 
outlived  her  kind  mistresses  but  two  years.  The  Countess  of  Hardwicke 
outlived  all  her  generation  of  friends  and  contemporaries:  died  1858,  aged  95. 


1852]  KETROSPECT.  515 


We  have  travelled  through  a  long  life  uncheqiiered  in 
its  career  by  any  strange  adventure,  or  by  any  startling 
vicissitudes,  but  not,  it  may  be  hoped,  without  affording 
interest  to  those  who  have  been  personally  or  traditionally 
familiar  with  the  names  and  events  connected  with  the 
time  that  dates  from  the  year  1783,  when  the  first  journal 
commences,  till  the  closing  scene  in  1852.  To  some  it  may 
awaken  recollections  of  former  days ;  and  to  the  younger 
generation  it  will  be  as  a  book  of  photographic  represen- 
tations, literal,  and  undisguised  by  art,  of  the  society  and 
the  times  in  which  their  parents,  their  grand-parents,  and 
even  their  great-grand-parents  hved.  Neither  Miss  Berry's 
letters  or  journals  were  written  for  display  :  they  were  the 
genuine  reflections  of  what  met  her  eye,  and  the  echo  of 
what  reached  her  ear.  The  tone  of  many  of  the  letters 
addressed  to  her,  evince  a  just  appreciation  of  her  strong 
understanding  and  energetic  mind ;  and  they  show  the 
estimation  in  which  she  was  held  by  persons,  whose  confi- 
dence and  approbation  it  was  an  honour  to  have  enjoyed. 
What  was  wanting  in  Miss  Berry's  mind  were  the  lighter 
graces  and  gifts  which  spring  from  a  lively  imagination — 
that  playfulness  of  thought  which,  by  the  humorous  com- 
bination of  fanciful  imagery,  enlivens  dulness  itself,  and 
can  convert  into  subjects  of  mirth  the  most  ordinary 
occurrences  or  even  the  trifling  annoyances  of  life.  Nor 
was  there  in  her  mind  that  vivid  connection  between 
things  seen  and  thoughts  unseen,  that  lends  the  magic 
charm  of  poetry  to  scenes  and  circumstances  which  can 
be  only  half  enjoyed  without  this  power  of  awakening 
association,  and  combining  reality  with  imagination.  Miss 
Berry  had  the  highest  admiration  for  poetry,  and  a  most 
cultivated  taste  in  the  selection  of  what  she  admired  ;  she 
had  an  intellectual  pleasure  in  epigrammatic  wit;  but 
social  intercourse  never  elicited  from  her  those  sparkles 

LL    2 


516  HABITS   OP   THE   MISSES   BEERY.  [1852 

which,  without  pretending  to  enhghten,  give  brilliancy  to 
trifles  unworthy  of  graver  discussion. 

Notwithstanding  the  depressing  sense  of  advancing  age 
and  receding  powers,  which  pervaded  most  strongly  every 
line  Miss  Berry  wrote  of  herself,  during  the  latter  years  of 
her  hfe,  a  certain  amount  of  social  enjoyment  never  really 
forsook  either  her  sister  or  herself :  they  cast  no  gloom  on 
the  friends  whom  they  welcomed,  and  who  congregated 
at  their  house  no  less  for  their  own  pleasure,  than  to  show 
their  love  and  respect  for  those  they  visited.  With  the 
hves  of  the  sisters  closed  a  society  which  will  be  ever 
remembered  by  all  who  frequented  those  pleasant  httle 
gatherings  in  Curzon  Street.  Sometimes  a  note,  sometimes 
a  word,  and  more  often  the  lamp  being  lighted  over  the 
door,  was  taken  as  notice  to  attend,  and,  on  entering,  it 
might  be  to  find  only  a  few  habitues,  or  a  larger  and  more 
brilHant  assembly.  All  that  was  uncertain  ;  but  it  was 
certain  to  find  the  cordial  welcome  of  the  two  genial 
lively,  well-dressed,  distinguished-looking  hostesses — the 
comfortable  tea-table,  over  which  their  friend  Miss  Anne 
Turner  presided  for  years,  and  Lady  Charlotte  Lindsay, 
the  third  partner  in  the  firm,  clever  and  agreeable  to  the 
last.  There  was  an  absence  of  formality — a  kindly  mingling 
together  of  persons  of  various  habits,  pursuits,  and  posi- 
tions in  life,  that  tended  to  bring  different  portions  of 
society  together,  as  much  as  in  other  coteries  there  is  a 
tendency  to  keep  them  apart ;  and  when  death  had  closed 
this  httle  chapter  in  our  social  life,  no  one  attempted,  or, 
indeed,  could  have  carried  it  on  with  equal  success  :  their 
age,  their  experience  in  society,  Miss  Berry's  acknowledged 
talent,  their  home- staying  hfe,  their  absence  of  domestic 
duties  and  of  family  ties,  all  contributed  to  give  them  the 
power  and  the  means  which  others  have  not,  to  do  that 
which  few  would  have  done  so  well,  under  equally  favour- 
able circumstances. 

It  has  long  been  over,  and  death  has  set  its  seal  on 


1852]  INSCRIPTION   AT   PETERSHAM.  517 

many  who  composed  that  society.  A  time  must  come  to 
all,  when  the  enjoyment  of  the  present,  and  the  hopes  of 
the  future,  cede  their  place  to  the  memory  of  the  past. 
We  cannot  renew  what  is  gone. 

Happy  are  those  who  can  look  back  to  social  pleasures, 
to  useful  toil,  and  to  domestic  happiness,  and  gratefully 
recall  the  time  '  when  such  things  were  ' ! 


Inscription   to   the    memory  of  Miss  Berry  and   her 
sister,  at  Petersham,  written  by  the  Earl  of  Carlisle  : — 

MAEY  BEREY, 

BOBIT  MAKCH   1763,   DIED   NOT.    1852. 

AGNES  BEREY, 

BOEK  MAT   1764,   DIED   JAN.    1852. 

BENEATH   THIS   STONE   ARE   LAID   THE   EEMAINS   OF 

THESE 

TWO   SISTERS, 

AMIDST  SCENES   WHICH   IN  LIFE 

THEY   HAD   FREaUENTED   AND   LOVED, 

FOLLOWED   BY   THE   TENDER  REGRET   OF   THOSE 

WHO   CLOSE 

THE   UNBROKEN   SUCCESSION   OF   FRIENDS 

DEVOTED   TO   THEM   WITH    FOND   AFFECTION 

DURING   EVERY   STEP 

OF   THEIR  LONG   CAREER. 

In  pious  adoration  of  the  great  God  of  Heaven  and  Eaiih, 

they  looked  to  rest  in  the  Lord. 

Tliey  were  lovely  and  pleasant  in  their  lives,  and  in  their 

death  they  were  not  divided. 


518  LINES   BY   MR.    MONCKTON   MILNES.  [1852 


The  following  lines  from  the  pen  of  Mr.  Monckton 
Milnes  (now  Lord  Houghton)  appeared  in  the  'Times'  after 
the  funeral  of  Miss  Berry : — 

MAEY  AND  AGNES  BERKY. 
Nov.  27,  1852. 

Two  friends  within  one  grave  we  place, 

United  in  our  tears, — 
Sisters,  scarce  parted  for  the  space 

Of  more  than  eighty  years  ; 
And  she  whose  bier  is  borne  to-day, 

The  one  the  last  to  go. 
Bears  with  her  thoughts  that  force  their  way 

Above  the  moment's  woe ; 

Thoughts  of  the  varied  human  life 

Spread  o'er  that  field  of  time — 
The  toil,  the  passion,  and  the  strife. 

The  virtue  and  the  crime. 
Yet,  'mid  this  long  tumultuous  scene, 

The  image  on  our  mind 
Of  these  dear  women  rests  serene. 

In  happy  bounds  confined. 

Within  one  undisturbed  abode 

Their  presence  seems  to  dwell. 
From  which  continual  pleasures  flowed. 

And  countless  graces  fell ; 
Not  unbecoming:  this  our  age 

Of  decorative  forms, 
Yet  simple  as  the  hermitage 

Exposed  to  Nature's  storms. 

Our  Enghsh  grandeur  on  the  shelf 

Deposed  its  decent  gloom. 
And  every  pride  unloosed  itself 

Within  that  modest  room, 


1852]  LINES   BY   MR.    MONCKTON   MILNES.  519 

Where  none  were  sad,  and  few  were  dull, 

And  each  one  said  his  best, 
And  beauty  was  most  beautiful 

With  vanitv  at  rest.    . 

Brightly  the  day's  discourse  rolled  on, 

Still  casting  on  the  shore 
Memorial  pearls  of  times  bygone. 

And  worthies  now  no  more  ; 
And  little  tales  of  long  ago 

Took  meaning  from  those  lips. 
Wise  chroniclers  of  joy  and  woe. 

And  eyes  without  eclipse. 

No  taunt  or  scoff  obscured  the  wit 

That  there  rejoiced  to  reign; 
They  never  could  have  laughed  at  it 

If  it  had  carried  pain. 
There  needless  scandal,  e'en  though  true. 

Provoked  no  bitter  smile, 
And  even  men  of  fashion  grew 

Benignant  for  a  while. 


"o' 


Not  that  there  lacked  the  nervous  scorn 

At  every  public  wrong, 
Not  that  a  friend  was  left  forlorn 

When  victim  of  the  strong. 
Free  words,  expressing  generous  blood, 

No  nice  punctilio  weighed, 
For  deep  and  earnest  womanhood 

Their  reason  underlaid. 

As  generations  onward  came. 

They  loved  from  all  to  win 
Kevival  of  the  sacred  flame 

That  glowed  their  hearts  within. 
While  others  in  Time's  greedy  mesh 

The  faded  garlands  flung. 
Their  hearts  went  out  and  gathered  fresh 

Affections  from  the  young. 


520  LINES   BY   MR.   MOXCKTON   MILNES.  [1852 

Farewell,  dear  ladies !  in  your  loss 

We  feel  the  past  recede, 
The  gap  our  hands  could  almost  cross 

Is  now  a  gulf  indeed. 
Ye,  and  the  days  in  which  your  claims 

And  charms  were  early  known, 
Lose  substance,  and  ye  stand  as  names 

That  History  makes  its  own. 

Farewell !  the  pleasant  social  page 

Is  read,  but  ye  remain 
Examples  of  ennobled  age, 

Long  life  without  a  stain  ; 
A  lesson  to  be  scorned  by  none. 

Least  by  the  wise  and  brave. 
Delightful  as  the  winter  sun 
That  gilds  this  open  grave. 


MS.  VERSES  FOUND  AMONGST  MISS  BERRY'S  PAPERS.    521 


FEAGMENTS. 

The  following  manuscript  verses  were  found  amongst 
Miss  Berry's  papers.  The  Editor  is  not  aware  that  any  of 
them  have  been  published  before. 

PEOPHETIE  TURGOTINE. 

(Composed  in  the  year  1775.) 

ViVENT  tous  nos  beaux  esprit  s, 

Encyclopedistes, 
Du  bonheur  franfais  epris, 

Grands  economistes ; 
Par  leurs  soins,  au  temps  d'Adam, 
Nous  reviendrons,  c'est  leur  plan. 

Momus  les  assiste : 
0  gue ! 

Momus  les  assiste. 

Ce  n'est  pas  de  nos  bouquins 

Que  vient  leur  science ; 
En  eux  ces  fiers  paladins 

Ont  la  sapience. 
Les  Colberts  et  les  Sully 
Nous  paraissent  grands,  mais  fi ! 

Ce  n'est  qu'ignorance : 
0  gue  ! 

Ce  n'est  qu'ignorance. 

On  verra  tous  les  etats 

Entre  eux  se  confondre, 
Les  pauvres  sur  leurs  grabats 

Ne  plus  se  morfondre. 
Des  biens  on  fera  des  lots 
Qui  rendront  les  gens  egaux. 

Le  bel  oeuf  a  pondre ! 
0  gue  ! 

Le  bel  oeuf  a  pondre. 


522  MS.    VERSES    FOUND   AMONGST 

Du  meme  pas  marcheront 

Noblesse  et  roture ; 
Les  Franpois  retourneront 

Aux  droits  de  nature. 
AdieUj  parlement  et  loix, 
Dues,  et  princes^  et  rois. 

La  bonne  aventure : 
0  gue ! 

La  bonne  aventure. 

Puis,  devenus  vertueux 

Par  philosophic, 
Les  Franpois  auront  des  deux 

A  leur  fantaisie ; 
Nous  reverrons  un  oignou 
A  Jesus  damer  le  pion. 

Ah,  quelle  harmonie ! 
0  gue ! 

Ah,  quelle  harmonie  ! 

Alors  d'amour  surete, 

Entre  soeurs  et  freres 
Sacrement  et  parente 

Seront  des  chimeres ; 
Chaque  pere  imitera 
Noe,  quand  il  s'enivra. 

Liberte  pleniere : 
0  gue ! 

Liberte  pleniere. 

Plus  de  moines  langoureux, 

De  plaintives  nonnes  ; 
Au  lieu  d'adresses  aux  lieux, 

Matines  et  nonnes, 
On  verra  ces  malheureux 
Danser,  abjurant  leurs  voeux. 

Grallante  chaeonne  : 
0  gue  ! 

Gallante  chaeonne. 


MISS   BERRY'S    PAPERS.  523 

Partisans  des  novations, 

La  fine  sequelle — 
La  France  des  nations 

Sera  le  modele ; 
Et  cet  honneur  nous  devrons 
Aux  Turgot  et  compagnons : — 

Besogne  immortelle ; 
0  gue ! 

Besogne  immortelle. 

A  qui  devrons- nous  le  plus? 

C'est  a  notre  maitre, 
Qui,  se  croyant  un  abus, 

Ne  voudra  plus  I'etre. 
Ah,  qu'il  faut  aimer  le  bien  ; 
Pour  de  roi  n'etre  plus  rien 

J'euverrais  tons  paitre ; 
0  gue  ! 

J'enverrais  tous  paitre. 

VERS  e'CRIT  sous  UN  DESSEIN  DE  DEUX  PETITS 
AMOURS.     Par  Mons.  de  Lally. 

Qu'avez-vous  done  ?  vous  pleurez,  mes  enfans. 

Helas,  monsieur,  voyez  notre  misere  : 
II  a  gele,  nous  sommes  tout  tremblans. 

Pauvres  petits  !  avez-vous  une  mere  ? 
Oh,  oui,  monsieur,  et  qui  nous  est  bien  chere. 

Elle  pourrait  vous  couvrir  un  pen  plus, 
Contre  le  froid  vous  n'etes  pas  vetus. 

Demandez-lui ;  C'est  qu'elle  est  en  colere  ; 
Si  vous  vouliez  porter  notre  priere ! 

Tres-volontiers ;  est-ce  elle  que  Ton  voit? 
Mon  frere  est  la,  qui  vous  la  montre  au  doigt. 

Votre  maman,  messieurs,  est  fort  genbille; 
Elle  se  nomme  ?     Agnes.     Et  vous  ?     Amours. 

Oh  !  je  connais  beaucoup  votre  famille, 
J'ai  dans  son  sein  passe  tous  mes  beaux  jours ; 

Je  sais  tres-bien  comme  il  faut  qu'on  I'habille, 
Et  les  saisons  qui  peuvent  la  glacer, 

Et  de  quel  bois  elle  veut  se  chauffer ; 


524  MS.    VERSES    FOUND    AMONGST 

Or  je  soupfonne  ici  quelques  mysteres, 
Vous  n'etes  pas  des  amours  ordinaires  : 

De  la  franchise.     Allons ;  ce  grand  courroux 
De  la  maman,  d'ou  vient-il  entre  nous  ? 


INSCEIPTION  FOE  A  BUST  OF  ME.  FOX. 
By  the  Hon.  William  Lamb. 

Live,  Marble,  live !  for  thine 's  a  sacred  trust — 
The  patriot's  face,  that  speaks  his  noble  mind ; 

Live,  that  our  sons  may  kneel  before  this  bust. 
And  hail  the  benefactor  of  mankind. 

This  was  the  man  who,  midst  the  tempest's  rage, 
A  mark  of  safety  to  the  nation  stood, 

Warn'd  with  prophetic  voice  a  servile  age, 

And  strove  to  quench  the  ruthless  thirst  for  blood. 

This  was  the  man  whose  ever-deathless  fame 
Eecalls  his  generous  life's  illustrious  scenes. 

To  bless  his  fellow-creatures  was  his  aim, 
And  universal  Liberty  his  means. 

BY  ME.  JEKYLL. 

From  Pepper  Arden's  law, 
From  Bonaparte's  paw, 

Grod  save  the  King ! 
From  war  and  want  of  bread. 
From  Portland  stone  and  lead, 
From  Bogy  Orenville's  head, 

Grod  save  the  King ! 

From  Billy  Pitt's  devi^^e, 
Dundas  and  Scotch  advice, 

God  shield  the  King  ! 
From  Windham's  sophistry, 
Pybus'  poetry, 
And  from  Lord  Hawkesbury, 

God  save  the  King  ! 


MISS  berky's  papees.  525 


0  Lord,  our  God,  arise, 
Send  us  some  new  allies. 

That  we  may  treat 
And  should  their  amities 
End  in  new  perfidies, 
Gret  back  our  subsidies. 

That  we  may  eat  I 


Mrs.  William  Lock,  wife  of  William  Lock,  Esq.,  of 
Norbury  Park,  Surrey,  was  celebrated  for  her  very  re- 
markable beauty.  The  following  lines  found  in  Miss 
Berry's  papers  are  headed,  '  On  Mrs.  William  Lock,  given 
at  a  Masquerade : '   they  are  not  in  Miss  Berry's  own 


handwriting. 


ON  MRS.  WILLIAM  LOCK  AT  A  MASQUERADE. 

When  G-recian  Zeuxis  labour'd  to  express 

A  perfect  form  of  female  loveliness. 

He  chose  some  feature  for  his  fair  design 

From  ev'ry  graceful  shape,  and  face  divine. 

Till  all  their  bright  and  countless  charms  combined 

Rose  on  his  canvas,  soften'd  and  refined. 

The  glory  of  the  Greeks,  the  wonder  of  mankind! 

0  thou !  thrice  bless'd,  in  all  that  blesses  life. 
The  tender  mother  and  the  spotless  wife, 
When  be,  whom  most  thy  gentle  mind  approves. 
The  wedded  partner  of  thy  hallow'd  loves. 
Shall  seek,  like  Zeuxis,  and  with  Zeuxis'  pow'r,* 
To  paint  the  form  of  beauty's  fairest  flow'r, 
His  happier  genius  shall  not  need  to  trace 
Each  scatter'd  feature  from  a  sep'rate  face  : 
He,  with  a  conscious  joy,  will  proudly  see 
Their  various  charms  united  all  in  thee — 
Clasp  the  pure  form,  the  model  of  his  art. 
And  hail  the  living  likeness  in  his  heart ! 

*  Mr.  Wm.  Lock  was  well  known  as  an  amateur  artist. 


526  MS.    VERSES    FOUND    AMONGST 

THE  COUNTEY  CAT. 

Docketed  *  by  Miss  Fanshawe.' 

A  COUNTRY  cat  of  high  degree 

Determined  London  town  to  see. 

Beloved  she  was,  approved  of  all, 

Whether  in  chamber  or  in  hall ; 

Descended  from  Grrimalkin's  race, 

Her  sires  the  inmates  of  the  place, 

An  ancient  tower,  a  moat,  a  park, 

A  castle  worthy  of  remark — 

All  this  was  hers  ;  the  lord  thereof 

Was  but  as  steward  on  her  behalf. 

Mistress  of  birds,  of  rabbits,  rats. 

The  very  happiest  of  cats  ! 

Ah  !  wherefore  should  she  wish  to  roam 

And  leave  her  handsome,  happy  home  ? 

But  cats  have  fancies — so  have  we : 

II  falloit  passer  son  envie. 

In  coach-and-four  she  drove  to  town 

And  halted  at  the  Bell  and  Crown. 

(I  needs  must  own,  if  you  should  ask  it. 

She  went  to  London  in  the  basket.) 

As  she  slipp'd  in,  so  slipp'd  she  out, 

Incog. :  she  thought  she'd  look  about. 

And  soon  she  spied,  with  joyous  glee, 

Six  handsome  cats  as  fair  as  she ; 

She  waved  her  tail,  and  join'd  the  party 

With  conscious  worth  and  manners  hearty ; 

Nor  yet  she  mark'd  the  look  askance, 

The  doubtful  quiz,  the  scornful  glance. 

She  spoke  her  name,  her  race,  her  wealth. 

Her  sudden  trip  to  town  by  stealth ; 

She  craved  protection  from  them  all. 

And  offer'd  hers  at — Purring  Hall. 

The  party  view'd  her  with  surprise. 
And  mark'd  her  fur  with  envious  eyes. 


MISS  berey's  papers.  527 

'  You  've  got  a  fine  pelisse,'  said  one  ; 
'  Pity  't  is  much  too  bright  for  town : 
'T  is  only  fit  for  country  folk. 
Yet  it  may  mend  by  London  smoke. 
Sorry  to  leave  you — but,  alas ! 
To-day  we  dine  with  Carrabas. 
In  steam-boat  we  go  up  the  river. 
But  never  take  a  stranger — never  ! 
At  Chiswick,  too,  there  's  choicest  fare, 
But  you,  of  course,  cannot  go  there; 
And  Wednesday  is  our  weekly  ball,* 
And  we  are  patronesses,  all. 
We  leave  the  yards  and  vulgar  level, 
And  on  the  leads  we  hold  our  revel ; 
We  give  the  entree  to  our  friends 
As  suits  our  tastes,  or  gains  our  ends. 
Yet  bar  each  independent  claim — 
No  tortoise  cat  shall  urge  her  name. 
The  sleekest  coat,  the  waving  tail, 
The  greenest  eye  will  nought  prevail ; 
Each  cat  or  kit,  or  high-back'd  puss. 
Must  purr,  and  purr,  and  purr  to  us. 
With  power  unbounded  we  refuse, 
And,  at  our  will,  reject  or  choose. 
Thus,  it  is  clear, —  we  're  very  sorry. 
But,  madam — there  's  no  ticket  for  ye.' 

Grrimalkin's  fair  descendant  heard, 
And  would  have  rather  died  than  purr'd; 
She  knew  the  value  of  her  paws. 
But  check'd  her  wrath,  and  sheath 'd  her  claws ; 
Indignant  at  their  saucy  ways. 
And  yet  abash'd  by  townish  phrase ; 
Nor  did  she  clearly  understand 
What  project  they  had  got  in  hand. 
They  talk'd  of  dinner,  ball,  or  treat. 
Yet  nothing  offer'd  her  to  eat. 
She  thought  perhaps  they  were  too  nice 
To  deign  to  dine  on  paltry  mice, — 

*  Almack's  ball  was  always  lield  on  Wednesday  night. 


528    MS.  VERSES  FOUND  AMONGST  MISS  BERRY'S  PAPERS. 

When,  lo  !  she  saw  each  lady  cat 
G-lauce  eager  at  a  lordly  rat. 
The  green-eyed  sisters  of  the  chace 
Instant  commenced  their  separate  race, 
And  off  they  scamper'd,  one  and  all, 
To  catch  a  rat  before  the  ball. 
'  Oh,  now,'  Grimalkin  purr'd  I  '  I,  too, 
Can  catch  a  rat  as  well  as  you.' 
Our  country  cat  was  chatte  de  race. 
And  never  let  occasion  pass  : 
She  distanced  all,— the  prey  she  found ; 
■    With  nervous  spring  and  lengthen'd  bound, 
Pounced  instant  on  the  precious  prize, 
And  flash'd  defiance  from  her  eyes  I 
Then  gently  turn'd,  with  civil  scorning 
She  wish'd  the  caterie  good-morning. 


INDEX. 


ABB 

A  BBEVILLE.  town  of,  ii.  128 
-^^     Abercorn,  Marchioness    of,    her 

death,  i.  364 
Abercorn,  ninth  Earl  of,  ii.  342 
Abercrombie,  General  Sir  John,  ii.  376; 

iii.  105 
Abercrombie,  Mr.  (now  Lord  Dunferm- 
line), iii.  176.     At  Chatsn-orth,  309 
Aberdeen,  Earl  of,  ii.  413,  445 
Aberdeen,  Lady,  ii.  444,  445 
Actoi's,  Italian,  i.  51 
Addison's   Travels,   Walpole's   parody 

on,  ii.  23 
Adrian,  Villa  of,  at  Rome.  i.  99,  113. 

Mausoleum  of,  at  Rome,  iii.  "264 
Agar,  Charles,  Archbishop  of  Cashel,  i. 

474,  480 
Agata,  Sta.,  i.  75 
Agate  Cup,  the  famous,  at  Naples,  i. 

77 
Agathe,  Madame  de  St.,  ii.  232 
Agnaiio,  Lake,  i.  80 
Agrippa's  aqueduct  at  Rome,  i.  99 
Arguebelle,  i.  129;  iii.  106 
Ailesbury,  Dowager  Countess  of,  i.  159 

197,  306,  412,  476;   ii.  29,  66,  103. 

Her  death,  228 
Aix,  i.  144;    ii.  216.     Road   from,  to 

Marseilles,  i.  144  ;  ii.  244 
Aix  le  Bains,  i.  34  ;  ii.  252.    The  baths 

at,  i.  34  ;  ii.  252 
Alban,  Madame  de  St.,  i.  300.  Arrested 

at  Paris,  200 
Albani,  Palazzo,  at  Rome,  i.  96 
Albani,   Villa,    at    Rome,    i.    98;    iii. 

269 
Albani,  Cardinal-Archbishop,  i.  98 
Albani,  his  '  Children '  at  Bologna,  i. 

244 
Albanians,  ii.  511,  512 
Albano,  Villa,  collection  of  antiquities 

at,  i.  Ill 


AME 

Albano,  Lake  of,  i.  116.  The  emissary 
at  the,  116.  Domitian's  mock  sea- 
fights  on  the,  116 

Albans,  Duchess  of,  her  illness,  i.  187 

Albans,  St.,  Abbey  church  of,  ii.  474 

Albany,  the  Countess  of,  i.  117:  iii. 
142.  In  England,  i.  303,  305.  Her 
interview  with  the  King  and  Queen, 
305.  At  Strawberry  Hill,  309,  310. 
At  Mrs.  Damer's,  312.  At  Florence, 
iii.  146.  149,  152 

Albert,  Archduke,  i.  19,  His  house  at 
Bruxelles,  19 

Aldega  Gallega,  i.  336 

Alderley,  visit  to,  iii.  312,  349 

Aldermen  of  London,  great  mortality 
of,  in  1711,  i.  209 

Aldini,  Professor,  ii.  238 

Aldobrandini,  the  Nozze,  i.  98 

Aldobrandini,  Villa,  at  Rome,  i.  98,  115 

Alexander,  Emperor  of  Russia,  in  Lon- 
don, iii.  26,  28,  29.  In  Portsmouth.  30 

Alfieri  at  Sirawberry  Hill,  i.  309,  310. 
His  Italian,  ii.  486.  His  '  La  Mirra,' 
iii.  341 

Algiers,  bombardment  of,  by  Lord  Ex-, 
mouth,  iii.  104 

Alhambra,  the,  i.  338 

Allessandre.  Comte,  iii.  231 

Allessandria,  town  of,  i.  239 

Alpenstocks,  i.  33 

Alps,  the,  i.  30.  Mountains  of  the,  32. 
Flora  of  the,  33.  View  of  the,  from 
the  Col  de  Balme,  132 

Altieri,  Palazzo,  i.  1 1 4 

Amand,  St.,  the  French  dancer,  ii.  162 

Ambleside,  ii.  359 

Ambroise,  St.,  village  of,  in  Piedmont, 
i.  37 

Amelia,  the  Princess,  her  death,  ii.  400 

America,  Miss  Berry's  opinion  of,  in 
1809,  ii.  388 


VOL.  in. 


M  M 


530 


INDEX. 


AMH 

Amherst,  Lady,  i.  304 

Amiens,  town  of,  ii.  129.  The  negotia- 
tors at,  129.  Col.  Nightingill's  ac- 
count of  their  mode  of  living,  ii.  130. 
Signature  of  the  peace  of,  157 

Amphitheatre  Cartieuse  at  Rome,  i.  95. 
Of  Nismes,  139.     At  Pazzuoli,  89 

Amsinc'k,  Mr.,  ii.  380 

Ancram,  Lady,  ii.  27 

Andalusia,  beauties  of,  i.  339 

Andernach,  i.  22 

Anderson,  Mrs.,  i.  169, 185,  296 

Andre,  St.,  village  of,  i.  226 

Audreossi  General,  ii.  200.  At  Devon- 
shire House,  235 

Andromeda  of  Guido,  at  Rome,  i.  97, 
653 

Anducar,  ancient  bridge  at,  i.  341 

Angelo,  Michael,  his  paintings  in  the 
Sistine  Chapel,  i.  64.  His  torso  at 
Rome,  111.  His  Dead  Christ  at  the 
Palazzo  Barberini,  114.  His  Medi- 
cean  Library  at  Florence,  331 

Angerstein,  Mr.,  visit  of  the  Princess  of 
Wales  to,  ii.  493 

Anglesey,  the  late  Marquis  of,  ii.  383 

Angouleme,  Due  d',  i.  238.  At  Do- 
ningtun  Castle,  with  Lord  Moira,474 

Angouleme,  Madame  d',  iii.  101 

Ankerstrom,  the  assassin,  i.  443 

Anne  of  Austria,  i.  210 

Anne  of  Cleves,  Holbein's  portrait  of,  i. 
440 

Anonymous  writers,  Walpole's  contempt 
for,  ii.  60 

Anson,  Lord,  his  seat  at  Shugborough, 
ii.  357 

Anspach,  Margrave  of,  death  of  the,  i. 
206 

Anspach,  Margravine  of,  her  death,  i. 
289.     Her  visit  to  England,  329 

Antibes,  town  of,  ii.  222 

Aiitiuous,  basso-relievo  of,  at  Rome,  i. 
99,  111.  Colossal  bust  of,  in  the 
Villa  Monte  Dragone,  115 

Antonio,  M.,  collection  of  his  "works  at 
Florence,  i.  332 

Antwerp,  i.  18.     Churches  at,  18 

Apennines,  tlie,  i.  40.  View  of  the,  from 
Bologna,  245.  Inhabitants  of  the, 
245.     Ascent  of  the,  iii.  136 

Aphrodisias,  ii.  525 

Apollo  Belvidere,  the,  i.  1 1 1.  Statue  of, 
at  the  Villa  Borghese,  i.  113 

Apollo  Didymffius,  temple  of,  ii.  518 
Appony,  Madame  d',  iii.  150,  230,  266. 
Her  ball  lor  the  Emperor  of  Austria's 
fete,  283.     Celebi-atiou  of  her  birth- 
day, 329 


AUG 

Apreece,  Mrs.  (afterwards  Lady  Davy)> 
ii.  427,  458,  461,  462 

Aquapendente,  i.  54 

Aqueduct,  the,  at  Caserta,  i.  86.  Agrip- 
pa's,  at  Rome,  99,  Near  Lisbon, 
272. 273 

Arago,  M.,  iii.  423 

Aranguez,  town  of,  i.  341 .  Antiques  in 
the  gardens  of  the  palace  of,  341 

Architecture,  Moorish,  in  Spain,  i.  338 

'Architecture,  Thoughts  on,'  Miss  Ber- 
ry's, ii.  108 

Aremlaerg,  Hotel  d',  visit  to,  iii.  313 

Arezzo,  i.  120 

Argyll,  John,  fifth  Duke  of,  i.  178,  208, 
209.     His  illness  at  Inverary,  313 

Argyll,  Elizabeth  Gunning,  Duchess  of, 
i.  179,  185,  208.     Her  death,  269 

Argyll,  Duchess  of,  ii.  365 

Argyll  Rooms,  the,  in  1809,  ii.  377,  380; 
iii.  49 

Arkwright,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  iii.  310 

Arnault,  L.  E.,  his  'Regulns,'  iii.  316 

Arruntius, Lucius,  sepulchre  of,at  Rome, 
i.  96 

Artois,  Comte  d',  sum  set  on  his  head, 
i.  174,  238 

Artois,  Comtesse  d',  i.  204 

Arveron,  source  of  the  river,  i.  30 

Asaph,  Mrs.  St.,  her  death,  i.  300 

Ashe,  Captain,  i.  435;  his  'Travels  in 
America,'  ii.  347 

Ashetons,  Mr.,  i.  37,  41,  48,  50,  56 

Ash  ford,  the  Duke  of  Devonshire's 
little  house  at,  iii.  309 

Ashley,  Lady  Barbara,  ii.  342 ;  dances 
the  tambourine  dance,  i.  418 

Assassinations  at  Bologna,  i.  51 

Assembly,  National,  description  of  the, 
in  1790,1.  217,  218.  The  absurdi- 
ties of  Anacharsis  Cloots,  219.  Wal- 
pole's abhorrence  of  it,  297.  Mrs. 
Danvers'  visit  to  it,  3-18 

Asservo,  mining  village  of,  i.  130 

Assis,  St.,  chateau  of  the  Duke  of 
Orleans  at,  i.  220 

Assisi,  chapel  of,  and  place  where,  St. 
Francis  died  at,  i.  119 

Asti,  town  of,  i.  239.  Road  from,  to 
Felizano,  239 

Astley's  Theatre,  in  1809,  ii.  393 

Astroni,  i.  81,  93 

Attitudes,  a  sketch,  i.  328 

Attorite,  Palazzo,  j/ortrait  of  Raffiicl  by 
himself  in  the,  i.  332.     The  marble 
thcrmes  in  pilaster,  332 
Au'icr,  his  'Chaperon  Rouge,'  iii.  168 
Augsburg,  castle  of  tlis  Bishops  of,  i. 
357 


INDEX. 


531 


[ 


AUG 

Augustus,  the  Emperor,  Julius  Cotius's 

arch  of  triumph  erected  to,  i.  228 
Aurora,  Guido's  famous  picture  of,  i.  65 
Austen,  William,  ii.  547 
Austin  Friars,  London,  i.  1 
Austrian s,  their  march    to   Naples,  iii, 

281,  290,  294 
Autun,  town  of,  ii.  207 
Avenches,  town  of,  ii.  265 
Avernus,  Lake,  i.  60 
Avignon,  city    of,  i.    137:  ii.   213,244. 

Lunatic  asylum  at,  i.  137.     Horrors 

at,  195,  197",  199 
Avon,  the  ii.  432.     In  Stoneleigh  Park. 

433.     Dropping  well  on  the  banks  of 

the,  436 


T>ABUA,  General,  iii.  140 

-^  Badajoz,  town  and  ruins  of,  i.  336 

Baden,  iii.  378 

Badini,  Lady  Mary  Duncan's  answer 
to,  i.  313 

Bagatelle,  near  Paris,  in  1802,  ii.  158 

Bagot,  Hon.  Sir  Charles,  ii.  507 

Ba'se,  i.  89 

Baillie,  Joanna,  her  '  Plays  on  the 
Passions,'  ii.  88,  90.  Her  prologue 
and  epilogue  to  Miss  Berry's  comedy 
of '  Fashionable  Friends,'  117.  Let- 
ter to  her  from  Miss  Berry  at  Both- 
well,  367.  Her  'Family  Legend,' 
381.  Visit  to  her  at  Hampstead, 
477.  Her  drama  of  'Hope,'  477. 
Her  '  Family  Legend,'  acted  at  Drury 
Lane,  iii.  50.  Her  writings,  490. 
Her  death,  513 

Baillie,  Dr.,  ii.  333 

Baker,  Sir  George,  i.  456 

Balbi,  Madame  de,  at  her  toilette,  i. 
347 

Balbus  and  his  son,  equestrian  statues 
of,  at  Portici,  i.  79 

Balducci,  La,  at  Naples,  i.  80 

Ball,  a,  in  1741,  ii.  26 

Ballet  champetre  in  Italy,  i.  246 

Balloons,  Walpole's  remarks  on,  i.  293 

Balls  in  Paris,  in  1802,  ii.  147, 155,  156, 
165,  173,  178 

Balme,  Col  de,  i.  132 

Bandalore,  game  of,  i.  230 

Bandini,  Canonico,  the  librarian  at 
Florence,  i.  331.  His  catalogue  of 
the  MSS.  in  the  Medicean  Library, 
459 

Banks,  Sir  Joseph,  his  literary  and 
scientific  meetings,  i.  286;  ii.  12 

Bannister,  Mrs.     See  Seton,  Miss  Bab. 


BEA 

Barbauld,  Mrs.,  i.  319.     Her  political 

pamphlets,  268 
Barberini,  Palazzo,  at  Rome,  i.  98,  114, 

115 
Baring,  Mr.  (afterwards  Lord  Ashbur- 

ton),  ii.  344 
Barlow,  Joel,  his  '  Columbiad,'  ii.  387 
Barnave,  M.,  his  attempt    to  negotiate 

with  the  French  princes,  i.  362 
Barreaus,  Fort,  ii.  251 
Barrere,  his  remark  to  a  French  gen- 
tleman, i.  416 
Barrett,  Mr.,  of  Lee,  Walpole's  visit  to, 

J.  204.       Description   of  his   house, 

205,  440 
Barrois,  M.,  the  bookseller,  ii.  133  ;    iii. 

74,81 
Barrow  Falls,  the,  ii.  361 
Barry,  Madame  du,  in  London,  i.  286, 

Her  death,  287,  iiote.    At  Strawberry 

Hill,  300 
Barrymore,  Lord,  his  theatres,  i.  203. 

And  amateur  theatricals,  206 
Barthelman's  concert,  ii.  41s 
Bartolini,  the  sculptor,  iii.  146,  230 — 

232 
Bartolommeo,    Fra,  Walpole's    opinion 

of  the  works  of,  i.  260 
Basillissophagi,  the  French  so  called  by 

Walpole,  i.  309 
Basle,  town  of,  i.  27  ;  ii.  269,  270.    Hol- 
bein's pictures  at,  270 
Bassano,  Due  de,  iii.  425 
Bastile,  taking  of  the,  by  the  mob.  i. 

174.     Ruins  of  the,  in  1790,  i.  217 
Batli,  Lord,  his  answer  to  Lord  Chester- 
field, ii.  28.     His  illness,  29 
Bath  House,  ii.  385 
Batt,  Mr.,i.  408.    Death  of  his  younger 

brother,  320 
Baycnne,  the  maire   de  la  ville  at    i. 

344 
Beauclerc,  Lady  Diana,  her  drawing  of 

the    Gipsies,   at    Strawberry  Hill,  i. 

302  ;  ii.  350 
Beauclerc,  Mrs.,  ii.  472 
Beauharnois,  Mdlle.  de,  ii.  165 
Beauharnois,  M.,  description  of  him,  ii. 

166 
Beaumont,  Lady,  her  death,  i.  289 
Beaumont,  Sir  George,  his  opinion  of 

Joanna Baillie'sPlayson  the  Passions, 

ii.  88.     Notice  of  him,  88,  ?ioto.  His 

view  of  the  character  and  genius  of 

Napoleon,  379.    Miss  Berry's  opinion 

of  him,  ii.  497 
Beauty,  Sir  Uvedale  Price  on,  ii.  547. 

Autliors  who  have   written   on   the 

subject,  547 


M  M 


532 


INDEX. 


BEA 

Beauvais,  church  of,  iii.  102 

Beanvean,  Princess  de,  visit  to  the,  ii. 
148,  172 

Beauveau,  Prince  de,  i.  389.  His  be- 
quest to  Lord  Orford,  389 

Beckford,Mr..  his  purchase  of  Gibbon's 
library,  ii.  260 

Bedford.  Duke  of,  statue  of,  in  Kussell 
Square,  ii.  393 

Bejrgars  in  Italy,  i.  243 

Belfort.  ville  de  guerre  of,  i.  359 

Bell,  Mr.  (afterwards  Sir  Charles),  ii. 
374 

Bell,  Rev.  Dr.,  at  Little  Strawberry 
Hill,  ii.  421 

Bellevue,  near  Paris,  in  1822,  iii.  319 

Belmonte,  Princess,  i.  76,  87 

Belsham,  Thomas,  his  strictures  on  Mr. 
'Wil  her  force's  Practical  View,'  ii.  85 

Belvidere,  cortile  of  the,  at  Rome,  i. 
Ill 

Beinbo,  Cardinal,  his  epitaph  on  the 
poet  Sanezzaro.  i.  S7 

Benedetto,  San,  village  of,  iii.  303 

Bentivoglio,  Cardinal,  Vandyck's  por- 
trait of,  the  Palazzo  Pitti,  i.  120 

Ben  well,  Mr.,  his  letter  to  Miss  Berry, 
i.  458 

Berbach,  town  of,  ii.  282 

Beresford,  Marshal,  liis  place  at  Capa- 
teria,  ii.  439.  Lord  Wellington  at, 
439 

Beresford,  Captain,  ii.  439 

Bergen- op-Zoom,  expedition  to,  iii.  6 

.Berkeley,  Frederick,  ii.  464 

Berne,  city  of,  ii.  266 

Bernini,  Giovanni  Lorenzo,  the  sculptor, 
i.  113 

Bernis,  Cardinal  de,  i.  57,  62,  69.  98. 
His  portrait,  and  Miss  Berry's  charac- 
ter of  him,  163.     His  death,  444 

Berri,  Due  de,  i.  238.  In  London,  ii. 
504.  His  assassination,  iii.  202,  203. 
Circumstances  gathered  by  Miss  Ber- 
ry regarding  the  crime,  207.  His 
funeral,  221 

Berri,  Duchesse  de,  iii.  84 
Berry,  Miss,  her  birth,  i.  2,  4.  Death 
of  her  mother,  5.  Her  education,  6, 
7.  Visits  the  Continent,  11,  16.  Her 
first  acquaintance  with  Matlame  de 
Stael,  134.  Her  reflections  at  twenty- 
two  compared  with  those  of  Madame 
Roland  at  twenty-three,  147.  Makes 
Horace  AValpole's  acquaintance,  150. 
His  dcscri]ition  of  Miss  Berry  and 
of  her  sister,  151.  His  letters  to  her 
{sec  Letters).  His  lines  on  her  visit 
to  Strawberry  Hill,    153.      Her  an- 


BER 

swer,  153.  Her  verses  on  the  '  Ber- 
ries,' 155.  Her  task  of  rescuing  the 
character  of  Walpole  from  miscon- 
ception, 160.  Her  dog  Tonton,  164, 
169,  179.  Her  residence  at  Tedding- 
ton,  192.  Her  arrangements  for  a  tour 
on  the  Continent,  196.  Meets  with 
an  accident  at  Pisa,  294.  Her  letter 
to  Lord  Orford  as  to  certain  news- 
paper reports,  377.  And  as  to  the 
honour  and  disinterestedness  of  their 
friendship,  384.  Her  character  of 
INIarshal  Conway,  462.  Her  play  of 
'Fashionable  Friends,'  486.  Her 
engagement  of  marriage  with  Gene- 
ral 0"Hara,  ii.  2.  Her  remark  attached 
to  the  packet  of  letters  which  had 
passed  between  them,  3.  Her  view 
of  the  blessings  of  married  life,  4. 
The  engagement  with  O'Hara  broken 
off,  4.  Was  Lord  Orford  a  lover  of 
Miss  Berry  ?  20.  Her  part  in  the 
collected  edition  of  his  works,  21,  22. 
Her  remarks  on  the  advantages  of 
travel,  69,  70.  Her  study  of  Greek, 
72,  93.  Her  observations  on  Mal- 
thus's  '  Essay  on  Population,'  74. 
And  on  the  Irish  Union,  79.  Her 
remarks  on  the  '  Tristram  Shandy ' 
and  '  Paradise  Lost,'  80.  Her  journal 
kept  in  Wales,  96.  Her  character  of 
'  Walpoliana,'  108.  Her  '  Thoughts 
on  Architecture,'  108.  Her  comedy 
of  '  Fashionable  Friends,'  1 1 6.  Tri- 
butes to  its  success,  120.  Leaves 
England  for  the  Continent,  122.  Her 
notes  of  what  and  who  she  saw  on 
her  journey,  123  et  seq.  Her  return, 
194.  Failure  of  her  'Fashionable 
Friends  '  at  Drury  Lane,  194.  Her 
own  account  of  the  causes  of  its  con- 
demnation, 197.  Again  visits  Paris, 
200.  Her  mode  of  hfe  at  Nice,  240. 
Her  proposed  plan  of  regular  employ- 
ment for  herself,  296.  Her  visit  to 
the  cotton-mill  near  Bothwell,  302. 
Her  account  of  Lord  Nelson's  fune- 
ral, 309.  Her  remarks  on  desultory 
reading,  313.  And  on  imauination, 
314.  Her  reflections  in  1807,  315. 
On  poor  marriages,  373.  And  in 
Twickenham  Churchyard,  390.  Her 
'  Thoughts  on  Language,'  406.  And 
'  On  Time  gliding  on,'  407.  Pub- 
lication of  her  '  Letters  of  Madame 
du  DefFand,'  421.  Letters  from 
some  of  her  friends  respecting  the 
work,  426  et.  seq.  Her  notions  of 
employment  for  her  useless  time,  and 


INDEX. 


533 


BER 

Professor  Playfair's  advice,  460,  461, 
473.     Reviews  of  her  edition  of  Ma- 
dame du  Deffand's   'Letters,'  468  — 
470.     Her  'Two  Martins,'  477,  497. 
Lets  Little  Strawberry  Hill  to  Alder- 
man Wood  for  seven  years,  542.   Her 
visit  to  Raith,  iii.  33.     Goes  to  Paris, 
7L   Returns  to  London,  102.   Again 
to  Paris,  1 04.     Death  of  her  father  at 
Genoa,  123.     Her  visit  ajiain  to  Flo- 
rence, 142.     Her  '  Memoirs  of  Lady 
Russell,'  152,   174.     In  Rome,   261. 
Again   to   Florence,    302.     Returns 
to  London,  308.     Visits  the  Duke  of 
Devonshire  at  Chatsworth,  309.  Goes 
again  to  the  Continent,  313.    Returns 
to  England,  345.    Visits  Chatsworth, 
355.  Goes  to  Cheltenham,  365.  And 
again   to   the  Continent,  367.     Her 
'  Comparative  View  of  Social  Life  in 
France    and    England,'    369,     413. 
Death  of  her    friend,    Mrs.  Damer, 
379.     Her  proposed  journal  of  her 
feelings,   mind   and  body,  445.     At 
Petersham,  451.    Her  comments  on 
the  life  of  Princess  Dashkoff,   466. 
Her  collection  of  her  writings,  488. 
Death  of  her  sister,  5 1 3.     Her  own 
death.  514.     Notice  of  her,  515.     In- 
scription on  her  tomb  at  Petersham, 
517.     Lines  on  her  and  her  sister  by 
Mr.  Monckton  Milnes,  518 
Berry,.  Miss  Agnes,  her  birth,  i.  2,  4. 
Her  acquaintance  with  Horace  Wal- 
pole,  150,  151.     Her  picture  of  Car- 
dinal Wolsey,    213,    229,    230,   302, 
361.      Her   drawings,    ii.  237.     Her 
engagement  broken  off,  and   her  ill- 
ness, 294.    Her  journal,  iii.  401.  Her 
illness,  483.     And  death,  513 
Berry,    Mr.,  father  of  Miss  Berry,  his 
uncle,  i.  1.     Bred  to  the  law,  2.     His 
marriage,   2.     His  edition   of  Lord 
Orford's  works,  ii.  21,  22.    His  death, 
iii.  123 
Berry,  William,  uncle  of  Miss  Berry, 

i.  3 
Berthier,  General,  visit  to,  in  Paris,  ii. 
142.     Sketch  of  his  career,  142,  note. 
His  ball,  165 
Berthier,  Leopold,  brother  of  the  gene- 
ral, ii.  290 
Bertie,  Lady  Charlotte,  i.  299 
Benin,  Mdlle.,  ii.  134 
Berwick,  Duke  and  Duchess  of,  ii.  29 
Besan^on,  the  public  walk  at,  iii.  223 
Bethlehem    Hospital,    in    St.    George's 

Fields,  visit  to,  iii.  308 
Beugnot,  M.,  his  oratory,  iii.  219 


BON 

Beverley,  Earl  of,  i.  249 

Bex,  i.  133.     Gradation  houses  at,  133. 

The  Souterrains,  133 
Bianchi,    Francesco,   the    musician,  at 

Rome,  i.  104 
Bibilus,  tomb  of,  at  Rome,  i.  101 
Billingtoa,    Mrs.,  the   singer,   ii.    186, 

483 
Bird,  an  automaton,  i.  286 
Bird,  Edward,  the  artist,  ii.  382 
Birmingham,  riot  at,  i.  316,  317 
Biron,    the   Duchesse  de,   i.   208,  210. 
Treatment    of    her    in    Paris,    276. 
Her  house  at  Richmond  Green,  290, 
Arrested  in  Paris,  and  put  to  death, 
397,  413 
Biscay,  roads  in,  i.  345 
Blagdon,  Sir  Charles,  i.  412;  ii.  167 
Blair's  Hospital,  i.  130 
Blake,  Mr.,  his  drawings,  ii.  486 
Blandfcrd,  Lord,  i.  208,  210.  364 
Blangini,  the  musician,  iii.  83 
Blantyre,  Monteith  &  Co.'s  cotton-mill 
at,  in  1805  and  in  1860,  ii.  302 — 308 
Blucher,  Prince,  in  London,  iii.  31 
Boar-hunt  at  Naples,  i.  93 
Boat-race   on  the  Thames  in  1790,  i. 

200 
Boats  on  the  Saone,  i.  136 
Bodoni,   the   director  of  the  printing- 
office  at  Parma,  i.  242 
Boisson,   Glacier  de,  i.  30,  131.     First 
visit  to,  from  curiosity,  31,  32.     As- 
cent of  the,  33 
Bolingbroke,  Lord,  Walpole's  parody  on 

his  lines  on  Maynard,.ii.  64 
Bologna,    city   of,   i.    50,    244.     Hotel 
charges  at,  244.     The  Sampieri  Gal- 
leria  at,  244.     Academy  of,  iii.  303 
Bonaparte,  Madame,  visits  to,  ii.  168, 

169,  171 
Bonaparte,  Jerome, his  champagne  bath, 
iii.  20.     His  ex-wife,  Mrs.  Patterson, 
100 
Bonaparte,  Joseph,  at  Amiens  in  1802, 
ii.  129,  130,  note.    His  wife,  130,  note 
Bonaparte,  Lucien,  in  England,  ii.  446 
Bonaparte,  Napoleon,  his  expedition  to 
Egypt,  ii.  101.  His  power  in  France, 
105.     Miss  Berry's  remarks  on,  110. 
His  apartments  in  the  Tuileries,  when 
First  Consul,  164.    His  review  of  the 
troops  in   1802,   180.     His  personal 
appearance,  180,  189.     Miss  Berry's 
interview  and  conversation  with  him, 
186.     His  alleged  cruelty  in  Egypt, 
235.     Defeat  of  his  army  near  Paris, 
iii.  9.     His  abdication,  10.     His  im- 
provements  in  Paris,  17.     Reaches 


534 


INDEX. 


BON 

Elba,  20.     His  escape  from  Elba,  43. 
Account  of  his  journey,  44.  Defeated 
at  Waterloo,  61.     On  board  the  Bel- 
lerophon,  62.     His  'Memoirs,'  120. 
And  the  Five  Hundred,  447 
Bonn,  town  of,  i.   22.     Palace  of  the 
Elector   of  Cologne   at,   22.     Vine- 
yards at,  22 
'Bonner's      Ghost,'     Hannah     More's 
poem  of,  i.  172.     Horace  Walpole's, 
remarks  on,  172 
Bonneville,  town  of,  i.  28.     An  inn  at, 

28,  129 
Bononi,  Mr.,  at  Rome,  i.  99 
Borghese,  the  Villa,  i.   68.     Works  of 

art  at  the,  72,  113 
Borghese  Chapel,  the,  at  Rome,  i.  69 
Borghese,  Palazzo,  i.  117;  iii.  270 
Borghese,  the  Prince,  at  Florence,  iii. 

152 
Borghetta,  visit  to,  iii.  161 
Boringdon,  Lord  (afterwards   Earl   of 

Morley),  his  motion,  ii.  495 
Borodino,  battle  of,  ii.  507 
Borrow  Dale,  ii.  363 
Boscawen,  Mrs.,  at  Strawberry  Hill,  i. 

199,  200 
Boschetti,  M.,  iii.  138 
Bosvvell,  James,  his  panegyric  on  Pascal 

Paoli,  i.  414 
Bothwell,  Miss  Berry's  visit  to  a  cotton - 
mill   at,   ii.    302.      Lord    Douglas's 
seat  at,  365 
Botzen,  town  of,  i.  355 
Boufflers,  Madame  de,  i.  161,  195,  208. 

Danger  of  her  son,  200 
Boufflers.  M.  de,  i.  258.     His  house  on 

Richmond  Green,  290 
Bourbon,  Duke  of,   at  Turin,  i.   2.37. 
Notice  of  him,  237.     In  London,  i. 
504 
Bourchier,  Miss,  the  governess,  i.  7 
Bourdonnaye,  M.  de  la,  iii.  204 
Bourke,  Mr.,  Danish  minister,  iii.  69 
Bournonville,  M.,  made  prisoner  by  Du- 

mourier,  i.   382 
Boustrephodon  inscription,  the,  ii.  518 
Boutourlin,  M.,  his  library  at  Florence, 

iii.  156 
Bowen,  Admiral,  at  Little  Strawberry 

Hill,  iii.  172 
Bowood,  in  1838,  iii.  460 
Boyd,  General,  made  governor  of  Gib- 
raltar, i.  233 
Boydell,  Mr.,  at  Strawberry  Hill,  i.  198 
Boyer,  General,  his  tiial  for  hiy;h  trea- 
son, iii.  73.     His  sentence,  75 
Boj-le,  Mis?,  i.  297.     Married  to  Lord 
Henry  Fitzgerald,  323 


BUF 

Boyle,  Lady  Charlotte,  it  26 

Bracciano,  Villa,  i.   115 

Braco,  mountainous  country  near,    iii. 

162 
Bramhall,  iii.  356 

Brand,  Rev.  Thomas,  i.  37,  56;  ii.  66 
Brehan,  M.  de.,  ii.  450,  451 
Breschetto  da  Dulichio,  the  architect  of 

the  Duomo  at  Pisa,  i.  329 
Bretons,  their  loyalty  to  Louis  XVI.,  i. 

206,  210 
Briche,  Madame  de  la,  iii.  201 
Bridgewater,  Duke  of,  his  death   and 

immense  property,  ii.  241 
Brighthelmstone,    the  Duke  of  Orleans 

at,  i.  199.  The  Old  Ship  at,  214.  The 

Prince   of   Wales's   Court    at,    471. 

In  1810,  ii.  442.  The  Old  Church  at, 

443.     The  Pavilion  at,  in  1811,  490 
Brisac,  Neiive,  town  of,  i.  27.     Fortifi- 
cations at,  27 
Broad ie.  Miss,  i.  475 
Broadlands,  ii.  236 

Broadstairs,  visitors  at,  in  1794,  i.  441 
Broadwater,  church  at,  ii.  506 
Broglie,  Marshal,  sum  set  on  his  head,  i. 

174.  Encamped  before  Versailles,  175 
Broglie,  Due  de,  iii.  186 
Broni,  i.  44 
Brouard,  Madame,  sister  of  Talma,  iii. 

169 
Brougham,    Mr.    (now   Lord),  ii.  341. 

His  speech  on  the  trial  of  the  Queen, 

iii.  255 
Broiigham  Hall,  iii.  357 
Bruce,  Lady  Mary,  i.   186,  note 
Bruce,  Lord,  his   imprisonment    in    a 

sentry-box  in  France,  i.  253 
Bruce,  Mr.,  the  African  traveller,  i.  297 
Brune,  General,  ii.   160 
Brunelleschi,    Filippo,    his    portico    at 

Santa  Croce,  Florence,  i.  333 
Brunet,  the  actor,  iii.  77 
Brunton,  Miss,  the  actress,  i.  364 
Bruschal,  town  of,  ii.  276 
Brunswick,  Duke  of,  his  victories  over 

the  French,  i.  427—429.     His  death, 

ii.  339 
Brunswick,    Duchess  of,    ii.  352.      At 

Black  heath,  493 
Bruxelles,  environs  of.  i.  1 9.     Town  of, 

19.     Theatres  at,  19,  20 
Bruyere,  les  caracteres  de  la,  ii.  461 
Buccleugh,  Duchess  of,  her  death,  iii.  34 
Buckingham,  JVlarquess  of,  ii.  505 
Buckinghamshire,    Lady,  her  Venetian 

breakfasts,  ii.  419,  502  ;  iii.  32 
Budc,  General,  i.  387,  339 
Button,  Madame,  i.   199 


INDEX. 


535 


BUL 

Buller,  Mrs.,  i.  288,  291,  299,  326,  383, 

392 
Bunbnry,  Sir  Charles,  at  Newmarket, 

ii.  398 
Burdett,  Charles  Sedley,his  death,!.  411 
Burdett,  Sir  Francis,  committed  to  the 

Tower,  ii.  413.    Eiots  in  consequence, 

414.     His  release,  419 
Burghersh,  Lady,  ii.  507 
Burghersh,  Lord,  at  Leghorn,  iii.  230 
Burgos,  cathedral  at,  ii.  343,  344 
Burgundy,  outrage  of  a  royalist  in,  i.  177 
Burke,  Edmund,  his  pamphlet  on  the 

French  Revolution,  i.  248,251,  252. 

Dr.  Price's  answer  to,    259.     Wal- 

pole's  opinion  of  it,  267.     Spurious 

pamphlet  attributed  to  him,  308 
Burney,  Dr.  Charles,  ii.  488,  503 
Burns,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  ii.  103 
Burton,  village  of,  ii.  359 
Bury,  Mr.,  his  marriage,  iii.  157 
Bush,  Mr.,  at  Strawberry  Hill,  i.  466 
Bute,   Lord,   accident  to,  i.    263.     As 

prime  minister,  ii.  56 
Bute,  Lady,  i.  404 
Butlar,  Madame,  at  Cassel,  ii.  284 
Buxton,  iii.  385 
Byron,  Lord,  at  Lady  Glenbervie's,  ii. 

496.    At  Mr.  Montague's,  497.     His 

'Lara,'  iii.  34 
Byron.  Lady,  ii.  505.      Her  school  at 

Ealing,  iii.  443 


pADOGAN,  Colonel,  ii.  366 

^  Cadval,  Due  de,  i.  272.  His  enter- 
tainment, 272,  273 

Cahir,  Lady,  ii.  235;  iii.  92.  At  the 
Tuileries,  ii.  188 

Cainea,  the  Chevalier,  his  singing,  ii. 
182 

Cairo,  panorama  of,  ii.  385 

Calabria,  earthquake  in,  i.  307 

Calais,  dangers  to  which  travellers  were 
liable  in  1791,  i.  366.  In  1802,  ii. 
124 

Caledon,  Lord,  ii.  474 

Caligula,  Fonte  di,  i.  88 

Calonne,  his  treachery  to  his  friend  La 
Chalotais,  i.  174.  His  subsequent 
life,  175.  His  'Lettresur  1  Etat  de 
la  France,  present  et  a  venir,'  248. 
Earl  Stanhope's  speech  against  it, 
259.  In  London,  813.  Walpole's 
opinion  of  him,  i.  314 

Cambaieres,  at  the  Ministry  of  Justice 
in  Paris,  ii.  343.  As  Second  Consul, 
ii.  153.  Visit  to  him,  153.  His  as- 
sembly, 159 


CAR 

Cambiasi,  wealth  of  the  house  of,  at 
Genoa,  i.  42 

Cambiaso,  Marquis,  his  road  to  Genoa 
i.  40 

Cambiaso,  Villa,  iii.  114 

Cambis,  Madame,  her  house  on  Rich- 
mond Green,  i.  290.  At  Park  Place, 
369 

Cambridge,  Richard  Owen,  i.  166,  169, 
note.  His  letters  to  Miss  Berry,  182, 
183.  Walpole's  description  of  the 
company  at  his  house,  189.  His 
stories,  285.  His  testimony  to  the 
value  of  Miss  Berry's  edition  of  Lady 
Russell's  letters,  ii.  428 

Cambridge,  Richard,  afterwards  Arch- 
deacon of  Middlesex,  i.  413 

Cambridge,  Miss,  i.  198 

Cambridge,  George,  i.  390,  393,  395 

Cambridge,  Mrs.,  the  Nymph  of  the 
Cherry-tree,  i.  398 

Cambridge,  visit  to  the  University  of, 
ii.  397.  And  to  the  public  library 
and  to  the  library  of  Trinity  at,  401. 
Cambridge  compared  with  Oxford, 
403.     Visit  to,  iii.  172,  346 

Camelford,  Lord,  his  pamphlet  and 
story  of  its  authorship,  i.  181.  His 
contradiction  of  the  charge  of  hav- 
ing published  a  pamphlet  on  France 
183 

Campbell,  Lady  Frederick,  her  death,  ii. 
329 

Campbell,  Thomas,  ii.  499.  His  first 
discourse  on  poetry,  ii.  502;  iii.  6 

Campbell,  Lady  Charlotte,  ii.  343.  At 
Florence,  iii.  155.  Her  marriage, 
157 

Camucia,  village  of,  i.  120 

Camuccini,  the  painter,  iii.  264,  265. 
His  pictures  at  Naples,  337 

Can,  Mont,  grotto  at,  ii.  231 

Cannes,  town  of,  ii.  221 

Canning,  Mr.,  his  claims  over  Mrs. 
Percival,  ii.  395 

Canning,  Mr.  (now  Lord  Stratford  de 
Redcliffe),  ii.  521 

Canova,  Antonio,  102.  103,  117.  In 
London,  iii.  67.  His  brother,  68. 
Sends  engravings  to  Miss  Berry,  70. 
His  works,  151.  Visit  to  his  studio 
at  Rome,  265,     His  death,  iii.  323 

Canterbury,  objects  of  interest  at,  i.  437 

Capet,  Mons.     See  Orleans,  Duke  of 

Capo  d'Istria,  at  Cappet,  iii.  342 

Capo  di  Monte,  at  Naples,  i.  77 

Caprera,  Cardinal,  ii.  146 

Capua,  i.  75 

Caracalla,  Baths  of,  iii.  265 


536 


INDEX. 


CAR 

Caracci,  L.,  his  pictures  at  Piacenza,  i. 

45 
Caracci,  Annibale,  his  paintings  in  the 

Farnese  Palace,  i.  72,  73 
Caravaggio,  Polidoro  de,  his  works  at 

Kome,  i.  96.     The  famous  Giocatori 

of,  i.  114 
Cardiff,  town  of,  ii.  97.     The  Castle  of, 

98 
Cardigan,  Earl  of,  i.  299 
Carignan,  Prince  de,  i.  238 
Carignario  theatre  at  Turin,  i.  236 
Carlisle,  Lady,  ii.  93.     Tribute  to  her 

memory,  93,  note 
Cai-lisle,  Earl,  his  marriage  with  Lady 

Georgiana  Cavendish,  ii.  115 
Carlsruhe,  the  Court   at,  i.  351,  352. 

The    Refugies    aristocrats    at,    352. 

Town  of,  ii.  275  ;  iii.  378 
Carlton    House,  in   1811,    ii.  478.     A 

grand  breakfast  at,  ii.  536 
Carnavali,  tlie  exhibitor  of  the  Fantoc- 
cini, his  prize  in  the  lottery,  i.  29,  287 
Carnival,  the,  at  Florence,  iii.  152.    At 

Rome,  288 
Caroline,  queen  of  Naples,  i.  83 
Caroline,  queen  of  England.   See  Wales, 

Princess  of 
Carteau,  General,  defeated  by  Captain 

Elphinstone.  i.  387 
Carter,  Miss,  i.  203 
Carter,  Mrs.,  the  translator  of  Epictetus, 

i.  401 
Carticuse,  Amphitheatre,  at  Rome,  i.  95 
Casale,  i.  40 

Cascade  near  Terni,  i.  118 
Caserta,  palace  at,  i.  85  ;  iii.  338 
Cashel,  Archbishop  of,  i.  474,  480 
Cassel,    town    of,   ii,    282,    283.      The 

Orangerie  at,  284.     Sights  at,  285 
Cassini,  Marchese,  his  palazzo  at  AUes- 

sandro,  i.  239 
Castel  Pagano,  Duchesa,  i.  76 
Castellana,  Civita,  ii.  118;  iii.  261 
Castellane,  Madame  de,  ii.  161 
Castello  Blanco,  village  of,  i.  338 
Castlecomer,  Lady,  story  of,  i.  184,  445 
Castlereagh,  Lady,  ii.  494,  495 
Castlereagh,    Lord,     the    Princess    of 

Wales's  letter  to,  iii.  31 
Catacombs  the,  at  Naples,  i.  87 
Catalani,  Madame,  the  singer,  ii.  337, 

339,    378,    467.      At    Madame    de 

Stael's,  ii.  7 
Cathcart,  Lord,  i.  187 
Catherine,  St.,  of  Raphael,  i.  117 
Catherine,   Empress  of  Russia,  i.  296, 

299.    Orders  a  bust  of  Charles  James 

Fox; 321 


CHA 

Catholic  Emancipation  in  1813,  ii.  534 

Cato,  Porcius,  Tusculum  of,  i.  115 

'  Cato,'  Addison's  tragedy  of,  ii.  454  ■, 

Cato  Street  Conspiracy,  iii.  215 

Caulincourt,  M.,  iii.  19 

Cavalli,  Monte,  the  Pope's  palace  at,  i. 
99 

Cavendish,  Lady  Georgiana,  ii.  93,  104. 
Her  marriage  with  the  Earl  of  Car- 
lisle, 115.    Visit  to  her  in  181 1,  484 

Cavendish,  Lady  Harriet,  ii.  348.  Her 
marriage  with  Lord  Granville  Leve- 
son  Gower,  405,  406,  411 

Cavendish,  Henry,  the  natural  philoso- 
pher, ii.  494,  note 

Cavendish,  Mrs.,  iii.  355 

Cayley,  Sir  George,  i.  8 

Cayley,  Mrs.,  i.  8 

Cayley,  Lady,  i.  9,  10 

'  Cecco,  Lamento  di,'  iii.  321 

Cecil,  Lady  Georgiana,  ii.  272 

Cecilia,  Metella,  tomb  of,  at  Rome,  i. 
102 

Cecilia,  St.,  the,  of  Domenichino,  i.  117 

Celle,  town  of,  ii.  291 

Cellini,  Benvenuto,  his  'Perseus,'  i.  260 

Cenci,  Beatrice  de,  Guido's  portrait  of, 
i.  116 

Cenis,  Mont,  the  hospital  on,  i.  227. 
Road  over,  iii.  106 

Cergat,  Miss,  at  Lausanne,  ii.  260 

Chabot  de  Castellane,  Madame,  ii,  141 

Chalets  on  the  Alps,  i.  132 

Chalons,  Madame  de,  i.  271 

Chalotais,La,Walpole's  account  of,  i.  175 

Chambery,  town  of,  i.  34,  129,  225; 
ii.  252.  Palace  of  the  Dukes  of  Savoy 
at,  i.  225.  Theatre  of,  225.  The  king 
of  Sardinia's  palace  at,  253.  The 
city  of,  254 

Chambre,  La,  in  Savoy,  i.  35 

Chamouni,  village  of,  i.  30,  130. 
Messrs.  Wyndham  and  Pococke's 
excursion  to,  31.  Excursions  near, 
130,  131.  Inhabitants  of  the  valley 
of,  131 

Champ  de  Mars,  in  Paris,  i.  219 

Channel,  crossing  the,  at  the  end  of  the 
last  century,  i.  375 

Chantilly  in  1802,  ii.  131.  The  Ha- 
meau  de,  public  ball  at,  178.  Cha- 
teau of,  iii.  177 

Chantrey,  Sir  Francis,  iii.  462 

Chapel  Royal,  the,  in  1811,  ii.  471 

Charlemont,  Earl  of,  ii.  534 

Charles  III.,  of  Naples,  his  aqueduct  at 
Caserta,  i.  86 

Charles  IV.,  King  of  Spain,  story  of,  i. 
181 


INDEX. 


537 


CHA 

Charles  X.,  his  abdication,  iii.  406, 
407 

Charles  Emmanuel,  Duke  of  Savoy,  his 
Chemin  de  la  Grotte,  i.  224 

Charlotte,  the  Princess,  at  fifteen,  ii. 
452.  At  Blackheath,  489.  Her  per- 
sonal appearance  in  1811,  489.  And 
in  1812,  499.     Her  death,  148 

Charlotte,  Queen,  her  correspondence 
with  the  Princess  of  Wales,  on  the 
subject  of  the  drawing-rooms,  iii.  25 

Charming  Man,  the,  i.  256,  291 

Char-a-banc,  i.  29 

Chartres,  Due  de,  in  1822,  iii.  318 

Chatelet,  Due  de,  assault  of  the  mob  on 
the  hotel  of  the,  i.  177 

Chatelet,  Mdme.  du,  arrest  of,  i.  .396 

Chatham,  Earl  of,  obtains  the  Garter,  i. 
263.     As  prime  minister,  ii.  56,  57 

Chatham,  second  Lord,  wounded  in 
Holland,  ii.  104 

Chatillon,  Duchesse  de,  arrested,  i.  398 

Chatillon,  M.,  ii.  165 

Chatsworth,  visits  to,  iii.  309,  355 

Chatterton,  Horace  VValpole's  memorial 
on  the  controversy  respecting  the 
forgeries  of,  ii.  44 

Chauvelin,  M.  de,  iii.  197 

Cheap,  Miss,  i.  209 

Cheltenham  in  1826,  iii.  365 

Chepstow,  castle  of,  ii.  97.  Town  of, 
97 

Cherry-tree,  Nymph  of  the,  i.  398 

Chesterfield,  Lord,  and  Lord  Bath,  ii. 
28 

Chiavere,  town  of,  iii.  162.  Road  from, 
to  Genoa,  162 

Chichester,  Mrs.,  masquerade  at  her 
house,  ii.  381 

Chiesa  Nuova,  great  Franciscan  church 
at,  i.  119 

Child,  Mrs.,  her  marriage  with  Lord 
Ducie,  i.  276 

Chilly,  the  Seigneur  de,  1.  210 

Chimay,  Princesse  de,  iii'.  222 

China  manufactory,  Ginori's,  near  Flo- 
rence, i.  121.     Indian,  ii.  393 

Chiswick,  the  College  House  at,  i.  6. 
The  Duke  of  Devonshire's  improve- 
ments at,  ii.  535.  Fete  champetre 
at,  iii.  29.  A  dejeune  dinatoire  at, 
104 

Choiseul,  M.  de,  his  treatment  by  the 
mob,  i.  309.  In  London,  383  ;  ii. 
35 

Cholmeley,  Mrs.,  i.  170,  194,  293.  Her 
death,  ii.  447 

Cholmondeley,  George,  i.  198.  His 
marriage  to  ilissPitt,  210 


CLU 

Cholmondeley,  Lord,  i.  298,  442.  His 
house  at  Broadstairs,  451 

Cholmondeley,  Lady,  her  assembly,  ii. 
412 

Cholmondeley,  Mrs.,  i.  299,  307,  308 

Christ,  the  Dead,  of  Michael  Angelo,  i. 
114.     Of  Guercino,  116 

Christmas  Day  at  Rome,  i.  61 

Churchill,  Mr.,  i.  176,   177 

Churchill,  Lady  M.,  i.   176,  177,  204 

Churchill,  Charles,  i.  205,  notes 

Churchill,  General,  his  son  by  Mrs.  Old- 
field,  i.  205 

Churchill,  Horace,  i.  437 

Churchill,  Mrs.  Horace,  i.  300 

Churchill,  George,  ii.  16 

Churchills,  their  house  at  Lewisham,  1. 
402 

Gibber,  Mr.,  ii.  26 

Cicero,  doubtful  bust  of.  at  Rome,  i. 
113.  The  Tusculum  of  Tully,  i.  115. 
His  letters  to  Atticus,  342 

Cicoquera,  Cointe,  iii.  234 

Cignani,  Carlo,  his  Five  Senses,  at 
Rome,  i.  65 

Cimabue,  Giovanni,  iii.  151 

Cintra,  Convention  of,  ii.  371 

Clackmannan,  Lady,  i.  210,  2^6.  The 
Lady  and  the  Cat,  i.  310 

Clarence,  William  Henry,  Duke  of,  his 
residence  at  Richmond,  i.  188.  His 
visit  to  Strawberry  Hill,  326.  At 
Richmond,  260,  264.  Walpole's  cha- 
racter of  him,  265.  Mrs.  Jordan, 
467, 471,  472.    See  also  William  IV. 

Clairfait,  General,  defeat  of,  i.  441,  442. 
His  victories,  487 

Clarke,  Dr.  E.  D.,  his  MSS,  collected 
in  the  Levant,  ii.  237 

Clausel  de  Coussergues,  M.,   iii.  203 

Clenientinum  Museum,  at  Rome,  i.  111. 
By  torchlight,  114 

Clermont,  park  and  chateau  of  the  Due 
de  Fitzjames  at,  ii.   130 

Cleveland  House,  in  1811,  ii.  478 

Clifden,  Lord,  i,  474     ' 

Clifden,  Lady,  i.  324 

Clive,  Kitty,  her  house  at  Little  Straw- 
berry Hill,  i.  375 

Cliveden,  the  country  residence  of  the 
Berrys,  i.  308,  310,  375.  See  Straw- 
berry Hill,  Little 

Cloots,  Anacharsis, '  I'Orateur  du  Genre 
Humain,'  i.  219 

Cloud,  St.,  visits  to,  iii.  101,  105,  319 
The  widowed  Duchesse  de  Berri  at, 
iii.  214 

Cluse,  town  of,  i.  28 

Clusi,  ascent  of  the,  i.  355 


538 


INDEX. 


CLY 

Clyde,  falls  of  the,  ii.   364 

Cnidos,  ii.  519 

Cobbett,  William,  the  '  Edinburgh  Re- 
view's' review  of  his  weekly  journal, 
ii.  326 

Coblentz,  town  of,  i,  23.  Castle  of  the 
Elector  of  Treves  at,  23 

Coburg,  Prince  de  Saxe,  at  Maubeuge, 
i.  397,  399.  His  defeat  of  the  French, 
404 

Cockerell,  Mr.,  the  architect,  ii.  513 

Cocks,  Mr.,  the  banker,  i.  392 

Coigny,  the  Comte  de,  i.  423.  The 
Comte  de  Provence's  answer  to,  362 

Coigny,  Madame  de,  ii.  100,101,102. 
Her  house  in  Paris,  167.  Her  danc- 
ing,  168 

Coleshil!,  ii.  355 

Colman,  George,  the  younger,  ii.  501. 
His  'Ways  and  Means,'  ii.  92 

Cologne,  town  of,  i.  21,  22.  Electors 
of,  22 

Colonna,  Palazzo,  at  Rome,  i.  Gl,  66, 
116 

Colonna,  Cardinal,  his  monument  to  his 
mother,  Marie  Mancini,  i.  330 

Colosseum,  the,  at  Rome,  by  moonlight, 
i.  64,  94,  105.  Origin  of  the  name, 
103 

Comedy,  Italian,  i.  72 

Conciergerie,  the,  iii.  222 

Concord,  Temple  of,  at  Rome,  i.  100 

Condorcet,  in  Switzerland,  i.  416 

Coningham,  Lord  and  Lady,  ii.  443 

Constant,  M.  Benjamin,  iii.  69, 218.  His 
romance  on  his-tory,  70.  His  criti- 
cisms on  Miss  Berry's  '  Comparative 
View,'  iii.  374.     His  death,  409 

Constantine,  arch  of,  at  Rome,  i.  64,  99 

Constantinople  in  1812,  ii.  522 

Contat,  Mdlle.,  the  French  actress,  ii. 
141,  150 

Contuela,  Mdlle.  de,  ii.  151 

Convento  Buono,  i.  53 

Conway,  Hon.  and  Rev.  Edward,  i.  103 

Conway,  General  Henry  Sej'^mour,  i. 
159,  199.  His  accident  while  review- 
ing the  Blues.  303.  Appointed  a 
field-marshal,  401.  His  meeting  with 
the  Prince  of  Wales,  404.  Joins 
Lord  Moira  in  his  expedition  to  the 
coast  of  France,  419.  His  death,  461. 
Miss  Berry's  character  of,  462.  Lord 
Orford's  fragments  on  the  life  and 
character  of  him,  463.  Walpole's 
verses  to  Conway  in  1758,  ii.  63 

Conway,  Lady  Anne  Seymour,  i.  186 

Conyers,  Lady  Harriet,  i.  169,  422 

Cookery,  Dutch,  i.  17 


coz 

Coombank,  Miss  Berry's  visit  to,  ii.  327 
Cope,    Miss   (afterwards  Lady  Strath - 

aven),  i.  298 
Copley,   Mr.  (afterwards  Lord  Lynd- 

hurst),  iii.  256 
Coppet,  Miss  Berry  at,  iii.  342 
Coral  manufactory  at  Leghorn,  i.  122. 

Price  of  beads,  123 
Corbiere,  M.,  iii.  184,  219 
Corday,  Charlotte,  her  murder  of  Ma- 
rat, i.  413 
Cordon,  Mons.,  the  Sardinian  minister 

at  Paris,  i.  200 
Corion  river,  the,  i.  240 
Cork,  Lady,  ii,  478.      Her  assemblies. 

478,  483 
Cornewall,  the  Misses,  ii.  345 
Cornewall,  Lady,  ii.  496 
Cornwallis,  LoBtl,  at  Amiens,  ii.  129 
Corodono,  visit  to,  iii.  161.     The  good 

priest  of,  161 
Correggio,  his  works  at  Parma,  i.  46 — 

48,  259 
Corsini,  Prince,  and  his  family,  i.  246. 

At  Florence,  iii.  152 
Cosmo  and  Damian,  SS.,  church  of,  at 

Rome,  i.  97 
Cosmo  III.,  his  MSS.  of  Travels  in  Eng- 
land, iii.  158 
Cosne,  town  of,  i.  221 
Cosway,  Mr.,  at  Strawberry  Hill,  ii.  15 
Cosway,  Mrs.,  the  artist,  ii.  135 
Cutellina,  La,  the  comic  actress,  i.  80 
Cotius,  Julius,  his  triumphal  arch  erected 

to  Augustus,  i.  228 
Courage,  moral  v.  civil,  iii.  420 
Court,  iVidlle.  le,  the  actress,  ii.  190 
Courtney,  Mr.,  his  poems,  i.  432 
Courtrai,  iii.  377 
Courvoisier,  M.,  iii.  205 
Coussmaker,  Captain,  i.  48,  50 
Coutts,   Mr.,  i.  448.      Marriage  of  his 

daughter  with  the  Earl  of  Guildford, 

i.  468 
Couzies,  M.  de,  Bishop  of  Arras,  i.  256 
Covent  Garden  Theatre  in  1809,  ii.  392. 

Opening   of    the   new   theatre,    394. 

The  O.  P.  riots,  394,  406 
Coventry,   visit   to,    in    1818,   iii.    175. 

Ribbon  manufacture  of,  175 
Cowbridge,  town  of,  ii.  9S 
Cowdry,  mansion  of,  burnt,  i.  390 
Cowper,  Geoi'ge  Nassau,  third  Earl,  i. 

13 
Coxc,  Mr.,  his  '  Life  of  Sir  Robert  WaU 

pole,'  i.  490 
Cozens,  Alexander,  the  painter,  i.  36, 

iiute 
Cozens,  John,  son  of  the  above,  i.  36 


INDEX. 


539 


CRA 

Craven,  Loi-d,  his  death,  i.  369 
Craven,   Elizabeth   Berkeley,  Lady,  i. 

369 
Craven,  Hon.  Keppel,  ii.  422.    His  nar- 
rative of  a  tour  to  the  East,  ii.  509, 

521,  531.    At  Naples,  iii.  38 
Crawford,  Madame,  in  Paris,  iii.  168. 

Notice  of  her,  1 68,  note.   Her  pictures 

and  other  treasures,  1 69 
Creche,  part  of  the,  in  which  our  Saviour 

was  born,  i.  61 
Crequy,  Madame  de,  iii.  422 
Crewe,  Lady,  ii.  508 
Crige,  M.  de  St.,  iii.  265 
Crillon,  Comte  de,  ii.  167;  iii.  142 
Crillon,  Madame  de,  ii.  168 
Croce,  Santa,  Princess,   i.  56,  67.     In 

Paris,  in  1802,  ii.  144 
Croce  in  Gerusalemme,  Sta.,  convent  of, 

at  Rume,  i.  95 
Croce,  Santa,  at  Florence,  portico  by 

Brunelleschiart,  i.  333 
Crosne,  M.  de,  French  Lieutenant  de 

Police,  his  escape  from  death,  i.  182 
Crostwick,  living  of,  ii.  1 1 
Cuma,  i.  90 

Cumberland,  Mr.,  his  comedies,  i.  207 
Cumberland,  Lady  A.,  ii.  11 
Cumberland,     Richard,     his     play    of 

'  Lovers'  Vows,'  ii.  72,  77 
Cumberland,  Duchess  of,  in  France,  ii. 

191.     At  Avignon,  213 
Cumberland,  Duke  of,  his  political  in- 
trigues, ii.  448 
Cumberland,  Duchess  of,  her  assembly, 

iii.  104 
Cunliffe,  Mrs,,  iii.  50 
Curran,  James,  at  Sir  J.  Mackintosh's, 

ii.  543 
Curzon,  Lord,  his  seat  at  Hagley,  ii. 

357 
Czartoriska,  the  Princess,  iii.  462 


~P^       the  Princess,  at  Rome,  i.  69 
-*-^*?     Dalberg,  the  Due  de,  iii.  119, 
138 

Dalmeney,  iii.  480 

Damas,  M.  de,  his  treatment  by  the 
mob,  i.  309 

Darner,  Hon.  John,  i.  159,  note 

Darner,  Hon.  Mrs.,  i.  159.  Her  reputa- 
tion as  a  sculptress,  160,  note.  Her 
health,  247,  252.  At  Lisbon,  271- 
274,  280.  Honours  paid  to  her  at 
Elvas,  297.  At  Grenada,  300.  Her 
sculpture  of  Dogs  at  Strawberry  Hill, 
302.  Her  return  to  England,  305. 
Her  illness,  306.    And  recovery,  307. 


DEL 

Her  letters  to  Miss  Berry  (see  Let- 
ters). Her  life  in  Lisbon,  335.  Her 
entry  into  the  town  of  Elvas,  340. 
Her  visit  to  the  Cathedral  at  Burgos, 
343.  At  Park  Place,  369.  Her  new 
house,  438.  Her  bust  of  Mrs.  Sid- 
dons,  438.  Her  lameness,  481.  Set- 
tles at  Strawberry  Hill,  ii.  66.  Her 
object  in  visiting  Paris  in  1802,  187. 
Death  of  her  mother,  228.  Visit  of 
the  Princess  of  Wales  to  her  at 
Strawberry  Hill,  388.  The  Empress 
Josephine's  present  of  porcelain  to, 
450.  Gives  up  Strawberry  Hill,  465. 
Her  bust  of  the  Princess  of  Wales, 
iii.  1.     Her  death,  379 

Damer,  Hon.  G.  D.,  iii.  1 

Dampier,  Dr.,  Bishop  of  Ely,  his  library, 
ii.  501 

Dancing  of  Italian  peasants,  i.  124.  Of 
the  French  servants  and  peasants,  143 

Daphne,  statue  of,  in  the  Villa  Borghese, 
i.  113 

D'Arblay,  Madame,  ii.  508.  Her  pam- 
phlet written  for  the  French  clergy, 
i.  420 

Darmstadt,  town  of,  ii.  278 

Darrel,  Mr.,  i.  436 

Darwin,  Dr.,  Walpole's  remarks  on  his 
'  Botanic  Garden,'  i.  161.  Miss 
Berry's,  162.  Walpole's  opinion  of 
his  poetry,  i.  329 

DashkofF,  Princess,  iii.  464 

Dauphin,  the  title  of,  ii.  247,  249 

Davenport,  Mr.,  his  tyranny  at  Twicken- 
ham, i.  483 

Davenport,  Mrs.,  ii.  467 

David,  the  painter,  his  'Rape  of  the 
Sabines,'  ii.  183 

Davy,  Lady,  ii.  427,  458,461.  462.  The 
Princess  of  Wales  a  visitor  to,  535 

Debordemens  in  a  torrent  near  Sallen- 
ches,  i.  130 

Decazes,  Comte,  iii.  204.  In  the  Cham- 
ber, 206 

Decres,  Admiral,  ii.  184 

Deepden,  near  Dorking,  ii.  382 

DefRmd,  Madame  du,  her  papers,  ii. 
333,  334.  Her  portrait,  i.  389.  Miss 
Berry's  account  of  the  publication  of 
her  Letters  at  Paris,  ii.  410.  Publi- 
cation of  Miss  Berry's  edition  of  her 
letters,  375,  378,  421.  Mr.  lloscoe's 
view  of  her  character,  430.  The 
'  Edinburgh  Review  '  on  Miss  Berry's 
edition  of  the  '  Letters  '  of,  467,  468 

Degenfelt,  Comte  and  Comtesse,  ii.  281 

Delia  Crusca,  its  '  Laurel  of  Liberty,'  i. 
252 


5-10 


INDEX. 


DEM 

DemidofF,  M.,  in  Paris,  ii.  173.  Grand 
ball  at  his  house,  173 

Denis,  St.,  Church  of,  in  1802,ii.  131 

Denman,  Mr.  (afterwards  Lord),  iii. 
229.     His  speech  for  the  Queen,  257 

Denmark,  Prince  and  Princess  of,  at 
Pome,  iii.  274 

Denner,  the  painter,  his  pictures  at 
Manheim,  i.  26 

Deptford,  launch  of  the  '  Queen  Char- 
lotte  '  at,  ii.  420 

Derby,  Countess  of,  i.  254.  At  Rich- 
mond, i.  313;  ii.  471 

Derby,  Earl  of,  i.  327,  391,  392,4  29 

Dernot,  the  painter,  at  Rome,  i.  71 

Desaix,  monument  of,  in  Paris,  iii. 
171 

D'Espremesnil,  M.,  how  his  house  in 
Paris  was  saved,  i.  171 

Dessolles,  General,  ii.  170,  177 

D'Este,  Villa,  near  Tivoli,  i.  112 

D'Este,  the  sculptor,  iii.  68 

'  Detached  Thoughts,'  Walpole's,  ii.  51 

'Devil  to  Pay,'  Bannister  and  Mrs. 
Jordan  in  the,  ii.  341 

Devil's  Ditch,  the,  near  Newmarket 
Heath,  ii.  398 

Devisme,  or  Deval,  his  singular  beha- 
viour at  Ramsgate,  i.  441 

Devonshire,  Duchess  of,  ii.  15 

Devonshire  House,  balls  at,  in  1803,  ii. 
271.  Concert  at,  in  1808,  339. 
Morning  dance  at,  471.  The  library 
at,  494 

Devonshire,  Duke  of,  his  library,  ii. 
501,  502.  His  papers,  509.  His 
improvements  at  Chiswick,  535.  At 
Cbatsworth,  iii.  309 

Diana,  temple  of,  at  Nismes,  i.  140,  143 

Dibdin  the  younger,  his  farce  of  '  The 
Jew  and  the  Doctor,'  ii.  77,89 

Dieppe,  town  of,  in  1790,  i.  214.  The 
castle  of,  i.  214 

Digby,  Earl  of,  i.  249.  His  house, 
Coleshill  House,  ii.  355 

Dillon,  Lord,  ii.  30 

Dixon,  Major,  his  adventure,  i.  169. 
His  soubriquet  of  the  '  Charming 
Man,'  i.  189 

Dolce,  Carlo,  his  Crucifixion  of  St. 
Andrea,  i.  333 

Domenichino,  his  pictures  in  the  Pa- 
lazzo Rospigliosi,  i.  68.  His  works 
in  the  Palazzo  Justiniani,  69.  His 
frescoes  at  Grotto  Ferrato,  1 1 5.  His 
Demoniac  Boy,  1)5.  His  Sibyl  at 
the  Borghese  Palace,  117 

Domitian,  the  vivarium  of,  at  Rome,  i. 
100 


DUN 

Donegal,  Lady,  ii.  345,381,437.     At 

Tunbridge,  ii.  332,  333 
Dorchester,  Lord,  his  death,  ii.  342 
Doria  Villa,  at  Albano,  i.  115 
Doria,  Palace  d'Andrea,   in  Genoa,  iii. 

112 
Doria,  Andrea,  tomb  of,  at  Genoa,   iii. 

162 
Dorset,  Duke  of,  ambassador  in  Paris, 

i.  172;  ii.  158 
Douai,  barbarity  of  the  Revolutionists 

at,  i.  293 
Douglas,  Lady,  her  illness,  i.  266j  269, 

276 
Douglas,  Mr.,  i.  443,  447 
Douglas,  Marquis  of,  ii.  156 
Douglas  Park,  ii.  366 
Dover,  Lord,  i.   183.      His  edition  of 

Walpole's    'Letters   to    Sir  Horace 

Mann,'  iii.  385 
Dover,  road  from  London  to,  ii.  123. 

Town  of,  124.      An  enormous  whale 

at,  199.     Views  from  the  castle,  200 
Dragone,  Villa  Monte,  colossal  bust  of 

Antinous  in  the,  i.  115 
Dresden,  taking  of,  by  the  allies,,  ii.  545 
Di'opping   well   on   the    banks   of  the 

Avon,  ii.  436 
Drummond,  Sir  W.,  ii.  445 
Drunkenness,    Walpole's   remarks    on, 

165 
Drury  Lane,  the  new  temple  of  Venus 

in,.i.  411 
Drury  Lane  Theatre,  great  fire  at,,  ii. 

377.     The  new  theatre,  ii.  508 
Drusus,  arch  of,  at  Rome,  i.  102 
Dryden,   John,  Walpole's   remarks  on 

his  'Flower  and  Leaf,'  i.  161.     Plis 

poetry  contrasted   by  Walpole  v/ith 

that  of  Pope,  ii.  63 
Dublin,  panorama  of,  ii.  385 
Du  Camp,  Miss,  the  actress,  ii.  197 
Du  Cane,  Mrs.,  ii.  443 
Duchenois,  Mdlle.,  the  French  actress, 

ii.  204 
Ducie,    Lord,   his    proposed    marriage 

with  Mrs.  Child,  i.  276 
Dudley,  Lady,  ii.  506 
Dudleys  Lord,  ii.  53t5.     At  Naples,  iii. 

350 
Dumas,  General  Matthew,  iii.  398 
Dumourier,    General,  his    defection,   i. 

382.      His   treatment   of  the   Com- 
missioners sent  by  the  National  As- 
sembly, 382 
Duncan,    Lady    Mary,    i.    260.     Her 

answer  to  Badini,  313 
Dundas,  Miss,  her  loss   of  a   foot,  ii. 

333.     Dunstanville,  Lady,  iii.  506 


INDEX. 


541 


DUP 

Dupont,  General,  iii.  344 

Dupres,  the  actor,  ii.  140 

Diiras,  Due  de,  in  England,  i.  303 

Duras,    Madame    de,    iii.    317.     Her 

school  of  Mutual  Instruction  in  Paris, 

170.       Her    'Edward,'    317.       Her 

works,  344 
Durazzo,  Madame,  her  wealth,  i.  42 
Durazzo,  Palazzo,  at  Genoa,  i.  125 
Dusseldorf,  town  of,  i.  21.     Cabinet  of 

pictures  at,  21 
Dutens,  M.,  notice  of,  i.  1 72,  note 
Dysart,  Lady,  her  illness,  i.  185,  190. 

Horace  Walpole's  epitaph  on  her,  190. 

Her  death,  190 


T^  ASTLAKE,  Mr.  (now  Sir  Charles), 

-^     iii.  262,  329 

Eastnor  Castle,  ii.  95 

Echo  Simonetta,  the,  i.  127 

Edgeworth,  Miss,  her  'Practical  Educa- 
tion,' ii.  85,  91.  Her  personal  ap- 
pearance in  1813,  ii.  534,  536 

Edgeworth,  Mr.,  ii.  536 

•Edinburgh  Review'  in  1809,  ii.  396. 
On  Miss  Berry's  edition  of  Madame 
du  Deffand's  Letters,  468 

Edinburgh,  old  town  of,  iii.  40 

Effingham,  Dowager  Lady,  her  death, 
i.  370 

Eimbeck,  town  of,  ii.  289 

Elector  Palatine,  his  palaces  at  Man- 
heim  and  Munich,  i.  25,  26 

Elgin  Marbles,  the,  ii.  344 

Eliot,  Sir  Gilbert,  made  commissioner 
of  Toulon,  i.  393 

Ellenborough,  Lord,  at  Tunbridge,  ii. 
330.  At  the  launch  of  the  Queen 
Charlotte,  420 

Ellevieu,  the  French  actor,  ii.  203 

Elliot,  Lady,  her  assembly,  ii.  466 

Ellis,  Mrs.,  ii.  227 

EUiston,  the  actor,  ii.  338,  346 

Elmo,  Castel  St.,  at  Naples,  i.  90 

Elphinstoiie,  Captain,  his  defeat  of  Ge- 
neral Carteau,  i.  387 

Elvas,  town  of,  i.  336.  Mrs.  Darner's 
entry  into,  340 

Englefield,  Sir  Harry,  i.  230;  ii.  380,384 

Epic  poetry, Walpole's  remarks  on,  ii.  50 

'Epitaphium  vivi  Auctoris,'  Walpole's, 
i.  380 

Eppler,  General,  ii.  269 

Erskine,  Cardinal,  ii.  146.  His  story  of 
the  Roman  mob,  i.  422 

Erskine,  Lord,  at  Tunbridge,  ii.  332. 
His  pamphlet  ou  the  war  with  France, 
340 


FIT 

Escars,  Due  d',  iii.  86 

Escurial,  visit  to  the,  i.  342 

Esprit,  St.,  Shrine  of,  i.  137 

Este,  Villa  d',  iii.  299 

Esterhazy,  Prince,  in  London,  ii.  337, 

note 
Estrelle  Mountains,  ii.  220 
Etruria,  the  ci-devant  Queen  of,  iii.  160 
Eusebio,  St.,  church  of,  at  Rome,  i.  103 
Eustace,  Colonel,  ii.  339 
Evelyn,    Sir   Frederick,   his   estate    at 

Wooton  Park,  ii.  383 
Everett,  Mr.,  of  the  United  States,  iii. 

495 
Exmouth,   Lord,  his  bombardment  of 

Algiers,  iii.  104 


"PALICORE,  village  of,  ii.  230 

-*-  Fanshaw,  Miss  Catherine,  ii.  297, 
298,  note,  451.  Her  ode,  299.  '  The 
Country  Cat '  docketed  by  her,  iii.  526 

Farmor,  Lady  Sophia,  ii.  28 

Farnese  Alexander,  i.  45.  His  statue 
at  Piacenza,  45 

Farnese,  Ranaccio,  statue  of,  at  Piacen- 
za, i.  45 

Farnese  Palace,  the  paintings  of  Ca- 
racci  in  the,  i.  72 

Farnesina,  the,  i.  74 

Farnesiani,  the  Orti,  at  Rome,  i.  97 

Earren,  Miss,  afterwards  Countess  of 
Derby,  i.  254,  296,  391,  392,  429 

'Fashionable  Friends,'  Miss  Berry's  play 
of,  i.  486 

Fawkener,  Mr.,  Clerk  of  the  Council,  i. 
203,  321 

Fearn  Islands,  iii.  33 

Feligara,  i.  52 

Felizano,  road  from  Asti  to,  i.  239.  Inn 
at,  239 

Fels,  M.,  the  banker,  of  Lyons,  i.  222 

Feluccas,  Italian,  i.  125 

Ferdinand  of  Austria,  the  Archduke, 
Duke  of  Milan,  i.  49 

Ferdinand  IV.,  King  of  Naples,  i.  84,  85 

Ferguson,  Mr.,  Mr.  Berry's  uncle,  i.  1. 
His  death,  9 

Fergusson,  R.,  ii.  461 

Ferrante,  Marchesa,  i.  76 

Ferrato,  Grotto, Domenichino's  frescoes 
at,  i.  115 

Feucheres,  Dame  Sophia  Dawes,  Ba- 
roness of,  i.  237 

Fiamengo,  his  picture  at  Rome,  i.  71 

Finch,  Polly,  and  the  Duke  of  Clarence, 
i.  189 

Fiquelmont,  M.  de,  iii.  281 

Fitzgerald,  Lady  H.,  i.  297 


542 


INDEX. 


FIT 

ritzgerald,  Lord  Henry,  married  to 
Miss  Boyle,  i.  323,  384.  At  Kensing- 
ton, ii.  411 
Fitzgerald,  Pamela,  i.  414 
ritzherbert,  Mrs.,  at  Margate,  i.  441. 
At  Marble  Hall,  461.  She  and  the 
Prince  of  Wales  in  1803,  ii.237 

Fitzjamcs,  Due  de,  his  park  and  cha- 
teau at  Clermont,  ii.  130 

Fitzroy,  Mrs.,  i.  457 

Fitzroy,  Lady  Maria,  ii.  272 

Fitzwilliam,  General,  his  death  and 
will.  i.  179.  Mr.  Cambridge's  re- 
marks on  the  -will,   182 

Fitzwilliam.  Lord,  his  entertainment  to 
the  Prince  of  Wales  and  the  Duke  of 
York,  i.  187.     His  will,  ii.  28,  172 

Fitzwilliam,  Charlotte  Ponsonby,  Coun- 
tess, i.  187,  note 

Fitzwilliam,  Lord,  removed  from  the 
Lord  Lieutenancy  of  the  West  Riding, 
iii.  190 

Flahault,  Comtesse  de,  ii.  345,  505 

Flahaut,  General,  iii.  69,  70 

Flassaus,  town  of,  ii.  243 

Flourv,  Due  de.  i.  383,  423 

Fleury,  Duchesse  de,  i..398,  423 

Fiexcourt,  village  of,  ii.  128 

Flora,  the  Farnese,  i.  73 

Florence,  illumination  of  Sta.  Maria 
Novella  at,  i.  121.  A  Sunday  even- 
ing ballet  champetre  at,  246.  Wal- 
pole's  friends  at,  260.  Laurentian 
Medicean  Library  at,  331.  The  Ma- 
rucelliana  Library  at,  332.  The 
Strozzi,  Attorite,  and  Gerardi  Palazzi, 
332,  333.  The  Convent  of  Santa 
Croce,  333.  The  Royal  Academy  of 
Arts  at,  333.  The  Stagione  di  San 
Martino  at,  414.  Academy  of  Arts 
at,  iii.  151.  The  Carnival  at,  152. 
The  Eecluso  dei  Poveri,  154.  Re- 
ception at  the  Pitti  Palace,  155. 
Portraits  in  the  Piazza  Sta.  Croce  il 
Coiisigliere  Ravani,  158.  The  Pra- 
tolina,  158.  The  Riccardiana  Library, 
159.  Ball  at  the  Pitti,  159.  The 
Bibliotica  Maglial)ecchiana,  159.  The 
Marucelliana  Library,  160.  Cere- 
monies on  Ascension  Day,  302.  The 
Fete  Dieu  at,  339.  '  Florence  Mis- 
cellany,' the,  i.  245 

Foldson,  Miss,  afterwards  Mi's.  Mee,  i. 
251, 256, 283,  288 

Foligno,  Raphael's  altar-piece  at,  i.  119 

Fontaine,  Madame  de   Morte,  story  of 

her  life,  iii.  380 
Fontaiiieldean,  foict  de,  i.  220;  ii.  206. 
Town  of,  220.    The  Chateau  of,  220. 


FRA 

Life  of  Louis  Philippe  at,  in  1834, 
iii.  426-429 

Footpads,  i.  435,  437,  455 

Fordyce,  Mrs.,  ii.  383 

Fortunes,  great,  i.  419 

Foster,  Lady  Elizabeth,  at  Naples,  i. 
84 

Fouche,  Madame,  ii.  142.  Her  assem- 
bly, 154,175 

Fouche,  M.  (afterwards  Due  d'Otranto), 
his  cai'eer  and  position  in  1802,  ii. 
151 

Foulon,  M.,  place  of  his  execution,  iii. 
181 

Fox,  Charles  James,  his  attack  on  the 
East  India  Company,  ii.  59.  His 
critique  on  Joanna  Baillie's  plays,  88. 
His  death,  339 

Foy,  General,  iii.  205,  218 

France:  French  refugees  in  England,  i. 
195,  Prcgress  of  affairs  in  France 
in  1750, 197-  Foolish  doings  of  the 
Etats,  197.  Progress  of  events  in, 
204,  206,  209.  Difficulty  of  obtain- 
ing money  in  France  in  1790,  215. 
Towns  of  France  contrasted  with 
those  of  Italy,  241.  Dangers  of 
travelling  in  France  in  1790,  265. 
Treatment  of  the  King  and  Queen  in 
Paris,  308,  309.  Walpole's  opinion 
of  the  French,  325.  Their  treatment 
of  Lord  and  Lady  Sheffield,  327.  The 
Pope  burned  in  effigy,  347.  A  French 
lady's  toilette  in  the  last  century,  347. 
Safety  of  strangers  in  Paris  in  1791, 
347.  Visit  from  the  Poissardes  de 
Paris,  347.  Ruins  of  the  Bastille, 
349.  Badness  of  the  roads  in  France, 
359.  Dangers  to  which  travellers 
through  France  were  exposed  in 
1791,  366,  367.  Walpole's  remarks 
on  the  atrocities  of  the  French  Revo- 
lution, 381.  Defection  of  Dumourier, 
382.  Capture  of  the  French  fleet  at 
Toulon,  387.  Events  in  1793,  396. 
Character  of  the  French  statesmen, 
397.  The  siege  of  Maubeugo  raised, 
402.  Surrender  of  Lyons,  402.  De- 
feat of  the  French  by  Don  Ricardos, 
402.  Rumours  in  London  respecting 
the  fate  of  the  Queen,  403.  News  of 
her  execution,  404.  Walpole's  horror 
of  French  excesses,  413.  Successes  of 
the  royalists,  419.  Lord  Moira's  expe- 
dition to  the  coast  of  France,  4 19.  Lord 
Howe's  naval  victory,  419,  421.  Ex- 
pulsion of  the  Gauls  from  Rome,  422. 
Walpole's  reflections  on  the  events  of 
1793,   428.     Aft'airs  iu    1793,   45^. 


INDEX, 


543 


FRA 

And  in  1795,  484.  Rumours  of 
Trench  invasion  of  England,  ii.  14. 
Government  of  the  Consuls,  106. 
French  prisoners  in  TEngland,  107. 
Bonaparte  First  Consul,  110.  Ap- 
pearance of  the  country  and  of  the 
French  people  on  the  road  from  Ca- 
lais to  Paris,  in  1802,  126.  Trees  of 
liberty,  127.  A  cottage  in  France 
at  this  time,  193.  The  country  and 
people  between  Paris  and  Autun,  206. 
Eecommencement  of  tbe  war  between 
England  and  France,  2.53.  Condition 
of,  in  1814,  iii.  3,  14.  State  of  the 
country  in  181.5,  63,  65.  French 
politics  in  1816.  86,  87.  Miss  Berry's 
remarks  on  French  manufactures, 
193.     The  vintage  in  18-34,  424 

Francis,  St.,  places  where  he  prayed 
and  died,  i.  119 

Francis,  Sir  Philip,  ii.  345 

Franciscans,  convent  of,  at  Rome,  i.  71 

Frankfort,  city  of,  i.  24.  The  'Maison 
Rouge  '  at,  24.  The  cathedral  at,  24 ; 
ii.  279 

Frassinous,  the  Abbe,  his  sermon,  iii. 
200 

Frederick-William  II.,  King  of  Prussia, 
his  perjury,  i.  405 

Frederick- William  III.,  King  of  Prussia, 
in  Loudon,  iii.  26,  29.  In  Portsmouth, 
30 

Fregeville,  M.  (afterwards  Marquis 
de),  ii.  172.  On  the  dix-huit  Bru- 
maire,  iii.  446 

Frejus,  town  of,  ii.  219.  Roman  am- 
phitheatre at,  220 

French,  Mrs.,  of  Hampton  Court,  i.  281. 
Her  pictures,  bronzes,  &c.,  289 

Fresenheim,  Benedictine  convent  near, 
ii.  272 

Fresole,  Cathedral  of,  iii.  157.  Works 
of  art  at,  157 

Freyburg,  town  of,  ii.  271 

Fryer  monument  in  Harleton  Church, 
li.  400 

Fuller,  Mr.,  the  banker,  his  place  at  the 
Rookery,  near  Dorking,  ii.  383 

Fiissen,  the  Abbey  of  St.  Magnus  at,  i. 
356 


/^ABRIELLI,  the  Princess,  her  hal 

^-^    masque,  iii.  330 

Gaeta,  Mola  di,  i.  75.  Visit  to,  iii.  334 

Gallienus,  arch  of,  at  Rome,  i.  95 

Gallois,  M.,  iii.  92 

Galloway,  Lord,  at  Broadstairs,  i.  441 

Gand,  Madame  de,  in  London,  i.  383 


GER 

Ganymede,  the,  of  Titian  in  the  Palazzo 
Colonna,  i.  116 

Garat,  the  French  singers,  ii.  182 

Garde,  Abbaye  du,  ii.  128 

Gardel,  Madame,  the  French  dancer, 
ii.  161 

Garforth,  Mary,  i.  6 

Garrick,  Mrs.,  at  Hampton,  i.  172,  313, 
324,  470 

Garstang,  town  of,  ii.  358 

Gas,  the  Imperial,  ii.  500 

Gas,  introduction  of,  into  London,  ii.  509 

Gaveston's  Hdl,  Warwick,  iii.  174 

Gazon,  Madame  du,  the  French  actress, 
ii.  204 

Geissen,  town  of,  ii.  282 

Gell,  Mr.  (afterwards  Sir  William),  ii. 
344,  389,  422.  Notice  of  him,  344, 
notes.  His  '  Ithaca,'  349.  His  Nar- 
rative of  a  Tour  to  the  East,'  513,  514. 
Returns  to  England,  538.  At  Naples, 
iii.  46.  His  suflferings  from  the  gout, 
249 

Geneva,  city  of,  i.  27 

Geneva,  lake  of,  i.  27 

Genlis,  Madame  de,  i.  414 

Genoa,  road  from  Campomarone  to,  i. 
40,41.  Town  of,  41.  The  Albergo 
dei  Poveri,  41.  The  Doge  of,  42. 
Wealth  of,  42.  Palaces  of,  125. 
View  of,  iii.  109.  Presentation  Day 
of  the  Virgin  in,  112.  The  carnival 
at,  116.  TheFestone,  116.  The  pro- 
cession of  La  Casacchia,  120.  The 
collection  of  engravings  at  the  Pa- 
lazzo Durazzo,  141.  Visit  to,  163. 
Disturbance  in  the  theati-e  at,  163. 
Government  palace  at,  163.  Libraries, 
164.  Tomb  of  Andrea  Doria,  164. 
Improvements  at,  in  1823,  341 

'  George  I.  and  II ,  Reminiscences  of 
the  Court  of,'  Horace  Waipole's,  i. 
158 

George  III.,  his  illness  in  1788,  i.  160, 
7totes.  His  progress  to  Plymouth  in 
17S9,  171.  Intended  assassination 
of,  442  et  seq.  Waipole's  Thoughts 
on  the  reign  of,  ii.  55.  The  jubilee 
year,  399.  His  illness  in  1810,  4S8, 
441,  446,  447.     His  death,  iii.  199 

George,  Prince  of  Wales,  afterwards 
George  IV.,  i,  179  Al  Yurk  Races 
and  at  Wentworth  House,  187.  {See 
Wales,  Prince  of) 

George  IV.  {see  Wales,  Prince  of),  his 
accession,  iii.  199 

George,  Mdlle.,  the  actress,  iii.  74 

Gerard,  the  French  painter,  iii.  91. 
His  '  Phaedra  and  Hippoly  tus,'  ii.  202 


544 


INDEX. 


GER 

Gerardi,  Palazzo,  pictures  in  the,  i.  332 
Gerau,  village  of,  i.  24 
Gerraains,  St.,  visit  to,  iii.  101 
Germanicus,    statue  of,  in  the   Palazzo 

Colonna,  i.  116 
Germany,  success  of  the   allies  in,  in 

1813,  ii.  544 
Ghigi,  Prince,  his  palace  at  Lerici,  i.  74 
Gibbes,  Miss,  ii.  236 
Gibbon,  Edward,  visited   at  Lausanne 
by  the  Earl  of  Sheffield,  i.  327.  Lord 
Sheffield's   '  Life  and   Miscellaneous 
Works  of  Gibbon,'  ii.  6.     His  house 
and  library  at  Lausanne,  260 
Gilford,  Lady,  iii.  496 
Gibson,  the  sculptor,  at  Rome,  iii.  278 
Gillini,  Marchese,  his  palazzo  at  Alles- 

sandria,  i.  239 
Gilpin,  Mr.,  i.  327 

Ginori's  china  manufactory,  near  Flo- 
rence, i.  121 
Giocatori,  the,  of  Caravaggio,  i.  114 
Giordano,  Luca,  his  pictures  from  Tasso, 

at  Genoa,  i.  125 
Giotto,  or  Angiolotto,  iii.  1.51 
Giovanni,  Castel  St.,  i.  240 
Girard,  the   French   painter,    iii.    168. 

Party  at  his  house,  169 
Girodet,  the  French  painter,  iii.  182 
Gladiator,  the  Dying,  statue  of,  at  Rome, 

i.  104 
Glayre,  M.,  at  Lausanne,  ii.  261 
Glenbervie,  Lord,  ii.  333,  380 
Glenbervie,  Lady,  ii.  333,  380 
Glencairn,  Lord,  his  house  on  the  Clyde, 

ii.  365 
Gloucester,  William   Henry,  Duke  of, 
his  marriage  vritli  the   Countess   of 
Waldegrave,  i.    188,  note,  2S8,  291. 
His  residence  at  the  Pavilions,  466 
Gloucester,   Duchess   of,    i.    199,  394. 
At  Strawberry  Hill,  426.    Her  death, 
ii.  327 
Gloucester,  Princess  Sophia  of,  ii.  503; 

iii.  66 
Gloucester,  the  Bishop's   palace  at,  i. 

473 
Gnu,  a,  at  Winipole,  ii.  490 
Godfrey,  Miss,  ii.  330,  379,  381 
Godfrey,  Miss  Phil.,  ii.  427 
Godwin's  'Travels  of  St.  Leon,'  Miss 

Berry's  remarks  on,  ii.  Ill 
Goitre,  the,  in  Savoy,  i.  35 
Gold  lace  weaving  at  Lyons,  i.  135 
Gontaut,  Madame  de,  iii.  319 
Gordon,   Lord   George,   his    death,   i. 

410 
Gordon,  Duchess  of,  ii.  236 
Gordon,  Mrs.,  and  her  sisters,  ii.  498 


GRO 

Gossipping,  Walpole's   remarks  on.  i. 

311 
Gottingen,  town  of,  ii.  289 
Gouvion,  M.,   his  remark  to  Philippe 

d'Orleans,  i.  205 
Gouvion  de  St.  Cyr,  Marshal,  iii.  182 
Government,  Walpole's  Thoughts   on, 

ii.  51 
Gow,  the  Scotch  fiddler,  ii.  343 
Gower,  Lord,  his  house  in  London,  ii. 

241 
Gozzoli,  Benozzo,  his  frescoes   in  the 

Campo  Santo  at  Pisa,  i.  124 
Graces,  the  Three,  marble  group  of,  at 

Sienna,  i.  53 
Grafton,  Duke  of,  as  prime  minister,  ii. 

.57,  58 
Graham,  Sir  James,  i.  37,  41,  48,  56 
Grammont,  Duchesse  de,  arrest  of  the, 

i.  396 
Gramola,  village  of,  iii.  226 
Granada,  city  of,  i.  338.      Mr.  Swin- 
burne's account  of,  338 
Grandison,  George,  Earl  of,  i.  33 
Granet,  Fran.,  the  painter,  iii.  179 
Grant.  Right  Hon.  Robert,  iii.  434 
Grant,  Mrs.,  of  Laggan,  ii.  349 
Grantham,  Lord  (afterwards    Earl  de 

Grey),  iii.  62 
Grassini,  the  singer,  iii.  168 
Grattan,  Right  Hon.   Henry,  in  1810, 

ii.  442.     In  his  own  house,  ii.  467 
Grattan,  Mrs.,  ii.  443,  467 
Greathead,  Bertie,  the  younger,  ii.  240. 

His  burialplace,  435 
Greathead,  Mr.,i.  245,  435.    His  trans- 
lation of  Boccaccio's  'Lisabetta  and 
her  Brothers,'  ii.  320.     His  improve- 
ments at  Guy's  Cliff,  431.     His  land 
at  Leamington,  432.      At  Margate, 
448.     His  translation  of  the  '  Life  of 
Heyne,'  iii.  349 
Greek  MS.,  discovery  of  a,  ii.  236,  237 
Greek,  Mitford's  advice  as  to  the  pro- 
nunciation of,  ii.  406 
Greeks,  modern,  their  critical  and  gram- 
matical learning  in  their  ancient  lan- 
guage, ii.  407.     Petrarchi,  the  Greek, 
407 
Greenwich,  Lady.  ii.  365 
Grcgoire.  Count  Henri,  iii.  183 
Grenoble,  town  of,  ii.  248 
Grenville,  Mr.,  created  a  peer,  i.  260, 

264.     As  prime  minister,  ii.  56 
Greville,  Sir  Fulke,  his  tomb  in  War- 
Mick  Church,  ii.  435 
Grifoni,  Madame,  of  Florence,  i.  260 
Grimpons,  i.  33 
Grotte,  Le  Chemin  de  la,  i.  224  ■ 


INDEX. 


545 


GRO 

Grotto  del  Cave,  the,  i.  80 

Guadalquiver,  ancient  bridge  over  the, 
i.34l 

Guadiana,  Roman  bridge  over  the,  i.  336 

Guerchy,  Comte  de,  ii.  30,  190 

Guercino,  works  of,  at  Piacenza,  i.  45. 
His  'Sybilla  iersica,' at  Rome,  72. 
His  great  picture  of  'Sta.  Petronilla,' 
at  Rome,  99.     His  '  Death  of  Dido.' 

.  104.  His  'Dead  Christ,' 116.  His 
'Abraham  and  Hagar,'  at  Bologna.244. 
Walpole's  opinion  of  his  works,  259 

Guiche,  Due  de,  and  his  bride,  iii.  168, 
169 

Gnido,  his  Aurora  and  Andromeda,  at 
Rome,  i.  65,  97.  His  works  in  the 
Palazzo  Giustiniani.  69.  His  Fortune 
flying  over  the  Globe,  71.  His  other 
works  at  Rome,  71.  His  works  in 
the  chapel  at  Monte  Cavalli,  99.  His 
Rape  of  Helen,  104.  His  Magdalen, 
in  the  Palazzo  Barberini,  114.  His 
portrait  of  the  Cenci,  116.  His  pic- 
tures at  Bologna,  iii.  303 

Guiers,  the,  i.  224 

Guildford,  Lord,  his  marriage  with  the 
daughter  of  Mr.  Coutts,  i.  468.  His 
letter  to  Miss  Berry  respecting  her 
work  on  Lady  Russell,  iii.  153.  In 
Paris,  343.  His  colleges  in  the  Ionian 
Islands,  362 

Guildford,  Lady,  at  Strawberry  Hill,  i. 
479 

Guinard,  Madame,  the  French  dancer, 
ii.  185 

Gunning,  Elizabeth,  Duchess  of  Argyll, 
i.  179 

Gunning,  Miss.  i.  174,  208,  210,  249. 
The  print  of  the  New  Art  of  Gun- 
ning, 289 

'Gunninghiad.'  Walpole's,  i.  284 

Gunnings,  the,  i.  362 

Gustavus  III.,  King  of  Sweden,  at 
Rome,  i.  58,  65.  At  Naples,  84.  At 
Pompeii,  87.     At  Naples,  90,  93 

Gwydyr,  Lord,  ii.  393 


XT  ACKERT,  James  Philip,  the  artist, 

■'-^  at  Rome,  i.  68 

Haddon  House,  iii.  309,  355 

Hall,  Sir  J.,  ii.  344 

Hallam,  Mr.,  iii.  182 

Halnacker  House,  ii.  13.  14 

Ham  House,  visit  of  Mi^^s  Berry  to,  ii. 
423.  The  Princess  of  Wales's  de- 
scription of  it,  423,  note 

Hamelin,  Madame  de,  ii.  165.  Her 
dancing,  174 

VOL.  III.  N 


HEM 

Hamilton,  Gavin,  the  artist,  his  works, 

i.  68 
Hamilton,  Sir  W.,  lines  on  his  wife,  i. 

328 
Hamilton,  Single-speech,  his  singular 

will,  ii.  14,  15 
Hamilton  Palace,  ii,  365 
Hamilton,  Lord  A.,  ii.  384 
Hamilton,  Lady  Anne,  ii.  384 
Hamilton,  Lady  Dalrym})le,  iii.  23 
Hamilton,  Marchioness  of,  iii.  35 
Hamilton,  Mrs.,  iii.  387 
Hampton  Court  Palace,  iii.  479 
Hampton,  Mrs.  Garrick  at,  i.  172 
Hanover,  in   1803,  ii.  289.     Recovered 

from  the  French,  ii.  544 
Hanover  Square  Rooms,  Barthelman's 

concert  at,  ii.  418 
Harcourt,  Lord,  ii.  37.     Turns  courtier, 

37.  4u,  346 
Harcourt,  Lady,  ii.  40,  346 
Hardinge,  Mr.  George,  his  boat-race  on 

the  Thames,  i.  200 
Hardwicke,  Lord,   death  of  his  son,  ii. 

348,  351.  His  hospitality,  399.  Death 

of  his  son  Charles,  417 
Hardwicke,  Lady,  her   theatricals,  ii. 

502 
Harekon  Church,  ii.  400 
Harrison's   Lake,   near  Tunbridge,  ii. 

331 
Harrowby,  Lord,  his  memorial  columa 

to  William  Pitt.  ii.  357 
Harrowby,  Lady,  ii.  384 
Harte,  Mrs.,  lines  on,  i.  328 
Hartington,   Marquis  of,   his  letter  to 

Miss  Berry,   ii.   235.     His  happiness 

at  his  sister's  marriage,  405.     Suc- 
ceeds to  the  Dukedom  of  Devonshire, 

ii.    484.      Conversation    with    him, 

493 
Harvey,  Lord  and  Lady,  i.  146 
Harvey,  General,  his  dowager  Mistress 

Monimia,  i.  187 
Haslingfield,  Manor-house  of  the  Wen- 

dys,  at,  ii.  401 
Hastings,  Warren,  trial  of,  i.  212,  264. 

His  defence,  i.  307 
Haymarket  Theatre,    the  Opera  at,  i. 

288,    293.       Frank   Norths    musical 

comedy  at  the,  i.   309.     Theatre,  in 

1809,  ii.  394 
Heidelburg,  the  great  tun  at,   i.    352  ; 

ii.  l!77.     Town  of.   ii.  276  ;  iii.  378. 

Castle  of,  276.     Vineyards  of,  ii.  278 
Helena,  St.,  her  sarcophagus,  i.  117 
Helen's,  Lord  St.,  at  Madrid,  i,  ."342 
Helveliyn,  ii.  366 
Hemiey  Park,  iii.  366 

N 


546 


INDEX. 


HEN 

Hennin,  Princess  d',  i.  389,  397.     Her 

execution,  434 
Henry  IV.,  bronze  statue  of,  in  Paris, 

iii.  171 
Herculanaeum,  i.  91;  iii.  335. 
Hercules,   the    Farnese,   i.    73.       The 

Nemean,  in  the  Farnese  Palace,  73 
Hermengild,  St.,  story  of,  ii.  464 
Herries,  Lady,  i.  150,198.    Her  illness, 

i.  263,  301 
Hertford.  Lady,  ii.  471 
Hervey,  Lord,  i.  249,  252 
Hervey,  Mrs.,  Pompoustown,  i.  300 
Hervey,  Mrs.,  i.  313 
Hesse,  Prince  of,  his  deer  park,  i.  24 
Hever  Castle,  ii.  485 
Hewitson,  Mr.,  the  sculptor,  at  Rome, 

i.  104 
Heyne,  Mr.  Greathead's  translation  of 

the  Life  of.  iii.  349 
Highway  robberies  in  1794,  i.  435,  437 
Hilsberg,  the  dancer,  i.  288 
Hind,  Dr.,  his  marriage,  ii.  343 
Hitsoff,  Madame,  iii.  281.  At  Florence, 

149 
Hobart,  Miss,  iii.  42 
Holbein,  his  portrait  of  Anne  of  Clevcs, 

i.  440.     His  pictures  at  Basle,  ii.  270 
Holland,  love  of  painting  in,  i.  18.   Road 

and  country  from  Antwerp  to  Brux- 

elles,  18,  19.     Expedition  to,   ii.   96, 

102,    104.      The  Duke  of  York  in, 

100 
Holland,  Lord  (father  of  Charles  James 

Fox),  his  buildings  at   Kingsgate,  i. 

430,448 
Holofernes,    Caravaggio's  head    of,   at 

Rome,  i.  96.     Rubens'    head  of,  at 

Avignon,  137 
Hood,  Lord,  i.  414 
Hood,  Lady  (afterwards   Lady  Stuart 

Mackenzie),  ii.  419 
Hope,  Henry,  author  of  '  Anastasius,'  ii. 

379,  445.      His   place   at   Deepden, 

382.     Great  assembly  at  his  house, 

413 
Hopley,  the  artist,  ii.  378 
Horace,  the  copy  of  which  belonged  to 

Petrarch,  i.  331 
Horner,  Francis,  iii.  112.     His  tomb  at 

Leghorn,  230 
Hospitals,  a  French  princess's  taste  lor 

visiting,  i.  307 
Hostilii,  the  Curiae,  at  Rome,  i.  100 
llotham,  Sir  Charles  i.  400 
Hotham,  Miss,  i.  400,  467.     Her  tea- 
parties,  472,  473 
Howard,  Mr.,  the  prison  philanthropist, 

i.  478 


JEK 

Howe,  Miss,  i.  213 

Howe,  Lord,  his  supposed  inactivity,  i. 

392.     Reported    naval  victory  over 

the  French  fleet,  421.     Takes  "five  of 

the  Brest  squadron,  424 
Howe,  Hon.  Caroline,  ii.  66 
Howe,  Lady,  ii.  103.     Her  devastation 

at  Pope's  villa,  334 
Howe,    Mrs.,    ii.    388.      Her   mind   at 

eighty-seven,  388,  391,  396,  437,  466 
Humboldt,  M.,  iii.  179 
Hume,  David,  his  quarrel  with  Rous- 
seau, ii.  31 
Humphrey.   Duke    of  Gloucester,   his 

tomb  at  St.  Albans,  ii.  474 
Hunt,  Henry,  and  the  Radical  riots,  iii. 

190 
Hunter,  Mrs.,  i.  301 
Hunter,  Dr.  John,   his  death,  i.  401. 

His  widow,  i.  412 
Hunting     at     Stupinigi,    i.    237,    238. 

Hunting  dresses  of  the  last  century, 

238 
Hutchinson,  Lord,  ii.  339 
Hutchinson,  Mrs.,  her  '  Memoirs '  of  her 

husband,  ii.  485 
Hyde  de  Neuville,  M.,  iii.  85 


TCE-CAVE,  i.  30 

Indian  jugglers,  ii.  536 
Industria,  the  Roman  city  of,  i.  39 
Inn,  an,  at  Bonneville,  i.  28 
Inspruck,  situation  of  the  town  of,  i. 

356.     The  country  near.  356 
Ireland,  Miss  Berry's  remarks  on  the 

Union  with,  ii.  79,  84 
Iron  mask,  man  with  the,  i.  363 
Irving,  Edward,  the  Scotch  preacher,  ii. 

263;  iii.  346 
Isere,  valley  of  the,  ii.  247 
Isiac  table,  the,  at  Turin,  i.  39 
Islands,  floating,  i.  113 
Italy,  towns  of,  contrasted  with  those  of 

France,  i.  241,     Italian  beggars,  243 


TACKSON,  Mr.,  English  minister  in 
^      Paris,  ii.  156 

Januarius,  St.,  Chapel  of,  at  Naples,  i.  79 
Jardin,  M.,  taken  prisoner,  i.  414 
Jardin,    M.,    he   and  his  family  made 

prisoners,  i.  419 
Jean  Maurieniie,  St..  fair  of,  i.  226 
Jeffrey,    Mr.    (afterwards    Lord),    and 

the 'Edinburgh  Review,' ii.  397;  iii. 

450,  451,  note 
Jekyll.  Mr.,  his  parody  of  '  God  save 

the  King,'  iii.  524 


IXDEX. 


547 


JER 

Jerningham,  the  Chevalier,  i.  189,  His 
works  and  character,  189,  twte.  His 
play  of  'The  Siege  of  Berwick,'  414. 
Walpole  at  a  performance  of  his 
'  Siege  of  Berwick,'  425.  His '  Lines 
written  by  one  of  Miss  Berry's  pens,' 
430.  Notice  of  him  and  of  his  works, 
430,  note.  His  '  Peckham  Frolic,'  ii. 
86.     His  distress,  86 

Jersey.  Countess  of,  her  va«t  fortune, 
i.  417 

John  Lateran,  St.,  Church  of,  at  Rome, 
i.  69 

Johnson,  Dr.,  Walpole's  repugnance  to, 
i.  305 

Johnston,  Lady  Cecilia,  notice  of,.i.  169, 
note,  185,  260.  Her  illness,  286. 
Her  malice  and  indiscretion,  468^ 
470 

Johnstone,  General,  i.  410 

Johnstone,  Miss,  ii.  501 

Joigny,  bust  of  Napoleon  at,  ii.  206 

Jordan,  Mrs.,  the  actress,  i.  364',  370;. 
ii.  338.  '  Nell'  in  the  '  Devil  to  Pay,' 
341.  Jordan,  Mrs.,  at  Richmond, 
467.  Does  the  honours  for  the  Duke 
of  Clarence,  472.  King  William  IV. 's 
proposed  monument  to  her,  iii.  463,. 
464 

Joseph  L,  King  of  Portugal,  statue  of,- 
at  Lisbon,  i.  334 

Joseiih  II ,  Emperor  of  Germany,  at 
Rome,  i.  57,  58,  63 

Josephine,  the  Empress,  her  present 
to  Mrs.  Damer,  ii.  450.  Her  death, 
iii.  97 

Joubert,  General,  ii,  144.  His  death,. 
144,  note 

Jourdan,  M.  Camille,  iii.  105 

Jubilee  year,  the,  ii.  399 

Judgment,  the  Last,  of  Rubens,  i.  21 

Juliers,  town  of,  i.  21 

Julius  II .  Pope,  his  mausoleum,  in  St. 
Pietro  in  Vincoli,  i.  97 

Julius  II.,  Pope  Raphael's  portrait  of, 
in  the  Palazzo  Pitti,  i.  L20 

Junot",  Marshal,  his  camp  near  Lisbon, 
ii.  440.  Supposed  to  have  been  shot, 
456.     Letter  from  his  wife,  456 

Jupiter  Stator,  remains  of  the  temple  of, 
at  Rome,  i.  64 

Jupiter  Serapis,  temple  of,  at  Puzzuoli, 
i.  88.  Statue  of,  at  Villa  Albano, 
111 

Justinian,  the  famous  original  copy  of 
the  Pandects  of,  i.  332 

Justiniaui,  Palazzo,  at  Rome,  i.  69 


LAI 

TZ'ASLOFFSKY,  Prince,  iii.  119 

-*-^  Kasloffsky,  M.,  at  Genoa,  iii.  16 

Kauffman,  Angelica,  i.  56 

liean,  Edmund,  in  '  Richard  III.,'  iii.  7. 
In  '  Hamlet,'  9.  In  '  Othello,'  30. 
In  '  Tamerlane,'  iii.  67.  In  '  Sir  Giles 
Overreach,'  69 

Keith,  Lord  and  Lady,  ii.  345 

Kemble,  John,  the  actor,  i.  296.  His 
'Othello,'  297.  In  ■  Cato,'  ii.  454. 
In  '  Brutus,'  494.  His  house  at  Lau- 
sanne, iii.  320 

Kemble,  Mrs.,  ii.  235 

Kemble,  Charles,  in  Bassanio,  ii.  406 

Kendal,  town  of,  ii.  359 

Kenilworth  Castle,  visit  to,  ii.  321.  The 
town  of  Kenilworth  and  its  manufac- 
ture, 322 

Kensington,  the  Princess  of  Wales  at, 
ii.  4t)4,  405,  452.  Dinner  party  at, 
454.  Dinner  at,  ii.  496.  In  1812, 
500.  Presentation  of  an  address  from 
the  city  of  London  to  the  Princess  of 
Wales,'  532 

Kensington  Gardens  in  1811,  ii.  475, 
476 

Keppel,  Mrs.,  her  house  let  to  Sheridan, 
i.  319 

Kergolay,  Florian  dte,  iii.  80 

King's  College  Chapel,  Cambridge,  visit 
to,  i.  168;  ii.  397 

Kingsgate,  Lord  Holland's  buildings  at, 
i.  439,  441,  448 

Kingston  Fencibles,  the,  i.  468 

Kinnaird,  Hon.  Douglas,  ii.  410  ;  iii.  1 

Kirgate,  Thomas,  Walpole's  printer, 
ii..  65.  His  farewell  to  Strawberry 
Hill,  65 

Klus,  Aassere,  village  of,  ii.  269 

Knight,  Miss  Cornelia,,  i.  56,  note 

Knight,  Richard  Payne,  ii.  92,7iote,  378. 
His  house  in  Soho  Square,  340 

Knowle  Park,  ii.  332.     Visit  to,  ii.  506 

KnyfF,.  M.  le  Chanoine,  his  collection  of 
pictures  at  Antwerp,   i.  IS 

Krumpholz,  Mdlle.,  ii.  527 


T  ABRUZZO,  Pietro,  orLabrosse,  his 

^^  Pictures  at  Rome,  ii  70 

Lafayette,  General,  resumes  the  com- 
mand of  the  troops,  i.  304.  Notice 
of  him,,  iii.  154>  note.  His  funeral, 
iii.  41<5 

Lafayette,  M.  de,  iii.  186 

Laffitte,  M.  de,  the  Paris  banker,  ii. 
174 

Laine,  M.,  President  of  the  Chamber  of 
Deputies,  iii.  85,  86,  184,  219 

M  2 


548 


INDEX. 


LAK 

Lake.  Sir  J.,  his  house  at  Kenilworth, 

ii.  355,  432 
Lally,  Moris,  de,  i.  308,  403 
Lally,  Marquis  de,  iii.  180.     At   An- 

teuil,  343 
Lally,  Tolleiidal,   Comte,  in    1830.  iii. 

384.     His  verses  on  the  Miss  Berrys, 

523 
Lally,  Madame  de,  in  Edinburgh,  iii.  40 
Lamb,  Hon.  W.,  his  Epilogue  to  Miss 

Berry's  '  Fashionable  Friends,' ii.  )96, 

7iote.     His  inscription  for   a  bust  of 

Mr.  Fox,  iii.  524 
Lamb,  Hon.  George,  ii.  235 
Lamb,  Hon.  Penisrone,  ii.  235 
Lamb,  Lady    Caroline,    ii,    346,    495. 

Her  novel  of  Glenarvon,'  346,  7iole 
Lamb,  Hon.  Frederick,  iii.  43 
Lambucca,  Marchese,  at  Naples,  i.  86 
Lameth,  M..  his  attempt  to  negotiate 

with  the  French  princes,  i.  362 
Lanark,  town  of,  ii.  364 
Lanckwex,  M.    van,    his   collection  of 

pictures  at  Antwerp,  i.  18 
Langres,  town  of,  i.  359 
Langcon  Green,  ii.  332 
Language,  Miss  Berry's   thoughts   on, 

ii.  406 
Lansdowne,  first  Marquis  of,  suspected 

of  having  set  Horne  Tooke  to  work, 

i.  197 
Lanslebourg,  i.  3(j,  129 
Lanti,  the  Duchess,  ii.   146 
Laucubn.  the,  i.   1 1 1 
Lape,  Madame  de.  ii.  337 
La  Place,  Pierre  Simon,  ii.  1 67 
Lara,  river,  i.    241 

Latin,  Mitford's  advice  as  to  the  pro- 
nunciation ot^  ii.  406 
Laure,  rChateau  de  Madame,  i.  138 
Laurentian   Mediceau  Library  at  Flo- 
rence, i.  331 
Lauriston,  General,  ii.  165 
Lausanne,  flight  of  the  English  to,  ii. 

259.     Gil)bon's  house  at,  260.    Visit 

to,  iii.  224 
Lavater,  i.  351 

Lawrence,  Sir  Thomas,  ii.  235,  340,  508 
Liiys,  Francis,  the  opera-singer,  ii.  137 
Lazaretto,  the,  at  Naples,  i.  88 
Leamington,  increasing  importance  of, 

in   1810,  ii.  432.     In   1818,  iii.  174. 

In  1823,  349 
Leathe's  VVaier,  ii.  360 
Le   Brun,    M.,    Third  Consul,  visit  to 

him,  ii.  153.      His  career,  153 
Le  Brun,  his  '  Tent  of  Darius,'  ii.  274 
Leeds,  Duke  of,  obtains  the    Garter,  i. 

263 


LKT 

Leeds,  Dowager  Duchess  of,  ii.  409 
Lfgarde,  Sir  John,  his  villa  at  Sunbury, 

ii.  349 
Legge,  Mrs.  Heneage,  i.  368 
Leghorn,   the  Mole   at,  i.  122.     Coral 
manufactory  at,  122.     Road  from,  to 
Pisa,  123.    Disturbances  in,  in  1790, 
198.     Drawings  of  the  old    masters 
at,  iii.  231 
Leicester,  Earl  of,  tomb  of,  in  Warwick 

Church,  li.  435 
Leigh,  Mrs.,  of  Stoneleigh.  ii.  433 
Leinster,  Duchess  of.  ii.  4  72 
Lenesino,  the  Italian  singer,  iii.  157 
Lenibourg,  village  of.  i.  23 
Lennox,  Lady  Caroline,  ii.  27 
Lennox,  Lady  Emily,  ii.  27 
Leo  X..  Pope.  Raphael's  portrait  of,  in 

the  Palazzo  Pitti,  i.  120 
Leoni,  his  translation  of  Byron's  'La- 
ment of  Tasso,'  iii.  158 
Lerici,  Prince  Ghigi's  palace  at,  i.  74. 

Town  of,  124 
Letters  from  ; — 

Abercrombie,  Hon.  J.,  to  Miss  Berry, 

iii.  189,  215 
Baillie,  Joaima.  to  Miss  Berry,  ii.  117; 
iii.    133,   176,  370,  371,  413,  442, 
453,  489 
Bodford,  Duke  of,  to  Miss  Berry,  iii. 

176 
Benwell,  Mr.,  to  Miss  Berry,  i.  458 
Berry,  Miss  Agnes,  to  Horace  Wal- 

pole,  i.  361 
Berry,  Miss  Mary,  to  Agnes  Berry, 
iii.  72 

to  Mr.  Abercrombie,  iii.  176 

to  Joanna  Baillie,  ii.  367  ; 

iii.  228,  369,  372,  490 

to  Mr.  Brande,  ii.  67 

to  Miss  Cayley,  iii.  414 

to  Mrs.  Cholnieley,   ii.  77, 

79,  82,  99,  110,  296,  421 

to  ]\Irs.  Darner,  ii.  70,  71, 

226,233.370,482,485;  iii.  13,62, 
64,  266,  297,  324 
to  the  Duchess  of  Devon- 
shire, ii.  105  ;  iii.  323 

to  the  Duke  of  Devonshire, 

iii.  232 

to  Lord  Dover,  iii.  385 

to  J\lr.  Everett,  iii.  495 

to  INIiss  Fanshaw,  ii.  302 

to  the  Princess  of  Wales,  ii. 

444 

tv  Robert  Ferguson,  ii.  368 

to  Sir  W.  Gill,  ii.  538 

to  Lord  Granville,  iii.  436 

to  a  Friend,  iii,  315 


INDEX. 


549 


LET 

Letters — continued. 

Bony,  Miss  Mary,  to  Mr.  Greathead, 

ii.  69,  437 

—  to  Mrs.  Greathead,  ii.  239 

to  Lord  Hardwicke,  iii   287 

— to  Lady  Hardwicke,  ii.  494, 

529,  540;  iii.  2,  3,  149,  155,  197, 

227,  2.33,  386 

to  Lord  Hartington.  ii.  115 

to  Lord  Jeffrey,  iii.  472, 476, 

484,  485 
to  Mr.  Macaulay,  iii.  417, 

432 
to  the  Countess  of  Morley, 

iii.  454.  479,  507.  .508 

—  to  Professor  Playfair.  ii.  461 

to  Mrs.  Somerville,  iii.  423 

■ to  Lady  Spencer,  ii.  95 

to  Madame  de  Stael,  iii.  84, 

121, 125 

to  Charles  Stuart,  ii.  448 

to  Lady  Elizabeth   Stuart, 

iii.  110,  118,  119,  134,  266,  286 
to  Horace  Walpole,  i.   154, 

162,  163,  211,  377,  440,  446,  450, 

451;  ii.  5 
to  a  friend,  i.  384,  435  ;  ii. 

9,  16v  17,  72,  239 
Berry,  Mr.,  to  Mr.  Bertie  Greathead, 

).  245 
Brande,  Mr.,  to  Miss  Berry,  i.  350  ; 

ii.  66 
Cambridge,  Richard  Owen,  to  Miss 

Berry,  i.  182,  183,  428 
Canova,  A.,  to  Miss  Berry,  iii.  70, 

113.  146,  307,  311 
Cholmeley,  Mrs.,  to  Miss  Berry,  i.  194 
Craven,  Hon.  Keppel,  to  Miss  Berrv, 

ii.  463.  509;  iii.  19,38,50,132,510 
Darner,  Mrs.,  to  Miss  Berry,  i.  247, 

248,  270,  333  ;  li.  228.  253 
Devonshire,  Duke  of,  to  Miss  Berry, 

iii.  65 
Devonshire,    Duchess    of,    to    Mi.ss 

Berry,  ii.  105  note 
Dudley,  Lord,  to  Miss  Berry,  iii.  350 
Dut^'erm,  Lady,  to  Miss  Berry,  iii.  496 
Englefield,  Sir  Harry,  to  Miss  Berry, 

ii.  236 
Erskine,  Lord,  to  Miss  Berry,  ii.  340 
Everett,  Mr.,  to  Miss  Berry,  iii.  503 
Fagel,  M.  de,  to  Miss  Berry,  iii.  202 
Friend,   to   Miss  Berry,  iii.  44,  438- 

441.474.501 
Gell,  Sir  William,  to  the  Miss  Berrvs, 

ii.  438,  454,  513,  517;  iii.  116,  131, 

325 
Greathead,  Mr.  Bertie,  to  Miss  Beiry, 

ii.  352 


LET 

Letters — continned. 

Guildford,  Earl  of,  to  Miss  Beriy,  iii. 
153 

Hartington,  Marquis  of,  to  Miss  Ber- 
ry, ii.  234 

Hope.  Mr.,  to  Miss  Berry,  ii.  428 

Howe,  Mrs.,  to  Miss  Berry,  ii.  241, 271 

Jeffrey,  Lord,  to  Miss  Berry,  iii.  450, 
473',  475,  484,  486,  487  ' 

Lally  ToUendal,  Comte,  to  Miss  Ber- 
ry, iii.  384 

Lewis,  M.  G.,  to  Lady  Charlotte 
Bury,  ii.  470 

Lindsay,  Lady  C,  to  Miss  Berry,  ii. 
362, "370,  509;  iii.  2,  3,  149,  155, 
197,  227,  233,  386 

Lindsay,  Lady  C,  to  the  Countess  of 
Hardwicke,  iii.  387 

Mann,  Horace,  to  the  'Sun 'news- 
paper, ii.  45 

Morley,  Countess  of,  to  Miss  Berry, 
iii.  491,  500,  501,  510 

Playfair,  Professor,  to  Miss  Berry,  i. 
485;  ii.  5,  294,391,  396,  411,  427, 
458,473,  487;.  iii.  48,  110,  127,128 

Price,  Sir  Uvedale,  to  Miss  Berry,  ii. 
67,.  528,  547 

Rodez,  Colbert,  Bishop  of,  to  Miss 
Berry,  ii.  426 

Roscoe,  Wm.,  to  Miss  Berry,  ii.  429 

Seymour,  Lord  Webb,  to  Miss  Berry, 
ii.  373,  386 

Smith,  Kev.  Sydney,  to  Miss  Berry, 
iii.  452,  469,  472,' 482,  488,  491 

Smythe,  Professor,  to  Miss  Berrv,  iii. 
373 

Spencer,  Dowager  Lady,  to  Miss 
Berry,  ii.  93 

Stael,  Madame  de,  to  Miss  Berrv,  ii. 
541;  iii.  24,  27,  42.  126 

Stuart,  Charles,  to  Miss  Berry,  ii.  450 

Thomson,  C.  Poulett,  to  Mi.ss  Berry, 
iii.  374 

Wales,  Princess  of,  to  Miss  Berrj',  ii. 
444;  iii.  30,  45,  224 

Walpole,  Horace,  to  the  Duchesse 
D'Aiguillon,  ii.  30 

to  Miss  Agnes  Berry,  i.  399 

to   Miss  Alary  Berry,  i.   153, 

159,  160,  161,  164,  167,'l69,  170, 
172,  174,  175,  177,  178,  180,  184- 
190,  192,  195,  196,  198,200-209, 
212,  229,  248-268,  275-328,  361- 
375,  376,  378-398,  406-429,  431- 
434,  435,  442,  449,  452,  461-492; 
ii.  5-16 

to  Mr.  Berry,  i.  268 

to  the  Duchesse  de  Choiseul, 

ii.  35 


550 


IXDEX. 


LET 

Letters — continued 
Walpole, Horace,  to  Henry  (aftei"wards 
Marshal)  Conway,  ii.  26-32,  63 

to  Mr.  Gray.  ii.  23 

to  the  Rev.  Wni.  Mason,  ii.  36 

to  Lady  Ossory,  i.  151,  380 

to  Mr.  Woodfall,  ii.  62 

to  (unknown),  ii.  40,  42,  238 

Ward,  Hon.  J.,  to  Miss  Berry,  iii.  13 
Wishaw,  Mr.,  to  Miss  Berry,  iii.  176 
Levis,  M.  le  Due  de,  i.  216 
Lewis,  M.  G.,  or  Monk  Lewis,  ii.  384. 
His  betises  upon  the  subject  of  poetry, 
.502 
Lichfield  Cathedral,  ii.  355 
Lichtenstein,    Princess   of,  at  Nice,  ii. 

231,  232 
Lichtenstein,  Louis  de,  his  wounds  re- 
ceived at  the  battle  of  Ratisbon,  IL 
390 
Liddell,  Sir  Thomas  (afterwards  Lord 

Ravensworth),  ii.  347 
Liddell,  Lady,  ii.  418 
Liege,  town  of,  i.  20  ;  iii.  367.   Prince- 
Bishops  of,  20.     Profligacy  of,  20 
Lieven,  M.  de,  iii.  3 
Lillo's  '  Fatal  Curiosity,'  ii.  453 
Lina,  Duchess  of,  ii.  29 
Lindsay,  Colonel,  his  model  of  a  .new 

telegraph,  ii.  404 
Lindsay,  Lady  Charlotte,  ii.  235.     Her 
examination  on  the  trial  of  the  Queen, 
iii.    233,   235.     Her  journal   of  the 
trial,  235.     Her  death,  509 
Linlithgow  Castle,  iii.  36 
Linois,  Admiral,  iii.  73,  note.     His  trial 

for  high  treason.  74 
Lisbon,  roads  and  carriages  in,  i.  271. 
Society  in,  in  1790,271.  Effects  of 
the  earthquake  at,  333.  The  Con- 
vento  Nuovo  or  Coracao  de  Jesu  at, 
333.  A  picture  by  Ra[)hael  at  the 
Marquis  Pamela's,  334.  Statue  of 
Joseph  I.  at,  334.  Miseries  and 
luxuries  of  the  Portuguese,  335.  Tiie 
city  in  1810,  ii.  441 
Lisle,  Mrs.,  in  waiting  at  Kensington, 

ii.  405 
Liston,  the  actor,  iii.  345 
Lithographing,  process  of,  iii.  169 
Litta,  the  Marchesina,  i.  126 
Liverpool  in  1824,  iii.  356 
Livia,  Baths  of,  at  Rome,  i.  97 
Lock,  Mr. ,  of  Norbury,  i.  361.    His  im- 
prisonment in  a  sentry-box  in  France, 
253.    Death  of  his  child,  ii.  444,  445. 
His  death,  445 
Locke,  Mrs.,  ii.  389  ;    iii.  52').     '  Lines 
on  her  at  a  Masquerade.'  525 


LUX 

Lodiges'  Nursery,  at  Hackney,  ii.  385 

Lodore,  falls  of,  ii.  362 

Loire,  valley  of  the,  i.  221,  222 

Lombardy,  plain  of,  i.  37,  44 

Longford  Castle,  iii.  457 

Lord's  Supper,  letter  to  a  friend  respect- 
ing the,  iii.  315 

Lorenzo,  Nuovo  San,  village  of,  i.  55 

Lorn,  Lord,  i.  324 

Lorraine,  Claude,  landscapes  of,  in  the 
Palazzo  Barberini,  i.  114 

Lottery,  prizes  in  the,  i.  287 

Louis  XIV.,  statue  of,  when  a  boy,  ii. 
152 

Louis  XVI.,  his  treatment  by  the  people, 
i.  204.  Loyalty  of  the  Bretons  to 
him,  206.  His  flight  to  Varennes, 
and  return  to  Paris,  307,  309 

Louis  XVII.,  fiction  of  his  having  been 
discovered  alive,  ii.  107 

Louis  XVIIL,  in  London  in  1814    iii. 

11.  Goes  to  France,  and  ascends  the 
throne,  1.1.     His  reception  in  Paris, 

12.  Arrival  of  Bonaparte  from  Elba, 
43, 44.  Escape  of  the  King  to  Ostend, 
44.  Defeat  of  Bonaparte  at  Waterloo, 
61.     His  crown,  iii.  307 

Louis-Philippe.     -See  Orleans,  Due  de 

Louis  de  Narbonne,  Count,  his  death, 
li.  546 

Louvel,  Louis  Pierre,  assassinates  the 
Due  de  Berri,  iii.  2L2,  note 

Louvre,  the,  in  1802,  ii.  133.  The  gal- 
lery of  the,  iii.  97.  Works  of  art  in 
the,  in  1818,  169.  Exhibition  of  the 
works  of  industry  at  the,  177 

Loveday,  Mr.,  of  Caversham,  i.  8 

Lowther  Castle,  iii.  357 

Lowthers,  the  two  Miss,  ii.  272 

Loyola,  Ignatius,  marble  figure  of,  ii.  1 52 

Lucan,  Lady,  i.  422 

Lucan,  Lord,  i.  472 

Lu^ay,  Madame,  ii.  142.  Her  assembly, 
146 

Lucca,  city  of,  i.  330.  The  Duomo,  330. 
Visit  to,  iii.  .160 

Lucretius,  Miss  Berry's  encomium  on, 
ii.  87 

Luines,  Duchesse  de,  her  assembly,  ii. 
176 

LuUin,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  ii.  477 

Luther  and  Calvin,  the,  of  Titian,  i.  116 

Luttrell,  Henry,  ii.  148.  Notice  of  him, 
\AS7iote,  485 

Luxembourg,  Due  de,  his  escape  from 
France,  i.  174 

Luxembourg,  Due  de,  caricature  on 
him,  i.  182 

Luxembourg,  palace  of  the,  iii.  88 


INDEX. 


551 


LUZ 

Luzerne,  M.  de  la,  his  death,  i.  364 

Lynot,  Lady,  i.  8,  448 

Lyons,  the  theatre  at,  i.  134.  The 
Quai  du  Rhone  at,  134.  Silk  and 
velvet  mills  at,  135.  Gold  lace- 
weaving,  135.  Shopping  at,  146. 
Events  at,  in  1790,  204.  Disturb- 
ances at,  208,  209.  Environs  of, 
222.  Surrender  of,  402.  Appear- 
ance of  the  city  in  1802,  ii.  208. 
Horrors  enacted  there  during  the 
Revolution,  208.  The  city,  in  18 16, 
Hi.  105 

Lysons,  Mr.,  and  his  brother  at  Straw- 
berry Hill,  i.  202,  208.  His  drawings 
of  the  discoveries  at  Woodchester,  ii. 
12 

Lysons,  Samuel,  ii.  376 

Lyttelton,  Mr.,ii.  340.  At Kensitigton, 
410,  411 


IX/TACARTNEY,  Sir  George  (after- 

-^*-*-  wards  Lord),  ii.  30 

Macaulay,  Mrs.,  her  pamphlet  on  the 

French    Revolution,    i.    268.      Her 

death,  309 

Macaulay,  Mr.  (afterwards  Lord),    iii. 

414.     Miss   Berry's   letters    to  him, 

417.      His    essay    on    Frederick    of 

Prussia,  478.     His  literary  honours, 
508 
Macdonald,  Lady  Louisa,  i.  287 
Macdonald,  General,  in  Paris,  ii.  143 
Macdonald,  Lady  Louisa,  i.  401 ;  ii.  384 
Mackenzie,  James  Stuart,  i.  172 
Mackinsay,  Lady  Betty,  i.  396 
Mackintosh,    Sir   James,   ii.    499.     At 

Wimpole,  iii.  173.    His 'Lectures  on 

the  Law  of  Nature  and  ot  Nations,' 

ii.  108 
Madama;,  Villa,  at  Rome,  iii.  270 
Maddocks,  Mr.,  and  his  brother,  ii.  235 
Madonna  degli  Angioli,  church  of  the, 

at  Rome.  i.  96 
Madonna,  Villa,  near  Rome,  i.  HI 
Madonna,  the,  ol  Guercino,  116 
Madonna  della  Sedea,  the,  of  Raphael, 

at  Florence,  i.  120 
Madonna  and  Child,  by  Raphael,  in  the 

Palazzo  Pitti,  i.  121 
Madrid,  riots  at,  i.  197.     Climate  of,  i. 

342 
Magdalen  of  Guido,  in  the  Palazzo  Bar- 

berini,  i.  114 
Iilagdalen  Cliapel,  evening   service   at 

the,  ii.  472 
Maiiliabecchiana  Library  at  Florence, 

iii.  159 


MAR 

Magnesia,  ii.  524,  526 

Magnus,  St.,  Abbey  of,  at  Fiissen,  i. 

356 
Maidalchini,  Olympia,  iii.    270.      Her 

boxes  in  the  Villa  Pamfili,  271 
Maillard,  Madame,  the  French  actress, 

ii.  161 
Malfrattrai,    Clotilde   Augustine,     the 

dancer,  ii.  138 
Malke,  Comte,  his  gardens  at  Cassel, 

ii.  284 
Malmaison,  visit  to,  iii.  96 
Malmesbury,  Lord,  i.  487 
Malthus,    Mr.,    his    '  Essay  on    Popu- 
lation,' ii.  73.     Miss  Berry's  remarks 
on  the  work,  74.    At  Mrs.  Apreece's, 
475.     His  personal  appearance,  475 
Malvern,  iii.  336 

Man,   a  dried,  at  Trinity  College  Li- 
brary, Cambridge,  ii.  402 
Mancha,  La,  the  country  of,  i.  341 
Mancini,  Marie,  her  monument  at  Pisa, 

i.  330 
Manheim,  city  of,  i.  25.     Palace  of  the 

Elector  Palatine  at,  25 
Mann,  Sir  Horace,  i.  13.     His  house  in 
Florence,  260.     His  nephew's  letters 
to  the    '  Sun  '   respecting  his  corre- 
spondence with  Horace  Walpole,  ii.46 
Mansfield,  Lord,  i.  443 
Manuel,  M.,  iii.  218 
Marat,  assassination  of,  i.  413 
Maratti,  Carlo,  the  painter,  i.  74 
Marbois,  Count  Barbe  de,  ii.  175 
Marbourg,  ii.  281 

Marcellus,  theatre  of,  at  Rome,  i.  100 
Marcet,  Dr.,  ii.  476.   In  Paris  in  1814, 

iii.  12 
Marcet,  Mrs., notice  of  her,  ii.  476,  note. 

Plays  at  her  house,  ii.  534 
Marcioni,  La,  the  actress,  iii.  341 
Marconi,  Madame,  iii.  266 
Marengo,  battle-field  of.  iii.  109 
Marguerite,  I'lsle  de  St.,  ii.  221 
Maria  di  Luca,  the  Chiesa    di,  at  Bo- 
•    logna,  i.  50 

Maria  Louisa,  at  Parma,  iii.  321 
Maria  Maggiore,  Santa,  church  of,  at 

Rome,  i.  61 
Marie  Amelie,  ex-Queen  of  the  French, 

in  1830,  iii.  399 
Marie  Antoinette,  Queen  of  France, 
caricature  on,  i.  182.  Her  treatment 
by  the  people,  204.  Loyalty  of  th 
Bretons  to  her  and  to  the  King,  206. 
Called  by  the  people,  '  La  Dame 
Capet,'  210.  Stopped  and  ordered 
back  to  Paris,  307,  309.  Sympathy 
felt  for  her  in  England,  311.     Ku. 


552 


INDEX. 


MAR 

rnours  in  London  respecting  her  fate, 

403.     Her  execution,  404.     Her  last 

days,  407.     Walpole's  eulogy  of  her, 

407 
Marlborough,  John,  first  Duke  of,  his 

avarice,  i.  20S 
Marlborough,  Duchess  of.  her  '  Waver- 
ing Weathercockhood,'  i.  210 
Marmont.  General,  ii.  157,  note.     His 

wife,  157 
Marmont,    Marshal,   and   the  Duke  of 

Wellington,  iii,  78,  79 
Marria>.'es,  left-handed,  i.   329.     Poor, 

Miss  Berry's  remarks  on,  ii.  373 
Mars,  Champ  de.  Miss  Berry's  descrip- 
tion of  the,  i.  249 
Mars,    Mdlle.,   the   actress,  iii.  75,  98, 

343,  345 
Marseilles,  environs  of,  i,  144.     Town 

of,  145 
Martigny,  plain  of,  i.  133 
Martigny,  town  of,  in    1818,  iii.    166. 

Accident  at,  in  1818,  320 
]Martin  V.,  Pope,  his  Colonna  Palace  at 

Eome,  i.  66 
Martin,   Mdlle.   de,  her  rouge  shop  in 

Paris,  ii.  190 
Martino,  Stagione  di  San,  at  Florence, 

i.  414 
Marucelliana    Library  at  Florence,   1. 

332;  iii.  160 
Mary  Beatrice  of  Este,  i.  49 
Masaccio,  works  of,  i.  260 
Maschiere,  view  from,  i.  353 
Mason,  Rev.   W.,  Walpole's  letter  to, 

ii.  36.     His  poems,  94 
Masquerade  at  Mrs.  Chichester's,  ii.  381 
Mass,  high,  at  St.  Peter's  at  Rome,  i.  68 
Massa,  visit  to,  iii.  1 60 
Massena,  General,  ii.  160' 
Massimo,  Marquis,  ii.  274.  278,  284 
Materosa,  Viscount,  ii.  353 
Matilda,  Queen  of  Denmark,  her  last 

resting-place,  ii.  292 
Matson,  George    Selwyn's  house  at,  i. 

473 
Mattel.  Palazzo,  at  Rome,  i.  1 1 3  ;  iii.  265 
Maubeuge,  siege  of,  i.  397,  399.     The 

siege  raised,  402,  404 
Maurepas,  Mons.  de,  his  Memoires,  i. 

397 
May,  Mr.,  i.  474.      His  verses  on  Lord 

Orford,  431,  432,  474 
Mayence,  iii.  378 
Mayfield,  palace  of  the  Archbishops  of 

Canterbury  at,  ii.  486 
Mazziiii,    Joseph,   Miss   Berry   on   his 

views,  iii.  474 
Mccsenas'  villa,  at  Tivoli,  i.  1 1 3 


MIT 

Medals,  collection  of,  at    apo  di  Monte, 

i.  77 
Medenham,  the  infamous   club  at,    ii. 

480 
Medicean    Librar}',    Canon    Bandini's 

Catalogue  of  the  MSS.  in  the,  i.  '458 
Mee,  Mrs.,  i.  251,  256,  283,  288 
Meleager,  statue  of,  in  the  Museum  Cie- 

mentinum,  i.  112 
Melian,  Mont,  i.  34.     Vineyards  of,  35 
Mello,  i.  297 
Melrose  Abbey,  ii.  372 
Melzi,  Comte,'i.  143 
Mendip,  Lord,  i.  467 
Mengs,  his  picture  of  St.  Eusebio,  at 

Rome,  i.  103 
Mer  de  Glace,  the,  130 
Mercer,  Mr.,  ii.  341.  441 
Mercer,  Miss  (now  Countess  de  Fla- 

hault.  Baroness  Nairne),  ii.  505 
Mercier,   M.  Bartholomew,  his  works, 

ii.  107 
Merry,  Robert,  his  '  Laurel  of  Liberty,' 

i.  252,  319 
Merry,  Mr.  Andrew,  at  Amiens,  ii,  129 
Merville.  M.  de,  his  '  La  Famille  Glinet,' 

iii.  170 
Meudon,  chateau  of,  iii.  319 
Mezeray,  Mdlle.,  the  actress,  ii.  140 
Michel,   St.,  church    and  abbey  of,  at 

Antwerp,  i.  18.  Village  of,  in  Savoy, 

35 
Mignard,  his  pictures  at  Avignon,  i.  137 
Milan,  cathedral  of,  i.  126.     Theatre  at, 

126.     Sta.  Maria  delle  Grazie,  127 
Milbanke,  Miss  (afterwards  Lady  By- 
ron), ii.  505 
Millico,  Giuseppe,  the  singer,  i,  80 
Milner,  Lady,  i.  255 
Milnes.     Mr.    Monckton     (now    Lord 

Houghton),  his  lines  on  the  death  of 

the  two  Miss  Berrys,  iii.  518 
Milton's  '  Paradise  Lost,'  Miss  Berry's 

remarks  on,  and  on  the  author's  in- 
tellect, ii.  80,  81 
Minerva  Medica,  temple  of,  at  Rome, 

i.  96 
Minerva,  temple  of,  at  Rome,  i.  99 
Mino  da  Fiesole,  his  bust  of   Bishop 

Salutati,  iii.  157 
Minorca,  capture  of,  by  the  English, 

ii.  79 
Minto,  ii.  372;  iii.  114.     His  speech  on 

tiie  Irish  Union,  ii.  111 
Mirabeau,  his  death,  i.  297 
Mireveldt.  Madame  de,  iii,  25 
Misenus,  Cape  of,  i.  88 
Mitlord,  his  advice  as  to  the  pronun- 
ciation of  Latin  and  Greek,  ii.  406 


INDEX. 


553 


MOC 

Mocchi,  Francesco,  his  equestrian  statue 

ac  Piacenzii,  i.  45 
Modena,  town  of,  i.  49 
Modena,  states  of,  i.  49.     Hercule  III., 

J)uke  of,  243,  note.     Town  of,   243. 

The  Duke's  pahice  nt,  244 
Modena,  Ducliess  of,  i.  243 
Moira,  Lord,  liis  secret    expedition  to 

the  coast  of  France,  i.  416,  419.    Ke- 

tires  to  Donington  Castle,  474 
Mole,  the,  at  Puzzuoli,  i.  88 
IMoIe,  tlie  French  actor,  ii.  150 
Molle,  Ponte,  scene  of  the  battle  be- 
tween Constantine  and  Maxentius  at, 

i.  116 
Moly neux,Mrs.,  her  sudden  death,  i.  47 1 
Monaldeschi,  Marquis,  his  resting-place, 

iii.  430 
Monge,  Gaspard,  ii.  166 
Monks,  the  two  Miss,  ii.  271 
Monrose,  the  actor,  iii.  431 
Montagu,  Duke  of,  his  place  at  Rich- 
mond, i.  208 
Montagu,  Mathew,  ii.  107,  449 
Montague  House,  Portuian  iSquare,  ii. 

378 
Montague,  Edward    (afterwards   Lord 

Rokeby),  ii.  384,  4Li6 
Jlontague,  Lord,  his  death,  i.  411 
Montaigne's  'Essays,'  ii.  74 
Montandre,  Marquise  de,  anecdote  of, 

1.  311 
Montanvert,  the,  i.  130.    Ascent  of  the, 

32 
Montcailler,  palace  at,  i.  239.     Fair  at, 

239 
Montgomery,  Miss,  dances    a   Bolero, 

ii.  418 
Monthyon   Prize,   the,   of  the   French 

Academy,  iii.  420 
Montier,  or  Monstier,  M.  de,  ii.  451 
Montmorency,  Duke   of,  his    tomb    at 

Moulins,  i.  221 
Montmorency,  Adrien  de,  ii.  156 
Montmorency,  [Sunday  fetts  at,  iii.  171 
Montolieu,  Mrs.,  her  accident  at  Tun- 
bridge,  ii.  331 
Montieuil,  town  of,  ii.  127 
Montrose,  Duke  of,  made  Master  of  the 

Horse,  i.  264 
Montrose,  Duchess  of,  and  her  daughters, 

ii.  391 
!Moore,  Jacob,  the  landscape-painter,  i. 

61 
Moore,  the  artist,  in  Rome,  i.  68 
Moore,  Francis,  ii.  201 
Moore,  Charles,  ii.  330 
Moore,    General    (Sir  John),    ii.    340. 

His  expedition  to  Spain,  ii.  354.    Re- 


MUS 

embarkation  of  his  army  in  Spain, 
375.  His  death,  376.  Account  of 
his  campaign  in  Spain,  390 

Moore,  Thomas,  at  Lady  Donegal's,  ii. 

.  3^5.  His  poems  'Corruption,'  and 
'  Intolerance,' ii.  351.  His  versifica- 
tion of  the  Prince  of  Wales's  letter, 
ii.  493  nule.  495.  Miss  Berry's 
opinion  of  his  Melalogue,  ii.  475. 
At  Sloperton,  iii.  460 

Moorish  architecture  in  Spain,  i.  338 

Morat,  lake  of,  ii.  266 

Morat,  town  of,  ii.  266 

Mordaunt,  Lady  Mary,  i.  394 

More,  Hannah,  her  '  Estimate  of  tlie 
Religion  of  the  Fashionable  World,' 
i.  285.  Her  verses  on  '  Bonner's 
Ghost,'  172.  Horace  Walpole's  re- 
marks on,  172.  Her  learning,  174, 
At  Lady  Amherst's,  304.  Her  work 
on  iemale  education,  ii.  91 

Moreau,  General,  ii.  235.  At  General 
Berthier's,  166.  Notice  of  him,  166, 
note 

Moreau,  Mdlle.,  iii.  67 

Morgan,  Sir  Charles,  ii.  97.  His  house 
at  Nice,  ii.  225,  226 

Morgan,  the  Baron  Adrien  de,  ii.  129, 
note 

Morges,  i.  27 

Morley,  Countess  of,  iii.  454 

Morritt,  Mr.,  ii.  368 

Mortier,  General,  ii.  283 

Moscow,  the  French  in,  ii.  507.  Sir 
Uvedale  Price's  poem  on  the  burning 
of,  528 

Mose,  Fontana  di,  at  Rome,  i.  96 

Moses,  the,  of  Michael  Angelo,  in  St. 
Pietro  in  Vincoli,  i.  97 

Motion,  perpetual,  i.  114 

Moulins,  town  of,  i.  221 

Mount  Edgecumbe,  Emma  Countess  of, 
anecdotes  of,  i,  171.     Her  pap-party, 

402,  483 

Mount  Edgcumbe,  Lord,  his  illness,  i. 

403.  His  recovery,  408.  His  pro- 
logue for  the  theatricals  at  Straw- 
berry Hill,  ii.   114 

Mozart,  his  'Marriage  ofFigaro,'iii.315 
Munich,  the  Elector  Palatine's  residence 

at,  i.  26 
Mui-at,  King  of  Naples,  his  conduct  in 

1814,  iii.   50.     His  reported  victory 

at  Solcntino,  52 
Murray,  Lady,  i.  297 
Murray,  the  Ladies,  i.  393 
Murray,  Mr.  (afterwards  Lord),  ii.  372 
Muses,  the  Nine,  in  the  Museum  Cle- 

mentinum,  i.  112 


554 


INDEX. 


NAM 

■^AMPORT,  village  of,  ii.  128 

Naples,  country  adjaceiuto,  i.  75. 
City  of,  76.  In  1814,  ii'i.  38-40.  And 
in  1815,  50  et  seq.  The  Austrians 
marching  on,  281.  Visit  to,  335. 
The  King's  palace,  337.  In  1849,  511 

Naples.  King  of,  and  the  Due  of  Wur- 
temberg's  cows,  i.  353 

Naples,  Queen  of,  her  reception  at  the 
Ottoman  Court,  ii.  549 

Narbonne,  Comte  Louis  de,  ii.  170 

National  Assembly,  Miss  Berry's  de- 
scription of  the,  i.  249 

Navona,  Piazza,  at  Rome,  iii.  331 

Necker,  M.,  his  dismissal,  i.  172.  Goes 
to  Switzerland,  172,  177.  His  cha- 
racter, 362 

Necker,  Matiame,  her  rules  and  advice 
for  the  conduct  of  a  woman  no  longer 
young  in  society,  ii.  336 

Negroni,  Villa,  at  Rome,  i.  95 

Nelson,  Lord,  Miss  Berry's  account  of 
the  funeral  of,  ii.  309 

Nervi  Villa  Fravega,  iii.  113 

Neuilly,  visit  to,  iii.  118.  Second  visit 
to,  343 

Neve,  John  Le,  his  Monumenta  Aiigli- 
cana,  i.  209 

Nevers,  town  of,  i.  221.  Manufactures 
of,  221 

Newcastle-under-Lyme,  town  of,  ii.  357 

Newgate,  visit  to  the  female  prisoners' 
side  at,  iii.  308 

Newmarket,  in  1809,  ii.  398.  The 
races  at,  399 

Newport,  town  of,  ii.  97 

Newspaper  writers,  Walpole's  remarks 
on,  i.  465 

Newton,  SirL'iaac,  Miss  Berry's  remarks 
on  his  intellect,  ii.  80.  Roubillac's 
statue  of,  at  Cambridge,  397 

Newton,  village  of,  ii.  99 

Ney,  Marshal,  his  execution,  iii.  18^ 

Nice,  town  of,  ii.  224 

Nicholas,  the  Grand  Duke  (afterwards 
Emperor),  iii.   65 

Nichols,  Mr.,  at  Strawberry  Hill,  i.  198. 
And  the  'London  Magazine,'  395 

Nicholson,  Margaret,  i.  443 

Nicita,  island  of,  i.  88 

Nieujvort,  unsuccessfully  attacked  by 
the  French,  i.  410 

Nile,  battle  of  the,  ii.  71 

Nismes,  the  Pont  du  Gard  at,  i.  138. 
Thetownof,  138.  The  amphitheatre 
at,  139.  Le  Maison  Quarrce  at,  139. 
The  Temple  c.f  Diana  at,   140 

Nivernois,  Due  de,  his  arrest  and  ac- 
quittal, i.  396 


ORA 

Noailles,  Comte  Alexis  de,  iii.  78,  79 
Noir,  M.  le,  of  the  Musee,  ii.  152,  153 
Nollekcns,  Joseph,  the  sculptor,  ii.  476. 

His  bust  of  Fox  at  Woburn,  325 
North,  Frank,  his  musical  comedy  at 

the  Haymarket,  i.  309 
North,  Lord,  as  prime  minister,  ii.  58 
North,  Brownlow,  iii.   343,  384 
North,  Hon.  Frederick  (afterwards  Earl 

of  Guildford),  ii.  354,  513.  His  house 

in  Conduit  Street  burnt  down,  385 
Northumberland,  Duke  of,  i.  473 
Novaleze,  village  of,  i.  36 
Novaleze,  i.  128.     L'Hopital  at,  128 
Novels,  Miss   Berry's  remarks   on  the 

false  pictures  of  human  life  given  in 

most,  ii.  112 
Nuneham,  i.    195,434;    ii.    93.     "Way 

of  living  at,  in  1799,  94 
Nursery,  Tiiompson's,  at  Mile  End,  ii. 

385.     Lodiges',  at  Hackney,  385 


r^BELISI^  the,  at  Rome.  i.  66 

^^  Obscure,  Vallee,  near  Nice,  ii.  229 

Offenberg,  town  of,  ii.  272 

Ogilvie,  Mr.,  his  accident  at  Goodwood, 
i.  232 

O'Hara,  General,  i.  103.  233,  284,  285, 
296,  301.  Made  Governor  of  Toulon, 
392.  At  Toulon,  417.  His  imprison- 
ment in  France  and  subsequent  libe- 
ration, 475,  478.  Notice  of  him, 
ii.  I.  Character  of  him,  from  '  Cyril 
Thornton,'  1,2.  His  engagement  of 
marriage  with  Miss  Berry,  ii.  2.  The 
engagement  broken  off,  4.  Miss 
Berry's  defence  of  his  conduct  and 
character,   17 

Olan,  Mons.  d',  hanged  by  the  mob,  i. 
195,   199 

Oldenburg,  Grand  Duchess  of,  in  Lon- 
don, iii.  10,  22,  23 

Oldfield,  Mrs.,  the  actress,  her  son  by 
General  Oldfield,  i.  205,  note 

Oleio,  Santa,  village  of,  i.  337 

O'Neil,  Miss,  the  actress,  iii.  67 

O.  P.  riots  at  Covent  Gardeu  Theatre, 
ii.  394 

Opera,  the,  in  Italy,  i.  51.  At  Rome, 
65.  At  Naples,  78.  In  London,  burnt, 
165,  note.  The  Opera  at  the  Hay- 
market  Theatre,  288,  293.  In  Loudon 
in  1741,  ii.  28.  Lord  Salisbury's  license 
for  operas  at  the  Pantheon,  i.  204 

Orange,  Roman  Triumphal  Arch  at,  i. 
145  ;  ii.  245.     Amphithean-e  at,  246 

Orange,  Prince  and  Princess  of,  at 
Hampton  Court  Palace,  i.  466 


INDEX. 


555 


ORA 

Orange,  Hereditary  Prince  of,  in  Paris, 
ii.   143 

Oratory,  French,  iii.  218,  219 

Orford,  Horace,  Earl  of.  See  Walpole, 
Horace 

Orford,  Lady,  i.  121.  Her  villa  near 
Florence,  121 

Orgon,  village  of,  ii.  215 

Orleans,  Duke  of,  relinquishes  his  title, 
i.  195.  Attends  the  new  St.  Bar- 
thelerai,  127.  At  Brighthelmstone, 
199.  Goes  to,  Paris  and  makes  a 
speech  to  the  Etats,  202.  Gouvion's 
remark  to  him,  205.  Insults  offered 
to  him,  208.  His  chateau  at  St. 
Assis,  220.  In  Paris  with  Madame 
de  Sillery,  310.     E.Kccution  of,  414 

Orleans,  Duke  of  (afterwards  Kinjj  of 
the  French),  iii.  317.  His  family, 
318.  Appointed  Lieutenant-General 
of  France, iii.  399.  And  subsequently 
King,  399 

Orleans,  Duchesse  d'  (now  ex-Queen  of 
the  French),  iii.  317 

Orleans  pictures,  exhibition  of  the,  in 
London,  ii.  86 

Orsini,  Marie,  Duchess  of  Montmorency, 
i.  221 

Osbaldiston,  Mrs.,  i.  421 

Ossory,  Lady,  i.  151.  Mr.  Vernon 
Smith's  edition  of  Walpole's  letters 
to,  ii.  67 

Ostend,  unsuccessfully  attacked  by  the 
French,  i.  4.10 

Oswald,  Mr.,  i.  1,  note 

Oswald,  Sir  John,  iii.  310 

Otto,  M.,  ii   125 

'  Otranto,  Castle  of,'  i.  242,  259.  Faults 
in  the  Parmesan  edition  of,  268 

Owen,  Richard,  notice  of,  i.  154,  note. 
His  lines  on  the  ]\Iiss  Berrys,  154 

Oxford,  Lady,  blunder  with  her  letter, 
i.  424 

Oxford,  fifth  Earl  of,  ii.  340 


TDAER,  Ferdinando,  the  composer,  iii. 
-*-       168 

Paganini,  the  violinist,  iii.  140 

Paget,    Lord   (afterwards    ISIarquis   of 

Anglesey),  ii.  383 
Paget,  General  Sir  Edward,  ii.  383 
Paine,  Tom,  his  answer  to  Mr.  Burke's 
pamphlet,   i.    297.     His    '  Rights    of 
Man,'  298,  304.     Distribution  of  his 
'Rights  of  Man'  among  soldier.'^  and 
sailors,  318.     Goes  to  Paris,  319 
Painting,  profession  and  love  of,  in  Hol- 
land, i.  18 


PAR 

Painting,  Walpole's  plan  for  encourag- 
ing, ii.  53 

Palaiox,  Don  Joseph,  his  rooms  at  Vin- 
cennes,  iii.  96 

Palais  Royal,  in  1820,  iii.  220 

Palisse,  La,  chateau  of,  i.  222 

Palk,  Lady  Mary,  her  death,  i.  286 

Pallavicini,  Fabio,  iii.   136,  137.      His 
house,  137 

Palm  Sunday  at  Rome,  i.  104 

Palmerston,  Lady,  ii.  236 

Pamfili,  Villa,  iii.  270 

Panaro  river,  the,  i.  244 

Panoramas  of  Cairo  and  Dublin,  ii.  3.-55 

Pantheon,  the,  at  Rome,  i.  62,  70 

Pantheon,  the  Lord  Chamberlaiu'.s  li- 
cense for  operas  at  the,  i.  204 

Pantheon,  in  Paris,  fa9ade  of  the,  ii.  202 

Paoli,  Pascal,  i.  414 

Paris,  doings  of  the  mob  in,  in  1789,  i. 
171.  Progress  of  the  Revolution  in, 
172,173,175,176,177.  Appearance 
and  condition  of,  in  1790,  216-219 
Safety  of  strangers  in,  in  1791,  347. 
The  Theatre  deMonsieurin,348.  Price 
of  lodgings  in,  in  1802.  ii.  132.  Fi- 
acres of,  132.  The  Louvre,  133.  The 
Theatre  de  la  Republique,  and  the  au- 
dience, 135,  136.  The  Opera,  137. 
Appear.ince  of  Parisian  society,  138, 
139,  145,  147.  Passport  busines-, 
139.  Shops  in  Paris,  141.  Vache's 
magazin,  141.  Dinners  in  1802,  142. 
The  Theatre  du  Louvois,  145  Gar- 
dens of  the  Tuileries.  145.  Balls  at 
Paris,  147,  155.  Churches  of  St.  Roc 
and  Notre  Dame,  149.  Musee  des 
Monuments  Nationaux,  152.  The 
Champs  Elysees  and  Bois  de  Bou- 
logne, 156.  The  illuminations  for  the 
peace  of  Amiens,  158.  Bagatelle,  158. 
Sunday  in  Paris  in  1802, 1 59.  French 
operas,  161,  167.  And  ballets,  162. 
Magnificence  of  the  First  Consul's 
apartments  in  the  Tuileries,  1 63.  Visit 
tohismother,  168, 169, 171.  The  The- 
atre de  Montansier,  173.  Propriety  of 
the  behaviour  of  the  lower  orders  in 
Paris,  179.  Review  of  the  troops  by 
Bonaparte  in  the  Place  de  Carousel, 
180.  The  Bibliotheque  du  Roi,  184. 
The  Pantheon,  202.  The  Luxembourg, 
203.  The  theatres  in  1802,  205,  206. 
Condition  of  the  upper  classes  in  the 
provincial  towns  in  1802,  216.  Ab- 
dication of  Bonaparte,  iii.  10.  The 
Allies  in  Paris,  16.  Bonaparte's  im- 
provements in  the  city,  17,  21.  The 
theatres  in,  17, 18.     Arrival  of  Bona- 


556 


INDEX. 


PAR 

parte  from  Elba,  43,  44.  The  battle 
of  Waterloo,  61.  French  politics  in 
1816.  86,  87.  The  Luxembourg,  88. 
The  horses  and  carriages  of  Paris,  89. 
The  Jardin  des  Plantes,  91.  Scene 
in  a  theatre  in,  iii.  167.  The  Louvre 
in  1818,  169.  The  Place  de  Greve, 
181.  Visit  to  a  Seance  Royale,  183. 
Fancy  bal  masque,  200.  Assassina- 
tion of  the  Due  de  Berri,  202  ct  seq. 
Visit  to  the  Garde  Meuble,  307.  Ex- 
hibition of  modern  pictures  in  1822, 
315.  Paris  in  1830,  386.  The  re- 
volution of  July,  3S9.  Troops  in 
the  city  in  1S34,  414.  Miss  Berry's 
fondness  for  Paris.  417.  Les  Enfants 
trouves,  432.  The  Hotel  1  ieu,  433. 
The  Revolution  of  1848,  .501 -.503 
Park  Place,].  195.  In  181 1,  ii.  479,  480 
Parkes,  Mr.,  of  Warwick,  ii.  433.  His 
.worsted  spinning  factory,  434.  Ad- 
ventures of  Mrs.  Parkes's  brother,  436 
Parma,  city  of,  i.  46,  241.  Objects  of 
interest  at,  46,  47.  The  public  build- 
ings at,  242.  The  printing  office  of, 
242.  The  royal  library  at,  242. 
Visit  to,  iii.  321 
Parma,   Maria  Amelia,  Duchess  of,  at 

Rome,  i.  70 
Parmegiano,  his  works  at  Parma,  i.  46, 

48 
Parr.    Queen   Catherine,  her   tomb   at 

Sudeley  Cistle,  i.  480 
Parsons,  Mr.,  at  Broadstairs,  i.  441 
Parsons,  Aldern  an,  ii.  26 
Pasquier,  M.,  iii.  203,  206.  His  oratory, 

220 
Pasquinades  at  Rome,  i.  70 
Patterdale,  ii.  363 
I'atterson,  Mrs.,  ex-wife  of  Jerome  Bo- 

nayiarte,  iii.  100 
Paul,  St.,  spot  at  Rome  where  it  is  said 

he  was  crucified,  i.  71 
Paul  III.,  Pope,  Titian's  portrait  of,  at 

Florence,  i.  120 
Paulina,  \illa,  at  Rome,  iii.  277 
Paulo  fuori    le   Mura,   St.,  church  of, 

at  Rome,  i.  101 
Pavia,  a  fete  day  at,  i.  125.     The  Uni- 
versity, 126.     Botanic  Gardens,  126 
Peace  of  1814,  illuminations  for  the,  iii. 
10.     Entry    of  the    Sovereigns   into 
London,  24.  The  Thanksgivmg  Day, 
81 
Pecquigny,   village   of,   ii,    128.      The 

chateau  of,  129,  vote 
Peel,  Mr.  (^afterwards  the  late  Sir  Ro- 
bert), ii.  497 
Peletier,  Le,  death  of,  iii.  380 


PIE 

Peletier,  Felix  Le,  iii.  381 

Peluccia,  Madame,  her  Sunday  dances 

at  Rome,  i.  94 
Pen,  Walpole's  address  to  his.  i.  429 
Peninsula,  condition  of  the  contending 

forces  in,  in  1811,  li.  456 
Penn,  Lady  Juliana,  i    169,  300.     Ac- 
cident to  her,  178,  185 
Penn,  Lady  Harriet,  i.  185 
Pennant,    Mr.,    his    'London,'   i.   203. 

Walpole's  notes  to,  203 
Penshurst,  iii.  66 
Peploe,  Mr.,  iii.  8 
Pepys,    Sir   William   Walter,    i.     170. 

Accident  to  his  son,  182,  183 
Pepyses,  the,  ii.  14 

Percival,  Mr.,  ii.   394.     Defeat  of,  on 
the  Regency  question,  448.     Assassi- 
nation of,  in  the  House  of  Commons, 
497 
Percy,  Hugh  Earl,  i.  4,  vote 
Percy,    Lady,  daughter  of  Lord  Bute, 

i.  4,  note 
Percy,  Dr.,  Bishop  of  Dromore,  his  cor- 
respondence with  Lord  Orford,  i.  398 
Percys.  Walpole's  remark  on  the,  i.  398 
Perregaux,  M.,  the  banker  and  senator, 

ii.  131.     Dinner  at  his  house,  184 
Perugia,  i.  119 
Perugino,  his  works  in  the  Cathedral 

at  Sienna,  i.  53 
Peter,  theEmperor,  his  assassination,  iii. 

445 
Peter  and  Paul,   SS.,  tomb  of,  in   St. 

Peter's,  i   63 
Peter   in  Montario,   St.,  church  of,  at 

Rome,  i.  71 
Peter's,  St.,  at  Rome,  i.  56,  63.     High 
mass   at,   57.      Illumination   of  the 
cross,  107 
Petrarchi,  the  modern  Greek,  his  acute- 
ness   respecting    the   ancient   Greek 
language  ii.  407 
Petrarque,  la  maison  de  Mons.,  i.  138 
Petty.  Lord  Henry  (afterwards  Marquis 
of  Lansdowne),  ii.  148,  162.     Notice 
of  him,  148,  vote 
Phalissie  of  the  ancients,  i.  118 
Piacenza,  town  of,  i.  44,  45.     Pastures 
near,  240.  Sights  to  be  seen  at,  240,  241 
Plan  della  Fonte,  i.  120 
Picard,  the  French  dramatist,  ii.  145 
Piedmont,  plain  of,  i   37 
Piedmont,  the  Prince  de,  i.  238 
Picdmontese,  the,  in  1821,  iii.  305 
Pietra  Mala,  i  52 

Pietra  Dura  works  at  Florence,  iii.  151 
Pietro   in   Vincoli,  St.,  church   of,   at 
Rome,  i.  97 


INDEX. 


557 


PIG 

Pigot,  Mr.,  goes  to  the  meeting  of  the 
llevolutionary  Chib,  i.  316 

Pilate's  house,  at  Home,  i.  100 

Pilgrims'  supper,  at  Rome,  i.  106 

Pillory,  the,  in  1811,  ii.  466 

Pinturiccio,  his  woiks  in  the  Cathedral 
at  Sienna,  i.  53 

Pionibo,  Sebastian  del,  his  'Raising  of 
Lazarus,'  ii.  86 

Piozzi,  Mrs.,  fete  at  her  house  at  Streat- 
ham,  i.  209  Her  work  on  English 
Synonymes,  412 

Pisa,  i.  'l23.  The  Lnng  Arno,  123. 
The  Leaning  Tower,  123.  TheCanvpo 
Santo  at,  123.  Baths  near,  124.  The 
Diiomo  at,  329.  The  Battisterio  at, 
329 

Piseiarelli,  the,  near  Naples,  i.  81  . 

Pistoia,  town  of,  i   330 

Pitt,  Mr.  Thomas,  i.  37,  41,  48,  .50,  56. 
At  West  Moulsey.  ii.  396 

Pitt,  Mr.  (afterwards  Earl  of  Chatham), 
ii.  56 

Pitt,  William,  the  younger,  as  prime 
minister,  li.  59.  His  death,  312.  Miss 
Berry's  views  of  his  character  and 
influence  on  his  country,  312.  Lie 
respecting  l)im,  iii.  187 

Pitti,  Palazzo,  at  Florence,  i.  120;  iii. 
150.     Library  of,  150 

Pius  VI.,  Pope,  his  village  of  Nuovo 
San  Lorenzo,  i.  55.  His  Christmas 
Day  high  mass  in  St  Peter's,  58. 
Interview  with,  67.  His  procession 
to  the  Madonna  sopra  Minerva,  102 

Plague  in  Greece,  in  1812,  ii.  525 

Plantagenet,  the  Dowager  Duchess,  i. 
200 

Playtair,  Mr.,  his  five  ten-guinea  vo- 
lumes of  a  'Peerage,'  li.  386 

Playfair,  Professor,  i.  484.  His  letters 
to  Miss  Berry,  485 ;  ii.  5.  His  tour 
with  Lord  John  Russell,  487.  Miss 
Berry's  opinion  of  him,  iii.  67.  M 
Florence,  1 10.    His  tour  of  Italy,  127 

Plum  trees  on  the  slopes  of  the  Alps,  i. 
28 

Pocklington,  Mr.,  his  house  at  Keswick, 
ii.  361 

Poggelini,  the  Chevalier,  i.  354 

Poissardes,  visit  from  the,  in  Paris,  i. 
347 

Poix,  Prince  de,  i.  397 

Poland,  Primate  of,  arrest  of  the,  in 
London, i   299 

Pompeii,  works  of  art  found  in  the 
remains  of,  i.  79.  Inscriptions  at, 
82,  83.  Remains  of,  iii.  335.  Visit 
to,  335 


PRI 

Pompey,  statue  of,  at  Rome,  i.  104 
Pom  pies,  Madame  de,  ii.  337 
Poncherolles,  Madame  de,  her  house  on 

Richmond  Gi'een,  i.  290 
Ponsonby,  Lord,  iii.  110 
Pontine  Marshes,  new  road  through  the, 

i.  94 
Pope,  the,  washing  the  feet  of  twelve 

poor  priests,  i.  106 
Pope,  Alexander,  his  poetry  contrasted 

by  Walpole  with  that  of  Drydeii,  ii. 

63 
Pope,  Mrs.,  the  actress,  i.  418.     In  the 

'  Siege  of  Berwick,'  425 
Porson,  lines  on,  ii.  541 
Porter,  Miss,  the  governess,  i.  6 
Porteus,  Dr.,  Bishop  of  London,  i.  172 
Portici,  the    Museum   at,  i.   78.     The 

Russian  minister's  house  at,  87 
Portland,  Duke  of,  as  prime  minister,  ii. 

59 
Porto  Maggiore,  at  Rome,  anciently  the 

Porta  Prcenestina,  i.  96 
Portuguese,  Mrs.  Darner's  character  of 

the,  i.  270.     Manners  and  customs  of 

the,  335.     Sir  W.  Gell's  description 

of  the,  439 
Post,  the,  in  Switzerland,  in  181S,  iii. 

166 
Postilions,  Dutch,  i.  17 
Potier,  tlie  actor,  iii.  77 
Pottingen,  Matilda,  ii.  70 
Pouilly,  town  of,  i.  221 
Pouzan,  village  of.  i.  136 
Pozzo  di  Borgo,  Prince,  in  Paris,  iii.  76, 

343 
Prato,  town  of,  i.  330 
Pratolino,  the,  at  Florence,  iii.  158 
Precipios  at  Naples,  i.  81 
Prejudices,    national.    Professor   Play- 
fair's  remarks  on,  ii.  459 
Prescutt,  Mr.,  imprisoned  in  France,  i. 

199,  200 
Preston,  town  of,  ii.  358 
Preville,  the  French  actor,  ii.  150 
Price,  Richard,  the  dissenting  minister, 

i.  205 
Price,  Dr.,  i.  252.  His  answer  to  Burke's 

pamphlet,  259.     His  death,  297 
Price,  Sir  Uvedale,  his  letter  to  Miss 

Berry,  ii.    67.     His  works,  67.     His 

Ode  on  the  Burning  of  Moscow,  &c., 

528.     On  beauty,  iii.  547 
Price,  Lady  Caroline,  iii.  8 
Priestley,  Dr.,  demolition  of  his  house, 

i.  316.     And  the  French  revolution, 

362 
Prinhnage,  i.  473 
Prior,  ]Matthew,  his  '  Turtle  and  Spar- 


558 


INDEX. 


PRO 

row,'  and  '  Apollo  and  Daphne,'  i. 

234 
Prophetic  Turgotine,  iii.  521 
Provence,  dress  of  the  peasant  women 

of,  i.  144 
Provence,  the  Comte  de,  his  answer  to 

the  Chevalier  de  Coigny,  i.  362.   His 

residence  nt  Venice,  444 
Proverbs,  a  work  on,  i.  183 
Prussia,  at  the  end  of  the  last  century, 

i.  294 
Pulteney,  Miss,  afterwards  Lady  Mur- 
ray, i.  297 
Pulteney,  Sir  James,  ii.  385 
Pulteney,    Sir  William    (first   Earl   of 

Bath),  ii.  385 
Puysegur,  Chevalier  de,  ii.  384 
Puzzuoli,  i.  88 
Puzzuoli.  Gulf  of,  i.  88 
Pyle,  village  of,  ii.  98 
Pyrrhus,  statue  of,  at  Rome,  i.  104 


QUARREE,  the  Maison,  at  Nismes, 
i.  139,  14a 
'Quarterly   Review'    on  Miss  Berry's 

edition  of  Madame  du  Deffand's  liet- 

ters,  ii.  469 
'  Queen   Charlotte,'   launch   of  the,  at 

Deptford,  ii.  420 
Queensberry,   Duke   of,  his    house   at 

Richmond,  i.  260 
Queensberry,  Duchess  of,  and  Mr.  Eitz- 

patrick,  i.  412 
Quin,  Dr.,  Notes  of  Conversations  with, 

iii.  399 


"PADICAL  Reformers    in    1819,  iii 


±\> 


190 


Raguse,  Duchesse  de,  iii.  96' 

Raith,  ii.  487 

Ramrudge,  Abbot,  tomb  of,  at  St. 
Albans,  ii.  475 

Ramsgate,  visitors  at,  in  1794,  i.  441 

Rangoni,  Ugo,  Bishop  of  Reggio,  his 
tomb  at  Reggio,  i.  243 

Ranuzio  Farnese,  statue  of,  at  Piacenza, 
i.  240 

Raphael,  his  designs  in  the  Cathedral 
at  Sienna,  i.  53.  His  Stanze  in  the 
Vatican,  62  ;  iii.  267.  His  Ascen- 
sion, at  Rome,  i.  71.  Portrait  of,  by 
himself,  1 14.  His  St.  Catherine,  117. 
His  altar-piece  in  the  Church  of  the 
Franciscans  at  Foligno,  119.  His 
Madonna  delia  Sedia  at  Florence, 
120.  His  Julius  H.,  in  the  PaJazxo 
Pitti,  120.     Madonna  and  Child  by, 


ROB 

in  the  Palazzo  Pitti,  120.  The  Spa- 
nish RafFaelles  in  Paris,  in  1818, 
169 

Rastadt,  town  of,  ii.  273.  Murder  of 
the  French  Deputies  at,  274 

Raucourt,  Mdlle.,  the  actress,  ii.  140 

Rauzar,  Duchesse  de,  iii.  178 

Reading,  Miss  Berry's  remarks  on  de- 
sultory, ii.  313 

Recamier,  M.  and  Madame,  ii.  177. 
Their  house  in  Paris,  191;  iii.  99 

Recteren,  Madame,  ii.  177 

R  ggio,  town  of,  i.  243 

Reinagle,  Philip,  the  artist,  ii.  378 

Remy,  St.,  village  of,  ii.  215.  Fete  at, 
i.  143 

Rene  of  Anjou,  King  of  Naples,  Wal- 
pole's  Sketch  of  the  Life  of,  ii.  60 

Revel,  the  Comte  de,  iii.  305 

Reventlow,  Madame,  i,  83 

Revolution,  French  ;  doings  of  the  mob 
in  Paris,  i.  171.  Progress  of  events 
in  1T89,  172  et  seq.  Caricature  on 
the  victims  of  the  Revolution,  182 

Revolution  Club,  the,  in  London,  i.  315 

Reynolds,  Sir  Joshua,  his  pictures  at 
Knowle,  ii.  507 

Rhine,  the,  at  Cologne,  i.  22.  Beau- 
ties of  the  banks  of  the,  from  Rema- 
gen  to  Andeniach,  23.  Convent  en 
an  island  in  the,  23 

Rhones,  the  Perte  du,  i.  134.  Banks 
of  the,  136.  Inundations  of  the,  ii. 
214,  215 

Rieardos,  Don,  his  defeat  of  7,000 
French,  i.  402 

Riccardiana  Library  at  Florence,  iii. 
15& 

Richelieu,  Due  de,  in  England,  i.  303. 
Returns  to  Paris,  304  ;  ii.  173.  In 
1816,  iii.  76 

Richelieu,  Cardinal,  tomb  of,  ii.  152 

Richmond,  Lady  Mary  &-uce,  Duchess 
of,  i.  186 

Richmond,  Duchess  of,  ii.  8,  13 

Richmond,  French  refugees  at,  i.  195, 
290.  Society  at,  in  1790,  258,  260, 
264 

Richmond  Hill,  view  from,  ii.  351 

Ricorsi,  i.  54 

'  Rights  of  Man,'  Tom  Paine's,  i.  298, 
304 

Rinaldo,  Ercole,  Duke  of  Modena,  i.  49 

Rivalto  di  Scrivia,  village  of,  i.  43 

Rivers,  Lady,  her  visit  to  Mesdames  les 
Poissardes,  i.  204 

Rivoli,  i.  37.  Duke  of  Savoy's  palaee 
at,  37 

Kobinson,  Sir  Thomas,  of  Rokeby  Park, 


INDEX. 


559 


ROB 

Wal  pole's  account  of  a  party  given 
by  him,  ii.  26   ' 
Robinson,  Mrs.,  iii.  9 

Eocca,  M.,  married  to  Madame  de 
Stael,  iii.  6 

Eochefoucauld,  Cardinal  de  la,  his 
reduced  revenue  in  1790,  i.  215 

Eochefoucauld,  Due  dela,  assassination 
of  the,  ii.  148.  note 

Eochefoucauld,  Duchesse  de  la,  ii.   148 

Eodez,  Colbert,  bishop  of,  ii.  378,  379. 
His  letter  to  Miss  Berrj',  respecting 
her  edition  of  Madame  du  Deffand's 
Letters,  426 

Ecederer,  Comte  de,  iii.  82,  178,  187 

Eogers,  Samuel,  ii.  340,  445 

Roland,  Madame,  her  reflections  at  the 
age  of  twenty-three  compared  with 
those  of  Miss  Berry  at  twenty-two,  i. 
147 

Eomana,  the  Marquis  de  la,  ii.  440. 
First  to  suggest  the  arming  of  the 
Spanish  peasants  against  the  French, 
440.     His  death  and  character.  455 

Eomans,  town  of,  ii.  247.  Its  morals 
in  1803,  247 

Eome,  suburbs  of,  i.  55.  St  Peter's, 
at,  56-58.  Objects  of  interest  at, 
61.  Ancient  plan  of.  in  marble,  98. 
Palm  Sunday  and  Passion  Week  at, 
104-108.  Easter  Sunday  at,  110. 
Miss  Berry's  visit  to,  iii.  261.  St.  Pe- 
ter's, 26-3.  Antique  remains  in  Rome, 
277.  The  villas,  279.  Consternation 
in  Rome  at  affairs  in  Naples  in  1821, 
284.      The  Carnival  at,  288.      The 

[  Austrians  at,  290,  291.  Horse-race 
at,  294.  Illumination  of  St.  Peter's, 
299.  The  Vatican  by  torchlight,  301. 
The  Saturnalia  in  October,  323.  The 
Ghetto  at,  iii.  329.  New  cardinals 
in  1823,  331 

Eomilly,  Lady,  iii.  12 

Eomilly,  Sir  Samuel,  iii.  173 

Eomualdo,  St.,  church  of,  at  Rome,!.  98. 
Sacchi's  altar-piece  at,  98 

Eomulus  and  Eemus,  famous  bronze 
statue  of,  at  Eome,  i.  103 

Eookery,  the,  near  Dorking,  ii.  383 

Eos,  Lady  de,  409 

Eosa  Salvator,  his  Vulture  preying 
upon  Prometheus,  i.  332 

Eosanmofsky,  Count,  Eussian  Minister 
at  Naples,  i.  80 

Euscoe,  William,  notice  of.  ii.  78,  note. 
His  translation  of  Tansillo's  '  La  Ba- 
bia,'  78.  82.     At  Liverpool,  iii.  356 

Eospigliosi,  Palazzo,  at  Eome,  i.  65 

Ross,  town  of,  ii.  96 


SAV 

Eoss,  Mrs.,  ii.  330 

Eosslyn,  Lord,  ii.  370  ;  iii.  34 

Eotterdam,  i.  16 

Eoubillac,  Louis  Francois,  his  statue  of 

Newton  at  Cambridge,  ii.  397 
Eouen,  city  of,  i,  215.     The  Cathedral 

of.  215 
Eousseau,  Hume's  quarrel  with,  ii.  31. 
Walpole's  letter  to,  31.     His  tomb  in 
the  Pantheon,  203.     Compared  with 
Madame  de  Stael,  234 
Rouvray,  village  of,  ii.  206 
Roxburghe,  Duke,  his  library,  ii.  502 
Roy,  Antoine,  his  oratory,  iii.  220 
Royston,  Lord,  his  death,  ii.  348 
Rubens,  his  pictures  at  Antwerp,  i.  18. 
His  'Last  Judgment,'  21.     Those  at 
Rome,  65.     His  '  Romulus  and  Re- 
mus,' at  Rome,  71.     His  '  Four  Bur- 
gomasters' in  the  Palazzo  Pitti,  120. 
His  '  Head  of  Holofernes,'  at  Avignon. 
137. 
Rule,  Sir  William,  ii.  420 
Rumford,  Madame  de,  iii.  179 
Russell,    Lord    John,  at   Florence,    ii. 
146,   149,    151.     His  residence  with 
Professor  Playfair  in  Edinburgh,  474. 
His  tour  with  Professor  Playfair,  487 
Russell,  Lady,  her  Letters,  ii.  152,  502 
Russell,  Lord  William,  iii.  330 
Russia  at  the  end  of  the  last  century,  i. 

294 
Rusthall  Common,  near  Tunbridge,  ii. 

332 
Rutland,  Duchess  of,  and  her  Malvolio 

at  Ramsgate,  i.  441 
Rydal,  waterfall  at,  ii.  360 
Ryder,  Lady  Susan,  iii,  66 


OACCHI,  Andrea,  his  altar-piece  in 

*^     St.  Romualdo,  i.  98 

Saint  Val,  the  actor,  ii.  140 

Saleve,  Mont,  i.  129 

Sallenches,  town  of,  i.  29 

Samos,  ii.  517 

Sampieri,  Palazzo,  at  Bologna,  pictures 

in  the,  i.  51,  244 
Sandwich  Islands,  the  King  and  Queen 

of  the,  in  L(mdon,  iii.  353 
Sanezzaro,  Jacobo,  the  poet,  his  tomb, 

i.  87 
Sanscrit  literature,  specimen  of,  i.  489 
Sante,  the  composer,  at  Rome,  i.  68 
Santini,  M.,  his  villa  at  Rome,  i.  114 
Saone,  tir  boats  on  the,  i.  136 
Saumer,  town  of,  ii.  127 
Savile,  Lady,  ii.  272 
Savonna,  town  of,  iii.  135 


560 


INDEX. 


SAV 

Savoy,  cottages  and  cottagers  of,  i.  35. 

Koads  of,  in  1790,  226.     Echelles  de, 

iii.  106 
Saxe,Marechal,  his  monument  at  Stras- 
bourg, i.  26 
Saxe  Gotha,  Duke  of,  obtains  a  Garter, 

i.  263 
Scagliola  works  at  Florence,  iii.  151 
Scala  Santa,  tlie,  at  Rome,  i.  69 
Scarborough  Castle,  iii.  32 
Scarowsky,  Comte,  i.  114 
Schaffhausen,    vineyards   of,    ii.    958. 

Town  of,  358.    Falls  of  the  Rhine  at, 

358 
Schimmelpennick,  M.,   at   Amiens,    in 

1802,  ii.  130,  note 
Schlegel,  M.,  on  the  drama,  iii.  18 
Scipio  Barbatus,  tomb  of,  at  Rome,  i. 

101 
Scotch  hospitality,  iii.  35.     Dirt  of  the 

poor  people's  dwellings,  35 
Scott,  Miss,  her  fortune,  i.  419 
Scott,    Sir  Walter,  at  Minto,  ii.  472. 

His  wife,  378.      At  Miss  Berry's  at 

breakfast,  381.  His  Life  of  Swift,  iii. 34 
Scott,  Sir   William   (afterwards   Lord 

Stowell),  ii.  384 
Scott,  Hon.  Mrs.,  iii.  221 
Scotti,     Orazio,    Count    of    Montalbo, 

monument  of,  at  Piacenza,  i.  46 
Scotti,  Palazzo,  at  Piacenza,  i.  241 
'  Scribleriad,'  the,  i.  154,  jiote 
Scrivia  river,  i.  240 
Scudamore,  Miss  Fitzroy,  married    to 

the  Duke  of  Norfolk,  ii.  30 
Sebright,  Sir  John,  ii.  487 
Secchia,  the  river,  in  autumn,  i.  243 
Sechecon,  ii.  253 

Sedaine,  the  French  dramatist,  ii.  150 
Seine,  roads  along  the  banks  of  the,  i. 

215 
Selfi-hness,  story  respecting,  i.  184 
Selkirk,  Lord,  ii.  344 
Seltzer,  spring  of,  i.  24 
Selwyn,  George,  his  last  illness,  i.  281 
Sens,  cathedral  of,  ii.  206;  iii.  306 
Serapis,  temple  of,  at  Puzzuoli,  i.  88 
Sestie,  town  and  bay  of,  iii.  162 
Sesto  Calende,  visit  to,  iii.  164 
Seton,  Miss,  married  to  Mr.  Berry,  i.  2. 

Her  death,  2,  5 
Seton,  Miss  Bab.  (afterwards  Mrs.  Ban- 
nister), i.    156,  231.   233,    249.     Her 

verses  to  the  '  Tea  Caddy,'  157 
Seton,  Mrs.,  and  her  daughters,  i.  4 
Severus,  arch  of,  at  Rome,  i.  64,  100 
Severus, S.,  ancient  bronze  tigiire  of,  i.  11  ^i 
Sevit^nc,  Madame   de,  her  '  Letters,'  ii. 

100,  102,  239 


SMI 

Sevres  china,  in  1802,  ii.  141 

Sextus,  Caius,  tomb  of,  at  Rome,  i.  100 

Seymour,  Lieut.-Col.    Hugh  Henry,  i. 

475 
Seymour,  Lady  Horatia,  i.  475 
Seymour,  Admiral  Sir  George,  i.  475 
Seymour,  Lady  George,  i,  483 
Seymour.  Lord  Webb,  ii.  369,  380,  385. 

His  departure  for  Scotland,  394 
Shaftesbury,  Lady,  her   balls,  ii.  352, 

418 
Shankbury,  ii.  506 
Siiarpe,  Mr.,  ii.  344 
Sheffield,  Earl  of,  his  visit  to  Gibbon  at 

Lausanne,  i.  327.     His  '  Life  and  Mis- 
cellaneous Work  of  Gibbon,'  ii.  6 
Shelburne,  Lord,  as  prime  minister,  ii. 

58 
Sheridan,  Richard  Brinsley.at  Isleworth, 

i.  319;  ii.  346 
Sheridan,  Mrs.,  ii.  4S3,  484 
Sibyl,  the,  of  Domenichirio,  i.  117 
Sibyl's  Temple,  at  Tivuli,  i.  113 
Sicard,  the  Abbe,  his  institution  for  the 

deaf  and  dumb,  ii.   162.     Notice  of 

him,  162.  note 
Sicily,  earthquake  in,  i.  307 
Sicidons,  Mrs.,  i.  264.  296.    Her  illness, 

277.    Mrs.  Darner's  bust  of,  438.    At 

Broadstairs,  452.     Notice  of  her,  ii. 

89,  note.    At  Westbourne  Farm,  478. 

Her  farewell  to  the  stage,  501,  502 
Sienna,  i.  53 
Sierra  Morena,  i.  341.     Roads  through 

the,  337.     Beauty  of  the  scenery  in 

the,  337 
Sierra  Nevada,  the,  i.  340 
Sillery,  Madame  de,  i.  310,  412,  416. 

Execution  of,  416 
Simeon,  Comte  Joseph,  iii.  220.     Plis 

oratory,  220 
Simonetta,  Marchesa,  echo  at  the  house 

of  the,  i.  127 
Simplon    Pass,    the,  ii.    165.       Injuries 

done  to,  by  the  tempests  of  1834  and 

1839,  iii.  166,  note 
Sismondi,  M.  de,  and  his  wife,  iii.  342 
Sistiiie  Chapel,  the,  at  Konie.  i.  64.    The 

'Miserere'  in  the,  106,  107 
Skavronsky,  Madame,  i.  56,  57 
Skeftington,  Mr.  (afterwards  Sir  L.  St. 

Geor-e),  ii.  381,  382 
Smith,  Mr.  Vernon  (now  Lord  Lyveden), 

his  edition  of  Walpole's   Letters    to 

I^ady  Ossory,  ii.  67 
Smitii,Sir  Sidney,  his  career.  i>.  \OQ,noie 
Smith,    Rev.    Sydney,    at    KensiiiL'tou 

Palace  Chapel,  ii.  412,  500.    At  John 

Street  Chapel,  iii.  174.     Visit  to  him. 


INDEX. 


561 


SMI 

at  Foston,  357.  His  imitation  from 
Virgil's  sixth  eclogue,  358.  His  Re- 
ceipt for  a  Salad,  470,  471 

Smith,  James,  and  his  brother,  iii.  61 

Smythe,  Mr.,  Professor  of  Modern  His- 
tory at  Cambridge,  iii.  173 

Solander,  Dr.,  his  writings  on  Natur.il 
History,  i.  163 

Soleure,  town  of,  ii.  263,  269 

Solfaterra,  ancient  volcano  at,  i.  89 

Sombreuii,  M.  de,  story  of,  i.  472 

Somers,  Lord,  of  Castleditch,  ii.  95 

Somerton,  Lady,  i.  480 

Somerviile,  Dr.,  his  '  History  of  Great 
Britain  during  the  Reign  of  Queen 
Anne,'  ii.  83 

Sompting,  village  of,  ii.  536 

Sophia  of  Gloucester,  Princess,  ii.  327. 
At  Kensington,  40.5,  409.  At  Black- 
heath,  488,  489 

Sotheby,  William,  his  '  Battle  of  the 
Nile,'  ii.  86,  87.  Notice  of  him,  86, 
note 

Sotheby,  Mrs.,  ii.  454 

Souterrains  at  Bex,  i.  133 

Spain,  story  of  the  King  of,  i.  181. 
The  contemplated  war  with,  in  1790, 

195.  The  Prime  Minister  of,  stabbed, 

196.  Pacification  with,  2.)0,  252. 
Towns  of,  336,  337.  Roads  through 
the  Sierra  Morena,  337,  338.  Beau- 
ties of  Andalusia,  339.  Discomfort 
ofthe  inns  of  Spain,  339.  Personal  ap- 
pearance of  Spaniards,  339.  Spanish 
hospitality,  340 

Spencer,   Dowager   Lady,  ii.    93.     At 
Nuneham,   93.      Her  translation    of 
the  end  of  one  of  Mason's  sonnets.  95 
Spencer,  W.  R.,  his  prologue  to   Miss 
Berry's  'Fashionable  Friends,' ii.  195, 
note 
Spencer,  Mrs.,  ii.  386 
Spencer,  Lavinia  Lady,  ii.  467 
Spezia,  gulf  of,  iii.  14  2 
Spires,  town  of,  i,  26 
Spode's  pottery,  ii.  356 
'  Spring,  The  Joys  of,'  Walpole's  song 
'        of,  ii.  62 
•St.  James's  Palace,  fire  in,  ii.  375 
St.  John,  John,  his  death,  i.  397 
Stadion,  Count,  i.  352 
Stael,  Madame  de,  in  1784,  i.  134.    Her 
marriage,   147.      In  Paris,  in   1791, 
362.     Her  father  and  husband,  362. 
Change  in  her  manner  to  Miss  Berry, 
370.     '"'isit  to,  in   1802,  ii.  145.     A 
diimer  at  her  house,  170.      Concert 
there,    182.      Her   '  Delphine,'   233. 
Compared  with  Rousseau,  234.     In 

VOL.  III.  0 


STR 

London,  in  1813,  536,  538.    Her  pro- 
posed works,  539.  540.    People  at  her 
house,  543.    AtMiddleton,545.  Com- 
pany at  her  house,  546;  iii.  4,  5.  Her 
'  L'Allemagne,'  549.    Miss  Berry  and 
Lord  Byron's  view  of  lier  character, 
iii.  13     Her  illness,  119.    And  death, 
139 
Stael,  Auguste  de,  iii.  342 
Standish,  Sir  Frank,  ii.  398 
Stanhope,  Charles    third   Ear],  i.  251, 
252.     His  sympathy  with  the  French 
revolationists,  201.      His  speech  on 
French  affairs,  259 
Stanhope,  Louisa   Grenville,  Countess, 

i.  304 
Stanhope,  Mrs.,  i.  457 
Stanhope,  Lady  Constance,  ii.  272 
Stanhope,  Lady  Hester,  ii.  522 
Stanley,    Sir    Jolm    (afterwards   Lord 

Stanley  of  Aiderley),  ii.  378 
Stafford,  Lady,  her  great  assemblies,  ii. 

478 
Starcmberg,  Prince,  ii.  19.  At  Tun- 
bridge,  331.  In  London,  334,  335. 
A  rntsse  de  minuit  at  his  house,  337. 
Leaves  England,  338.  Again  in  Eng- 
land in  disguise,  ii.  378,  379.  At 
Genoa,  iii.  163 
Statterheim,  General,  at  Rome,  iii.  289, 

290 
Stefano    Rotondo,   St.,   church    of,   at 

Rome,  i.  99 
Sterne's  'Tristram  Shandy,' Miss  Berry's 

remarks  on,  ii.  80 
Sterziiig,  town  of,  355 
Stevens,  Mr.  Walpole's  remark  on  his 
edition  of  Shak.'peare's  works,  i.  367 
Stockacli,  town  of,  i.  358 
Stolberg.  Louisa  Maximiiiana  de.  Coun- 
tess of  Albany,  i.  117.     In  England, 
303,  305,  306.     See  Albany 
Stoneland  Park,  ii.  332 
Stoneleigh    Abbey  and  Park,  ii.   433 
Value  of  the   timber   of  the   I^^igh 
estates,  434 
Stopford,  Lord,  his  mnrriairc  with  the 
Duke  of  Buceleugh's  daughter,  i.  234 
Stotheim,  the  Comtesse,  ii.  280—288 
Stowe  in  1823,  iii.  347 
Strafford,  the  la.'^t  Wentworth  Earl  of, 

his  death,  i.  289 
Strasbourg,  town  of.  i.  26 
Strathaven,  Lord,  married  to  Miss  Cope, 

i.  298 
Strawberry  Hill,  the  Miss  Berrys'  first 
visit  to,    i.    153.     Horace  Walpole's 
lines   on    the    occasion,     153.     The 
printing  press  at,  153,  172.     Visitors 

0 


562 


INDEX. 


STR 

to,  185,  396,  482.  Walpolc's  in- 
scription of  the  Catalogue  of,  to  the 
Miss  Berrys,  193.  The  place  in  the 
summer'  o'f  1790,  195.  Walpole's 
love  of  the  place,  197.  Hospitahties 
at,  202.  Its  attractions,  439.  Private 
theatricals  at.  in  1800,  ii.  113,  116. 
Visit  of  the  Princess  of  Wales  to,  422. 
Given  up  by  Mrs.  Darner,  465.  Ca- 
talofrue  and  sale  of  the  collection, 
iii.  476 

Strawberry  Hill,  Little,  Miss  Berry  at, 
i.  375.  Let  to  Dr.  Bell,  ii.  421.  In 
January,  451.  Let  for  a  twelve- 
month, 475.  Let  on  lease  to  Alder- 
man Wood,  ii.  542.  Occupied  by 
Admiral  Bowen,  iii.  172.  Its  state 
in  1818,  172 

Straw  hats,  made  between  Florence  and 
Leghorn,  i.  122 

Strozzi  Palace,  at  Florence,  Titian's 
picture  of  a  child  in  the,  i.  332 

Stuart,  Lady  Jane,  ii.  29,  30 

Stuart.  General,  his  capture  of  Minorca, 
ii.  79 

Stuart,  Charles  (afterwards  Lord  Stuart 
de  Rothsay),  ii.  390,  403,  404,  409, 
464.  Marries  Lady  Elizabeth  Yorke, 
iii.  71 

Studeo  Publici,  at  Naples,  i.  87 

Stumpety  Stumpv,  i.  397 

Stupinigi,  the  hunt  at,  i.  237,  238.  The 
palace  at,  238 

Stutgard,  regiment  of  giants  at,  i.  351 

Sudeley  Castle,  tomb  of  Catherine  Parr 
at,  i.  480 

Summer,  the,  of  1790,  i.  198 

Sunday  dances  at  Rome,  i.  94 

Supper,  the  Last,  by  Leonardo  da 
Vinci,  at  Milan,  i.  127 

Susa,  town  of,  i.  128,  228.  The  arch  of 
triumph  at,  228 

Sussex,  Duke  of,  at  Freemason's  Hall, 
iii,  23 

Sussex,  the  Duchess  of,  iii.  32 

Sutton,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  i.  473,  Lord 
Orford  at  their  houses,  4  75 

Sutton,  Sir  Thomas,  ii.  396 

Sweden,  King  of,  his  letter  to  his  minis- 
ter in  Paris,  i.  327 

Sweden,  Eugenie,  queen  of,  iii.  199 

Swinburn,  Mrs  ,  i.  303 

Swinburn,  Mr.,  his  'Travels  through 
Spain,'  i.  338 

Switzerland,  democracy  in,  i.  327.  The 
post  in,  in  1818,  ii.  166.  The  French 
in,  261-264 

Synagogue,  the  Jewish,  Duke's  Place, 
iii.  61 


TIT 

nnABOR     and     Pipe,  the   ladies    so 
-^      called  by  Lord  Orford,  i.  412 
Tain,  village  of,  ii.  211 
Talbot,  Lord,  his  seat  at  Ingcstre,  ii.  357 
Talleyrand,  Madame  de  Stael's  passion 

for,  i,  370.     In  Paris  in  1816,  iii.  77, 

83.     Conversation    with    him,    183. 

In  1822,  315 
Tallien,  Madame,  iii.  221 
Talma,  the    actor,  ii.   189;  iii.  17,  74, 

317,     His    part   of  '  Manlius,'    167. 

His  sister,  Madame  Brouard,  169 
Tancred,  Lady,  ii,  395 
Tansillo.  Luigi,  Roscoe's  translation  of 

'  The  Nm-se'  of,  ii.  78 
Tantallon  Castle,  iii.  33 
Tarare,  mountain  of.  i.  222 
Taro  river,  i.  46,     Bridge  over  the,  46, 

note 
Tarpeian  Rock,  at  Rome,  i.  100 
'  Tea  Caddy,'  Miss  Bab.  Seton's  verses 

to  the,  i.  157 
Temple,  Hon.  Fanny,  iii.  61 
Templetown,  Lady,  iii.  67 
Terni,  the  cascade  near,  i.  118 
Teniers,  his  pictures  at  Cassel,  ii.  285 
Terracina,  town  of,  i.  75 
Testaccio,  Mons,  at  Rome,  i.  100 
Tewkesbury  Abbey  Church,  iii.  366 
Theatre  at  Parma,  i.  48.     At  Bologna, 

51.    Those  at  Bruxelles,  19,  20,     In 

Rome,    65.     At   Naples,    76,  78, 82. 

In  Paris  in  1790,  217 
Theatricals,  amateur,  in  1790,  i.  206 
Thelwall,  Mr.,  at  Lady  Cork's,  ii.  478 
'  Theysay,    Mrs.,'  Truth's  toadeater,  i. 

487 
Thompson,  Sir  Charles  Hotham,  i.  296 
Thompson,  Thomas,  ii.  372 
Tliompson's  Nursery,   at  Mile-end,  ii, 

385 
Thornton,  Mr.  Henry,  ii.  342.     Votes 

against  Ministers,  448.     His  library, 

489 
Throckmorton,  Mr.  William,  ii.  201 
Thunderstorm,  a,  in  1810,  ii.  423 
Tighe,  Mrs.,  party  at  her  house,  ii,  484- 
Time  gliding  on.  Miss  Berry's  thoughts 

on,  li.  407 
Tintern,  village  of,  ii,  97 
Tippoo  Saib,  death  of,  ii.  99 
Titian,  portraits  by,  in  the  Palazzo  Bar- 

berini,  i.  114,    Ilis  Venus  and  Adonis 

in   the  Palazzo  Colonna.    116,     His 

Ganymede,   116.      His   Luther   and 

Calvin,  116.  His  portrait  of  Paul  III., 

120,     His  Venus,  120 
Titus,  Arch  of,  i.  64,  99 
Titus,  Baths  of,  i.  96,  160;  iii.  269 


INDEX. 


563 


TIV 

Tivoli,  i.   112.     Villa  cT  Este  at,  112. 

Temple  of  Vesta  at,  iii.  299 
Tone,  Theobald    Wolf,   his   trial   and 

death,  ii.  73 
Tonelli,  M.,  iii.  1.50 
Tooke,  Home,  his  revolutionary  speech 
on  the  hustings,i.  197.     His  libel  on 
the  House  of  Commons,  284 

Toro  Farnese,  the,  i.  74 

Torquay,  iii.  459 

Tory  country  gentlemen  in  the  last  cen- 
tury, i.  8 

Tossia,  temple  of  the  goddess,  near 
Tivoli,  i.  113 

Tournon,  town  of,  ii.  211.  Chateau  of 
the  Dues  de  Soubise  at,  211.  Col- 
lege of  the  Jesuits  at,  211 

Tours,  valley  and  village  of,  i.  133 

Tourves,  town  of,  ii.  217 

Towey,  Mr.  Commissioner,  ii.  420 

Townley  Marbles,  the,  ii.  345 

Townshend,  Charles,  ii.  28,  30.  Wal- 
pole's  account  of  Charles  Townshend's 
speech,  33 

Townshend,  George,  ii.  28,  30 

Townshend,  Lord,  ii.  30 

Townshend,  Lady,  ii.  28,  30 

Traineaux,  at  Stutgard,  i.  351 

Trajan's  Column,  at  Rome,  i.  65 

Tramazzini,  the  singer,  ii.  467 

Travellers,  dangers  to  which  they  were 
liable  in  France,  in  1791,  i.  366,  367. 
Crossing  the  Channel  at  the  end  of 
the  last  century,  375.  Mifs  Berry's 
remarks  on  the  advantages  of  travel, 
ii.  69,  70 

Trebia,  the  river,  at  Piacenza,  i.  240 

Tremazzani,  the  singer,  ii.  498 

Tremouille,  Duchesse  de  la,  i.  405. 
In  London,  383 

Trent,  city  of,  i.  355 

Tresham,  Henry,  the  artist,  at  Rome,  i. 
103 

Trevor,  Mr.  John,  i.  39,  238,  239 

Trevor,  Mrs.,  i.  238,  239 

Trimmer,  Miss,  ii.  94 

Trinity  (college,  Cambridge,  library  of, 
ii.  402 

Troyes,  town  of,  i.  360.  Cathedral  of, 
360 

Tuileries,  gardens  of  the,  ii.  145.  Mag- 
nificence of  the  First  Consul's  apart- 
ments, 163.     Visit  to  the,  iii.  100 

Tullins,  village  of,  ii.  247 

Tunbridge  Wells,  the  rocks  ia  the 
neighbourhood  of,  ii.  330.  Illu- 
mination at,  505.  Tunbridge  Castle, 
486 

Turin,  city  of,  i.  37.     Palace  and  thea- 

o 


VAU 

tres  of,  38,  39.     The  Valentino   at, 

127.     The  great  opera  house  at,  128. 

Prince  Carignano's  theatre  at,   128, 

236.     Hotels  at,  228.     The   city  in 

1816,  iii.  107 
Turner,  Anne,   ii.    437;   in.   361,    371, 

372 
Tuscany,  disturbances  in,  iii.   1790,  i. 

198,  201.     Grand  Duke  of,  iii.  143 
Tusculum  of  Tully,  the,  i.  115 
Twiss,  Horace,  ii.  501 
Tylney,  Lord,  i.  85.     At  Naples,  76 
Tyrol,  beauty  of  the,  i.  356,  357 
Tyrwhit,  Mr.,  his  death,  i.  47 1 


TTDNEY,  Mrs.,  i.  208,  210 
^   Udney,  Mr.,  at  Teddington,  i.  47G 
Ullswater,  ii.  363 
Ulm,  town  of,  i.  357.     The  cathedral 

of,  357 
Utrecht,  MSS.  in  Paris  relating  to  the 

Peace  of,  iii.  170 


"yACCINO,  Campo,  at  Rome,  i.  64 
'     Vado,  town  of,  iii.  135 

Val,  Mdlle.  St.,  the  actress,  i.  222 

Valence,  Gothic  church  at,  ii.  246 

Valetort,  Lady,  i.  201,  321.  Illness  of 
her  daughter,  456 

Valiere,  Duchesse  de  la,  kept  prisoner  in 
her  own  house,  i.  398 

Valladolid,  visit  to,  i.  342 

Vallier,  St.,  i.  146 

Valombrosa,  Walpole's  remarks  on,  i. 
367 

Vandeveldt,  his  pictures  at  Cassel,  ii. 
285 

Vandj'ck,  his  Dead  Christ,  at  Antwerp, 
i.  18.  His  portrait  of  a  Dutchman  in 
the  Pitti  Palace,  120,  And  of  a  boy 
of  the  House  of  Medici,  120 

Vanhove,  Mdlle.,  the  actress,  ii.  140 

Vanneck,  Miss,  i.  47 1 
■  Varley,  John,  the  artist,  ii.  378 

Vatican,  the  Stanze  di  Rafaeili  in  the, 
i.  62.  Library  of  the,  64,  105.  Me- 
dals in  the,  105 

Vauban,  his  fortifications  at  Neuve  Eri- 
sac,  i.  27 

Vaublanc,  M.  de,  his  escapes,  iii.  81 

Vaucluse,  fountain  of,  i.  137 

Vaud,  canton  of,  ii.  261 

Vaudemont,  Princesse  de,  her  villa  on 
the  Seine,  iii.  100 

Vauxhall,  at  Bruxelles,  i.  19 

o  2 


564 


IXDEX. 


VAU 

Vanxliall  Gardens,  fete  at,  in  1813,  ii. 

536 
Vauxliall  Bridge,  iii.  103 
Vega,  Don  —  de,  ii.  354 
Velleia,  ancient  city  of,  i.  47.  Antiqui- 
ties found  at,  47,  48 
Velvet-weaving  at  Lyons,  i.  135 
Vendas  Novas,  i.  336 
Vendee,  Ln,  defeat  of  the  royalists   at, 

i.  410 
Venus  Callapyge,  the,  at  Rome,  i.  74. 

Temjile    of    Venus    and   Cupid    at 

Rome,  i    95.  Tiie  Venus  and  Adonis 

of  Titian,  in  the  I'alazzo  Colonna,  i. 

116 
Vergenncs,  M.  de,  his  commercial  treaty 

with  England,  ii.  16 
Veronese,   Paul,  a  portrait  by,  in  the 

Palazzo  Pitti,  i.    120.     His  Capo  d' 

Opera,  at  Genoa,  125 
Versailles,  visit  to,  iii.  98 
Verus,  Lucius,  statue  of,  at  Rome,  i. 

Ill 
Vesoul,  town  of,  i.  359 
Vesta,  tem])!e  of,  at  Rome,  i.  100 
Vestris,  Madame,  wife  of  Paco  Vestrls, 

i.  134 
Vestris,  Auguste,  the  dancer,  i.  288  ;  ii. 

138, 174 
Vesuvius,  streams  of  lava  from,  i.    83, 

".'1.      Sir  W.    Cell's  account  of  the 

erupti(Mi  of,  iii.  325 
Vcvay,  i.  129 

Vice,  Walfiole's  remarks  on,  i.  165 
Victor  Emmanuel,  King  of    Sardinia, 

his  abdication,  iii.  304 
Victoria,  Queen,  iii.  456 
Vienne.  i.  136;  ii.  210,  211 
Vignola,   G,  Ii.  da,  his  Church  of  St. 

Augustine    at  Piacenza,  i.  46,  241. 

His  villa  at  Rome,  iii.  276 
Villebaque,  Madame  de,  i.  204 
Villegagnon-Wal])ole,   Madame  de,    i. 

204,210 
Villole,  le  Comte  Joseph  de,  iii.  184, 

219 
Villequier,  Due  de,  in  England,  i.  303 
Villiers,  Hon.  Mrs.,  ii.  345 
Vincenncs,  cliateau  of,  iii.  95 
Vinci,  Leonardo  da,  his  Last  Supper,  at 

Milan,  i.  127 
Vine,  cultivation  of  the,  near  St.  Jean 

de  Maurienne,  i.  129 
Vineyards  near  Bonn,  i.  22.     Of  Mont 

Melian,  35.    From  Parma  to  Modena, 

i  48.     On  the  lava  at  Pompeii,  82. 

Near  Naoles,  86 
Virgil,  tomb  of,  i.  86.     The  MS.  of,  in 

the  Mcdiccan  Library,  331 


WAL 

Visconti,  Madame,  ii.  176 

Vitellius,  bust  of,  at  Parma,  i.  47 

Vittoria  in  Biscay,  i.  343.  Tlie  battle 
of,  ii.  536.  Panorama  of  the  battle, 
iii.  27 

Vittorio  Amedeo  IIL,  King  of  Sardinia, 
i.  238 

Voghera,  town  of,  i.  240 

Volcanoes,  craters  of  old,  near  Naples, 
i.  80,  81.  An  ancient  crater  at  Sol- 
faterra,  i.  89 

Volconsky,  Prince,  iii.  275 

Volconsky,  Princess,  iii.  274,  Her  re- 
citations, 274,  275 

Voltaire,  his  influence  in  tlie  last  cen- 
tury, i.  7.  Tomb  of,  in  the  Pantheon, 
ii.  203.  Inscription  on  it,  203,  rtote. 
His  mistress,  Madame  de  Chatelet, 
iii.  371 

Vyse,  Dr.,  Bishop  of  Peterborough, 
anecdote  of,  ii.  328 


Tl/'ABERN,  village  of,  ii.  282 
'  '     Walcheren  expedition,  ii.  427 

Waldegrave,  Earl  of,  i.  172 

Waldegrave,  Laura  Countess  of,  i.  172, 
409 

Waldegrave,  Dowager  Countess  of,  mar- 
ried to  the  Duke  of  Gloucester,  i.  188, 
note 

Waldegrave,  Lady  Elizabeth,  i.  299 

Wales,  George,  Prince  of,  with  Mrs. 
Fitzherbert  at  Richmond,  i.  260. 
His  extravagance,  286.  His  illness, 
303.  His  convalescence,  304.  Sworn 
as  Regent,  ii.  463.  At  Lady  Hert- 
ford's, 471.  And  at  Lady  Derby's, 
471.  At  Devonshire  House,  4  79. 
His  palace  at  Brighton,  490.  His 
letter  to  the  Duke  of  York,  493. 
At  the  Ancient  Music,  496.  At  the 
Earl  of  Hardwicke's,  504.  His  con- 
duct to  Miss  Mercer,  505.  At  the 
Opera,  5 

Wales,  the  Princess  of,  her  arrival  in 
London,    4  61.       At   Mr.  Hope's,  ii. 

379,  380.     Her  personal  appearance, 

380.  At  Lady  Glenbervie's,  380. 
At  Mrs.  Fordyce's,  383.  Her  visit 
to  Strawberry  Hill,  388,  422.  Miss 
Berry's  opinion  of  her,  389.  The 
boy  Austen,  whom  she  brought  up, 
389.  At  Kensington,  404,405.  Din- 
ner and  assembly  given  by  her,  405. 
Her  description  ot  Ham  House,  423. 
At  Kensington,  425.  Her  k'tter  to 
Miss  Berry,  and  Miss  Berry's  ariswer 
to   her,   444,  445.     Pier   position  in 


INDEX. 


565, 


1811,  478,  479.  At  Blacklieath,  479, 
48S,  492,  499,  5U3.  Her  conversa- 
tion with  Miss  Berry,  47;).  At  Ken- 
sington, 479.  Her  rapid  toilette,  49  . 
At  Mr.  Anfjerstein's  and  at  the 
Duchess  of  Brunswick's,  493.  Her 
visit  to  ]\Iiss  Berry  in  North  Audley 
Street,  496.  Her  despondency,  496. 
Takes  the  Imperial  gas  at  Sir  H. 
Davy's,  .500.  Her  conversations  with 
Miss  Berry  on  her  position,  479,  488, 
492,  499,  503,  503.  Her  letter,  529. 
Her  reccjition  of  Miss  Berry  at  Bhtck- 
heath,  530.  Address  of  the  city  of 
London,  532.  At  tlie  Opera,  535. 
Her  position  in  1813,  ii.  539,  546.  At 
Connaught  Place,  544,  546  ;  iii.  6. 
Her  letter  to  the  Queen,  25.  To 
Lord  Castlereagh,  31.  And  to  the 
Speaker,  31.  Determines  to  leave 
England,  33.  In  the  Mediterranean, 
45-47.  Her  stay  at  Geneva,  224. 
Proceedings  against  her,  227.  Her 
return  to  England,  235 

Wales,  South,  distinctive  characteristics 
of,  ii.  98 

Walkinshaw,  Mrs.,  i.  404 

"Wallace,  Lady,  her  brutality  to  Lady 
Dashwood,  i.  427 

Waller,  Sir  Wathen,  his  collection  of 
Sevres  china  at  Twickenham,  iii.  354 

■\Valpole,  Horace  (afterwards  Earl  of 
Orford),  makes  the  Miss  Berrys'  ac- 
quaintance, i.  L50.  His  letters  {see 
Letters).  His  lines  on  the  Miss 
Berrys'  visit  to  Strawbei-ry  Hill,  153. 
Miss  M.  Berry's  verses  aiidressed  to 
him,  1.55.  His  answer  and  her  reidy, 
155,  156.  His  '  A))oh)gy  for  her  pale- 
ness,' 156.  His  '  lieminiscences  of 
the  Court  of  George  I.  and  II.,'  158. 
His  remarks  on  Darwin's  '  Botanic 
Garden,'  161.  And  on  Hannah 
More's  poem  of  '  Bonner's  Ghost,' 
172.  His  epitaph  on  Lady  Dysart, 
190.  His  accident  at  Hampton  Court 
Green,  i.  191.  His  inscription  of  the 
Catalogue  of  Strawberry  Hill  to  the 
Miss  Berrys,  193.  His  'Koyal  and 
Noble  Authors,'  208.  His  friendship 
for  the  Miss  Berrys,  213.  His  fears 
for  their  safety  on  the  Continent,  247, 
et  seq.  His  attacks  of  gout,  280.  His 
growing  infirmities,  283.  His  'Gun- 
niiighead,'  284.  Improved  state  of 
his  health,  291.  His  self-sacrifice, 
293.  His  repugnance  to  Dr.  John- 
son, 305.  Attacked  with  rheumatism, 
314.     lieturn  of  the  gout,  315.     His 


WAL 

mistake  with  the  medicine,  317. 
Eobbed  by  his  footman  John,  371. 
Attacked  by  erysipelas,  371.  Suicide 
of  his  footman,  372.  Succeeds  to  the 
earldom  of  Orford,  376.  His  vexa- 
tion at  certain  newspaper  r  ports  re- 
specting Miss  Berry  and  him,  378. 
His  description  of  Miss  Berry  and 
her  sister,  380.  His  'Epi  aphium  vivi 
Auctoris,'  380.  His  parody  of  the 
Creed  on  the  atrocities  of  the  French 
Revolution,  381.  Miss  Berry's  letter 
to  him  respecting  tlieir  i'riendship, 
384.  His  eulogy  of  Queen  Marie 
Antoinette,  407.  His  lines  to  his  pen, 
on  the  cessation  of  his  correspondence 
with  Miss  Berry,  429.  His  two  frag- 
ments on  the  life  and  character  of 
Marshal  Conway,  463.  _His  serious 
indisposition,  ii.  10-12.  His  sym- 
pathy with  his  friends,  13.  Dispersion 
of  them,  15.  His  last  letter  to  Miss 
Berry,  16.    His  last  illness  and  death, 

19.  Was  he  a  lover  of  Miss  Berry  ? 

20.  His  parody  on  Addison's  Travels, 
23.  His  account  of  Charles  Towiis- 
hend's  wonderful  speech,  33.  Death 
of  his  brother,  36.  His  explanation 
of  a  letter  he  sent  to  the  Rev.  W. 
Mason,  39.  His  plan  for  inspiring 
patriotism,  41.  His  office  in  the  Ex- 
chequer, 43.  His  remarks  on  the 
Chatterton  controversy,  44.  His '  De-. 
tached  Thoughts,'  46.  His '  Thoughts 
on  Government,'  51.  His  plan  for  en- 
couraging painting,  53.  His 'Thoughts 
on  the  Reign  of  George  III.,'  65. 
His  life  of  Rene  of  Anjou,  King  of 
Naples,  60.  His  song  of '  The  Joys 
of  Spring,'  62.  His  verses  to  the 
Hon.  H.  Conway,  63.  His  parody  . 
on  Lord  Bolingbroke's  lines  on  May- 
nard,  64.  Mr.  Roscoe's  view  of  his 
character,  431.  His  letters  in  Miss 
Berry's  possession,  iii.  350.  His  Let- 
ters to  Sir  Horace  Maan,  edited  by 
Lord  Dover,  385 

Walpole,  Sir  Robert,  his  daughter  by 
Miss  Sherret,  i.  204 

Walpole,  Lady,  story  of,  and  the  bugles, 
i.  285 

Walpole,  Mr.,  English  minister  at  Lis- 
bon, i.  271 

Walpole,  Mr.  Thomas,  and  his  French 
wife,  i.  204,  210 

'  Walpoliana,'  Miss  Berry's  character  of 
the  work,  ii.  108 

Walsingham,  Mrs.,  i.  175 

Walter,  Mr.,  editor  of  the  '  Times,'  i. 


566 


INDEX. 


WAR 

465.     His  house  near  Twickenham, 
ii.  538 
"Ward,  Hon.  J.  W.,  ii.  442,  445,  485. 
At  Kensington,  543.     His  illness  in 
Paris,  iii.  317 
Warren,  Sir  George,  i.  56 
Warren,  Miss,  her  novel  '  Conrade,  or 

the  Gamester,'  ii.  347 
Warrington,  town  of,  ii.  357 
Warton,  his  criticism  on  Pope,  ii.  87 
Warwick  Castle,  visit  to,  ii.  316.     Ball 

at,  in  1823,  iii.  348 
Warwick  Church,  ii.  435.     Tombs  in, 

435 
Waterloo,  battle  of,  iii.  61.    The  eagles 
and  flags  taken  at,  69.     Visit  to  the 
battle-field,  iii.  313 
Waterloo  Bridge,  iii.  103 
Watier  Club,  masked  ball  of  the,  iii.  30 
Watson,  Mr.,  the  surgeon,  i.  280 
Webster,  Lady,  illtreated  by  the  French, 

i.  325 
Wedgewood,  Josiah,  his   earthenware, 

ii.  329 
Weissemberg,  storming  of  the  lines  of, 

i.  410 
Wellesley  Pole,  Mrs.  (afterwards  Lady 

Maryborough),  ii.  502 
Wellington,  Lord  (afterwards  Duke  of), 
at  Marshal  Beresford's,  ii.  439.     His 
celebrated  lines  at  Lisbon,  440,  441. 
At  Santarem,  463.     His  victory  .at 
Salamanca,  505.      And  at  Vittoria, 
ii.  536.     His  further  successes,  iii.  1. 
In  Paris,  16.     At  Lady  Coke's,  30. 
His  victory  at  Waterloo,  61.     Miss 
Berry's    conversation    with   him    in 
Paris,   78.      His  answer   respecting 
Waterloo,  79.     His  residence  at  the 
Elysee  Bourbon,  79.     In  Paris,  168. 
At  Calais,  in  1823, 345.     Summoned 
to  form  a  cabinet,  437 
Wellington,  Lady,  ii.  506 
Wendys,  manor-house  of  the,  ii.  401. 
Monuments  of  them  in  Haslingfield 
Church,  401 
Wentworth  Castle,  visit  of  the  Prince 
of  Wales  and  the  Duke  of  York  to, 
i.  187,  188.     Horace    Walpole's    de- 
scription   of  it,   189.      Miss  Berry's 
visit  to,  iii.  433 
Wentworth,  Lady  Charlotte,  at  Straw- 
berry Hill,  i.  393 
West,  Lady  Cecilia,  i.  169.     Notice  of 

her,  i.  169,  note 
West,  Hon.  Septimus,  his  regard  for  the 
Miss  Berrys,  i.  318.     His  death,  409 
West,  Benjamin,  his  works,  ii.  476 
Westbourue  Farm,  ii.  478 


YOR 

Westmorland,  Lady,  her  death,  i.  415. 
Her  fortune,  417.  Enormous  fortune 
of  her  eldest  daughter,  419.  At  the 
Villa  Niollis,  iii.  293 

Whale,  an  enormous,  at  Dover,  ii.  199 

Whitbread,  Mr.,  ii.  338;  iii.  22,  23 

White,  Miss,  ii.  484:  iii.  49 

Wickes,  Mr.,  and  his  wife,  i.  187, 192 

Wigan,  town  of,  ii.  357 

Wilberforce,  William,  his  'Practical 
View,'  and  Mr.  Belsham's  strictures 
on  it,  ii.  85 

Wilkes,  Miss,  i.  326 

Wilkie,  David,  his  pictures  in  the  Ex- 
hibition in  1809,  ii.  382. 

Wilmot,  Mr.  (afterwards  Sir  Kobert 
Wilmot  Horton),  ii.  431;  iii.  6.  Mrs. 
Wilmot's  tragedy  of  '  Ina,'  48 

William  IV.  compels  the  minister  to 
resign,  iii.  436.  His  proposed  monu- 
ment to  Mrs.  Jordan,  463,  464 

Williams,  Miss  Helen,  i.  319  ;  ii.  432 

Williamshohe,  near  Cassel,  ii.  285 

Wilson,  Sir  Robert,  at  Kensington,  ii. 
410.  Notice  of  him,  410,  no<e.  His 
trial  in  Paris  for  high  treason,  iii. 
73,93 

Wimpole,  the  library  at,  ii.  402.  The 
garden  at,  446.     The  school  at,  527 

Wincanton,  iii.  458 

Windham,  Mr.,  ii.  326,  384 

Wisdom,  Walpole's  Remarks  on,  i.  164 

Wishaw,  Mr.,  iii.  141 

Woburn  Abbey,  visit  to,  ii.  324 

Wolsey,  Cardinal,  Miss  Agnes  Berry's 
picture  of,  i,  213 

Woolstonecroft,  Mary,  her  '  Thoughts 
on  the  Education  of  Daughters,'  ii.  91 

Wooton  Park,  Sir  Frederick  Evelyn's 
place  at,  ii.  383 

Wooton,  iii.  366 

'  World,'  the,  i.  154,  note 

Wraxall's  '  Memoirs,'  ii.  72,  74 

Wurmser,  General,  his  success,  i.  403. 
Storming  of  the  lines  of,  410.     His 
victories,  487 
Wurtemburg,  duchy  of,  threatened  by 
the  French,  ii.  1 1 

Wurtemburg,  Duke  of,  his  marriage 
with  the  Princess  Royal  of  England, 
ii.  11 

Wye,  the  river,  ii.  96 


TTORK,  Duke  of,  at  York  races  and 

-•-     Wentworth   House,   i.    187.      At 

Berlin,  303.     His  proposed  marriage 

with  the  Princess  of  Prussia,  320, 326. 

In  Holland,  441  ;   ii.  100.     Charges 


INDEX. 


TOR 


against  him  concerning  Mrs.  Clark, 

ii.  376,  377 
York,  Cardinal,  his  medal,  i.  320 
York,  Duchess  of,  i.  386.     Her  visit  to 

Strawberry  Hill,  386,  388 
Yorke,  Hon.  Charles,  his  death,  ii.  417 
Yorke,  Sir  J.,  in  the  Tagus,  ii.  464 
Yorke,  Lady  Elizabeth,  ii,  492.  Married 

to  Sir  Charles  Stuart,  iii.  71 


Young,  the  actor 

494;  iii.  170 
Ypres,  iii.  377 


567 

ZUY 
His  acting,  ii.  412  , 


r^ANTE,  ii.  511 

^    Zeneide,  Princesse,  her  novel,  iii. 

344 
Zuylin,  Comte,  iii.  203 


THE   END. 


LONDON 

PKINIED    BT    BPOTTISWOODE    AND     CO. 

NEW-STEEET  SQUARE 


39  Paterxoster  Eotv,  E.G. 
London,  July  1865. 


GENERAL  LIST  OF  WOEKS, 


NEW  BOOKS  AND   NEW  EDITIONS, 

PUBLISHia}  BT 

Messrs.  LOI&MAIS,  QEEEI,  READER,   and  DYER. 


Arts,  Manufactures,  &c 

Astronomy,  Meteorology,  Popular 
Geography,  &e 

Biography  and  Memoirs  

Chemistry,  Medicine,  Surgery,  and 
the  Allied  Sciences 

Commerce,  Navigation,  and  Mercan- 
tile Affairs     

Criticism,  Philology-,  &c 

Fine  Arts  and  Illustrated  Editions 

General  and  School  Atlases 

Historical  Works 

Index  21- 


11 

7 
3 

9 

18 

4 

10 

19 

1 

■24 


Kno-svledgb  for  the  Young 20 

Miscellaneous  and  Popular  Meta- 
physical Works 6 

Natural     History    and     Popular 

Science S 

Periodicai,  Publications  20 

Poetry  and  the  Drama 17 

Eeligious  Works   12 

KuRAL  Sports,  &c 17 

Travels,  Voyages,  &e ...  15 

Works  of  Fiction 16 

AVoRKS  OF  Utility  and  General  In- 
formation     18 


-<«3i*it>o- 


Historical  Works. 


The    History   of   England   from 

the  Fall  of  Wolsey  to  the  Death  of  Eliza- 
beth. By  James  Anthony  Fkoode,  M.A. 
late  Fellow  of  Exeter  College,  Oxford. 

Vols.  I.  to  IV.  the  Reigu  of  Henry 
VTH.     Third  Edition,  54s. 

Vols.  V.  and  VI.  the  Reigns  of  Edward 
VI.  and  Mary.     Second  Edition,  28s. 

Vols.  VH.  and  VIII.  the  Reign  of 
Elizabeth,  Vols.  I.  and  II.  Third  Edi- 
tion, 28s. 

The    History   of   England  from 

the  Accession  of  James  II.  By  Lord 
Maoaulay.     Three  Editions,  as  follows. 

Library  Edition,  5  vols.  8vo.  £i. 

Cabinkt  Edition,  8  vols,  post  8\'o.  48s. 
*      People's  Edition,  4  vols,  crown  8vo.  16s. 

Revolutions  in  English  History. 
By  Robert  Vaughan,  D.D.  3  vols.  8vo.  45s. 

Vol.     I.  Revolutions  of  Race,  15s. 
Vol.    II.  Revolutions  in  Religion,  15s. 
Vol,  III.  RevolutioiisiaGovei"nment,15s. 


An  Essay  on  the  History  of  the 

English  Govcninicnt  and  Constitution,  from 
the  Reign  of  Henry  VII.  to  the  Present 
Time.  By  Jon.v  Earl  Russell.  Third 
Edition,  revised,  with  New  Introduction. 
Crown  8vo.  (is. 

The  History  of  England  diu'ing 

the  Reign  of  George  the  Third.  By 
William  Massey,  M.P.    4  vols.  8vo.  48s. 

The    Constitutional    History    of 

England,  since  the  Accession' of  George  III. 
1760—1800.  By  THt»iAs  Erskine  May, 
C.B.     Second  Edition.     2  vols.  8vo.  33s. 

Historical  Studies.    I.  On  some  of 

the  Precursors  of  the  French  Revolution; 
IT.  Studies  from  the  History  of  the  Seven- 
teenth Century;  III.  Leisure  Hours  of  a 
Tourist.  By  Herman  Merivale,  M.A. 
8vo.  12s.  Gd. ' 

Lectures  on  the  History  of  Eng- 
land. By  William  LOng.man.  Vol.  I. 
from  the  Earliest  Times  to  the  Death  of 
King  Edward  II.  with  6  Maps,  a  coloured 
Plate,  and  53  Woodcuts.    8vo.  15s. 


NEW  WORKS  PUBLISHED  By  LONGMANS  and  CO. 


A  Clironiele  of  England,  from  cc. 

55  to  A.D.  1485  ;  written  and  illustrated  by 
J.  E.  Doyle.  With  81  Designs  engraved 
on  Wood  and  printed  in  Colours  by 
E.  Evans.    4to.  428. 

History  of  Civilization.    By  Henry 
Thomas  Buckle.    2  vols.  £1  17s. 

Vol.  I.    England  and    France,    Fourth 
Edition,  2 Is. 

Vol.  II,  Spain    and     Scotland,    Second 
Edition,  16s. 

Democracy  in  America.  By  Alexis 

De  Tocqueville.  Translated  by  Henky 
Reeve,  with  an  Introductoiy  Notice  by  the 
Translator.     2  vols.  8vo.  21s. 

The     Spanish     Conquest     in 

America,  and  its  Relation  to  the  History  of 
Slavery  and  to  the  Government  of  Colonies. 
By  Artiiitr  Helps.  4  vols.  8vo.  £3. 
Vols.  I.  &  II.  28s.  Vols.  III.  &  IV.  16s.  each. 

History  of  the   Eeformation   in 

Europe  in  the  Time  of  Calvin.  By  J.  H. 
Merle  D'Aubigne,  D.D.  Vols.  I.  and 
II.  8vo.  28s.  and  Vol.  III.  12s. 

Library   History   of    France,    in 

5  vols.  8vo.  Bj'  Eyre  Evans  Crowe. 
Vol.  I.  14s.  Vol.  II.  15s.  Vol.  III.  18s. 
Vol.  IV.  nearly  ready. 

Lectures     on     the     History    of 

France.  By  the  late  Sir  James  Stephen, 
LL.D.    2  vols.  8vo.  24s. 

The  History  of  Greece.  By  C.  Thirl- 
WALL,  D.D.  Lord  Bisliop  of  St.  David's. 
8  vols.  8vo.  £3  ;  or  in  8  vols.  fcp.  28s. 

The  Tale  of  the  Great  Persian 

War,  from  the  Histories  of  Herodotus.  By 
George  W.  Cox,  M.A.  late  Scholar  of 
Trin.  Coll.  Oxon.    Fcp.  7s.  M. 

Ancient  History  of    Egypt,   As- 

syria,  and  Babylonia.  By  the  Author  of 
'Amy  Herbert.'     Fcp.  8vo.  Qs. 

Critical  History  of  the  Lan- 
guage and  Literature  of  Ancient  Greece. 
By  WiLLiAJi  Mure,  of  Caldwell.  5  vols. 
8vo.  £3  'Js. 

History    of    the     Literature    of 

Ancient  Greece.  Bj' Professor  K  O.  MUller. 
Translated  by  the  Right  Hon.  Sir  George 
Cornewall  Lewis,  Bart,  and  by  J.  W. 
DoNALDSONT,  D.D.     3  vols.  Svo.  36s. 


History   of  the   Romans    under 

the  Empire.  By  Charles  Merivale,  B.D. 
Chaplain  to  the  Speaker. 

Cabinet  Edition,  8  vols,  post  8vo.  48s. 

Library  Edition,  7  vols.  8vo.  £5.  lis. 

The  Pall  of  the  Roman  Re- 
public :  a  Short  History  of  the  Last  Cen- 
tury of  the  Commonwealth.  By  the  same 
Author.     12mo.  7s.  6c/. 

The  Conversion   of  the  Roman 

Empire:  the  Boyle  Lectures  for  the  j'ear 
1864,  (k'livercd  at  the  Chapel  Royal,  White- 
hall. By  the  same.  2nd  Edition.  8vo.  8s.  6d. 

Critical   and    Historical    Essays 

contributed  to  the  Edinburgh  Reinew.  By 
the  Right  Hon.  Lord  Macaulatt. 

Library  Edition,  3  vols.  8vo.  36s. 

Traveller's  Edition,  in  1  vol.  21s. 

In  Pocket  Volumes,  3  vols.  fcp.  21s. 

People's  Edition,  2  vols,  crown  8vo.  8s. 

Historical      and      Philosophical 

Essays.  Bj-  Nassau  ^Y.  Senior.  2  vols, 
post  8vo.  16s. 

History  of  the  Rise  and  Influence 

of  the  Spirit  of  Rationalism  in  Europe.  Bj' 
W,  E.  H,  Lecky,  3LA,  Second  Edition. 
2  vols.  8vo.  25s. 

The     Biographical     History    of 

Philosophj',  from  its  Origin  in  Grt-ece  to 
the  Present  Day.  By  George  Henry' 
Lewes.  Revised  and  enlarged  Edition. 
8vo.  16s. 

History  of  the  Inductive  Sciences. 

By  William  Whewell,  D.D.  F.R.S.  Master 
of  Trin.  Coll.  Cantab.  Tliird  Edition.  3  vols, 
crown  8vo.  24s, 

Egypt's  Place  in  Universal  His- 
tory ;  an  Historical  Investigation.  By 
C,  C.  J,  BuNSEN,  D.D.  Translated  by 
C.  H.  CoTTRELL,  M.A.  With  man}'  Illus- 
trations. 4  vols.  8vo.  £5  8s.  Vol.  V.  is 
nearly  ready,  completing  the  work. 

Maunder's  Historical  Treasiu'y ; 

comprising  a  General  Introductory  Outline 
of  Universal  History,  and  a  Series  of  Sepa-     ■ 
rate  Histories.     Fcp.  10s.  I 

Historical  and  Chronological  En- 
cyclopaedia, presenting  in  a  brief  and  con- 
venient form  Chronological  Notices  of  all 
the  Great  Events  of  Universal  History,  By 
B,  B.  Woodward,  F.S.A.  Librarian  to  the 
Queen,  [_In  the  press. 


NEW  WORKS  PUBLisHEu  by  LONGMAN'S  and  CO. 


« 


History  of  the  Christian  Cjaiircli, 

from  the  Ascension  of  Christ  to  the  Conver- 
sion of  Constantine.  By  E.  Burton,  D.D. 
late  Hegius  Prof,  of  Divinity  in  the  Univer- 
sity of  Oxford.  Eighth  Edition.  Ecp.  3s.  G J. 

Sketch,   of   the   History   of    the 

Church  of  England  to  the  KevoUition  of 
1688.  By  the  Right  Rev.  T.  Y.  Shout,  D.D. 
Lord  Bishop  of  St.  Asaph.  Sixth  Edition. 
Crown  8vo.  10s.  G(/. 

History   of   the    Early   Church, 

from  the  First  Preaching  of  the  Gospel  to 
the  Council  of  Nicsea,  a.d.  325.  By  the 
Author  of '  Amy  Herbert.'    Fcp.  4s.  6d. 

The    English    Beformation.     By 

r.  C.  Massingeekd,  M.A.  Chancellor  of 
Lincoln  and  Rector  of  South  Orrasby.  Third 
Edition,  revised  and  enlarged.    Ecp.  6s. 


History  of  Wesleyan  Methodism. 

By  George  S.miih,  F.A.S.  Fourth  Edition, 


with  numerous    Portraits. 
8vo.  7s.  each. 


0   vols.   crov.'n 


Villari's   History  of  Savonarola 

and  of  his  Times, translated  from  tliu  Italian 
by  Leo^wkd  Horner,  F.R.S.  with  the  co- 
operation of  the  Author.  2  vols,  post  8vo. 
with  Medallion,  18s. 

Lectures  on  the  History  of  Modern 

Music,  delivered  at  the  Royal  Institution, 
By  Joiiy  HuLLAii,  Professor  of  Vocal  Music 
in  King's  College  and  in  Queen's  College, 
London.  First  Course,  with  Chronolo- 
gical Tables,  post  8vo.  6s.  6c/.  Second 
Course,  on  the  Transition  Period,  with  26 
Specimens,  8vo.  16s. 


Biography  and  Memoirs. 


Letters     and     Life    of    Francis 

Bacon,  including  all  his  Occasional  Works. 
Collected  and  edited,  with  a  Commentary, 
by  J.  Spedding,  Trin.  Coll.  Cantab.  Vols. 
L  and  IL    8vo.  24s. 

Passages  from  the  Life  of  a  Phi- 
losopher. By  Charles  Babbage,  Esq. 
M.A.  F.R.S.  &:c.    8vo.  12s. 

Life  of  Robert  Stephenson,  F.R.S. 

By  J.  C.  JeaffresoN,  Barrister-at-Law, 
and  William  Pole,  F.R.S.  Memb.  Inst. 
Civ.  Eng.  With  2  Portraits  and  17  Illustra- 
tions.    2  vols.  8vo.  32s. 

Life  of  the  DiLke  of  Wellington. 

By  the  Rev.  G.  R.  Gleig,  M.A.  Populav 
Edition,  carefully  revised;  with  copious 
Additions.     Crown  8vo.  with  Portrait,  tis. 

Erialmont  and  Gleig's  Life  of  the  Dulce 
of  Wellington.  4  vols.  8vo.  with  Illustra- 
tions, £2  14s. 

Life  of  tlie  Duke  of  "Wellington,  partly 
from  the  French  of  M.  Brialmont,  partly 
from  Original  Documents.  Hy  the  Rev. 
G.  R.  Gleig,  M.A.    8vo.  with  Portrait,  15s. 

History  of  my  Religious  Opinions' 

By  J.  H.  Newman,  D.D.  Being  the  Sub- 
stance of  Apologia  pro  Vita  Sua.  Post 
8vo.  Gs. 

Father  Mathew :  a  Biography. 
By  John  Francis  Maguiue,  M.P.  Popular 
Edition,  with  Portrait.     Crown  8vo.  3s.  Qd. 

Rome ;  its  Kulers  and  its  Institutions. 
By  the  same  Author.  New"  Edition  in  pre- 
paration. 


Memoirs,  Miscellanies,  and  Let- 
ters of  the  late  Lucy  Aikin  ;  including  those 
addressed  to  Dr.  Channing  from  1826  to 
1842.  Edited  by  P.  II.  Le  Breton.  Post 
8vo.  8s.  Qd. 

Life  of  Amelia  Wilhelmina  Sieve - 

king,  from  the  German.  Edited,  with  the 
Author's  sanction,  by  Catherine  Wink- 
worth.    Post  8vo.  with  Portrait,  12s. 

Louis    Spohr's     Autobiography. 

Translated  from  the  German.    8vo.  14s. 

Felix  Mendelssohn's  Letters  from 

Italy  and  Switxrland,  and  Letters  from  1833 
to  1847,  translated  by  Lady  Wallace.  New 
Edition,  with  Portrait.  2  vols,  crown  8 vo. 
5s.  each. 

Diaries   of  a    Lady  of  Quality, 

from  1797  to  1844.  Edited,  with  Notes,  by 
A.  Haywaed,  Q.C.     Post  8vo.  10s.  6rf. 

Recollections  of  the  late  Williain 

Wilberforce,  M.P.  for  the  County  of  York 
during  nearly  30  Years.  By  J.  S.  Harford, 
F.R.S.    Second  Edition.     Post  8vo.  7s. 

Memoirs  of  Sir  Henry  Haveloek, 

K.C.B.  By  John  Cr-ARic  Makshman. 
Second  Edition.     8vo.  with  Portrait,  12s.  Gd. 

Thomas  Moore's  Memoirs,  Jour- 
nal, and  Correspondence.  Edited  and 
abridged  from  the  First  Edition  by  Earl 
Russell.  Square  crown  8to.  with  8  Por- 
traits, 12s.  6(7. 


NEW  WORKS  PUBLISHED  BY  LONGMANS  and  CO. 


Memoir  of  the  Rev.  Sydney  Smith. 

By  his  Daughter,  Lady  Holland.  With 
a  Selection  from  his  Letters,  edited  by  Mrs. 
Austin.     2  vols.  8vo.  28s. 

Vicissitudes  of  Families.    By  Sir 

Beenakd  Burke,  Ulster  King  of  Arms. 
First,  Second,  and  Third  Series.  3  vols, 
crown  8vo.  12s.  Gd.  each. 

Essays  in  Ecclesiastical  Biogra- 
phy By  the  Right  Hon.  Sir  J.  Stei'iikx, 
LL.D.     Fouith  Edition.     8vo.  14s. 


Biographical  Sketches.    By  Nassau 

W.  Senior.     Post  8vo.  10».  Gd. 

Biographies  of  Distinguished  Sci- 
entific Men.  By  Francois  Ai'.ago.  Trans- 
lated by  Admiral  W.  H.  Smyth,  F.R  S.  the 
Rev.  B.  Powell,  M.A.  and  R.  Grant,  JLA 
8vo.  18s. 

Maunder's  Biographical  Trea- 
sury ;  Memoirs,  Sketches,  and  brief  Notice.s 
of  above  12,000  Eminent  Persons  of  All 
Ages  and  Nations.     Fcp.  8vo.  10s. 


Criticism,  Philosophy,  Polity,  cjr. 


Papinian:  a  Dialogue  on  State  Affiiirs 
between  a  Constitutional  Lawyer  and  a 
Country  Gentleman  about  to  enter  Public 
Life.  By  George  Atkinson,  B.A.  Oxon. 
Serjeant- at- Law.     Post  8vo.  os. 

On  Representative   Government. 

By  John    Stuart   IMill.     'Jliird  Edition 

8vo.  9s.  crown  8vo.  2s. 
On  Liberty.     By  the  same  Author.    Third, 

Edition.      Post    8vo.   7s.   6d.   crown  8vo. 

1».  id, 
Principles  of  Political  Economy.  Ey  the 

same.     Sixth  Edition.     2  vols.  8vo.  30s.  or 

in  1  vol.  crown  8vo.  5s. 

A  System  of  Logic,  Katiocinative  and 
Inductive.  By  the  same.  Fifth  Edition. 
2  vols.  8vo.  25.*. 

Utilitarianism.   By  the  same.  2dEdit.  8vo.  5s. 

Dissertations  and  Discussions.  By  the 
same  Author.     2  vols.  8vo.  2-\s. 

Examination  of  Sir  W.  Hamilton's 
Philosophy,  and  of  the  Principal  Philoso- 
phical Questions  discussed  in  his  AVritings. 
By  the  same  Author.     8vo.  14s. 

Lord  Bacon's  Works,  collected 
and  edited  byR.  L.Ellis,  M.A.  J.  Spedding, 
M.A.  and  D.  D.  Heath.  Vols.  I.  to  V. 
Philosophical  Works,  5  vols.  8vo.  £4  6s. 
Vols.  VL  and  VH.  Literary  and  Profes- 
sional Works,  2  vols.  £1  IGs. 

Bacon's  Essays,  with  Annotations. 

By  R.  Whatkly,  D.D.  late  Archbishop  of 
Dublin.     Sixth  Edition.     8vo.  10s.  Qd. 

Elements  of  Logic.  By  R.  Whatelt, 

D.D.    late   Archbishop   of    Dublin.     Ninth 
Edition.     8vo.  10s.  d/.  crown  8vo.  As.  Gd. 

Elements    of    Rhetoric.      By   the    same 
Author.      Seventh   Edition.     Svo.    10s.  (jd. 
'    crown  8vo.  4s.  Gd. 

English  Synonymes.  Edited  by  Arch- 
bishop Whately.    5tli  I'^dition.    Fcp.  3s. 


Miscellaneous  Remains  from  the 

Commonplace  Book  of  Richard  Whately, 
D.D.  late  An^hbishop  of  Dublin.  lulited  by 
Miss  E.  J.  Whately.    Post  8vo.  7s.  Gd. 

Essays  on  the  Administrations  of 

Great  Britain  from  1783  to  1830.  By  the 
Right  Hon.  Sir  G.  C.  Lewis,  Bart.  Edited 
bj'  the  Right  Hon.  Sir  E.  Head,  Bart.  Svo. 
with  Portrait,  15s. 


Si/  the  same  Author. 

A    Dialogue    on    the    Best 
Government,  4s.  Gd. 


Form    of 


Essay  on  the  Origin  and  Formation  of 
the  Romance  Languages,  7s.  Gd. 

Historical  Survey  of  the  Astronomy  of 

the  Ancients,  15s. 

Inqiiiry    into    the    Credibility    of   the 
Early  Roman  History,  2  vols.  30s. 


On  the  Methods  of  Observation 

Reasoning  in  Politics,  2  vols.  28s. 


and 


Irish  Disturbances 
Question,  lis. 

Remarks    on  the    Dse 
some  Political  Terms,  9s. 


and  Irish    Church 


and    Abuse  of 


On  Foreign  Jurisdiction  and  Extradi- 
tion of  Criminals,  2s.  Gd. 

The  Fables  of  Babrius,  Greek  Text 
with  Latin  Notes,  Part  L  5s.  Gd.  Part  XL 
3s.  Gd. 

Suggestions  for  the  Application  of  the 
Egyptological  Method  to  Modern  History',  Is. 

An    Outline    of   the    Necessary 

Laws  of  Thought ;  a  Treatise  on  Pure  and 
Applied  Logic.  By  the  Most  Rev.  W. 
Thomson,  D.D.  Archbishop  of  York.  Crown 
8vo.  5s  Gd. 


NEW  WORKS  PUBLISHED  BY  LONGMAXS  and  CO.; 


The  Elements  of  Logic.  By  Thomas 

Shedden,  M.A.  of  St.  Peter's  Coll.  Cantab. 
12mo.  4.S.  6d. 

Analysis  of  Mr.  Mill's  System  of 

Logic.     B}'  W.  Stebbing,  M.A.  Fellow  of    j 
Worcester  College,  Oxford.     12mo.  3s  6d.       j 

The  Election  of  Representatives, 

Pailianieiitarj'  and  Municipal;  a  Treatise. 
By  Thumas  Hare,  Barrister-at-Law.  Third 
Edition,  with  Additions.     Crown  bvo.  6s. 

Speeches  of  the  Right  Hon.  Lord 

Macaulay,  corrected  by  Himself.  8vo.  12a-. 

Lord    Maeaulay's    Speeches    on 

Tarliamentary  Reform   in   1831  and  1832. 

16mo.  Is. 

• 

A    Dictionary    of    the     English 

Language.  By  R.  G.  Latham,  M.A.  M.D. 
F.R.S.  Founded  on  the  Dictionary  of  Dr.  S. 
Johnson,  as  edited  by  the  Rev.  H.  J.  Todd, 
with  numerous  Emendations  and  Additions. 
Publishing  in  3(5  Parts,  price  3s.  6d.  each, 
to  form  2  vols.  4to. 

Thesaurus  of  English  Words  and 

Phrases,  classified  and  arranged  so  as  to 
facilitate  the  Expression  of  Ideas,  and  assist 
in  lyiterary  Composition.  By  P.  M.  Roget, 
M.D.     14th  Edition,  crown  8vo.  10s.  6d. 

Lectures  on  the  Science  of  Lan- 
guage, delivered  at  the  Royal  Listitution. 
By  Max  MiJLLEi:,  M.A.  Taj'lorian  Professor 
in  the  University  i  f  Oxford.  First  Seuies, 
Fourth  Edition,  12s.     Second  Series,  18s. 

The  Debater  ;  a  Scries  of  Complete 
Debates,  Outlines  of  Debates,  and  Questions 
for  Discussion.     By  F.  Rowton.     Fcp.  6s. 

A   Course    of  English   Reading, 

adapted  to  every  taste  ;md  capacity ;  or, 
How  and  What  to  Read.  By  the  Rev.  J. 
Pycroft,  B.A.     Fourth  Edition,  fcp.  5s. 

Manual   of    English    Literature, 

Historical  and  Critical :  with  a  Chapter  on 
English  Metres.  By  Thomas  Arnold,  B.A. 
Post  8vo.  lOs.  Gd. 

Southey's   Doctor,  complete  in   One 

Volume.  Edited  by  the  Rev.  J.W.  Warter, 
B.D.     Square  crown  8vo.  12s.  6d. 


Historical  and  Critical  Commen- 
tary on  the  Old  Testament,  with  a  New 
Translation.  By  M.  M.  Kai.xsch,  Ph.  D. 
Vol.  L  Genesis,  8vo.  18s.  or  adapted  for  the 
General  Reader,  12s.  Vol.  II.  Exodus,  15s. 
or  adapted  for  the  General  Reader,  12s. 

A  Hebrew  Grammar,  ■with.  Exercises. 
Ry  the  same.  P.\rt  1.  Outlines  tcilh  Exer- 
cises, %yo.  lis.  Gd.  Key,  OS.  Part  \\.  Ex- 
ceptional Forms  and  Constructions,  12s.  6d. 

A  Latin-English  Dictionary.    By 

J.  T.  White,  M.A.  of  Corpus  Christi  Col- 
lege, and  J.  E.  Kiddle,  M.A.  of  St.  Edmund 
Hall,  Oxford.  Imp.  8vo.  pp.  2,128,  42s. 

A  New  Latin-English.  Dictionary, 
abri<iged  from  the  larger  work  of  IVhite  and 
Riddle  (as  above),  by  J.  T.  White,  M..-\. 
Joint-Author.     Medium  8vo.  pp.  1,048,  18t. 

A  Diamond  Latin-English  Dictionary, 

or  Guide  to  the  Meaniiii;,  Quality,  and 
Accentuation  of  Latin  Classical  Words.  By 
J.  E.  Riddle,  M.A.     32mo.  2s.  Gd 


An  English- Greek  Lexicon,  con- 
taining all  tbe  Greek  Words  used  b3-  Writers 
of  good  authority.    By  C.  D.  Yonge,  B.A. 

Fifth  Edition.     4to.  21s. 

Mr.  Yonge's  New  Lexicon,  En- 
glish and  Greek,  abridged  from  his  largtr 
work  (as  above).    Square  12nio.  8s.  6d. 

A  Greek-English  Lexicon.  Com- 
piled by  H.  G  Liddell,  D.D.  Dean  of 
Christ  Church,  and  R.  Scott,  D.D.  Master 
of  Balliol.  Fifth  Edition,  crown  4to.  31s.  Gd. 

A  Lexicon,  Greek  and  English, 
abridged  from  Liddell  and  Scott's  Greek- 
English  Lexicon.  Eleventh  Edition,  S(iuare 
12  mo.  7s.  6d. 


A   Practical    Dictionary   of   the 

French   and    Englisii    Languages.      By   L. 
CoNTANSEAU.  8th  Edition,  post  8vo.  lOs.Gd. 

Contansean's        Pocket        Dictionary, 

French   and    F.nglish,   abridged    from    the 
above  by  the  Author.  New  Edition.  ISmo.  6s. 


New  Practical  Dictionary  of  the 

German  Language;  German- r.nglish,  and 
English-German.  By  the  Rev.  W.  L. 
Blackley,  M.A.,  and  Dr.  Carl  Marti.x 
Friedlandeil     Post  8vo.    \^Ia  tite press. 


NEW  WORKS  PUBUSHiiD  by  LONG-MANS  and  CO. 


Miscellaneous   Worts  and  Popular  Metaphysics, 


Recreations  of  a  Country  Parson: 

being  a  Selection  of  the  Contributions  of 
A,  K.  II.  B.  to  Fraser's  3Iagazine.  Second 
Series.    Cromi  8vo.  3s.  6J. 

Th.e  Commonplace  Philosoplier  in 
Town  and  Country-.  By  the  same  Author. 
Crown  8vo.  3s  6J. 

Leisure  Hoivrs  in  Town ;  Essays  Consola- 
tory, Jisthetical,  Moral,  Social,  and  Do- 
mestic.   By  the  same.     Crown  8vo.  3s.  &d. 

The  Atitumn  Holidays  of  a  Country 
Parson  :  Essays  conti-ibuted  to  Fraser's  Mag- 
azine and  to  Good  Words,  by  the  same. 
Crown  8vo.  3s.  Qd. 

The  Graver  Thoughts  of  a  Country 
Parson,  Second  Series.  By  the  same. 
Crown  8vo.  3s.  6c?. 

Critical  Essays  of  a  Country  Parson, 
selected  from  Essays  contributed  to  Fraser''s 
3Iagazine,  by  the  same.    Post  8vo.  9s, 

A  Campaignei'  at  Home.  By  Shir- 
ley, Author  of  'Thalatta'  and  'Nuga; 
Criticie.'    Post  8vo.  with  Vignette,  7s.  6c/. 

Fi'iends  in  Council:  a  Series  of 
Eeadings  and  Discourses  thereon.  2  vols, 
fcp.  9s. 

Friends  in  Council,  Second  Seeies. 
2  vols,  post  8vo.  14s. 

Essays  written  in  the  Intervals  of 
Business.     Fcp.  2s.  6d. 

Lord   Macaulay's   Miscellaneous 

Writings. 
LiBHARv  Edition,  2  vols.  8vo.  Portrait,  21s. 
PEorLE's  Edition,  1  vol.  crown  8vo.  4s.  Gd. 

The  Rev.  Sydney  Smith's  Mis- 
cellaneous Works ;  including  his  Contribu- 
tions to  the  Edinburgh  Rtviatc. 

Library  Edition,  3  vols.  8vo.  36s. 

Traveller's  Edition,  in  1  vol.  21s. 

In  Pocket  Volumes,  3  vols.  fcp.  21s. 

People's  Edition,  2  vols,  crown  8vo.  8s. 

Elementary  Sketches  of  Moral  Philo- 
sophy, delivered  at  the  Royal  Institution. 
By  the  same  Author.     Fcp.  7s. 

The  Wit  and  "Wisdom  of  the  Be  v. 
Sydney  Smith:  a  Selection  of  the  most 
memorable  Passages  in  his  Writings  and 
Conversation,     16mo.  7s.  Gc/. 


The  History  of  the  Supernatural 

in  All  Ages  and  Nations,  and  in  Ail 
Churches,  Christian  and  Pagan ;  demou- 
strating  a  Universal  Faith.  By  William 
Howitt.    2  vols,  post  8vo.  18s. 

The  Superstitions  of  Witchcraft. 

By  Howard  Williams,  M.A.  St.  John's 
Coll.  Camb.    Post  8vo.  7s.  &d. 

Chapters  on  Mental  Physiology. 

By  Sir  Henry  Holland,  Bart.  M.D.  F.K.S. 
Second  Edition.    Post  8vo.  8s.  Qd. 

Essays  selected  from  Contribu- 
tions to  the  Edinburgh  Review.  By  Henet 
Rogers.    Second  Edition.    3  vols.  fcp.  21s. 

The  Eclipse  of  Faith;  or,  a  Visit  to  a 
Religious  Sceptic.  By  the  same  Author. 
Tenth  Edition.    Fcp.  5s. 

Defence  of  the  Eclipse  of  Faith,  by  its 
Author  ;  a  Rejoinder  to  Dr.  Newman's 
Reply.     Third  Edition.    Fcp.  3*.  6c?. 

Selections  from  the  Correspondence 
of  R.  E.  H.  Greyson.  By  the  same  Author. 
Third  Edition.     Crown  8vo.  7s.  Qd. 

Fulleriana,  or  tlie  Wisdom  and  Wit  o? 
Thomas  Fuller, with  Essay  on  his  Life  and 
Genius.    By  the  same  Author.    16mo.  2s.  6d. 

The   Secret   of  Hegel:    being   the 

Hegelian  System  in  Origin,  Principle,  Form, 
and  Matter.  By  James  Hutchison  Stir- 
ling.    2  vols.  8vo.  28s, 

An  Introduction  to  Mental  Phi- 
losophy, on  tlie  Inductive  Method.  By 
J.  D.  Morell,  M.A.  LL.D.    8vo.  12s. 

Elements  of  Psychology,  containing  the 
Analysis  of  the  Intellectual  Powers.  By 
the  same  Author.    Post  8vo.  7s.  Gd. 

Sight   and   Touch :    an  Attempt  to 

Disprove  the  Received  (or  Berkeleian) 
Theory  of  Vision.  By  Thomas  K.  Abbott, 
M.A.  Fellow  and  Tutor  of  Trin.  Coll.  Dublin. 
8vo.  with  21  Woodcuts,  5s.  M. 

The    Senses   and  the    Intellect. 

By  Alexander  Bain,  M.A.  Prof,  of  Logic 
in  the  Univ.  of  Aberdeen.  Second  Edition. 
8vo.  15s. 

The  Emotions  and  the  "Will,  by  the 
same  Author  ;  completing  a  Systematic 
Exposition  of  the  Human  Mind.     8vo.  15s. 

On  the  Stixdy  of  Character,  iucliuUng 
an  Estimate  of  Plirenology.  ISy  the  same 
Author.     8vo.  Ps. 


NEW  WORKS  PUBLISHED  BY  LONGMANS  and  CO. 


Time  and  Space :  a  Metaphysical 
Essay.  By  Siiadwoetii  H.  Hodgson. 
8vo.  pp.  588,  price  IGs. 

Hours  with  the  Mystics :  a  Contri- 
bution to  tlie  Historj'  of  Religious  Opinion. 
By  Robert  Alfred  Vaughan,  B.A,  Se- 
cond Edition.    2  vols,  crown  8v'o.  12a 

Psychological   Inquiries.     By  the 

late  Sir  Benj.  C.  Brodie,  Bart.     2  vols,  or 
Series,  fcp.  os.  each. 


The  Philosophy  of  jNecessity;  or, 

Natural  Law  as  applicable  to  Mental,  Moral, 
and  Social  Science.  By  Charles  Bray. 
Second  Edition.    8vo.  9s. 

The  Education  of  tlie  Feelings  and 
Affections.  By  the  same  Author.  Third 
Edition.    8vo.  3s.  6d. 

Christianity  and  Common  Sense. 

By  Sir  Willoughby  Jones,  Bart.  M.A. 
Trin,  Coll.  Cantab.    8vo.  6s. 


Astronomy,  Meteorology,  Pojmlar  Geography,  ^x. 


Outlines  of    Astronomy.    By  Sir 

J.  F.  W.  Herschel,  Bart,  M.A.  Seventh 
Edition,  revised ;  with  Plates  and  Woodcuts. 
Svo.  18s. 

Arago's     Popular      Astronomy. 

Ti-anslated  by  Admiral  W.  H.  Smyth, 
RR.S.  and  R.  Grant,  M.A.  With  25  Plates 
and  358  Woodcuts.    2  vols.  Svo.  £-2  5s. 

Arago's  Meteorological  Essays,  with 
Introduction  hy  Baron  Humboldt.  Trans- 
lated under  the  superintendence  of  Major- 
General  E.  Sabine,  R.A.    Svo.  18s. 

Saturn  and  its  System.    By  Eich- 

ARD  A.  Proctor,  B.A.  late  Scholar  of  St. 
John's  Coll.  Canib.  and  King's  Coll.  London. 
Svo.  with  14  Plates,  14s. 

The   "Weather-Book ;  a  Manual  of 

Practical  Meteorology.  By  Rear-Admiral 
Robert  Fitz  Roy,  R.N.  F.R.S.  Third 
Edition, -with  16  Diagrams.     Svo.  15s. 

Saxby's  Weather  System,  or  Lunar 

Influence  on  Weather.  By  S.  M.  Saxby, 
R..N.  Instructor  of  Naval  Engineers.  Second 
Edition.    Post  Svo.  4s. 

Dove's   Law  of  Storms  considered 

in  connexion  with  the  ordinary  Movements 
of  the  Atmosphere.  Translated  by  R.  H. 
Scott,  M.A.  T.C.D.    Svo.  10s.  Gd. 

Celestial    Objects    for    Common 

Telescopes.  By  T.  W.  Webb,  M.A.  F.R.A.S. 

With  Map  of  the  Moon,  and  Woodcuts. 
16mo.  7s. 

Physical  Geography  for  Schools 

and  General  Readers.  By  M,  F.  Maury, 
LL.D.    Fcp.  with  2  Charts,  2s.  6rf. 


A  Dictionary,  Geographical,  Sta- 
tistical, and  Historical,  of  the  various  Coun- 
tries, Places,  and  principal  Natural  Objects 
in  the  World.  By  J.  R.  M'Cdlloch.  With 
6  Maps.    2  vols.  Svo.  63s. 

A  General  Dictionary  of  Geo- 
graphy, Descriptive,  Physical,  Statistical, 
and  Historical  ;  forming  a  complete 
Gazetteer  of  the  World.  By  A.  Keith 
Johnston,  F.R..S.E.    Svo.  31s.  6rf, 

A  Manual  of  Geography,  Physical, 
Industrial,  and  Political.  By  W.  Hughes, 
F.R.G.S.  Prof,  of  Geog.  in  King's  Coll.  and  in 
Queen's  Coll.  Lond.  With  6  Maps.  Fcp.7s.6rf. 

The  Geography  of  British  History  ;  a 
Geographical  Description  of  the  British 
Islands  at  Successive  Periods.  By  the  same. 
With  6  Maps.    Fcp.  8s.  6cf. 

Abridged  Text-Book  of  British  Geo- 
graphy.    Bj'  the  same.     Fcp.  Is.  Gd. 

The   British  Empire  ;  a  Sketch  of 

the  Geography,  Growth,  Natural  and  Poli- 
tical Features  of  the  United  Kingdom,  its 
Colonies  and  Dependencies.  By  Caroline 
Bray.     With  5  Maps.     Fcp.  7s.  M. 

Colonisation  and  Colonies  :  a  Series 

of  Lectures  delivered  before  the  University 
of  Oxford.  By  Herman  Merivale,  M.A. 
Prof,  of  Polit.  Econ.    Svo.  18s. 


Maunder's  Treasury  of  Geogra- 
phy, Phj'sical,  Historical,  Descriptive,  and 
Political.  Edited  by  W.  Hughes,  F.R.G.S. 
With  7  Maps  and  16  Plate?.     Fcp.  10s. 


NEW  WORKS  PU15LTSHED  BY  LONGMANS  and  CO. 


Natural  History  and  Popular  Science. 


The    Elements    of     Physics    or 

Natural  Philosophy.  By  Neil  Ahnott, 
M.D.  F.R.S.  Phy.-siciiin  Extraordinary  to 
the  Queen,  Sixth  Edition.  Paut  I.  8vo. 
lOs.  M. 

Heat  Considered  as  a  Mode   of 

Motion.  By  Professor  John  Tyndatx, 
F.R.S.  LL.D.  Second  Edition.  Crown  8vo. 
■with  Woodcuts,  12s.  Gd. 

Volcanos,  the  Character  of  their 
Phenomena,  their  Shave  in  the  Structure 
and  Composition  of  the  Surface  of  the  Globe, 
&c.  By  G.  Poui-ETT  Sci'.opK,  M.P.  F.R.S. 
Second  Edition.  8vo.  with  Illustrations,  \iis. 

A    Treatise    on    Electricity,    in 

Theory  and  Practice.  By  A.  Die  la  Rivic, 
Prof,  in  the  Academy  of  Gene.  a.  Trans- 
lated by  C.  V.  Walkeii,  F.R.S.  3  vols. 
8vo.  with  Woodcuts,  £3  13s. 

The     Correlation     of     Physical 

Forces.  By  W.  R.  Grovk,  Q.C.  Y.P.K  S. 
Fourth  Edition.     8vo.  7s.  CJ. 


The   Comparative  Anatomy  and 

Piij'sinlogy  of  the  Vertebrate  Animals.  By 
Richard  Owkx,  F.R.S.  D.C.L.  2  vols. 
8vo.  with  upwards  of  1,200  Woodcuts. 

\_In  the  press. 

Homes  without  Hands :  an  Account 

of  the  Habitations  constructed  by  various 
Animals,  classed  according  to  their  Princi- 
ples of  Construction.  By  Rev.  J.  G.  Wood, 
M.A.  F.L.S.  Illustrations  on  Wood  by  G. 
Pearson,  from  Dra>vings  by  F.  W.  Keyl 
and  E.  A.  Smith.     In  20  Parts,  Is.  each. 

Manual  of  Corals  and  Sea  Jellies, 

By  J.  R.  GuEiiNK,  B.A.  Edited  by  the 
Rev.  J.  A.  Galbkaith,  M.A.  and  the  Rev. 
S.  Haugiiton,  M.D.  Fcp.  with  39  Wood- 
cuts, OS. 

Manual  of  Sponges  and  Animalculse  ; 
with  a  General  Introduction  on  the  Princi- 
ples of  Zoology.  By  the  same  Author  and 
Editors.    Fcp.  with  IG  Woodcuts,  is. 


Manual  of  the  Metalloids. 
M.D.  F.R.S.  and  the  same 
with  38  Woodcuts,  7s.  6c?. 


By  .J.  Apjohit, 
Editors.     Fcp. 


The    Geological     Magazine;    or. 

Monthly  Journal  of  Geology.  Edited  by 
Henry  Woodward,  F.G.S.  F.Z.S.  British 
Museum  ;  assisted  by  Professor  J.  Morris, 
F.G.S.  and  R.  Etiikhidge,  F.R.S.E.  F.G  S. 
Svo.  price  Is.  monthly. 

A  Guide  to  Geology.  By  .T.  Fhillips, 

M.A.  Prof,  of  Geol.  in  the  Univ.  of  Oxford. 
Fifth  Edition ;  with  Plates  and  Diagrams. 
Fcp.  4s. 

A  Glossary   of   Mineralogy.    By 

H.  W.  Bristow,  F.G.S.  of  the  (Teological 
Survey  of  Great  Britain.  With  -186  Figures. 
Crown  Svo.  12s. 

Phillips's  Elementary  Introduc- 
tion to  Mineralogy,  witii  extensive  Altera- 
tions and  Additions,  by  H.  J.  Brooke, 
F.R.S.  and  W.  II.  IMiLi'iiR,  F.G.S.  Post 
Svo.  with  Woodcuts,  18s. 

Van  Der  Hoeven's  Handbook  of 

Zoology.  Translated  from  the  Sec«iid 
Dutch  ELdition  bv  the  Rev.  W.  Clark, 
M.D.  F.R.S.  2  vols.  Svo.  with  2'±  Plates  of 
Figures,  GOs. 


The  Sea  and  its  Living  Wonders. 

By  Dr.  G.  Hartwig.  Second  (English) 
Edition.  Svo,  with  manj*  Illustrations,  18s. 

The  Tropical  World.    By  the  same 

Author.  With  8  Chromoxylographs  and 
172  Woodcuts.     Svo.  21s. 

Sketches  of  the  Natural  History 

ofCevlon.  By  Sir  J.  Emeuson  Tennent, 
K.C.S.  LL.D.'  With  82  Wood  Engravings. 
Post  Svo.  12s.  6d. 

Ceylon.  By  the  snme  Author.  5th  Edition ; 
with  Maps,  &c.  and  90  Wood  Engravings. 
2  vols.  Svo.  £2  10s. 

A    Familiar    History    of    Birds. 

By  E.  Stanley,  D.D.  F.R,S.  late  Lord 
Bishop  of  Norwich.  Seventh  Edition,  with 
Woodcuts.     Fcp.  3s.  Qd. 

Marvels  and  Mysteries  of  In- 
stinct; or.  Curiosities  of  Animal  Life.  By 
G.  Gauuatt.    Third  Edition.    Fcp.  7s. 

Home  Walks  and  Holiday  Ram- 
bles. By  the  Rev.  C.  A.  Johns,  B.A.  F.L.S. 
Fcp.  with  10  Illustrations,  6s. 


NEW  WORKS  PUBLISHED  BY  LONGMANS  and  CO. 


Kirby  and  Spence's  Introduction 

to  Entomology,  or  Elements  of  the  Natural 
History  of  Insects.  Seventli  Edition.  Crown 
8vo.  5s. 

Maunder's  Treastury  of  Natural 

History,  or  Popular  Dictionary  of  Zoology. 
Eevised  and  corrected  b\'  T.  S.  Cobbold, 
M.D.     Fcp.  with  900  Woodcuts,  10s. 

The  Treasury  of  Botany,  on  the 

Plan  of  M  lunder's  Treasury.  By  J.  Lind- 
LEY,  M.D.  and  T.  Mooue,  F.L.S.  assisted 
bj'  other  Practical  Botanists.  With  IG 
Plates,  and  many  Woodcuts  from  designs 
by  W.  H.  Fitch.    Fcp.  \_In  the  press. 

The  Rose  Amateur's  Guide.    By 
Thomas  Rivers.  8th  Edition.  Fcp.  4s. 

The  British  Flora ;   comprising  the 

PhiBnogamous  or  Flowering  Plants  and  the 
i    Ferns.     By  Sir  W.  J.  Hookeu,  K.H.  and 
G.    A.    Walicer-Arsott,    LL.D.     12mo. 
•with  12  Plates,  14s.  or  coloured,  21s. 

Bryologia    Britannica ;    containing 

the  Mosses  of  Gieat  Britain  and  Ireland, 
arranged  and  described.  By  W.  Wilson. 
8vo.  with  Gl  Plates,  4-2s.  or  coloured,  £4  4s. 

The    Indoor    Gardener.    By    Miss 

M.\Li^G.     Fcp.  with  Frontispiece,  5s. 


Loudon's  Encyclopssdia  of  Plants; 

comprising  the  Specific  Character,  Descrip- 
tion. Culture,  Histor}',  ike.  of  all  the  Plants 
found  in  Great  Britain.  With  upwards  of 
12,000  Woodcuts.     8vo.  £3  13s.  6d. 

lioudon's  Encyclopaedia  of  Trees  and 
Shrubs;  containing  tlie  Hardy  Trees  and 
Shrubs  of  Great  Britain  scientilically  and 
popularly  described.  With  2,000  Woodcuts. 
Svo.  bQs. 

Maunder's  Scientiflc  and  Lite- 
rary Treasury ;  a  Popular  Encyclopaedia  of 
Science,  Literature,  and  Art.     Fcp.  10s. 

A  Dictionary  of  Science,  Litera- 
ture, and  Art.  Fourth  Edition.  Edited  by 
W.  T.  Beande,  D.C.L.  and  George  W. 
Cox,  M.A.,  assisted  by  gentlemen  of  emi- 
nent Scientific  and  Literary  Acquirements. 
In  12  Parts,  each  couiaining  240  pages, 
price  OS.  forming  3  vols,  medium  8vo.  price 
21s.  each. 

Essays   on   Scientiflc   and  other 

sulijects,  contributed  to  Reviews.  By  Sif  H. 
Holland,  Bart.  M.D.  Second  Edition. 
8vo.  lis. 

Essays  from  the  Edinburgh  and 

Quarterlif  Reviews  ;  with  Addresses  and 
other  Pieces.  By  Sir  J.  F.  W.  Heksckel, 
Bart.  M.A.    8vo.  18s. 


Chemistry,  Medicine,  Surgery,  and  the  Allied  Sciences. 


A  Dictionai'y  of  Chemistry  and 

the  Allied  Branches  of  other  Sciences,  tiy 
Henry  Watts,  F.C.S.  assisted  hj  eminent 
Contributors.  5  vols,  medium  8vo.  in 
course  of  publication  in  Parts.  Vol.  I. 
3s.  Gd.  Vol.  II.  2Gs.  and  Vol.  IIL  31s.  6rf. 
are  now  read}'. 

Handbook  of  Chemical  Analysis, 

adapted  to  the  Unitary  System  of  Notation: 
By  F.  T.  CoNiNGTON,  M.A.  F.C.S.  Post 
•8vo.  7s.  Gd.  —  Tables  of  Qualitative 
Analysis  adapted  to  the  same,  2s.  Grf. 

A    Handbook     of   Volujnetrical 

Analysis.  By  Robert  H.  Scott,  M.A. 
T.C.D.         Post  8vo.  4s.  6d. 

Elements  of  Chemistry,  Theore- 
tical and  Practical.  Bv  William  A. 
Miller,  M.D.  LL.D.  F.R.S.  F.G.S.  Pro- 
fessor of  Chemistry,  King's  College,  London. 
3  vols.  8vo.  £2  13s.  Part  I.  Chemical 
Physics,  Third  Edition,  12s.  Part  H. 
Inorganic  Chemistry,  21s.  Part  III. 
Organic  Chemistry,  Second  Edition,  20s. 


A  Manual  of  Chemistry,  De- 
scriptive and  Theoretical.  By  VV'^illiam 
Odling,  M.B.  F.R.S.  Lecturer  on  Che- 
mistry at  St.  Bartholomew's  Hospital.  Part 
I.  8vo.  2s. 

A  Course  of  Practical  Chemistry,  for  the 
use  of  Medical  Students.  By  the  same 
Author.  Second  Edition,  with  70  new 
Woodcuts.    Crown  8vo.  7s.  Gd. 

The  Diagnosis  and  Treatment  of 

the  Diseases  of  Women;  inclu<iiiig  the 
Diagnosis  of  Pregnancy.  Qy  Gk.uly 
Hewitt,  M.D.  Physician  to  the  British 
Lying-in  Hospital.    8vo.  16s. 

Lectures  on  the  Diseases  of  In- 
fancy and  Childhood,  hy  Charles  West, 
M.D.  &C.  5th  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged. 
8vo.  ICs. 

Exposition    of    the     Signs    and 

Symptoms  of  Pregnancy  :  witli  other  Papers 
on  subjects  connected  with  Midwifery.  B^' 
W.  F.  Montgomery,  M.A.  M.D.  M.R.LA. 
Svo.  T'ilh  Illustrations,  25s. 


10 


NEW  WaRKS  PUBLISHED  BY  LONGMANS  and  CO. 


A  System  of  Siirgeryj  Theoretical 

and  Practical,  in  Treatises  by  Various 
Authors.  Edited  by  T.  Holmes,  M.A. 
Cantab.  Assistant-Surgeon  to  St.  George's 
Hospital.     4  vols.  8vo.  £1  13s. 

Vol.  I.    Gensral  Pathology,  2ls. 

"Vol.  II.  Local  Injui'ies :  Gun-shot  Wounds, 
Injuries  of  the  Head,  Back,  Face,  Neck, 
Chest,  Abdomen,  Pelvis,  of  the  Upper  and 
Lower  Extremities,  and  Diseases  of  the 
Eye.     21s. 

Vol.  III.  Operative  Surgery.  Diseases 
ef  the  Organs  of  Circulation,  Locomotion, 
&c.    2U.  j 

Vol.  IV.     Diseases   of  the  Organs   of  j 

Digestion,   of  the  Genito-Urinary   System,  | 

and  of  the  Breast,  Thyroid  Gland,  and  Skin  ;  j 

with  ArrENDix  and  Geseual  Index.  30s.  | 

Lectures  on  the  Principles  and 

Practice  of  Physic.  By  Thomas  Watson,  i 
M.D.  Physician-Extraordinary  to  the  | 
Queen.     Fourth  Edition.    2  vols.  '8vo.  Sis. 

Iieetures  on  Surgical  Pathology. 

By  J.  Paget,  F.R.S.  Surgeon-Extraordinary 
to"^  the  Queen.  Edited  by  W.  TunxEi;,  M.B. 
8vo.  with  117  Woodcuts,  21s. 

A    Treatise    on    the    Continued 

Fevers  of  Great  Britain.  By  C.  M  urchison, 
M.D.  Senior  Physician  to  the  London  Fever 
Hospital.     8vo.  with  coloured  Plates,  18s. 

Anatomy,  Descriptive  and  Sur- 
gical. By  Henry  Gray,  F.R.S.  With 
410  Wood  Engravings  from  Dissections. 
Third  Edition,  by  T.  Holmes,  M.A.  Cantab. 
Eoyal  8vo.  28s. 

The  Cyclopsedia  of  Anatomy  and 

Physiology.  Edited  by  the  late  R.  B.  Todd, 
M.D.  F.R.S.  Assisted  by  nearly  all  the 
most  eminent  cultivators  of  Physiological 
Science  of  the  present  age.  5  vols.  8vo. 
with  2,853  Woodcuts,  £G  Cs. 


Physiological  Anatomy  and  Phy- 

siolog3'  of  Man.  By  the  late  II.  B.  Todd, 
M.D.  "r.R.S.   and  W.  Bowman,  r.R.S.  of 

King's  College.  With  numerous  Illustra- 
tions.   Vol.  II.  8vo.  25s. 

A  Dictionary  of  Practical  Medi- 
cine. By  J.  Copland,  M.D.  F.R.S. 
Abridged  from  the  larger  work  by  the 
Author,  assisted  by  J.  C.  Copland,  M.R.C.S. 
1  vol.  8vo.  [^In  the  press. 

Dr.  Copland's  Dictionary  of  Practical 
Medicine  (the  larger  work).  3  vols.  8vo. 
£5  lis. 

The  Works  of  Sir  B.  C.  Brodie^ 

Bart,  collected  and  arranged  by  Ciiakles 
Hawkins,  F.R.C.S.E.  3  vols.  8vo.  with 
Medallion  and  Facsimile,  48s. 

Atitotiograpliy  of  Sir  B.  C.  Brodie, 
Bart,  printed  from  the  Author's  materials 
left  in  MS.     Fcp.  4s.  M. 

Medical   Notes  and  Reflections. 

By  Sir  II.  Holland,  Bart.  M.D.  Third 
Edition.    8vo.  18s. 

A    Manual   of    Materia    Medica 

and  Therapeutics,  abridged  from  Dr. 
Peeeira's  Elements  hy  F.  J.  Farre,  M.D. 
Cantab,  assisted  by  R.  Bentley,  M.R.C.S. 
and  by  R.  Wakington,  F.C.S.  1  vol. 
8vo.  \_In  October. 

Dr.  Pereira's  Elements  of  Materia 
Medica  and  Therapeutics,  Third  Edition,  by 
A.  S.  Taylor,  M.D.  and  G.  0.  Rees,  M.D. 
3  vols.  8vo.  with  Woodcuts,  £3  15s. 

Thomson's    Conspectus    of    the 

British  Pharmacopoeia.  Twentj^-fourth 
Edition,  corrected  and  made  conformable 
throughout  to  the  New  Pharmacopoeia  of 
the  General  Council  of  Medical  Education. 
By  E.  Lloyd  Birkett,  M.D.    ISmo.  5s.  Gd. 

Manual  of  the  Domestic  Practice 

of  Medicine.  l>y  W.  B.  Kesteven, 
F.R.C.S.E.  Second  Edition,  thoroughly 
revised,  with  Additions.    Fcp.  Ss. 


The  Fine  Arts,  and  Illustrated  Editions. 


The  Hew  Testament,  illustrated  with 

Wood  Engravings  after  the  Early  Masters, 
chiefly  of  the  Italian  School.  Crown  4to. 
(i."s.  cloth,  gilt  top;  or  £5  5s.  elegantly 
bound  in  morocco. 


Lyra    Germanica ;    Hymns   for   the 

Sundays  and  Chief  Festivals  of  the  Christian 
Year.  Translated  by  Cathepjne  Wink- 
worth;  125  Illustrations  on  Wood  drawn 
by  J.  Leighton,  F.S.A.    Fcp.  4to.  21s. 


NEW  WORKS  PUBLISHED  BY  LONGMANS  and  CO. 


11 


Cats'  and  Farlie's  Moral  Em- 
blems ;  with  Aphorisms,  Adages,  and  Pro- 
verbs of  all  Nations  :  comprising  121 
Illustrations  on  Wood  by  J.  Leighton, 
F.S.A.  with  an  appropriate  Text  by 
K.  PiGOT,    Imperial  8vo.  31s.  6d. 

Bunyan's     Pilgrim's     Progress : 

with  126  Illustrations  on  Steel  and  Wood 
by  C.  Bennett  ;  and  a  Preface  by  the  Rev. 
C.  KiSGSLET.     Fcp.  4to.  21s. 

Shakspeare's      Sentiments     and 

Similes  printed  in  Black  and  Gold  and  illu- 
minated in  the  Missal  style  by  Henry  Noel 
Humphreys.  In  massive  covers,  containing 
the  Medallion  and  Cypher  of  Shakspeare. 
Square  post  8vo.  21s. 


The  History  of  Our  Lord,  as  exem- 
plified in  Works  of  Art ;  with  that  of  His 
Types  in  the  Old  and  New  Testament.  B\- 
Mrs.  Jameson  and  Lady  Eastlake.  Being 
the  concluding  Series  of  '  Sacred  and 
Legendary  Art;'  with  13 Etchings  and  281 
Woodcuts.    2  vols,  square  crown  8vo.  42s. 

Ill  the  sayne  Series,  bij  Mrs.  Jaimeson. 
Legends  of  th.e  Saints    and    Martyrs, 
Fourth  Edition,  with  19  Etchings  and  187 
Woodcuts.     2  vols.  31s.  Gd. 

Legends  of  tlie  Monastic  Orders,  Third 
Edition,  with  11  Etchings  and  88  Woodcuts. 
1  vol.  21s. 


Legends  of  the  Madonna.  Third  Edition, 
with  27  Etchings  and  1G5  Woodcuts. 
1  vol.  21s. 


Arts^  Manufactures^  (S,'c. 


Encyclopaedia   of    Arcldtecture, 

Historical,  Theoretical,  and  1 'radical.  By 
Joseph  Gwilt.  With  more  than  1,000 
Woodcuts.    8vo.  42s., 

Tuscan    Sculptors,  their    Lives, 

Works,  and  Times.  With  45  Etchings  and 
28  Woodcuts  from  Original  Drawings  and 
Photographs.  By  ChaPvLes  C.  Perkins 
2  vols.  imp.  8vo.  G3s. 

The  Engineer's  Handbook ;  ex- 
plaining the  Principles  which  should  guide 
the  young  Engineer  in  the  Construction  of 
Machinery.  By  C.S.Lowndes.  Post  8vo.  5s. 

The    Elements    of     Mechanism. 

By  T.  M.  GooDEVE,  M.A.  Prof,  of  Me- 
chanics at  the  R  M.  Acad.  Woolwich. 
Second  Edition,  with  217  Woodcuts.  Post 
8vo.  6s.  M. 

lire's  Dictionary  of  Arts,  Manu- 
factures, and  Mines.  Re-written  and  en- 
larged by  RoBEKT  Hunt,  F.R.S.,  assisted 
by  numerous  gentlemen  eminent  in  Science 
and  the  Arts.  With  2,000  Woodcuts.  3  vols. 
8vo,  £L 

Encyclopaedia  of  Civil  Engineer- 
ing, Historical,  Theoretical,  and  Practical. 
By  E.  Crest,  C.E.  With  above  3,000 
Woodcuts.    8vo.  42s. 


Treatise  on  Mills  and  Millwork, 

By  W.  Fairbaikn,  C.E.  F.R.S.  With  18 
Plates  and  322  Woodcuts.    2  vols.  8vo.  32s. 

Useful  Information  for  Engineers.  By 
the  same  Author.  Fikst  and  Second 
Series,  with  many  Plates  and  Woodcuts. 
2  vols,  crown  8vo.  10s.  6c?.  each. 

The  Application  of  Cast  and  "WrougM 
Iron  to  Building  Purposes.  By  the  same 
Author.  Third  Edition,  with  G  Plates  and 
118  Woodcuts.     8vo.  IGs. 

The  Practical  Mechanic's  Jour- 
nal :  An  Illustrated  Record  of  Mechanical 
and  Engineering  Science,  and  Epitome  of 
Patent  Inventions.    4to.  price  Is.  monthly. 

The     Practical     Draughtsman's 

Book  of  Industrial  Design.  By  W.  John- 
son, Assoc.  Inst.  C.E.  With  manj-  hundred 
Illustrations.    4to.  28s.  &d. 

The  Patentee's  Manual :  a  Treatise 

on  the  Law  and  Practice  of  Letters  Patent 
for  the  use  of  Patentees  and  Inventors.  Bj- 
J.  and  J.  H.  Johnson.     Post  8vo,  7s.  ijd. 

The  Artisan   Club's   Treatise  on 

the  Steam  Engine,  in  its  various  Applica- 
tions to  Mines,  Mills,  Steam  Navigation, 
Railways,  and  Agriculture.  By  J.  Boxtuke, 
C.E.  Sixth  Edition;  with  37  Plates  and 
546  Woodcuts.    4to.  42s. 


15 


jNEW  WORKS  PUBLISHED  BY  LONGMANS  and  CO. 


Catechisin  of  the  Steam  Engine, 

in  its  various  Applications  to  Mines,  Mills, 
Steam  Navifjation,  Railways,  and  Agriiul- 
ture.  Bj'J.  BouiiNE.C.E.  With  I  99  Wood- 
cuts Fe|j.9s.  Ttie  Introduction  of '  Recent 
Improvements'  may  be  Lad  separately,  with 
110  Woodcuts,  price  3s.  Cd. 

Handbook  of  the  Steam  Engine,  by  the 
same  Author,  forminj^  a  Kky  to  the  Cate- 
chism ot  the  Steam  Engine,  with  67  Wood- 
cuts.    Fcp.  9s. 

The  Theory  of  War   lUnstrated 

l>3'  numerous  Examples  from  liistorj'.  Br 
Lieut.-Col.  P.  L.  MacDougaix.  Third 
Edition,  with  10  Plans.     Post  8vo.  10s.  6rf. 

Collieries  and  Colliers  ;  A  Hand- 
book of  the  Law  and  leading  Cases  relating 
thereto.  B\'  J.  C.  Fowler,  Barrister-at- 
Law,  Stipendiary  Magistrate..  Fcp.  6s. 

The  Art  of  Perfumery  ;  the  History 

and  theory  of  Odours,  and  the  Methods  of 
Extracting  the  Aromas  of  Plants.  By 
Dr.  PiKssE,  F.C.S.  Third  Edition,  with 
53  Woodcuts.     Crown  <Svo.  10s.  6d. 

Chemical,  ZSTatiiral,  and  Physical  Magic, 
for  Juveniles  during  the  Holidays.  By  the 
same  Author.  Third  Edition,  enlarged, 
with  3S  Woodcuts.     Fcp.  Gs. 

The  Laboratory  of  Chemical  "Wonders : 
A  Scientific  Melange  for  Young  People. 
By  the  same.     Crown  8vo.  5x.  Gd. 

Talpa  ;  or,  tlie  Clironicles  of  a  CInv 
Farui.  By  C.  W.  Hoskyns,  Esq.  With  24 
Woodcuts  from  Designs  by  G.  Cruiic- 
6IIANK.     IGmo.  OS.  Gd. 


H.B.H.     the     Prince     Consort's 

Farms;  an  Agricultural  Memoir,  by  John 
Chalmers  Morton.  Dedicated  by  per- 
mis>ion  to  Her  Majesty  the  Queen.  With. 
40  Wood  Engravings.     4to.  62s.  6d. 

Loudon's  Encyclopgedia  of  Agri- 
culture: Comprising  the  Laying-out,  Im- 
provement, and  Management  of  Landed 
Property,  and  the  Cultivation  and  Economy 
of  the  Productions  of  Agriculture.  With 
1,100  Woodcuts.     8vo.  31s.  6(f. 

Loudon's  Encyclopasdia  of  Gardening : 
Comprising  the  'llieory  and  Practice  of 
Horiiculture,  Floriculture,  Arboriculture, 
and  Landscape  Gardening.  With  1,000 
Woodcuts.     8vo.  31s.  6d. 

Loudon's  Encyclopaedia  of  Cottage,  Farm, 
ana  Villa  Architecture  and  Furniture.  With 
more  than  2,000  Woodcuts,     iivo.  42s. 

History  of  Windsor  Great  Park 

and  Windsor  Forest.  By  William  Men- 
ziEs,  Resident  Deputy  Surveyor.  With  2 
Maps  and  20  Photographs    Imp.  folio.  £8  8s. 

The  Sanitary  Management  and  Utili- 
.sation  of  Sewage:  comprising  Details  of  a 
System  applicable  to  Cottages,  Dwelling- 
Honses,  Public  Buildings,  and  Towns;  Sug' 
gestions  relating  to  the  Arterial  Urainage 
of  the  Country,  a»d  the  Water  Supply'  of 
Rivers.  B_v  the  same  Author.  Imp.  8vo. 
with  9  Illustrations,  i2s.6d. 

Bayldon's  Art  of  Valuing  Rents 

and  Tillages,  and  Claims  of  Tenants  upon. 
Quitting  Farms,  both  at  Michaelmas  and 
Lady-Day.  Eighth  Edition,  revised  by 
J.  C.  Morton.     8vo.  TOs.  Gd. 


Religious  and  Moral  Works. 


An  Exposition  of  the  39  Articles, 

Historiial  and  Doctrinal.  By  E.  HaR(jld 
Bkowne,  D.D.  Lord  Bishop  of  Ely.  Sixth 
Edition,  8vo.  16s. 

The  Pentateuch  and  the  Elohistic 
Psalms,  in  Reply  to  Bishop  Colenso.  Bv 
the  same.     Second  Edition.     8vo.  2s. 

Examination  Questions  on  Bishop 
Browne's  Exposition  of  the  Articles.  By 
the  Rev.  J.  Gorlic,  M.A.     Fcp.  3s.6rf. 

Five  Lectures  on  the  Character 

of  St.  I'aul;  being  the  Hulsean  Lectures 
for  1862.  By  the  Rev.  J.  S.  Howso.v,  D.D. 
Second  Edition.     8vo.  9s. 


The    Life    and    Epistles   of    St. 

Paul.  By  W.  J.  Conybkaue.  M.A.  late 
Fellow  of  Trin.  Coll.  Cantab,  and  J.  S. 
IlowsoN,  D.D.  Principal  of  Liverpool  Coll. 

Library  Edition,  with  all  the  Original 
IllustntiuMs,  Maps,  Landscapes  on  Steel, 
Woodcuts,  vSlC.     2  vols.  4to.  4t)s. 

Intehmediatk  Edition,  with  a  Selection 
of  .Maps,  Plates,  and  Woodcuts.  2  vols, 
square  cruwn  8vo.  3 Is.  Gd. 

People's  Edition,  revised  and  con- 
densed, with  46  Illustrations  and  Maps. 
2  vols,  criiwn  8vo.  12s 


:NEW  works  published  by  LONGMANS  and  CO. 


13 


The  Voyage  and   Shipwreck  of 

St.  Paul;  with  Dissertations  on  tlie  Sliips 
and  Navigation  of  the  Ancients.  By  Jamks 
Smith,  F.R.S.    Crown  8vo.  Charts,  8s.  Gd. 

A  Critical  and  Grammatical  Com- 
mentary on  St.  Paul's  Epistles.  By  C.  J. 
Ellicott,  D.D.  Lord  Bishop  of  Gloucester 
and  Bristol.     Svo. 

Galatians,  Third  Edition,  8*.  6i. 

Ephesians,  Third  Edition,  8s.  6c/. 

Pastoral  Epistles,  Third  Edition,  10s.  C3. 

Philippians,  Colossians,  and  Philemon, 
Third  Edition,  10s.  6(1. 

Thessalonians,  Second  Edition,  7s.  6d. 

Historical  Lectures  on  the  Life  of  Our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ:  being  the  Halsean 
Lectures  for  18.59.  By  the  same  Author. 
Fourth  Edition.     8vo."lOs.  Gd 

The  Destiny  of  the  Creature  ;  and  other 
Sermons  preached  before  the  Uiiiversit_v  of 
Cambridge.     B\'  the  same.     Post  Svo.  5s. 

The  Broad  and  the  Narrow  "Way;  Two 
Sermons  preached  before  the  University  of 
Cambridge.     By  the  same.     Crown  8vo.  2s. 

Hev.  T.  H.  Home's  Introduction 

to  the  Critical  Study  and  Knowledge  of  the 
Holy  Scriptures.  Eleventh  Edition,  cor- 
rected, and  extended  under  careful  Editorial 
revision.  With  4  Maps  and  22  Woodcuts 
and  Facsimiles.     4  vols.  Svo.  £3  13s.  6d. 

'Rev.  T.  H.  Home's  Compendious  In- 
troduction to  the  Study  of  the  Bible,  being 
an  Analysis  of  the  larger  work  bj'  the  same 
Author.  Re-edited  by  the  Rev.  John 
Atke,  M.A.    With  Maps,  &c.    Post  Svo.  9s. 

The  Treasury  of  Bible  Know- 
ledge, on  the  plan  of  Maunder's  Treasuries. 
By  the  Rev.  John  Ayre,  M.A.  Fcp.  Svo. 
with  Maps  and  Illustrations.  [7/i  the  press. 

The  Greek  Testament ;  with  Notes, 

Grammatical  and  ICxegetical.  Bv  the  Rev. 
W.  Webstek,  M.A.  and  the  Rev.  W.  F. 
Wilkinson,  M.A.     2  vols.  Svo.  £2  4s. 

Vol.  I.  the  Gospels  and  Acts,  20s. 

Vol.  n.  the  Epistles  and  Apocalypse,  24s. 

The  Four  Experiments  in  Church 

and  Stute;  and  the  Conflicts  of  Churches. 
By  Lord  Robeut  Montagu,  M.P.  Svo.  12s. 

Every-day  Scripture  Difficulties 

explained  and  illustrated;  Gospels  of  t-'t. 
Matthew  and  St.  Mark.  By  J.  E.  Pkescott, 
M.A.    Svo.  ds. 


The    Pentateuch    and    Book   of 

Joshua  Critically-  Examined.  By  the  Right 
Rev.  J.  W.  Coi.ENSO,  D.D.  Loid  Bishop  of 
Natal.  People's  Edition,  in  1  vol.  crown 
Svo.  C.S-.  or  in  5  Parts,  Is.  each. 

The    Pentateuch    and    Book   of 

Joshua  Critically  Examined.  By  Prof.  A. 
KI3ENEN,  of  Leyden.  Translated  from  the 
Dutch,  and  edited  with  Notes,  by  the  Right 
Rev.  J.  W.  CoLEN.so,  D.D.  Bishop  of  Natal. 
Svo.  8s.  Gd. 

The  Formation  of  Christendom. 

Part  I.     By  T.  W.  Ali,i7.s.     Svo.  12s. 

Christendom's  Divisions  ;  a  Philo- 
sophical Sketch  of  the  Divisions  of  the 
Christian  Family  in  East  and  West.  By 
Edmund  S.  Ffoulices,  formerly  Fellow  and 
Tutor  of  Jesus  Coll.  Oxford.   Post  Svo.  7s.  Gd. 

The  Life  of  Christ,  an  Eclectic  Gos- 
pel, from  the  Old  and  New  Testaments, 
arranged  on  a  Xew  Principle,  with  -■Analytical 
Tables,  &c.  By  Charles  De  la  Pryme, 
M.A.  TriiL  Coll.  Camb.  Revised  Edition. 
Svo.  5s. 

The  Hidden   Wisdom  of  Christ 

and  the  Key  of  Knowleiige;  or.  History  of 
the  Apocrypha.  By  Ernest  de  Bunsen. 
2  vols.  Svo.  -/8s. 

Hippolytus   and  his  Age  ;    or,  the 

Beginnings  and  Prospects  of  Christianitj'. 
By  Baron  13unsen,  D.D.     2  vols.  Svo.  30s. 

Outlines  of  the  Philosophy  of  TTni- 
versal  History,  ajiplied  to  Language  and 
Religion :  Containing  an  Account  of  the 
Alphabetical  Cotiferences.  By  the  same 
Author.     2  vols.  Svo.  33s. 

Analecta  Ante-TvTicaDna.  By  the.  same 
Author.     3  vols.  Svo.  42.'!. 

Essays  on  Religion  and  Litera- 
ture. l>3'  various  Writers.  Edited  by 
H.  E.  Manning,  D.D.     Svo.  10s.  Gd. 

Essays  and  Reviews.    By  the  Rev. 

W.  Temple,  D  D.  the  Rev.  R.  Wiluams, 
B.D.  the  Rev.  B.  Powell  M.A.  the  Rev. 
H.  B  Wilson,  B.D.  C.  W.  Goodwin,  M.A. 
the  Rev.  M.  Pattisox,  B.D.  and  the  Rev. 
B.JowETT,  M..A..  12th  Edition.  Fcp.  Svo.  os. 

Mosheim's  Ecclesiastical  History. 

Mi;ri)ocic  and  Soami.s's  Translation  ;iiid 
Notes,  re-edited  by  the  Rev.  W.  Stubbs, 
iii.A.     3  vols.  Svo.  4.5s. 


14 


NEW  WORKS  PUBLISHED  BY  LONGMANS  and  CO. 


Bishop  Jeremy  Taylor's   Entire 

Works:  With  Life  by  Bishop  Hebek. 
Eevised  and  corrected  by  the  Rev.  C.  P. 

Eden,  10  vols.  £b  5s. 

Passing    Thoughts   on   Religion. 

By  the  Author  of '  Amy  Herbert.'    8th  Edi- 
■    tion.    Fcp.  5s. 

Tliouglits  for  the  Holy  Week,  for 
Young  Persons.  By  the  same  Author. 
3d  Edition.     Fcp.  8vo.  2s. 

NigM  Lessons  from  Scripttu'e.  By  the 
same  Author.     2d  Edition.     32mo.  3s. 

Self-examination  before  Confirmation. 
B3'  the  same  Author.    32mo.  Is.  Gd. 

Readings  for  a  Month  Preparatory  to 
Confirmation  from  Writers  of  the  Pearly  and 
English  Church.    By  the  same.    Fcp.  4s. 

Headings  for  Every  Day  in  Lent,  com- 
piled from  the  Writings  of  Bishop  Jeremy 
Taylor.    By  the  same.    Fcp.  os. 

Preparation  for  the  Hoiy  Communion ; 
the  Devotions  chiefly  from  the  works  of 
Jebemy  Taylor.   By  the  same.    32mo.  Ss. 

Morning    Clouds.      Second    Edition. 

Fcp.  OS. 
Spring  and  Autumn.    By  the  same  Author. 
Post  8vo.  6s. 

The  Wife's    Manual ;    or,  Prayers, 

Thoughts,  and  Songs  on  Several  Occasions 
of  a  Matron's  Life.  By  the  Rev.  W.  Cal- 
vert, M.A.    Crown  8vo.  10s.  6cf, 

Spiritual  Songs  for  the  Sundays 

and  Holidays  throughout  the  Year.  By 
J.  S.  B.  Monsell,  LL.D.  Vicar  of  Egham. 
Fourth  Edition.     Fcp,  4s.  GcZ. 

The  Beatitxides  :  Abasement  before  God : 
Sorrow  for  Sin  ;  Meekness  of  Spirit ;  Desire 
for  Holiness  ;  Gentleness ;  Purity  of  Heart ; 
the  Peace-makers;  Sufferings  for  Christ. 
By  the  same.     2d  Edition,  fcp.  3s.  6(/. 

Hymnologia  Christiana ;  or,  Psalms 

and  Hymns  selected  and  arranged  in  the 
order  of  the  Christian  Seasons.  By  B.  H. 
Kennedy,  D.D.  Prebendary  of  Lichfield. 
Crown  8vo.  7s.  6d. 

Lyra  Domestica  ;  Christian  Songs  for 
Domestic  Edification.  Translated  from  the 
Psaltery  and  Harp  of  C.  J.  P.  Spitta,  and 
from  other  sources,  by  Richard  Massie. 
First  and  Second  Series,  fcp.  4s.  6d.  each. 

Lyra  Sacra  ;  Hymns,  Ancient  and 
Modern,  Odes,  and  Fragments  of  Sacred 
Poetry.  Edited  by  the  Rev  B.  W.  Sayile, 
M.A.     Fcp.  5s. 


Lyi*a  Germanica,  translated  from  the 
German  by  Miss  C.  Winkwortii.  First 
Series,  Hj'mns  for  tha  Sundays  and  Chief 
Festivals;  Second  Series,  the  Christian 
Life.    Fcp.  5s.  each  Series. 

Hymns  from  Lyra  Germanica,  aSmo,  1*. 

Historical   Notes   to   the    'Lyra 

Germanica : '  containing  brief  Memoirs  of 
the  Authors  of  the  Hymns,  and  Notices  of 
Remarkable  Occasions  on  which  some  of 
them  have  been  used ;  with  Notices  of  other 
German  Hymn  Writers.  By  Theodore 
KL'bler.     Fcp.  7s.  6c/. 

Lyra    Eucharistica  ;    Hymns    and 

Verses  on  the  Holy  Communion,  Ancient 
and  Modern  ;  with  other  Poems.  Edited  by 
the  Rev.  Orby  Shipley,  M,A.  Second 
Edition.     Fcp.  7s.  6d. 

Lyra  Messianica ;  Hymns  and  Verses  on 
the  Life  of  Christ,  Ancient  and  Modern ; 
with  other  Poems.  By  the  same  Editor. 
Fcp.  7s.  6c?. 

Lyra  Mystica ;  Hymns  and  Verses  on  Sacred 
Subjects,  Ancient  and  Modern.  By  the 
same  Editor.     Fcp.  7s.  Cc/. 

The  Chorale  Book  for  England ; 

a  complete  Hymn- Book  in  accordance  with 
the  Services  and  Festivals  of  the  Church  of 
England  -.  the  Hymns  translated  by  Miss  C. 
Winkwortii  ;  the  Tunes  arranged  by  Prof. 
W.  S.  Bennett  and  Otto  Goldschbhdt. 
Fcp.  4to.  12s.  Qd. 
Congregational  Edition.    Fcp.  -Is. 

The    Catholic    Doctrine    of    the 

Atonement;  an  Historical  Inquirj'  into  its 
Development  in  the  Church  :  with  an  Intro- 
duction on  the  Principle  of  Theological 
Developments.  By  H.  N.  Oxenham,  M.A. 
formerly  Scholar  of  Balliol  College,  Oxford. 
8vo.  8s.  Of?. 

Prom  Sunday  to  Sunday;  an  attempt 

to  consider  familiarly  the  Weekday  Life 
and  Labours  of  a  Country  Clergyman.  By 
R.  Gee,  M.A.  Vicar  of  Abbott's  Langley 
and  Rural  Dean.     Fcp.  5s. 

First    Sundays    at    Church;    or. 

Familiar  Conversations  on  the  Morning  and 
Evening  Services  of  the  Church  of  England. 
By  J.  E.  Riddle,  M.A.     Fcp.  2s.  &d. 

The    Judgment    of    Conscience, 

and  other  Sermons.  By  Richard  Whately, 
D.D.  late  Archbishop  of  Dublin.  Crown 
8vo.  4s.  6r/. 

Paley's    Moral    Philosophy,    with 

Annotations.  By  Richard  Whately, D.D. 
late  Archbishop  of  Dublin.     8vo.  7s. 


XEW  WOEKS  PUBLISHED  BY  LONGMANS  and  CO. 


ir. 


Travels^    Voyages,  Sfc. 


Outline    Sketches    of    the    High 

Alps  of  Dauphine.  By  T.  G.  Bonney,  M.A. 
F.G.S.  M.A.C.  Fellow  of  St.  John's  Coll, 
Camb.  With  13  Plates  and  a  Coloured  Map. 
Post  4to.  16s. 

lee  Caves  of  France  and  Switzer- 
land; a  narrative  of  Subterranean  Explora- 
tion. By  the  Eev.  G.  F.  Browne,  MA. 
Fellow  and  Assistant-Tutor  of  St.  Catherine's 
Coll.  Cambridge,  M.A.C.  With  II  Woodcuts. 
Square  crown  8vo.  12s.  Gd. 

Village  Life  in  Switzerland.    By 

Sophia  D..  Delmaed.    Post  8vo.  9s.  M. 

How  we  Spent  the  Summer;  or, 

a  Yoyago  cu  Zigzag  in  Switzerland  and 
Tyrol  with  some  Members  of  the  Alpine 
Club.  From  the  Sketch-Book  of  one  of  the 
Party.  In  oblong  4to.  with  about  300  Illus- 
trations, 10s.  6f/. 

Map  of  the  Chain  of  Mont  Blanc, 

from  an  actual  Survev  in  1863 — ISCi.  By 
A.  Adajis-Eeilly,  f'r.G.S.  M.A.C.  Pub- 
lished under  the  Authority  of  the  Alpine 
Club.  In  Chromolitliography  on  extra  stout 
drawing-paper  28in.  ;;  17in.  price  10s.  or 
mounted  on  canvas  in  a  folding  case,  12s.  M. 

The  Hunting  Grounds  of  the  Old 

World  ;  First  Sskies,  Asia.  By  11.  A.  L. 
the  Old  Sheknrry.  Third  Edition,  with  7 
Illustrations.     8vo.  18s. 

Camp  and  Cantonment ;  a  Journal 

of  Eife  in  India  in  1857— 1859,  with  some 
Account  of  the  Way  thither.  By  Mrs.  Leo- 
pold Paget.  To  which  is  added  a  Short 
Narrative  of  the  Pursuit  of  the  Rebels  in 
Central  India  by  Major  Paget,  ll.H.A. 
Post  8vo.  10s.  M. 

Explorations      in      South  -  west 

Africa,  from  Walvisch  Bay  to  Lake  Ngami 
and  the  Victoria  Falls.  By  Tiiojias  Baines, 
F.R.G.S.  8vo.  with  Maps  and  Illustra- 
tions, 21s. 

South  American  Sketches  ;  or,  a 

Visit  to  Rio  Janeiro,  the  Organ  Mountains, 
La  Plata,  and  the  Parana.  By  Thomas  W. 
HiNCHLiFF,  M.A.  F.R.G.S.  Post  8vo.  with 
Illustrations,  12s.  6d. 

Vancouver   Island    and    British 

Columbia  ;  their  Historj',  Resources,  and 
Prospects.  By  Matthew  Macfie,  F.R.G.S. 
With  Maps  and  Illustrations.    8vo.  18s. 


History    of    Discovery    in    our 

Australasian  Colonies,  Australia,  Tasmania, 
and  New  Zealand,  from  the  Earliest  Date  to 
the  Present  Day.  By  Williaji  Howitt. 
With  3  Maps  of  the  Recent  Explorations 
from  Official  Sources.    2  vols.  8vo.  28s. 

The    Capital   of  the   Tycoon ;    a 

Narrative  of  a  3  Years'  Residence  in  Japan. 
By  Sir  Rutherford  Alcock,  K.C.B. 
2  vols.  8vo.  with  numerous  Illustrations,  42s. 

Last  Winter  in  Home.     By  C.  R. 

Weld.  With  Portrait  and  Engravings  on 
Wood.    Post  8vo.  14s. 

Autumn     Eambles      in      North 

Africa.  By  John  Ormsby,  of  the  Middle 
Temple.  With  16  Illustrations.  Post  8vo. 
8s.  M. 

The  Dolomite  Moxmtains.  Excur- 
sions through  Tyrol,  Cariuthia,  Carniola,and 
Friuli  in  1861,  1862,  and  1863.  By  J. 
Gilbert  and  G.  C.  Churchill,  F.R.G.S. 
With  numerous  Illustrations.  Square  crown 
8vo.  21s. 

A  Summer  Touj.'  in  the   G-risons 

and  Italian  Valleys  of  the  Bernina.  By 
Mrs.  Henry  Freshfield.  With  2  Coloured 
Maps  and  4  Views.    Post  8vo.  10s.  6c?. 

Alpine  Bjrways  ;  or,  Light  Leaves  gathered 
in  1859  and  1860.  By  the  same  Authoress. 
Post  8vo.  with  Illustrations,  10s.  M. 

A  Lady's  Tour  Round  Monte  Rosa; 

including  Visits  to  the  Italian  Valleys. 
With  Map  and  Illustrations.     Post  8vo.  14s. 

Guide  to  the  Pyrenees,  for  the  use 
of  Mountaineers.  By  Charles  Packe. 
With  Maps,  &c.  and  Appendix,     Fcp.  &s. 

The  Alpine  Guide.  By  John  Ball, 
M.R.I.A.  late  President  of  the  Alpine  Club. 
Post  8vo.  with  Maps  and  other  Illustrations. 

Guide  to  the  "Western  Alps,  including 
Mont  Blanc,  Monte  Rosa,  Zerraatt,  &c. 
7s.  6rf. 

Gtiide  to  the  Oberland  and  aU  Switzer- 
land, excepting  the  Neighbourhood  of 
Monte  Rosa  and  the  Great  St.  Bernard; 
Avith  Lombardy  and  the  -adjoining  portion 
ofTvrol.     7s.  6f7. 


16 


NEW  WORKS  PUBLISHED  BY  LONGMANS  and  CO. 


Christopher   Columbus ;   liis  Life, 


Voyages,  and  Discoveries. 
■with  4  ^\'oodcuts.     ISmo. 


Revised  Edition, 
2s.  6d. 


Captain    James    Cook;     bis   Life, 

Voyages,  and  Discoveries.  Revised  Edition, 
with  numerous  Woodcuts,     18nio.  2.?.  6d. 

lS"arratives  of  Shipwrecks  of  the 

Royal  Navy  between  1793  and  1857,  com- 
piled from  Official  Documents  in  the  Ad- 
miralty by  W.  0.  S.  GiLLY  ;  with  a  Preface 
by  W.  S.'Git.ly,  D.D.    3rd  Edition,  fcp.  5s. 


A  Week  at  the  Land's  End- 
By  J.  T.  Blight  ;  assisted  by  E.  H.  Rodd, 
R.  Q.  Couch,  and  J.  Ralfs.  With  Map 
and  96  Woodcuts.     Fcp.  6s.  Gd. 

Visits    to    Remarkable    Places  : 

Old  Halls,  Battle-Fields,  and  Scenes  illus- 
trative of  Striking  Passages  in  English 
History  and  Poetrj'.  By  William  Howitt. 
2  vols,  square  crown  8vo.  -with  Wood  En- 
gravings, 25s. 

The     Rural    Life    of    England. 

By  the  same  Author.  With  Woodcuts  by 
Bewick  and  Williams.  Medium  8vo.  12s.  6d. 


Works  of  Fiction. 


Late  Laurels  :  a  Talc.     By  the  Author 
of  '  Wheat  and  Tares.'    2  vols,  post  8vo.  15s. 

A  First  Friendship.    [Reprinted  from 
Fiuser's  Magazine.']     Crown  8vo.  7s.  Gd. 

Atherstone  Priory.  By  L.  N.  Comtn. 

2  vols,  post  8vo.  21s. 
Ellice  :  a  Talc.    By  the  same.    Post  8vo.  9s.  &d. 

Stories  and  Tales  by  the  Author 

of  '  Amy  Herbert,'  uniform    Edition,  each 
Tale  or  Story  complete  in  a  single  volume. 


Amy  Hekbert,  2s.  Gd. 
Gertrude,  2s.  Gd. 
Eaul's  Daughter, 

2s.  Gd. 
Experience  of  Life, 

2s.  Gd. 
Cleve  Halt>,  3s.  Gd. 
Ivors,  3s.  Gd. 


Katharine  Ashton, 
3s.  Gd. 

Margaret  Perci- 
VAL,  5s. 

Laneton  Parson- 
age, 4s  Gd. 

Ursula,  4s.  6c?. 


A  Glimpse  of  tlie  "World.  By  the  Author 
of  '  Amy  Herbert.'     Fcp.  7s.  Gd. 

Essays  on  Fiction,  reprinted  chiefly 
trom  Reviews,  with  Additions.  'By  Nassau 
W.  Senior.    Post  8vo.  10s.  Gd. 

Elihu  Jan's  Story;  or,  the  Private 
Life  of  an  Eastern  Queen.  By  William 
Knighton,  LL.D.  Assistant-Commissioner 
in  Oudh.     Post  8vo.  7.9.  Gd. 

The  Six  Sisters  of  the  Valleys: 

an  Historical  Romance.  By  W.  Bramley- 
MooRE,  M.A.  Incumbent  of  Gerrard's  Cross, 
Bucks.  Third  Edition,  with  1411lustraiions. 
Crown  8vo.  5s. 


i  The  Grladiators  :  a  Tale  of  Rome  and 
Juda3a.  By  G.  J.  Whyte  Melville. 
Crown  8vo.  bs. 

Digby  Grand,  .in  Autobiogi-aphy.  By  the 
same  Author.     1  vol.  5s. 

Kate  Coventry,  an  Autobioj^rajjhy.  By  the 
same.     1  vol.  6s. 

General  Bounce,  or  the  Lady  and  the  Lo- 
custs.    By  the  same.     1  vol.  5s. 

Holmby  House,  a  Tale  of  Old  Northampton- 
shire.    1  vol.  5s. 

Good  for  Nothing,  or  All  Down  Hill.  By 
the  same.     1  vol.  6s. 

The  Queen's  Maries,  a  Romance  of  Holy- 
rood.    1  vol.  6s. 

The  Interpreter,  a  Tale  of  the  War.  By 
the  same.     1  vol.  5s. 

Tales  from  Greek  Mythology. 
By  George  W.  Cox,  M.A.  late  Scholar 
of  Trin.  Coll.  Oxon.  Second  Edition.  Square 
16mo.  3s.  Gd. 

Tales  of  th.e  Gods  and  Heroes.  By  the 
same  Author.    Second  Edition.  Fcp.  bs. 

Tales  of  Thebes  and  Argos.  By  the  same 
Author.     Fcjj.  4s.  Gd. 

The  "Warden  :  a  Novel.  By  Anthony 
Trollope,     Crown  8vo.  3s.  Gd. 

Barehester  Towers :  a  Sequel  to  'The 
Warden.'  By  the  same  Author.  Crown 
8vo.  5s. 


NEW  WORKS  PUBLISHED  BY  LONGMANS  and  CO. 


17 


Poetry  and  the  Drama. 


Select  Works  of  the  British  Poets ; 

with  Biographical  and  Critical  Prefaces  by 
Dr.  AiiciN :  with  Supplement,  of  more 
recent  Selections,  by  LucyAikin.  Medium 
Svo.  18s. 

Goethe's  Second  Faust.    Translated 

by  John  Ansteu,  LL.D.  M.li.I.A.  Kegius 
Professor  of  Civil  Law  in  the  University  of 
Dublin.     Post  Svo.  I5s. 

Tasso's     Jerusalem      Delivered, 

translated  into  English  Yerse  by  Sir  J. 
Kingston  James,  Kt,  M.A.  2  vols.  fcp. 
with  Facsimile,  I4«. 

Poetical  "Works  of  John  Edmund 

Ileade ;  nith  final  Ilevision  and  Additions. 
3  vols.  fcp.  18s.  or  each  vol.  separately,  6s. 

Moore's  Poetical  Works,  Cheapest 

Editions  complete  in  1  vol.  including  the 
Autobiographical  Prefaces  and  Author's  last 
Notes,  which  are  still  copyright.  Crown 
Svo,  ruby  type,  with  Portrait,  7s.  Gd.  or 
People's  Edition,  in  larger  type,  12s.  6t/. 

Moore's  Poetical  "Works,  as  above,  Library- 
Edition,  medium  Svo.  with  Portrait  and 
Vignette,  14s.  or  in  10  vols.  fcp.  os.  6J.  each 

Tenniel's    Edition     of    Moore's 

Lalla  Rookh,  with  68  Wooil  Engravings 
from  Original  Drawings  and  otlier  Illustra- 
tions.    Fcp.  4to.  2 Is. 

Moore's  Lalla  Eookh.  32mo.  Platf,  1*. 
16mo.  Vignette,  2s.  Cc/. 


Maelise's  Edition  of  Moore's  Irish 

Melodies,  y/iVn.  161  Steel  Plates  from  Original- 
Drawings.     Super-ro3'al  Svo.  31s.  6(Z, 

Moore'a  Irish  Melodies,  32mo.  Portrait, 
Is.     16mo.  Vignette,  2s.  Gd. 

Southey's    Poetical    Works,   wliIi 

the  Author's  last  Corrections  and  copyrig'it 
Additions.  Librarj-  Edition,  in  i  vol. 
medium  Svo.  with  Portrait  and  Ti-;;ette, 
14s.  or  in  10  vols.  fcp.  3s.  Gc/.  each. 

Lays  of  Ancient  Rome  ;  wit!)  1,-nj 

and  the  Aniuida.  By  the  Riglit  Hon.  Loud 
Macaulay.     lOmo.  As.  Qd. 

Lord  Macaiilay's  Lays  of  /ncient 
Rome.  With  90  Illustrations  on  Woo.!, 
Original  and  from  t!ie  Antique,  from 
Drawings  by  G.  Scharf.    Fcp.  4to.  21s. 

Poems.  By  Jkan  Ingelow.  I>iinti!  Edi. 
tion.     Fcp.  Svo.  os. 

Poetical  Works  of  Letitia  Eliza- 
beth Landon  (L.E.L.)    2  vols.  IGmo.  10s. 

Playtime  with  the  Poets  :  a  Selec- 
tion of  the  best  English  Postr}'  for  tiie  n.se 
of  Children.    By  a  Lady.     Crown  Svo.  5s. 

Bowdler's    Family    Shakspeare, 

cheaper  Genuine  Edition,  complete  in  1  vo!. 
large  type,  with  36  Woodcut  Illu.strations, 
price  14s.  or,  with  the  same  Illustkatiu.ns, 
in  6  pocket  vols.  3s.  6(/.  each. 

Arundines  Cami,  sive  Jvlus^nim  Can- 

tabrigiensium  Liisus  Canori.  Co! legit  atque 
edidit  H.  Duury.  M.A.  Evlitio  Sexta,  cu- 
ravit  II.  J.  Hodgson,  JI.A.  Crown  Svo. 
7s.  6d. 


Rural  Sports,  c^r. 


Encyclopsedia  of  Rural   Sports  ; 

a  Complete  Account,  Historical,  Practical, 
and  Descriptive,  of  Hunting,  Shooting, 
Fishing,  Racing,  &c.  By  D.  P.  Bl.mne. 
With  above  600  Woodcuts  (20  from  Designs 
by  John  Lekcii).    Svo.  42s. 

Notes  on  Rifle  Shooting.  By  Cap- 
tain Heaton,  Adjutant  of  the  Third  Man- 
chester Rifle  Volunteer  Corps.    Fcp.  2s.  Qd. 


Col.    Hawker's    Instructions    to 

Young  Sportsmen  in  all  that  relates  to  Guns 
and  Shooting.  Revised  by  the  Author's  Sox. 
Square  crown  Svo.  with  Illustrations,  IBs. 

The  Dead  Shot,or  Sportsman's  Complete 
Guide;  a  Treatise  on  the  Use  of  the  Gun, 
Dog-breaking,  Pigeon-shooting,  &c.  Bj 
Marksman.    Fcp.  Svo.  with  Plates,  os. 


18 


NEW  WORKS  PUBLISHED  BY  LONGMANS  akd  CO. 


The    Fly  -  Fisher's    Entomology. 

Ry  AxFRED  Ronalds.  With  coloured 
Representations  of  the  Natural  and  Ariifi- 
cial  Insect.  Gth  Edition ;  with  20  coloured 
Plates.    8x0.  lis. 

Hand-book  of  Angling  :  Teaching 

Fly-fishing,  Trolling,  Bottom- fishing,  Sal- 
mon-fishing; with  the  Natural  History  of 
River  Fish,  and  the  best  modes  of  Catching 
them.  By  I'^hemera.    Fcp.  Woodcuts,  5s. 

The  Cricket  Field ;  or,  the  History 
and  the  Science  of  the  Game  of  Cricket.  By 
James  Pyckoft,  B.A.  Trin.  Coll.  Oxon. 
4th  Edition.    Fcp.  5s. 

The  Cricket  Tvitor  ;  a  Treatise  exclusively 
Practical.    By  the  same.     18mo.  Is. 

Cricketana.  By  the  same  Author.  With  1 
Portraits  of  Cricketers.     Fcp.  6s. 

The  Horse  :  with  a  Treatise  on  Draught. 
By  WiLLiAJi  Youatt.  New  Edition,  re- 
vised and  enlarged.  8  to.  with  numerous 
Woodcuts,  10s.  6d. 

,  The  Dog.    By  the  same  Author.    8vo.  with 
numerous  Woodcuts,  6s. 


The  Horse's  Foot,  and  how  to  keep 

it  Sound.  By  W.  Miles,  Esq.  9th  Edition, 
with  Illustrations.    Imp.  8vo.  12s.  Gd. 

A  Plain  Treatise  on  Horse-shoeing.  By 

the  same  Author.  Post  8vo.  with  Illustra- 
tions, 2s.  Gd. 

Stables  and  Stable  Fittings.  By  the  same. 
Imp.  8vo.  with  13  Plates,  15s. 

Remarks  on  Horses'  Teeth,  addressed  to 
Purchasers.    By  the  same.  Post  8vo.  Is.  Gd. 

On    Drill    and    Manoeuvres     of 

Cavalry,  combined  with  Horse  Artillery. 
By  Major- Gen.  Michael  W.  Smith,  C.B. 
Commanding  the  Poonah  Division  of  the 
Bombay  Army.     8vo.  12s.  Gd. 

The  Dog  in  Health  and  Disease. 

By  Stoneiienge.  With  70  Wood  En- 
gravings.    Square  crown  8vo.  15s. 

The  Greyhound  in  1864.  By  the  same 
Author.  With  24  Portraits  of  Greyhounds, 
Square  crown  8vo.  21s. 

The  Ox,  his  Diseases  and  their  Treat- 
ment ;  with  an  Essaj*  on  Parturition  in  the 
Cow.  By  J.  R.  DoBSON,  M.R.C.V.S.  Crown 
8vo.  Avith  Illustrations,  7s.  Gd. 


Commerce,  Navigation,  and  Mercantile  Ajfairs. 


The  Law  of  Nations  Considered 

as  Independent  Political  Communities.  Bj' 
Travers  Taviss,  D.C.L.  Regius  Professor 
of  Civil  Law  in  the  Uuiversitj'  of  Oxford. 
2  vols.  8vo.  30s.  or  separately,  Part  I.  Peace, 
12s.  Part  II.  War,  IBs. 

A  Nautical   Dictionary,  defining 

the  Technical  Language  relative  to  the 
Building  and  Equipment  of  Sailing  Vessels 
and  Steamers,  &c.  By  Arthur  Young. 
Second  Edition;  with  Plates  and  150  Wood- 
cuts.   8vo.  18s. 


A  Dictionary,  Practical,  Theo- 
retical, and  Historical,  of  Commerce  and 
Commercial  Navigation.  By  J.  R.  M'Cul- 
LOCH.    8vo.  with  Maps  and  Plans,  50s, 

The   Study   of   Steam   and    the 

Marine  Engine,  for  Young  Sea  Officers.  By 
S.  M.  Saxby,  R.N.  Post  8vo.  with  87 
Diagrams,  5s.  Gd, 

A  Manual  for  Naval  Cadets.    By 

J.  M'Neil  Boyd,  late  Captain  R.N.  Third 
Edition ;  with  240  Woodcuts,  and  1 1  coloured 
Plates.    Post  8vo.  12s.  Gd. 


Works  of  Utility  and  General  Information, 


Modern     Cookery     for     Private 

Families,  reduced  to  a  S3'stem  of  Easy 
Practice  in  a  Series  of  carefully -tested 
Receipts.  By  Eliza  Acton.  Newl}'  re- 
vised and  enlarged;  with  8  Plates,  Figures, 
and  150  Woodcuts.     Fcp.  7s.  Gd. 


The  Handbook  of  Dining ;  or.  Cor- 
pulency and  Leanness  scientificallj'  con- 
sidered. By  Brillat-Savarin,  Author  of 
'  Physiologic  du  Gout.'  Translated  by 
L.  F.  Simpson.  Revised  Edition,  with 
Additions.    Fcp.  3«.  Gd. 


NEW  WORKS  PUBLISHED  Br  LONGMANS  and  CO, 


H^ 


On  Food,  and  its   Digestion  ;   an 

Introduction  to  Dietetics.  By  W.  Bkinton, 
M.D.  Phj'sician  to  St.  Thomas's  Hospital, 
&c.    With  48  Woodcuts.    Post  8vo.  12s. 


Wine,  the  Vine,  and  the  Cellar. 

By  Thomas  G.  Shaw.  Second  Edition, 
revised  and  enlarged,  with  Frontispiece  and 
31  Illustrations  on  Wood.    8vo.  16s, 


A  Practical  Treatise  on  Brewing ; 

with  Formula)  for  Public  Brewers,  and  In- 
structions for  Private  Families.  By  W. 
Black.    8vo.  10s.  M. 


Short  Whist.       By   Major    A,     The 

Sixteenth  Edition,  revised,  %vith  an  Essay 
on  the  Theory  of  the  Modern  Scientiiic 
Game  by  Prof.  P.     Fcp.  Ss.  6d. 


Whist,  What  to  Lead.     By  Cam. 

Second  Edition.     32mo.  Is. 

Hints    on    Etiquette     and    the 

Usages  of  Society ;  with  a  Glance  at  Bad 
Habits.  Revised,  with  Additions,  by  a  Lady 
of  Rank.  Fcp,  2s.  6d. 

The  Cabinet   Lawyer ;   a  Popular 

Digest  of  the  Laws  of  England,  Civil  and 
Criminal  20th  Edition,  extended  by  the 
Author ;  including  the  Acts  of  the  Sessions 
1863  and  1864.    Fcp.  10s,  6d. 


The  Philosophy  of  Health ;  or,  an 

Exposition  of  the  Phj-siological  and  Sanitary 
Conditions  conducive  to  Human  Longevity 
and  Happiness.  By  Southwood  Smith, 
M.D.  Eleventh  Edition,  revised  and  en- 
larged; Avith  113  Woodcuts.     8vo.  15s. 

Hints  to  Mothers  on  the  Manage- 
ment of  their  Health  during  the  Period  of 
Pregnancy  and  in  the  Lying-in  Room.  Bv 
T.  Bull,  M.D,     Fcp.  5s. 

Th.8  Maternal  Management  of  Children 
in  Health  and  Disease,  Bj'  the  same 
Author.     Fcp.  os. 

Notes  on  Hospitals.  By  Florence. 
Nightingale.  Third  Edition,  enlargetl;. 
with  13  Plans.     Post  4to.  18s. 

C.  M.  WiUich's  Popiilar  Tables 

for  Ascertaining  the  "Value  of  LifehokU 
Leasehold,  and  Church  Property,  Renewal 
Fines,  &c,;  the  Public  Funds;  Annual 
Average  Price  and  Interest  on  Consols  from 
1731  to  1861  ;  Chemical,  Geographical,. 
Astronomical,  Trigonometrical  Tables,  &c. 
Post  8vo.  10s. 

Thomson's    Tables  of    Interest, 

at  Three,  Four,  Four  and  a  Half,  and  Five 
per  Cent.,  from  One  Pound  to  Ten  Thousand 
and  from  1  to  365  Days.     12mo.  3s.  Gd. 

Maunder's  Treasuiy  of  Know- 
ledge and  Libraiy  of  Reference :  comprising 
an  English  Dictionary  and  Grammar,  Uni- 
versal Gazetteer,  Classical  Dictionary,  Chro- 
nology, Law  Dictionary,  Synopsis  of  tlie- 
Peerage,  useful  Tables,  &c.     Fcp.  10s. 


General  and  School  Atlases. 


An  Atlas  of  History  and  Geo- 
graphy, representing  the  Political  State  of 
the  World  at  successive  Epochs  from  the 
commencementof  the  Christian  Era  to  the 
Present  Time,  in  a  Series  of  16  coloured 
Maps.  By  J.  S.  Brewer,  M.A.  Third 
Edition,  revised,  &c.  b^'  E.  C  Brewer, 
LL.D.     Royal  8vo.  15s. 

Bishop  Butler's  Atlas  of  Modern 

Geography,  in  a  Series  of  33  full-coloured 
Maps,  accompanied  b)'  a  complete  Alpha- 
betical Index,  New  Edition,  correctctl  and 
enlarged.     Iiojal  8vo.  10s,  6c/. 

Bishop  Butler's  Atlas  of  Ancient 

Geography,  in  a  Series  of  24  full-coloured 
Maps,  accompanied  by  a  complete  Accen- 
tuated Index,  New  Edition,  corrected  and 
enlarged.     Royal  8vo.  12s, 


School  Atlas  of  Physical,   Poli- 
tical, and  Commercial   Geography,  in  17 
full-coloured    Maps,   accompanied    by  de- 
scriptive   Letterpress.      By    E.    Hughe* 
F.R.A.S.     Royal  8yo.  10s.  Gd. 

Middle- Class   Atlas   of    General 

Geography,  in  a  Series  of  29  full-coloured 
Maps,  containing  the  most  recent  Terri- 
torial Changes  and  Discoveries.  By  Walter 
M'Leod,  F.R.G.S.    4to.  5s, 


Physical  Atlas  of  Great  Britain 

and  Ireland;    comprising  30  full-coloured 
Maps,  with  illustrative  Letterpress,  forming 
a  concise  Synopsis  of  British  Physical  Geo- 
graphy.   By  Walter  M'Leod,    F.R.G.S* 
Fcp.  4to.  7s.  Gd. 


20 


NEW  WORKS  PUBLISHED  by  LONGMANS  and  CO. 


Periodical  Publications. 


The  Edinburgh  Review,  or  Cri- 

tiial  Journal,  published  Quarterly  in  Janu- 
ary, April,  July,  and  October.  8vo.  price 
Cs.  eiR-li  No. 

The    Geological     Magazine,     or 

Monthly  Journal  of  Geology,  edited  by 
Henry  Woodward,  F.GS.  ;  assisted  by 
Prof,  J.  Mouuis,  F.G.S.  and  R.  Etiikuidge, 
P.R  S.E.  F.G.S.     8vo.  price  Is.  each  No. 


Fraser's  Magazine  for  Town  and 

Country,  published    on    the    1st    of    each 
Month.    8vo.  price  2s.  Grf.  each  No. 

The   Alpine   Jotirnal:  a  Record  of 

Mountain  Adventure  and  Scientific  Obser- 
vation. By  Members  of  the  Alpine  Cluh. 
Edited  by  H.  B.  George,  JI.A.  Published 
Quarterly,  May  31,  Aug.  31,  Nov.  30,  Feb. 
28.    8vo.  price  Is.  6cZ.  each  No. 


Knowledge  for  the  Young. 


The  Stepping  Stone  to  Knowledge: 

Containing  upwards  of  Seven  Hundred 
Questions  and  Answers  on  Miscellaneous 
Subjects,  adapted  to  the  capacity  of  Infant 
Minds.  By  a  IMorjiKR.  New  Edition, 
enlarged  and  improved.     ISmo.  price  !»•. 

The  Stepping  Stone  to  Geography : 
Containing  several  Hundred  Questions  and 
Answers  on  Geographical  Subjects.  18mo.  Is. 

The  Stepping  Stone  to  English  History : 
Containing  several  Hundred  Questions  and 
Answers  on  the  History  of  England.    Is. 

The  Stepping  Stone  to  Bible  Knovy- 
ledgc:  Contaniing  several  Hundred  Ques- 
tions and  Answers  on  the  Old  and  New 
Testaments.     18mo.  Is. 

The  Stepping  Stone  to  Biography: 
Containing  several  Hundred  Questions  and 
Answers  on  the  Lives  of  Eminent  Men  and 
Women.     18mo.  Is. 

Second   Series   of  the    Stepping 

Stone  to  Knowledge :  containing  upwards 
of  Eight  Hundred  Questions  and  Answers 
on  Sliscellaneous  Subjects  not  contained  in 
the  First  Series.     ]8mo.  Is. 

The  Stepping  Stone  to  French  Pronun- 
ciation and  Conversation:  Containing  seve- 
ral Hundred  Questions  and  Answers.  By 
Mr.  P.  Sadler.     18mo.  Is. 

The  Stepping  Stone  to  English  Gram- 
mar :  containing  several  Hundred  Questions 
and  .Answers  on  English  Grammar.  By 
Mr.  P.  Sadler.     18mo.  Is. 

The  Stepping  Stone  to  Nattiral  History : 
Ykmtkijkatk  or  Backboxed  Anim'ai.s. 
Vaiw '[,  MammuUa;  Part  II.  Birds,  Rep- 
tiles, Fishes.     18mo.  Is.  each  Part. 


The  Instructor;  or.  Progressive  Les- 
sons  in  General    Knowledge.      Originally 
published  under  the  Direction  of  the  Com- 
mittee of  General  Literature  and  Education 
of  the   Society    for    Promoting    Christian 
Knowledge.    7  vols.  18mo.  freely  illustrated 
with  Woodcuts  and  Maps,  price  1  Is. 
I.  Exercises,Tales,and  Conversations 
on  Familiar  Subjects  ;  with  luisy  Les- 
.sons  from  History.     Revised  and  im- 
proved Edition.     Price  2s. 
II.  Lessons  on  Dwelling-Houses  and 
the  Materials  used  in  Building  Them; 
on  Articles  of  Furniture ;  and  on  Food 
and  Clothing.     Revised  and  improved 
Edition.     Price  2s. 

III.  Lessons  on  the  Universe ;  on  the 

Three  Kingdoms  of  Nature,  Ani- 
mal, Vegetable,  and  Mineral ;  on  the 
Structure,  Senses,  and  Habits  <if  I\Ian ; 
and  on  the  Preservation  of  Health. 
Revised  and  improved  Edition.     2i-. 

IV.  Lessons  on  the  Calendar  and  Al- 

manack; on  the  Twelve  Months  of  the 
Year  ;  and  on  the  appearances  of  Na- 
ture in  the  Four  Seasons,  Spring, 
Summer,  Autumn,  and  Winter.  Re- 
vised and  improved  Edition.  Price  2s. 
v.  Descriptive  Geography  with  Popu- 
lar Statistics  of  the  various  Countries 
and  Divisions  of  the  Globe,  their  Peo- 
ple and  Productions.  Revised  and 
imjiroved  Edition.  With  G  Maps.  2s. 
VT.  Elements  of  Ancient  History,  from 
the  Formation  of  the  First  Great  Mo- 
narchies to  the  Fall  of  the  Roman 
Empire.  Revised  and  improved  Edi- 
tion. Price  2s. 
VII.  Elements  of  [Mediaeval  and]  Mo- 
dern History,  from  a.d.  406  to  a.d. 
18G2 :  with  brief  Notices  of  European 
Colonies.  Revised  and  improved  Edi» 
tion.    Price  2s. 


INDEX. 


Abbott  on  Sight  and  Touch 6 

Acton's  Modern  Cookery    18 

Ai kin's  Select  British  Poets 1" 

— — —  Memoirs  and  Remains 3 

Alcock's  Residence  in  Japun 15 

Allies  on  Formation  of  Christianity 13 

Alpine  Guide  (The) 15 

■ Journal  (The) 20 

Apjohn's  Manual  of  the  Metalloids 8 

Arago's  Biographies  of  Scientific  Men  ....  4 

Popular  Astronoray 7 

— Meteorological  Essays 7 

Arnold's  Manual  of  English  Literature....  5 

Arnctt's  Elements  of  Physics  8 

Arundines  Canil    17 

Atherstone  Priory    16 

Atkinson's  Papinian    4 

Autumn  Holidays  of  a  Country  Parson    ....  6 

Ayrk's  Treasury  of  Bible  Knowledge 13 

Babb  age's  Life  of  a  Philosopher 3 

Bacon's  Essays,  by  VVhately 4 

Life  and  Letters,  by  Speddinq..  ..  3 

— ■ Works,  by  Ellis,  Spedding,  and 

H  BATH 4 

Bain  on  the  Emotions  and  Will 6 

on  the  Senses  and  Intellect 6 

on  the  Study  of  Character 6 

Baines's  Explorations  iu  S.W.  Africa  ....  15 

Ball's  Guide  to  the  Central  Alps 15 

Guide  to  the  Western  Alps  15 

Bayldon's  Rents  and  Tillages 12 

Black's  Treatise  on  Brewing 19 

Blackley   and    Fhiedlander's  German 

and  English  Dictionary 5 

Blainb's  Rural  Sports 17 

Blight's  Week  at  the  Land's  End 16 

Bonn ey's  Alps  of  Dauphin^   15 

Bourne's  Catechism  of  the  Steam  Engine..  12 

Handbook  of  Steam  Engine   ....  12 

Treatise  on  the  Steam  Engine. ...  11 

Bowdler's  Family  Skakspeare 17 

Boyd's  Manual  for  Naval  Cadets 18 

Hr  A  M  ley-Moore's  Six  Sisteis  of  the  Valleys  16 
Brandk's  Dictionary  of  Science,  Literature, 

andArt 9 

Bray's  (C.)  Education  of  the  Feelings 7 

Philosophy  of  Necessity 7 

(Mrs.)  Briiish  Empire 7 

Brewer's  Atlas  of  History  and  Geography  19 

Brinton  on  Food  and  Digestion 19 

Bristow's  Glossary  of  Mineralogy 8 

BRODifc's  (Sir  C.  B.)  Psychological  Inquiries  7 

. Works 10 

■ Autobiography 10 

Browne's  Ice  Caves  of  France  and  Switzer- 
land   15 


Browne's  Exposition  39  Articles 12 

— : Pentateuch I3 

Buckle's  History  of  Civilization 2 

Bull's  Hints  to  Mothers 19 

Maternal  Management  of  Children..  19 

Bunskn's  Analecta  Ante-Nicsena 13 

Ancitnt  Egypt 2 

Hippolytiis  and  his  Age  13 

Pliilosopby  of  Universal  History  13 

Bunsen  on  Apocrypha 13 

Bun  yan's  Pilgrim's  Progress,  illustrated  by 

Ben'nktt 11 

Burke's  Vicissitudes  of  Families 4 

Burton's  Christian  Church   3 

BuTLEii's  Atlas  of  Ancient  Geography  ....  19 
Modern  Geography 19 

Cabinet  Lawyer 19 

Calvert's  Wife's  Manual  14 

Campaigner  at  Hioiie 6 

Cats  and  Fa  It  lie's  Moral  Emblems 11 

Chorale  Book  for  England  14 

CoLENso  (Bishop)  on  Pentateuch  and  Book 

of  Joshua 13 

Columbus's  Voyages 16 

Commonplace    Philosopher    iu   Town    and 

Country 6 

Conington's  Handbook  of  Chemical  Ana- 
lysis    9 

Contanseau's  Pocket  French  and  English 

Dictionary 5 

Practical  ditto 5 

Con  YBEARE  and  Howson's  Life  and  Epistles 

ofSt.  Paul 12 

Cook's  Voyages   16 

CoPLA^D's  Dictionary  of  Practical  Medicine  10 

Abridgment  of  ditto 10 

Cox's  Tales  ot  the  Great  Persian  War 2 

Tales  from  Greek  .Mythology 16 

Tales  of  the  Gods  and  Heroes 16 

Tales  ot  Thehe.s  and  Argos  15 

Cresy's  Encyclopaedia  of  Civil  Engineering^  11 

Critical  Essays  ot  a  Country  Parson 6 

Crowe's  History  of  France 2 

D'AuBiGNF.'s  History  of  the  Reformation  in 

the  time  of  Calvin  2 

Dead  shot  (The),  by  Makks.man 17 

De  la  Rive's  Tre.-itise  on  Electricity 8 

Delmaud's  Village  Life  in  Switzerland....  15 

De  la  Pryme's  Life  oi  Christ 13 

De  Tocqueville's  Deiuticracy  in  America  2 

Diaiics  of  a  Ladv  of  Quality 3 

DoBsON  on  the  O-v is 

Dove's  Law  ot  Storms 7 

Doyle's  Chronicle  of  England 2 


22 


NEW  WOEKS  PUBLISHED  BY  LONGMANS  and  CO. 


Edinburgh  Review  (The)  20 

EUice,  a  Tale 16 

Ellicott's  Broad  and  Narrow  Way 13 

Commeiitary  on  Ephesians  ....  13 

Destiny  of  the  Creature 13 

Lectures  on  Life  of  Christ 13 

Commentary  on  Galatians  ....  13 

— — Pastoral  Epist.  13 

Philippians,&c.  13 

•  Thessalonians  13 

Essays  and  Reviews i3 

on  Religion  and  Literature,  edited  by 

Manning 13 

written  in  the  Intervals  of  Business  6 

Faikbairn's    Application    of     Cast    and 

Wrought  Iron  to  Building; 11 

Information  for  Engineers  . .  11 

Treatise  on  Mills  &  Millwork  11 

Ffoulkes's  Christendom's  Divisions 13 

First  Friendship  16 

FiTz  Roy's  Weather  Book    7 

Fowler's  Collieries  and  Colliers  13 

Eraser's  Magazine  20 

Fresh  field's  Alpine  Byways 15 

Tour  in  the  Grisons 15 

Friends  in  Council  6 

Froude's  History  of  England 1 

Garratt's  Marvels  and  Mysteries  of  Instinct  8 

Gee's  Sunday  to  Sunday 14 

Geological  Magazine 8,  20 

GiLBERxand  Churchill's  Dolomite  Moun- 
tains    15 

Gilly's  Shipwrecks  of  the  Navy 16 

Goethe's  Second  Faust,  by  Anster 17 

Goodeve's  Elements  of  Mechanism 11 

Gorle's  Questions  on  Browne's  Exposition 

of  the  39  Articles 12 

Graver  Thoughts  of  a  Country  Parson 6 

Gray's  Anatomy 10 

Greene's  Corals  and  Sea  Jellies  8 

Sponges  and  Animalculae 8 

Grove  on  Correlation  of  Physical  Forces  ..  8 

Gwilt's  Encyclopaidia  of  Arcliitecture   ....  11 

Handbook  of  Angling,  by  Ephemera 18 

Hare  on  Election  of  Representatives 5 

Hartwig's  Sea  and  its  Living  Wonders. ...  8 

Tropical  World    8 

Hawker's  Instructions  to  Young  Sports- 
men    17 

Heaton's  Notes  on  Rifle  Shooting 17 

Helps's  Spiinish  Conquest  in  America  ....  2 
Herschel's  Essays  from  the  Edinburgh  and 

Quarterly  Reviews  9 

■             Outlines  of  Astronomy 7 

Hewitt  on  the  Diseases  of  Women 9 

Hinchliff's  South  American  Sketches 15 

Hints  on  Etiqiiette 19 

Hodgson's  Time  and  Space 7 

Holland's  Chapters  on  Mental  Physiology  6 

Essays  on  Scientific  Subjects  ..  9 

Medical  Notes  and  Reflections  10 

Holm  es's  System  of  Surgeiy 10 

Hooker    and  Walker-Arnott's    British 

Flora 9 

Horne's  Introduction  to  the  Scriptures.. ..  13 


I    Horne's  Compendium  of  the  Scriptures  ..  13 

i    HosKYNs'sTalpa    12 

'     How  we  Spent  the  Summer 15 

Howitt's  Australian  Discovery  15 

!    • History  of  the  Supernatural 6 

Rural  Life  of  England 16 

Visits  to  Remarkable  Places 16 

HowsoN's  Ilulsean  Lectures  on  St.  Paul....  12 
Hughes's  (E.)  Atlas  of  Physical,  Political, 

and  Commercial  Geography  i>> 

' (W.)  Geography  of  British  His- 
tory   7 

Manual  of  Geography 7 

i    Hullah's  History  of  Modern  Music S 

Transition  Musical  Lectures  S 

j    Hum PHRKYs' Sentiments  of  Shakspeare.. ..  11 

'    Hunting  Grounds  of  the  Old  World 15 

Hymns  from  Lyra  Germanica 14 


Ingelow's  Poems 17 

Instructor  (The)   20 


i    Jameson's  Legends  of  the  Saints  and  Mar- 

i       tyrs  11 

j Legends  of  the  Madonna    11 

i Legends  of  tlie  Monastic  Orders  11 

;    Jameson  and  Eastlake's  History  of  Our 

Lord 11 

Johns's  Home  Walks  and  Holiday  Rambles  8 

Johnson's  Patentee's  Manual   11 

Practical  Draughtsman II 

Johnston's  Gazetteer,  or  Geographical  Dic- 
tionary    7 

Jones's  Christianity  and  Common  Sense  . .  7 


Kalisch's  Commentary  on  the  Old  Testa- 
ment    5 

Hebrew  Grammar 5 

Kennedy's  Hymnologia  Christiana   14 

Kesteven's  Domestic  Medicine    10 

KiRBY  and  Spence's  Kntomology    9 

Knighton's  Story  of  Elihu  Jan    16 

KIbler's  Notes  to  Lyra  Germanica It 

Kuenen  on  Pentateuch  and  Joshua 13 


Lady's  Tour  round  Monte  Rosa 15 

Landon's(L.  E.  L.)  Poetical  Works 17 

Late  Laurels 16 

Latham's  English  Diction.Try  5 

Leg ky's  History  of  Rationalism  2 

Leisure  Hours  in  Town 6 

Lewes's  Biographical  History  of  Philosophy  2 
Lewis  on  the  Astronomy  of  the  Ancients  ..  4 
on  the  Credibility  of  Early  Roman 

History    4 

Dialogue  on  Government 4 

. on  Egyptological  Method 4 

Essays  on  Administrations 4 

Fables  of  Babrius 4 

on  Foreign  Jurisdiction    4 

. on  Irish  Disturbances 4 

on  Observation  and  Reasoning  in 

Politics 4 

on  Political  Terms 4 

on  the  Romance  Languages    4 

LiDDELLaudScoTT'sGreeli-English  Lexicon  5 

Abridged  ditto    5 

LiNDLEV  and  Moore's  Treasury  of  Botany,  1> 


NEW  WORKS  PUBLISHED  BY  LONGMANS  and  CO. 


n 


Longman's  Lectures  on  the  History  of  Eng- 
land    1 

Loudon's  Encyclopaedia  of  Agriculture .. ..  12 

Cottase,    Tarni, 

and  Villa  Architecture 12 

Gardening   12 

Plants    9 

Trees  and  Shrubs  9 

Lowndes's  Engineer's  Handbook    11 

Lyra  Domestica    14 

Eucharistica 14 

Gernianica    11,  14 

Messianica    14 

Mystica 14 

Sacra 14 

Macaula y's  (Lord)  Essays 3 

— History  of  England 1 

Lays  of  Ancient  Rome 17 

■ Miscellaneous  Writings 6 

Speeches 5 

Speeches    on    Parliamentary 

Reform 5 

Macdoug all's  Theory  of  War 12 

Marshman's  Life  of  Havelock 3 

McLeod's    Middle-Class  Atlas  of  General 

Geography 19 

Physical  Atlas  of  Great  Britain 

and  Ireland    19 

McCuLLOCH  's  Dictionary  of  Commerce. ...  18 

Geographical  Dictionary  ....  7 

Macfie's  Vancouver  Island  15 

Magui re's  Life  of  Father  Mathew 3 

Rome  and  its  Rulers 3 

Mali  no's  Indoor  Gardener 9 

Massey's  History  of  England 1 

Massingberd's  History  of  the  Reformation  3 

Maunder's  Biographical  Treasury 4 

Geographical  Treasury 7 

Historical  Treasury  2 

Scientific  and  Literary  Treasury  |  9 

Treasury  of  Knowledge 19 

Treasury  of  Natural  History  ..  9 

Maury's  Physical  Geography , 7 

May's  Constitutional  History  of  England  . .  1 

Melville's  Digby  Grand   16 

General  Bounce 16 

Gladiators    16 

Good  for  Nothing 16 

Holmby  House  16 

Interpreter 16 

Kate  Coventry 16 

Queen's  Maries 16 

Mendelssohn's  Letters 3 

Menzies' Windsor  Great  Park 12 

on  Sewage 12 

Merivale's  (H.)  Colonisation  and  Colonies  7 

Historical  Studies    1 

(C.)  Fall  of  the  Roman  Republic  2 

Romans  under  the  Empire  2 

on  Conversion  of  Roman 

Empire 2 

■ on  Horse's  Foot 18 

. on  Horse  Shoeing 18 

■ on  Horses' Teeth 18 

on  Stables 18 

Mill  on  Liberty 4 

on  Representative  Government 4 

on  Utilitarianism 4 


JIill's  Dissertations  and  Discussions 4 

Political  Economy   4 

System  of  Logic 4 

Hamilton's  Philosophy 4 

Miller's  Elements  of  Chemistry 9 

Monsell's  Spiritual  Songs 14 

Beatitudes 14 

Montagu's   Experiments  in  Ciiurch   and 

State 13 

Montgomery  on  the  Signs  and  Symptoms 

of  Pregnancy 9 

Moore's  Irish  Melodies  17 

Lalla  Rookh  17 

Memoirs,  Journal,  and  Correspon- 
dence      3 

Poetical  ^A'orks 17 

Morell's  Elements  of  Psychology 5 

• Mental  Philosophy 6 

Morning  Clouds   H 

Morton's  Prince  Consort's  Farms  12 

Mosheim's  Ecclesiastical  History 13 

MItller's  (Max)  Lectures  on  the  Science  of 

Language    5 

(K.  O.)   Literature   of  Ancient 

Greece 2 

Murchison  on  Continued  Fevers 10 

M ore's  Language  and  Literature  of  Greece  2 

New  Testament  illustrated  with  Wood  En- 
gravings from  the  Old  Masters  10 

Newman's Historyof  his  ReligiousOpinions  3 

Nightingale's  Notes  on  Hospitals    19 

Odling's  Course  of  Practical  Chemistry. ...  9 

-Manual  of  Chemistry 9 

Ormsby's  Rambles  in  Algeria  and  Tunis  . .  15 
Owen's  Comparative  Anatomy  and  Physio- 
logy of  Vertebrate  Animals 8 

Oxenham  on  Atonement 14 

Packe's  Guide  to  the  Pyrenees 15 

Paoet's  Lectures  on  Surgical  Pathology    ..  10 

Camp  and  Cantonment 15 

Pereira's  Elements  of  Materia  Medica....  10 

Manual  of  Materia  Medica 10 

Perkins's  Tuscan  Sculpture 11 

Phillips's  Guide  to  Geology 8 

Introduction  to  Mineralogy. .. .  8 

Piesse's  Art  of  Perfumery 12 

•   Chemical,   Natural,  and  Physical 

Magic  12 

— Laboratory  of  Chemical  Wonders  12 

Playtime  with  the  Poets 17 

Practical  Mechanic's  Journal 11 

Prescott's  Scripture  Difficulties 13 

Proctor's  Saturn 7 

Pycroft's  Course  of  English  Reading  ....  5 

■ Cricket  Field 18 

Cricket  Tutor 18 

Cricketana  18 

Reade's  Poetical  Works 17 

Recreations  of  a  Country  Parson,  Second 

Series    6 

Reilly's  JIapof  Mont  Blanc 15 

Riddle's  DiamondLatin-English  Dictionary  5 

First  Sundays  at  Church 14 

Riveus'.s  Rose  Amateur's  Guide  9 


S4 


NEW  WORKS  PUBLISHED  BY  LOXGMANS  and  CO. 


Rogers's  Correspon(ience  of  Greyson 6 

Kclipse  nj  FHitli 6 

Defence  of  tlitto    6 

— Essays  (rom  the  Edinburgh  Review  C 

Fiillcriana 6 

Fooet's  Thesaurus  of  EnsHsh  Words  ami 

Phrases 5 

RoNALDs's  Fly-Fisher's  Entomology 18 

Rowton's  Debater 5 

Russell  on  Government  and  Constitution  .  1 

Saxby's  Study  of  Steam  18 

■  Went hiT  System. .. .   7 

Scott's  Hamihook  of  Volumetrical  Analysis  £9 

ScROPK  on  Vdlcanos   ••  8 

Sknior's  Biographical  Sketches    4 

Historical      and       Philosophical 

Essays 2 

— Kssays  on  Fiction 16 

Sewell's  Amy  Herbert 1*> 

• Ajicient  History 2 

CleveHall  16 

Earl's  Dauojhter 16 

Experience  of  Life  16 

Gertrude 16 

■ Glimpse  of  the  World 16 

History  of  the  Early  Church 3 

— Ivors     16 

Katharine  Ashtnn 16 

— LaiLCtoii  Parsonage 16 

Margaret  Percival   16 

Niifht  Lessons  f  om  Scripture.. ..  14 

• Passing:  Thou!rlit<  on  Relivrion 14 

Preparation  fnrComrnun  on 14 

'           Ke^dinps  lor  Confirmation    14 

Readinjrs  for  I  rut 14 

• SeU-Exaniinatiou    before    Confir- 
mation   14 

Stories  an'd  Tales 16 

Thoughts  for  the  Holy  Week 14 

Ursula 16 

Shaw'5  Work  on  Wine 19 

Shisodkn's  Elements  of  Logic   5 

Short  Whist    19 

Shoht's  Church  History 3 

SiR.VKKiNo'8    (Amiilia)    Life,    by    Wink- 

WOKTH 3 

Simpson's  Handbook  of  Dining 18 

Smith's (.-ouTHwooD)  Phih^soph^nf  Healtii  19 

(J.)  Voyage  and  Shipwreck  of  St. 

Paul 13 

(0.)  Wesleyan  Mpthodism 3 

(Sydney)  Memoir  and  Letters....  4 

Misrellaneou-  Works   ..  6 

Sketches  of  Moral  Philo- 
sophy   6 

• Wit  Hiid  Wisdom    6 

Sm  ith  o\\  Cavalry  Drill  and  Manceuvres 18 

fc'OUTHKY's  'Doct<  r) 5 

Poetical  Works 17 

SeoHii's  Autobiograpl'iy   3 

Snrinsr  and  Autumn    14 

Stani.kv's  History  of  Urstish  Birds 8 

Stkbbino's  Analysis  of  Mill's  Logic 5 

Stephenson's  (R.)    Life  by  Jeaffreson 

and  Pole    3 

Stephen's    Essays    in   Ecclesiastical    Bio- 
graphy   4 


Stephen's    Lectures    on   the    History   of 

France a 

Stepping  Stone  to  Knowledge,  &c 20 

Stirling's  Secret  of  Hegel 6 

Stonehenoe  on  the  Dog.. , 18 

on  the  Greyhound  18 

Tasso's  Jerusalem,  by  James 17 

Taylor's  (Jeremyj  Works,  edited  by  Edkn  14 

Tennent's  Ceylon 8 

Natural  History  of  Ceylon   8 

Thirlwall's  History  of  Greece  2 

Thomson's  (Archbishop)  Laws  of  Thought  4 

(J.)  Tablf s  of  Interest 19 

Conspectus,  by  iJ  irkett 10 

Todd's  Cyclopaedia  of  Anatomy  and  Pliysio- 

logy  10 

and  Bowman's  Anatomy  and  Phy- 
siology of  Man 10 

Trolloi'e's  Barchester  Towers IG 

Warden 16 

Twiss's  Law  of  Nations  13 

Tyin call's  Lectures  on  Heat 8 

Ube's  Dictionary  of  Arts,  Manufactures,  and 

Mines 11 

VvN  der  Hoeven's  Handbook  of  Zoology  8 
Vaughan's    (R.)    Revolutions    in  English 

History I 

(R.  A.)  Hours  with  the  Mystics  7 

ViLLARi's  Savonarola 3 

Wat.son's  Principles  and  Practice  of  Physic  10 

Watts's  Dictionary  of  Chemistry 9 

Webb's  Celestial  Objects  for  Common  Tels- 

scopes  7 

Webster  &  Wilkinson's  Greek  Testament  13 

VVeld's  Last  Wiriter  in  Rome 15 

Wellington's  Life,   by   Brialmont   and 

Gleio 3 

by  Glbig 3 

West  on  the  Diseases  of  Infancy  and  Child- 
hood    0 

Whately's  English  Synonymes 4 

Logic 4 

■  Remains t 

Rhetoric    4 

Sermons l-t 

Paley's  Moral  Phylosophy 1  + 

Whewell's  History  of.  the  Inductive  Sci- 
ences   2 

Whist,  what  to  lead,  by  Cam  19 

White  and  Riddle's  Latin-English  Dic- 
tionary    5 

WiLBKnFORCE    (W.)    Recolkctions    of,    by 

Harford  3 

Williams's  Superstitions  of  Witchcraft   ..  6 

Wiilich's  Popular  Tables 19 

Wilson's  Bryologia  Britannica 9 

Wood's  Homes  without  Hands 3 

Woodward's  Historical  and  Chronological 

Encyclopedia 2 

Yonge's  Enariish-Greek  Lexicon 5 

Abridged  ditto    5 

Yo  IT  no's  Nautical  Dictionary 18 

Youatt  on  the  Di)g    18 

on  the  Horse  ' 18 


^OIIIS'.VOODK    AKTJ     CO.,    PBIMTKR?,     KEW-STUBET     SQUAEIi,     LOlfUOIf 


t 


■  r 


:4i 


'■■..  ^ 


e%: 


»•    -fry*     rf;.^ 


.ao- 
